She's one of the most talked about models of the moment and Jourdan Dunn certainly didn't disappoint when she attended the Topshop Unique catwalk show for London Fashion Week.

The 24-year-old showed off her slender legs in a tiny pair of shiny leather hotpants as she arrived at the swanky event at Tate Britain on Sunday.

She teamed her bottoms with a matching leather jacket and a simple white T-shirt, as well as flat black biker boots.

Scroll down for video

Luxe like leather: Jourdan Dunn wore a shiny suit to the Topshop Unique show at Tate Britain on Sunday for London Fashion Week

Loving the skin she's in! Jourdan boasted a stunning complexion and perfectly tousled hair

With her hair teased into lovely curls, the stunner cosied up for snaps with her stylish pal, Alexa Chung, who wore a floral dress.

Jourdan was in good company on the day, sitting on the coveted FROW with fashion forces such as fellow model Cara Delevingne.

Also by her side was reality star and model Kendall Jenner, IT girl Pixie Geldof and Arcadia boss, Phillip Green.

In good company: The 24-year-old was seated next to Kendall Jenner

Boot-iful: She shunned heels for trendy flat black bikers which would have been much more comfortable

Different approaches: Model and television presenter Alexa Chung sported a floral dress while Jourdan's look was more edgy

The cool crowd: Kendall Jenner, Alexa Chung, Cara Delevingne and Jourdan Dunn at Tate Britain

High-fliers: The group appeared to be having a blast as they watched the show

Cheeky: Cara was engrossed in conversation with the fashion mogul with Jourdan gave some applause

Keeping it classy, Kendall wore a fitted pair of blue trousers with a cream crop top, capped with a camel-colored overcoat which she draped over her shoulders.

The brunette beauty wore her raven locks in a casual centre-parting.

She topped off her look with a pair of cream court shoes which gave her outfit a ladylike flourish and matched the exact hue of her jacket.

Inseparable: Kendall and Cara arrived at the event together

Less is more: Cara wore a simple ensemble which consisted of a leather skirt with a white shirt

Just can't get enough: The women are frequently spotted out together at the best events

Style queen: Kendall wore a fitted pair of blue trousers with a cream crop top, capped with a camel-colored overcoat which she draped over her shoulders

Besties: Together, the young women been something of a fashion duo in recent weeks

Looking good: Kendall wore a fitted pair of blue trousers with a cream crop top, capped with a camel-colored overcoat which she draped over her shoulders

Put that tongue away! Cara pulls her favourite pose once again for a selfie with the reality TV star

Meanwhile, Cara opted for a slightly more tomboy approach.

She wore a white T-shirt with her hair up in a messy ponytail which showed a shaved portion of her head, while seemingly keeping make-up definition to a minimum.

The aspiring actress, who stars in a new film opposite Kate Beckinsale, added a pair of strappy shoes to sex up the simple image.

Fashion-forward: Kendall opted for a demure, classy look, while Cara went for urban cool

Getting excited: The women were clearly excited about being at the Topshop show

Pastel colours: Kendall wore an impeccable outfit at the show, which was a LFW highlight

Aspiring: The wannabe actress, who stars in a new film opposite Kate Beckinsale, added a pair of strappy shoes to sex up the simple image

Together, they were joined by the multi-millionaire businessman owner of Topshop, who was clearly delighted to be joined by the pair.

The women recently wowed industry big-wigs when they appeared together on the cover of Love magazine.

In the black and white image, Kendall appeared to throw herself into her 22-year-old British counterpart's arms.

Three's a (cool) crowd: Kendall and Cara keep close to the main man - Arcadia boss Sir Phillip Green

Front-row: Phillip and Cara were naturally at the centre of the showcase in Tate Britain

Acting the goat: At one point Cara could be seen hollering into the crowd, while pulling 'wacky' faces to try and impress/entertain Kendall.

Showing her support: Cara shouts words of encouragement to models on the runway

Watching it all happen! The brand new range was given its first airing at Sunday's show

Enjoying it all: The girls' on-set chemistry is obviously genuine as the pair laughed and joked their way through the show, which previewed the new collection

But their on-set chemistry is obviously genuine as the pair laughed and joked their way through the show, which previewed the new collection.

At one point Cara could be seen hollering into the crowd, while pulling 'wacky' faces to try and impress/entertain Kendall.

Good friends: Kendall momentarily loses Cara's attention while she chats to Sir Phillip Green

Chic: Kendall has certainly transformed herself into a modern fashionista

Words of wisdom: Phillip imparts some sage advice to the star about her sartorial choices

The two girls have been inseparable lately and were recently the life of the party at the annual British Fashion Awards.

The models would not leave each other alone, posing for pictures, hugging and giggling their way through the night.

Even the appearance of their shared ex Harry Styles did not rattle the pair's close bond, they simply held hands, smiled and embraced the boybander.

Hair today - gone tomorrow! Cara has embraced a slight punk aesthetic into her look

Windy city: Alexa Chung covered up against the elements in a grey overcoat

Pixie Lott wore another random outfit - her third in one day - which saw her front a v-neck jumper with a baby-blue skirt and wrap-around, peep-toe, lace shoes

Paloma Faith wore an over-sized jumper with a layered skirt and matching statement shoes.

She teamed her footwear with a pair of bright orange socks.

Fashion fail: Pixie Lott wore another random outfit - her third in one day - which saw her front a v-neck jumper with a baby-blue skirt and wrap-around, peep-toe, lace shoes

Dressed in the dark: Paloma Faith also attended in questionable attire, which consisted of an over-sized jumper with a layered skirt and matching statement shoes

Trying too hard? Emilia Fox wore an uncharacteristic look, which included leather culottes

And they're off! Models walk the runway at the TOPSHOP Unique show during London Fashion Week

Going hell for leather: The collection features lots of rich fabrics and popular finishes, such as this jacket

Popular: The show was a calendar highlight at the annual style summit, which takes place across the capital

Practical, high-street fashion: Topshop are famed for their combination of realistic style at affordable prices

Naturally, Daisy Lowe was keen to be seen - and, for the occasion, clearly thought-out her outfit.

Keeping it colourless, she wore tailored, high-waisted trousers with a vest top, leather jacket and suede ankle boots.

She capped the look with over-sized sunglasses - which she wore indoors.

Biker chic: Daisy Lowe was keen to be seen - and, for the occasion, clearly thought-out her outfit

Lowe and behold: Earlier this week the model took part in Naomi Campbell's charity fashion show

Gorgeous: The model held her own as she posed with singer Jessie Ware and supermodel Erin O'Connor

Line-up: Harley Viera Newton, Emily Ratajkowski, Ellie Goulding, Jessie Ware, Alexa Chung and Pixie Geldof attend the Topshop Unique show

Singers: Ellie Goulding (left) and Jessie Ware (right) must have had lots to talk about

Smile - you're at fashion week! The trio barely manage a facial expression as they wait for the show

Stunning: Daisy, Alexa, Pixie and Kendall made up one very glamorous foursome at the event

What IS she saying? Cara had Pixie and Kendall in stitches as she regaled them with a hilarious story while on the FROW

Posing up a storm: The ever-present Alexa Chung was happy to get some camera time with Kendall