It was a banner week for dictators.



President Barack Obama ended a half-century of sanctions against Cuba without receiving anything lasting in return. Sen. Marco Rubio, a Florida Republican, says the president “is the single worst negotiator we have had in the White House in my lifetime.” But Obama is hardly even a negotiator. He is more like an exhausted poker player who shoves all his chips into the middle of the table and stalks out of the room.

Many experts now predict that the influx of American investment will no more liberalize Havana than it has Hanoi or Beijing. It turns out that American dollars and political prisons go well together.



[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the Sony Hack]

In Hong Kong, Beijing applied the determined use of force and threats of legal harassment to demoralize the forces of democracy, prompting the Umbrella Movement to fold. China’s solemn pledge of “one country, two systems” turns out to be just another reselling of the Brooklyn Bridge. (A Chinese executive I know was astonished that Westerners had actually taken Beijing’s rhetorical promise seriously.)



And then there’s Sony, which capitulated to a cyberattack and threats of violence by mothballing "The Interview." Sony’s surrender proved the ability of North Korea’s Kim Jong Un to reach into American society, frighten Hollywood celebrities into abandoning their colleagues and dupe the news media into undermining free speech. Kim’s success is now an open-source template that dictators, billionaires and the world’s growing list of Bond villains can use to intimidate free speech around the world.

Of course, the use of power to punish speech is hardly new. What is new is that today’s tyrants are adept at the use of the soft power of embarrassment, intellectual theft and insincere promises solemnly delivered to get what they want.

In the early 1980s, at the height of Cold War tensions with the Soviet Union, a French intellectual named Jean-François Revel released a somber book, "How Democracies Perish." In it, Revel wrote that democracy “tends to ignore, even deny, threats to its existence because it loathes doing what is needed to counter them. It awakens only when the danger becomes deadly, imminent, evident. By then, either there is too little time left for it to save itself, or the price of survival has become crushingly high.”



[GALLERY: Editorial Cartoons on North Korea]

We need a sustained national dialogue on how to prevent falling into Revel’s trap. Toward this end, it would help to have a president who would lead this dialogue. Given that this leadership probably won’t emerge until 2017, here are in the meantime some New Year’s resolutions we can all adopt to counter future, soft-power attacks.

1) We will stand by victims in attacks on free speech. Hollywood cherishes the memory of standing up to the blacklisting era, and prides itself on fearlessly speaking truth to power. But when real power came calling – in the guise of a dark, angry, intimidating cybermonster – Hollywood ran screaming in its undies like Will Ferrell in "Talladega Nights."

The backlash against Sony alone, however, is misguided. Sony waved the white flag because almost no one stood by it. Absent support from other studios, theater chains and movie stars who refused to sign George Clooney’s letter of support – absent, especially, any sign of support from the Obama White House – Sony had little choice but to protect its shareholders and employees.

Every news outlet (I’m talking about you, Variety) needs to understand that what was done to this studio can be done to a newspaper, magazine or network news organization. In my youthful newsroom experience, the catty remarks made by Sony executives were air kisses compared to the kinds of things editors and reporters say in emails about each other, not to mention the publishers. Be assured that what is good for the gander won’t be as tasty.



[GALLERY: Barack Obama Cartoons]

2) Don’t give into the temptation for self-censorship. China, Russia and many other authoritarian regimes invest a great deal into the apparatus of censorship. But there cannot be a censor for every blogger, journalist or filmmaker. So these systems practice economy in terror, making a horrific example out of one outspoken person, publication or studio. Fear does the rest.

The greatest danger then from the Sony debacle is not another cyberattack. It is that writers and artists will quietly begin to edit themselves. Don’t let anyone insert a fear filter into your head.

3) Be a nuisance. If Cuba does open up to tourism, go there. Spend your money and enjoy the beach. As you do, don’t forget to document human rights abuses with your smartphone. Seek out dissidents and interview them for your blog. As for myself, I would like to walk down Havana’s Malecón wearing a Che Guevara shirt with an “X” across his pretty face.