FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

June 9, 2014



Contact:

AARP Media Relations

202-434-2560

media@aarp.org

@AARPMedia



AARP Names New Board Directors and Officers



Washington, D.C. – AARP today appointed new members and officers to its Board of Directors, including the organization’s newest Chair, Carol Raphael, and President, Jeannine English who will both serve in this capacity until 2016.

The all-volunteer, 21-member Board of Directors is the governing body of AARP. Some of the major responsibilities of AARP board members are to approve the budget and monitor AARP finances, set policy positions, and determine the association's future direction.

AARP received a large number of applicants to become an AARP Director from AARP members all over the country in response to a call for applications.

New AARP Board members and officers include:

Carol Raphael, MPA (Chair), of New York, New York, served as President and Chief Executive Officer of the Visiting Nurse Service of New York (VNSNY), the largest nonprofit home health organization in the United States from 1989 to 2011. Prior to joining VNSNY, she held executive positions at Mt. Sinai Medical Center and in New York City government. In 2013, President Obama appointed Raphael to the Bipartisan Commission on Long Term Care. In 2012, she was an Advanced Leadership Fellow at Harvard University. Raphael is a nationally recognized leader in health policy. She served on numerous commissions including the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (MedPAC) and several Institute of Medicine Committees. She is chair of the New York eHealth Collaborative and the Long Term Quality Alliance. Raphael is a member of the National Quality Forum Measurement Applications Partnership Coordinating Committee and chairs its Post-Acute, Long Term Care and Hospice Workgroup. She serves on numerous Boards in health care, education and human services. She is a member of the New York City Age-Friendly Commission and edited the book “Home Based Care for a New Century.”

Ronald E. Daly, Sr., (Vice Chair) of Olympia Fields, Illinois, spent 38 years at the R R Donnelley Company beginning as a factory worker and advancing to the level of president of its largest unit. Following retirement from R R Donnelley, Ron served as President and CEO of Oce' USA Holdings and was a member of the Board of Directors of the parent, Oce' N.V. of the Netherlands until 2004. Ron serves on the board of U.S. Cellular and formerly served on the boards of Loyola University of Chicago, Executive Service Corp of Chicago, the Chicago Symphony Orchestra, Metropolis Strategies and SuperValu.

Joan Ruff, J.D. (Secretary/Treasurer), of Mission Woods, Kansas, is an executive, human resources consultant and attorney from Mission Woods, Kansas. After more than 10 years as a tax attorney, she joined William M. Mercer Inc., where she consulted on employee benefits and compensation. She then held executive management positions at Zurich Financial Services and H&R Block. Her leadership on numerous nonprofit boards and committees includes service as chair of the Mid-Continent Girl Scouts’ Human Resources and Capital Campaign committees. She has also contributed expertise to Habitat for Humanity and the Kansas City Red Cross.

Jeannine English, CPA, MBA (President), of Sacramento, California, has experience in government integrity, legislative redistricting, campaign finance and political reform. Previously, she was the volunteer president of AARP California. Now retired, she was a founding partner of Lehman English Kelly and O'Keefe; executive director for the Commission on California State Government Organization and Economy (the Little Hoover Commission); assistant executive director, California Transportation Commission; and financial auditor, California Departments of Finance and Health Services. She was the campaign committee president for the successful California Redistricting Commission Initiative and co-chair of the California Open Primary Initiative.

Eric Schneidewind, J.D. (President-Elect), of Grand Rapids, Michigan, is an energy attorney from Grand Rapids, Michigan. A partner in the Varnum LLP law firm, he specializes in energy law. As a public servant, he was chair of the Michigan Public Service Commission, deputy director of policy and consumer protection for the Michigan Insurance Bureau and attorney for the Michigan State Housing Authority. His volunteer roles include service as state president of AARP Michigan, secretary for the Great Lakes Renewable Energy Association and more than 20 years of volunteering at local homeless shelters.

Beth Ellard, MBA, of New York, New York is Executive Vice President of Media, overseeing the media function for The Ad Council and securing more than $1.5 billion in donated media support annually for the organization’s 50 national public service campaigns. To this end, she is chiefly responsible for the Ad Council’s relationships with over 200 U.S. media companies, across all platforms, as well as the top 20 U.S. media agencies. She also oversees media marketing & distribution, media measurement & analytics and creative services. She has also held positions at several top media companies including NBCU/Comcast, Hearst, Disney and Time Inc., with significant experience in brand development, revenue diversification, and digital transformation.

Annette Franqui, MBA, of Miami, Florida, is a Founding Partner of Forrestal Capital, a company providing wealth management and direct equity investment advice to a select number of families in Latin America. A native of Puerto Rico, she is a senior financial services executive with prior CFO experience as well as 15 years on Wall Street with JP Morgan and Goldman Sachs. Franqui serves on the boards of several early stage private companies as well as Arcos Dorados, a NYSE listed company that is the largest operator of McDonald's restaurants in Latin America and the Caribbean and its largest franchisee, in terms of system wide sales and number of restaurants. Franqui has a Bachelor in Economics from the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania and an MBA from Stanford University's Graduate School of Business.

Lloyd E. Johnson, MBA, of Charlotte, North Carolina, is Managing Director and Global Chief Audit Executive with Accenture. He has more than 25 years’ experience in auditing, finance, accounting, mergers and acquisitions, divestitures, and risk management with large corporations. Prior to Accenture, his career experience includes senior finance positions with automobile electronics and components maker Delphi, Emerson Electric, and Sara Lee Corporation. He began his career as an accountant at Coopers & Lybrand, CPA's. He serves on the volunteer board at the United Way of Central Carolinas, where he chairs the Audit Committee and sits on the Finance and Executive Committees. Lloyd also serves as a member of the Blumenthal Performing Arts Board of Trustees where he chairs the Governance Committee and sits on the Executive Committee.

Doris Koo, MSW, of Seattle, Washington, recently retired from a 13-year career with Enterprise Community Partners, a leading national nonprofit specializing in affordable housing advocacy and development, having served in a variety of executive roles, including that of president and CEO. Earlier, she spent seven years with the Seattle Housing Authority, leading efforts to build or preserve affordable housing units, overseeing bond financing and asset and portfolio management, and serving as Director of Development. She founded and led, as Executive Director, Asian Americans for Equality, taking it from an all-volunteer organization to the biggest owner and developer of low-income housing in New York City’s Chinatown and Lower East Side neighborhoods. She has been a respected member of the AARP Foundation Board since 2012.

Neal Lane, MSW, of Wynantskill, New York, has been an AARP volunteer since 2007, currently serving as AARP New York State President and lead state spokesperson, and chairing the AARP New York Executive Council. He is also a Partner and Analyst with consultancy Optimum Partners, working on projects including care systems for HIV/AIDS; dental systems for high risk and low-income children; helping communities and schools with troubling behavior of youth; and long-term care systems, especially those for older persons and young people with disabilities. He was also Director of the New York State Office for the Aging, from 2005-2007, and Executive Deputy Director before that. In 2005, he led the New York State delegation to the White House Conference on Aging.

Libby Sartain, MBA, of Bastrop, Texas, is an independent advisor, working with companies on human resource issues. With more than 30 years of experience in human resources, she is also an author and frequent speaker, using her HR leadership and management experience at companies in technology, transportation, and manufacturing. She led human resources at Yahoo! and Southwest Airlines during transformative periods. Both companies were among Fortune magazine’s “Best Places to Work” during her tenure. She is the former board chair of the Society for Human Resource Management and is on the board of Manpower Group.

Janet Porter, Ph.D., of Hilton Head, South Carolina, has 35 years of experience as a hospital administrator, teacher, association executive, consultant, public health leader, and patient advocate. She joined Stroudwater Associates in 2012 and serves as a part-time strategy and operational consultant to academic medical centers, specialty hospitals, physician practices, pharmaceutical companies, and national associations. Previously, she managed large health care facilities, including the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, where she was Chief Operating Officer from 2006-2012. She has served on several non-profit community, state, and national boards.

For more information about the AARP Board of Directors, please visit www.aarp.org.