How to protect your equipment

Putting fuel into a piece of equipment used to be a fairly simple, straight-forward thing. Regular or diesel? Leaded or unleaded? Once ethanol was added to the mix, things got more complicated. Ethanol has been mixed with gasoline for many years and became more widely available to consumers in the early 2000s.

Originally, and until late 2010, fuels were authorized to contain no more than 10 percent ethanol, commonly known as E10. Small engine manufacturers responded with the production of engines that could handle the fuel. In recent years, E15, which is a mix of up to 15 percent ethanol, has become more of a staple at the pump and it is no longer safe to assume that gas that can burn in a car will work for any gas-powered engine.

Customers who are in the habit of filling a gas can for use in lawn mowers and other small engine machines at the same time they purchase gas for their car may find this practice is causing more harm than convenience. Without the sophisticated electronic fuel controls found on modern cars, small engines have a harder time compensating for the higher heat, lack of lubrication and corrosive effect the higher alcohol content of E15 can have on them.

Use of E15 — or any fuel that is not recommended in manufacturer instructions — in incompatible engines will void the warranty and damage becomes the owner’s responsibility. This has long been the case, but until recently, the chance of doing so has been relatively minimal.

With the fuel choices available at a variety of price points dispensed side-by-side at gas stations across the country, it was only a matter of time before complications started to hit the equipment rental industry.

Tim Allen, owner, Tim Allen Equipment/Roseburg Rentals, Roseburg, Ore., says fuel issues are the No. 1 problem he sees coming into his shop.

“We started seeing issues around 2009-2010. We’re an authorized dealer for many of our machines. In the beginning, customers were told it would be fine to use ethanol. It took us about 30 to 60 days to realize this was a fuel compatibility issue,” Allen says.

Generators in particular were coming back with fouled fuel systems. “Gasoline-powered generators have always had fuel issues. They typically sit for far longer periods than most power equipment,” Allen says.

In an online blog post on the issue, Allen explains that, when repairing the generators, they were finding that the fuel wasn’t lasting as long as it once did. In one case, they did a typical fuel system cleaning and repair, tested the machine and sent it home with the owner. About 90 days later, the customer tried to use it, but it ran poorly. He brought it back once again and they found that the fuel already had gone bad, so they went through the cleaning process again. In addition to issues with the fuel systems, parts were failing.

“Fuel filters would melt, the fuel shut-off needle in the carburetor would get sticky and stick shut, and fuel lines and primer bulbs were failing,” Allen says. He decided it was time to investigate further.

“We ran two tests at our facility,” Allen says. “One was to simply pour some fuel into a clean white 5-gal. bucket and let it sit. Within one week the ethanol started separating from the fuel and settling in the bottom of the container. This means if your lawn mower didn’t get shaken well enough before you tried to start it, it was getting pure ethanol instead of mixed fuel. If it ran at all it would run very poorly. The second test was to put a short piece of new fuel line into a beaker filled with ethanol fuel. By the end of just day one there was visible expansion indicating the ethanol was attacking the rubber.”

As E10 became more common and readily available, engine manufacturers responded with engines designed to handle fuel containing up to 10 percent ethanol.

“Today things are better,” Allen says. “They are using products other than butyl in rubber, which has alleviated many of the parts failures.” However, he also says he is cautious about what the increasing popularity of E15 might bring.

With the recent push to increase the ethanol content in gasoline, widespread introduction of E15 has caused the issue to come to the forefront once again. In general, small engines are not designed to deal with the more corrosive E15 blend. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has not approved it for non-automotive uses such as mowers and other power equipment, and users need to understand that aspect of caring for small engine equipment.

“If people are putting E15 into engines that are not designed to handle it, there could be problems,” says Mike Graboski, Ph.D., consulting engineer for the American Rental Association (ARA). “It’s a customer education issue. Newer equipment, which comprises most rental fleets, should be able to run on fuels containing ethanol that are being made to ASTM standards. Manufacturers are making engines that run on E10, but you should check your engine warranty to see if there are restrictions regarding fuels. Many of the issues people are seeing stem from using fuel of a higher ethanol content than the engine was designed for. The best way to avoid issues is to make sure you’re in compliance with manufacturers’ recommendations for fuel usage.”

However, a survey commissioned by the Outdoor Power Equipment Institute (OPEI), an international trade association representing 100 small engine, utility vehicle and outdoor power equipment manufacturers and suppliers, found that nearly two-thirds of respondents assume that any gas sold at the gas station is safe for all cars as well as mowers, chain saws, generators and other equipment with small engines. In addition, 91 percent said price is the No. 1 thing they notice at the pump, with only 25 percent noticing the ethanol content. More than 70 percent say they use the least expensive grade of gasoline whenever possible.

These responses indicated that warnings at the pumps are insufficient to deter customers from using inappropriate fuel. Concerns that customers would blame equipment makers should mowers and other small engine equipment fail as a result of confusion over fuel spurred OPEI to launch the “Look Before You Pump” campaign. The goal of the campaign was to reach consumers through a variety of media to encourage equipment users to be more mindful at the gas pump.

“E15 is an issue,” says Linda Beattie, brand marketing manager, Schiller Grounds Care, Southampton, Pa. “As a smaller engine user, with handhelds and four-cycle equipment, it will destroy the engine. We purchase engines as part of our equipment, so the responsibility falls on the engine manufacturer. We do note what grade of fuel to use in the manuals, such as no more than 10 percent ethanol. Recently, we included a sticker to say no E15 in this machine. The rental dealer is going to inform the customer as to what the right fuel is needed, so that helps them as well.”

While small engine manufacturers are working towards engines that can run on E15, many are still in the early stages.

“E10 has been fully tested with our current engine offering and performs within the required engine specifications,” says Bill Phleger, vice president of counterbalance solutions, Yale Materials Handling Corp., Greenville, N.C. “E15 is still in the testing phases. While our engine manufacturers indicate their designs will hold up mechanically to E15, the concern is with the potential reduction in performance due to the lower energy content in ethanol versus straight gasoline. The power reduction is expected to be minimal, however additional testing will allow Yale to accurately inform customers of the effect of E15 on performance.”

However, manufacturing engines that are compatible with E15 will not immediately solve the issue. When manufacturer recommendations are not followed and customers use E15 in a piece of equipment for which it was not intended, issues will arise. As with so many aspects of the rental business, customer education is the key. Manufacturers do what they can to ensure their engines are functioning properly with the fuel ratings advertised. From there, the rental operator conveys requirements to the customer.

While Allen agrees that customer education on this issue is important, he takes responsibility for preventing ethanol-related issues. “We don’t put this on the customer,” he says. “We ask them not to put ethanol in the equipment, but we also take steps before it’s stored to ensure that no ethanol is left in the machine.”

Allen says he has found that this approach to the fuel issue eases the burden on customers and ensures that each machine is fueled properly for the next renter.

Storage tips for maintaining fuel systems

If an engine does come back to your rental store with the wrong fuel, draining the fuel system before it sits for too long will mitigate damage that may occur. This is particularly necessary before storing a piece of equipment that may not be rented again for a while. If left too long, the fuel can start to separate and leave a corrosive residue.

Tim Allen, owner, Tim Allen Equipment/Roseburg Rentals, Roseburg, Ore., has had issues with ethanol fouling fuel systems. While he does ask customers not to put ethanol in this equipment, he says he doesn’t hold his customers responsible for ensuring the gas tanks are free from ethanol. Instead, he takes steps to ensure that equipment is ready for use over the long haul.

Allen says he and his employees follow these steps when storing a machine that will not be rented over the course of the winter:

Make sure the last fuel put in the machine was non-ethanol and put a fuel stabilizer in.

Run the engine for about 10 minutes to circulate it through.

Drain all fuel from the machine.

If equipment has the potential to be rented from time to time throughout the winter months, he says they fill it with non-ethanol fuel and leave it full so it is ready to go without the potential issues that can be caused by leaving ethanol to sit for too long.

What is E15?

Ethanol was originally added to gasoline in order to replace methyl tertiary butyl ether (MTBE), a chemical that was used to reduce carbon monoxide emissions in regions that had difficulty meeting government air quality standards.



Over time, it became a means for making oil supplies go further and reducing dependence on foreign oil. In 2005, Congress adopted the renewable fuel standard (RFS), which was expanded in 2007, requiring oil companies to blend increasing volumes of renewable fuels like ethanol with gasoline. By 2022, the RFS will grow to 36 billion gallons.



Today, virtually all of the gasoline sold in the United States contains some ethanol, typically up to 10 percent, known as E10. In 2014, about 13 billion gallons of fuel ethanol were added to the motor gasoline produced in the United States, according to the U.S. Energy Information Administration. Fuel ethanol accounted for about 10 percent of the total volume of finished motor gasoline consumed.



In 2009, the ethanol industry petitioned the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to approve a blend of up to 15 percent ethanol in gasoline, from the previous cap of 10 percent. The industry asserted that raising the blend from E10 to E15 would accelerate the use of renewable fuel, increase energy security, create U.S. jobs, reduce transportation costs and improve the environment by displacing conventional gasoline with low-carbon ethanol.



While E15 has been approved by the EPA for use in all 2001 and newer cars, trucks and SUVs, the agency has not approved it for non-automotive uses such as mowers and other power equipment. The agency states that many non-automotive engines do not have the sophisticated computer controls to adjust for fuel variations and that these engines have numerous applications and vary in types and sizes. In addition, a Department of Energy study found that E15 caused hotter operating temperatures, accelerating the potential for damage, such as erratic running and engine-part failure.



The potential for damage to vital components is a result of ethanol’s fairly corrosive nature in relation to rubber and certain metals. Ethanol also has the potential to introduce water to the fuel, since it can absorb moisture. This can separate inside the tank, allowing moisture to settle to the bottom if an engine sits for long periods between uses. Such settling can potentially clog pumps and filters or cause damage to fuel lines, injectors, seals, gaskets and valve seats as well as carburetors on older engines.