LEADING Australian doctors do not think the tiniest premature babies - born below 24 weeks and weighing less than 500g - should be given life-saving resuscitation at birth.

Although doctors do not routinely resuscitate babies born this early, some do so at the request of parents.

But a new Australian study shows that in a six-year period at one hospital, no baby born this early, who was also very small, survived without disability.

Only one baby born before 24 weeks and weighing less than 500g survived, but was severely impaired, the research found.

The findings have prompted a team of Australian and American doctors to question whether parents should be given the option of resuscitation for babies this premature.

Dr Dominic Wilkinson, Associate Professor of Neonatal Medicine and Bioethics at the University of Adelaide, said there were two groups of babies.

"Babies born weighing less than pound of butter (500g) have a better chance of surviving if they are more mature, but small because of poor growth in the womb," he said.

But he said babies who were both extremely premature and extremely small had a very low chance of surviving without severe disability.

"In such cases it's hard to see that resuscitation is a wise choice," he said. "If they are told there is some chance of survival, many parents ask doctors to do what they could to save the baby".

But he said many doctors "would be reluctant to pursue intensive care treatment that may be very burdensome for the baby".

The research team studied the 36 babies born at the Adelaide Women's and Chidlren's Hospital between 2005 and 2010, weighing an average of 443g, and born at an average of 24.4 weeks.

The smallest baby was 330g and the youngest was born at just 22 weeks. The doctors found the survival rate of such babies was just 39 per cent. Ten of the babies died at birth or just after birth. Of the 26 admitted to neonatal intensive care, 12 died during admission. Of the 14 that survived, two had no negative outcomes, four had a mild disability and eight had a moderate or severe disability.

Carolyn Lindsey, president of the National Premmie Foundation, said there is inconsistency between hospitals over resuscitation.

"Some hospitals will give parents a choice and others don't," she said. "Families also need to be given the information and statistics but they don't factor in a babies will and determination".

Doctors at Melbourne's hospitals with specialist Neonatal Intensive Care Units, assess each baby individually, but do not routinely resuscitate babies born under 24 weeks. Parents' wishes are usually taken into account.

Melinda Cruz, CEO and founder of the Miracle Babies Foundation said families "should not be judged but loved and supported through every decision".

"We believe that along with medical advice and opinion, parents in this situation must be given access to past parents who have been in a similar situation".

Parool Shah, co-founder and director of Life's Little Treasures Foundation, said families shouldn't have to go through this experience alone.

"This experience can be isolating but there are many out there who have been through it," she said.

"We can help them connect and get the right support they need to help them navigate through this life changing journey".

ROCHELLE and Kevin Simmons were given just 15 minutes to decide whether their baby girl, born at just 23 weeks, should live or die.

Their baby, Charlene, was 500g and barely longer than a biro. Doctors advised them to let her go.

But after hearing her heart beat inside her tiny chest, the Simmons' knew there was no question about what to do.

"I told them that if there is life in there, then they must resuscitate the baby. If there is life, there is hope, so resuscitate the baby," Ms Simmons told the Herald Sun yesterday.

"We had been trying for six years to get pregnant so it was not easy to just let her go," she said.

"I believe in miracles".

Ms Simmons was hemorrhaging heavily and had lost three litres of blood in hospital.

"We were told they had to take the baby out to save my life. Everyone was very panicked, they told us to let her go," she said.

"They reckon she should not be here because she was just 23 weeks and they don't resuscitate until 24 weeks because babies at that age have a better chance.

"They said she would be disabled, that there would be problems, they didn't want us to have the baby.

"I was trying to hold the baby inside me, I felt like she was safe in there. But then I couldn't hold her any more and she was born, still in the sac," Ms Simmons said.

Charlene was airlifted to Adelaide six hours after being born.

"Forty eight hours later she opened her eyes, and I knew she would be okay," she said.

The next day Ms Simmons flew to Adelaide and spent the next four months at the Women's and Children's Hospital with Charlene.

In the end, Charlene is most definitely a miracle baby. "They said she would need surgery but she did not. Even the specialists said she was the only baby they had ever seen born this young who didn't even need oxygen," Ms Simmons said.

It's now three years on, and Charlene is a bouncy, inquisitive, fun-loving little girl who is absolutely normal in every way.

"She is a joy, making us really happy".

Ms Simmons said she felt sad for other parents who had to choose whether to resuscitate their baby or not.

"Doctors really should listen to the parents and go with what they want," she said.

"Every time I think of that 15 minutes I get teary, thinking that we might have let her go".

Blog with Susie at Susieobrien.com.au and tweet @susieob