Editorial: Make family leave for all

Photo: chaiyon021 - Fotolia Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 Fotolia Fotolia Photo: chaiyon021 - Fotolia Editorial: Make family leave for all 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

THE ISSUE:

Some argue smaller businesses should be exempt from a proposed family leave law.

THE STAKES:

Paid leave should be available to all New Yorkers, regardless of where they work.Every working person deserves the option of paid leave to care for and bond with a new child or to assist and spend quality time with an ill or dying family member. It's a matter of compassion, dignity and humanity.

A sensible and affordable plan to provide all working New Yorkers with up to 12 weeks of partially paid leave easily passed the Assembly last week. It has strong support from Gov. Andrew Cuomo. But its fate in the state Senate is unclear. The last four times the Republican-controlled chamber had the chance to make paid family leave the law, it balked.

Senate Majority Leader John Flanagan, R-Long Island, has expressed concerns about how the law might affect smaller businesses. The good news, though, is that Mr. Flanagan, who is in his first year as leader, says he supports the concept and indicates he is open to negotiations.

More Information To comment: tuletters@timesunion.com or at http://blog.timesunion.com/opinion

So New York could become the fourth state to offer such a paid benefit, following New Jersey, Rhode Island and California.

Importantly, not a cent of the leave pay would come from employers. It would be covered by insurance, funded by a small deduction from employee paychecks, estimated at between 45 cents and a dollar per week.

Gov. Cuomo made a passionate appeal for paid leave in his State of the State address last month, and more recently he appeared with Vice President Joe Biden to underscore why we must support people who need to spend time with loved ones. For both men, it was personal. Last year Mr. Cuomo was pulled away from work to be with his father, former Gov. Mario Cuomo, as he neared death, and again a few months later when his partner, Sandra Lee, underwent cancer surgery. Mr. Biden recently suffered the tragic loss of his son, Beau.

The federal Family Medical Leave Act of 1993 offers most workers up to 12 weeks off to care for relatives, but without pay, making it useless for those who can't afford to miss work. Of 185 countries, the U.S. is one of just three that doesn't guarantee paid maternity leave.

The Assembly bill is skewed to pay a higher percentage of lower earners' pay. The governor's proposal differs slightly, but a compromise is clearly within reach.

In the past, Senate leaders have deferred to the state Business Council and others who say a paid leave program could disproportionately hurt small businesses. In fact, though, this benefit could help small companies compete with larger employers that more often provide paid leave. Studies show, too, that worker satisfaction and retention are measurably enhanced when this option is available.

Yes, leaves can be inconvenient for employers, large or small. But the vast majority of those taking the full 12 weeks are new parents, allowing time for prior notice and planning.

Simply, this is the decent thing to do. It's an affordable way for New York to help its citizens, regardless of income, better balance making a living with living life's most vital moments.