Topics: ceelo green, De La Soul, Freddie King, Jimi Hendrix, jody watley, lists, mariah carey, Miles Davis, Music, otis redding, Ray Charles, Run DMC, Stevie Wonder, Video, Social News, Media News, Life News, Entertainment News

When people think of black rock musicians, Jimi Hendrix is often the first name that springs to mind. To some degree this makes sense; Hendrix is an incredibly talented and important songwriter, and certainly one of the all-time rock greats. But regarding Hendrix as the beginning and end of a genre can be deceptive.

The list below proves that rock has been black music from the beginning, long before Hendrix, and has remained black music up to the present day. (Hat tip to Dee at http://blackrockandrollmusic. tumblr.com for the idea for this post.) Basically, black rock music is central to the most critically acclaimed pop of the last 60 years.

Roy Brown, “Butcher Pete” 1950



Roy Brown was one of the great jump blues vocalists, foreshadowing Little Richard in his explosive vocal style, and any number of raunchy rockers in his single-entendre penis jokes (“Oh, Pete, he loves that meat!”). Rockabilly is often presented as the beginning of rock. As a result, jump blues performers like Brown and Wynonie Harris, who laid the groundwork for Elvis and Jerry Lee, are mistakenly seen as outliers rather than founders.

LaVern Baker, “Soul on Fire” 1953



Musicians like Chuck Berry and Bo Diddley are, like Hendrix, performers who can be easily slotted into a narrative about white guitar bands. LaVern Baker shows how limited that view is. A major, successful, early rock star, her music was horn- and piano-based rather than rooted in guitar and country. “Soul On Fire” in particular, is in a torch song tradition that has remained part of rock, from Aretha to Joni Mitchell to Journey.

Ray Charles, “What’d I Say” 1959



One of the most massively influential rock records of all time. The rhythmic assault and lascivious lyrics of “What’d I Say” convinced Paul McCartney to become a musician; it was the first song performed by the band that would become the Rolling Stones, and the blueprint for black rock artists from James Brown to Aretha Franklin. It became a standard in the repertoire of Jerry Lee Lewis. Yet Charles is rarely mentioned among the seminal early rock artists like Elvis or Little Richard. Instead, he’s pigeonholed as the inventor of soul, as if inventing soul somehow means he can’t have invented rock as well.

Howlin’ Wolf, “Mama’s Baby” 1962



Even playing guitar isn’t necessarily enough to get black artists acknowledged as rockers. Howlin’ Wolf’s harsh, dirty sound, influenced by blues and country, is an essential part of the DNA of heavy rock, and Wolf was recording at the same time as canonical rock stars. Yet he’s called “blues.” Maybe it’s all part of some sort of plot to make “Exile on Main Street” look original?

Cookies, “Wounded” 1967



Girl-group pop was an essential subgenre in early rock. It was a major influence on rock bands like the Beatles and the Beach Boys, not to mention Ray Charles, with whom many of the Cookies recorded as the Raylettes. This track shows that Beatles and Beach Boys’ influence is coming back around. “Wounded” isn’t some embalmed source for the rock music innovations of white-boy geniuses, but a slice of psychedelic rock itself.

Otis Redding, “Papa’s Got a Brand New Bag” 1968



Redding was a huge Little Richard fan, and performed with Richard’s backing band early in his own career. But, in a quintessentially rock star mode, his influences were eclectic; he’d cover blues and country as well as rock songs like the Stones’ “Satisfaction.” This performance of James Brown’s “Papa’s Got a Brand New Bag” is so tight and fierce it just about turns into metal — hard rock funk.

Freddie King, “Going Down” 1971



One of the great progenitors of electric guitar rock listened to his disciples on both sides of the Atlantic, and then stepped up to show them he could beat them at their own game. King is supposed to be a blues artist, but if this were recorded by Zeppelin or ZZ Top, there’s little doubt where it would be shelved at your local record store.

Miles Davis, “Black Satin” 1973



Davis’ “On The Corner” was hugely controversial when it came out; his use of tape loops and electronics and the studio as an instrument alienated jazz purists and just about everybody else. The album’s genius has long since been recognized. And yet, though its eclecticism, experimentation and fierceness scream “rock!”, “On the Corner” still never gets mentioned in lists of greatest rock albums, and Miles is never really considered as an important rock musician. But he is.

Donna Summer, “Hot Stuff” 1979



Rock and disco are supposed to be sworn enemies. But if the rhythmic funk of Ray Charles and the vocal tradition of LaVern Baker are seen as part of rock, it starts to look like disco is an offshoot rather than an opposite. Donna Summer’s great, swaggering disco-rock fusion in this case isn’t a synthesis of strangers, but a reunification of siblings, separated briefly perhaps, but both raised on gospel, blues, snarling guitars and rhythmic hot stuff.