Pat Walker Health Center started charging new fees to UA students as of July.

A student fee of $7.25 per credit hour covered students’ clinic visits in past years, but now the center requires a co-payment for those visits. Insurance is also billed for any laboratory, x-ray or special procedures.

“The biggest change is that we are now charging medical office visits, charging to student’s health insurance plan,” said Mary Alice Serafini, executive director of the Pat Walker Health Center. “That is working us toward future staffing, future building and meeting the demand we have right now.”

This does mean additional charges for students, Serafini said, but the new fees are targeted at obtaining from insurance companies money that was previously “just sitting there.”

“All these years we have been using the health fee to cover office visits,” Serafini said.

“Insurance companies haven’t had to pay us and so they got the break because they didn’t have to reimburse. But that is what they are collecting now.”

Under the Affordable Care Act, which took effect October 2013, everyone 18 and older must be insured. Those who do not have the required coverage will face a penalty in 2014, but many college age residents still lack coverage.

About 27 percent of U.S. residents between the ages of 19 and 25 were uninsured in 2012, according the latest census data.

UA students are no exception. Anywhere from 25 to 35 percent of students were without health insurance as of 2013, according to Pat Walker Center research.

Pat Walker also applied new fees to Counseling and Psychological Services (CAPS). The student health fee covers an intake assessment at CAPS, Emergency Services, case management services, referral services, outreach and group counseling. A fee of $20 is charged for individual counseling. Students’ must pay $20 for individual counseling visits. The initial visit to see a psychiatrist is $85 for the first appointment and $40 for each follow-up visit.

Because insurance reimbursement for psychiatric treatment is more difficult than reimbursement for other medical exams, Pat Walker set up CAPS to be all self-pay, Serafini said. Students who want to pursue mental health insurance coverage must personally send the needed paperwork to their insurance companies, she said.

Raising prices on student health care was a difficult decision, but one Serafini said she thinks students understand.

“This summer we had a team that called students who had used us six or more times in the last year and let them know about it,” Serafini said. “Their reactions were mostly ‘Well that sounds like what happens at my other health care provider, so I am OK with it.’”

Students have varying opinions on the new fees.

Senior Ashton Pohlman has used the center both when sick and before studying abroad. She said she would now rather travel three and a half hours to see her family doctor.

“Even with the charges, it is still more convenient and faster for students,” Pohlman said. “That being said, I trust my clinic at home more. So knowing I would have to pay either way, I’d probably go home.”

The fees could deter some students from seeking treatment when they first become ill.

“Most students will go no matter what if they are sick and live on or near campus, but it could cause some to hold off because of everything they are already having to pay for,” junior Alberto Chavez said.

The number of uninsured UA students might seem high, but Serafini said the co-pay charges would lend clearer data for this year.

“Hopefully that is not what is happening now, but it has only been since July that we have been charging for the office visits,” she said. “Now that we are, we expect to have a better handle on just how many people are paying with insurance and how many are not.”

Insurance enrollment through the Affordable Care Act is closed until Nov. 15, according to HealthCare.gov.

“Unless they have lost their insurance or their job, or had a major life-changing event, the open enrollment for health care is closed,” said Amanda Rochier, a financial consultant at Pat Walker Health Center.

Those who still are not insured can receive medical help at a discounted rate at Pat Walker. The service can be charged to students’ ISIS accounts. However, Serafini said if students have insurance, they should use it.

“Some have insurance and don’t use it,” She said. “People are funny that way. Health insurance is really financial security so health problems don’t interrupt your education.”