Wedding parties line up Sunday for annual Loveland Wedding Center dress giveaway

Jenn Platzek has fun trying on wedding dresses at the Loveland Wedding Center on Sunday. Platzek chose the first dress she tried on and got to take it home for free. The wedding center hosts an annual dress giveaway for formal gowns. ( Jessica Benes / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Twenty minutes.

Up to four dresses at a time in the dressing room.

And nervous brides-to-be looking for the perfect gown.

First in line on Sunday to find a wedding dress she'd get to take home for free was Jenn Platzek of Loveland with her friend, Cherie Carlson, and sister, Lisa Arnold.

"I saw it in the paper and said, 'Did you know?'" Carlson said about the wedding dress giveaway hosted by the Loveland Wedding Center. Platzek arrived at 7:20 a.m. on Sunday to wait in line and by 12:30 p.m. the line wrapped around the building.

The first time Dianne Carpenter decided she should host a wedding dress giveaway three ago, it was because she had over 80 wedding dresses sitting in a back room that her store, Wed Wisely, in the Loveland Wedding Center, was selling on consignment. The dresses hadn't sold and the owners didn't want them.

"I feel like we're blessed so we can turn around and bless others," she said. "Kind of the whole, 'God gives to you so you're supposed to give to others.'"

Once the dress consignment due date is finished on Sept. 30 and the owners have decided not to pick up their gowns, she and her company are free to give them away. This year they had about 100 dresses to give away.

Instead of leaving the formal dresses with secondhand stores where they could be damaged, Carpenter said, "We figured we could bless the community, open the doors and say, 'Take a dress.'"

So she started an annual wedding dress giveaway where brides, bridesmaids and mothers of the bride or groom have 20 minutes to find a dress they like. If they find their dress, it's free.

Advertisement

In 2013, the Loveland Wedding Center gave 80 wedding gowns away as well as several bridesmaid gowns, mothers' dresses and flower girl dresses.

Carpenter's staff hands out numbers to the women who form a line around the building.

Brides to be also have the chance to visit with Marsha Hardy with Alterations by Marsha about dress alterations (not free).

Jenn Platzek's fiance proposed to her on July 4 while staking out their spot in North Lake Park to watch the fireworks. They hope to get married in a small ceremony there on July 4, 2015.

Bridal assistant Callie Anstett helped Platzek find gowns to take into the dressing room.

Platzek, who is used to simple, black clothing, was looking for a dress with as little frill or sequins as possible.

"I wanted something like a tank top," she joked.

She tried her first gown on, a sleeveless dress without adornment, and said, "I like it. I don't even want to try the other ones on."

After trying on gowns that poofed out "like a princess," or had drapes of glittering folds, she went back to the first dress as her favorite.

Her bridal assistant wrapped up her dress and Platzek left, a very excited and satisfied customer.

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Jessica Benes at 970-669-5050 ext. 530 or jbenes@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter at twitter.com/jessicabenes.