Topics: aol_on, Donald Trump, Elections 2016, GOP primary, Michael Bloomberg, Third Party Candidate, News, Politics News

Just when you thought this primary campaign could not get any funnier, here comes Michael Bloomberg and his potential third-party campaign. Because if there is one thing the whole carnival has been missing, it is a humorless billionaire who could throw away a fortune on a vanity presidential run and barely notice the dent in his checking account.

There’s a campaign slogan for you. Michael Bloomberg for President: Sure, Why Not.

To be fair, Bloomberg has more experience as an elected politician than the Republican frontrunner or even most of the GOP field. He spent three terms as mayor of New York City, a huge job that requires a thick skin and a level of toughness that could serve him well in a long presidential campaign. His policy positions tend to be a mixture of fiscally conservative and socially liberal, with a dash of the authoritarian law-and-order self-righteousness that will likely raise the ire of the left and those libertarians who are genuinely concerned with law-enforcement overreach, not just posing because they see criminal justice reform as a Trojan horse to smuggle major cuts to government regulations into the system.

In other words, there is plenty for people of all political persuasions to hate about Michael Bloomberg.

But the former mayor is considered a centrist of the sort who makes the “both sides are the same” reflexes of the Beltway class of commentators and opinion-makers and Sunday talk-show guests start twitching. Bemoaning the existence of partisanship in our system might be the most tired argument in politics, but that doesn’t stop the David Brookses and Thomas Friedmans of the world from gathering at round tables every week to marvel at the hard-right drift of the Republican Party while suggesting that the Democrats are equally at fault for political polarization because they elected that unrepentant Marxist, Barack Obama.

This ridiculous centrism prizes compromises above all else, even when the policy pursued by one side is objectively terrible. It neglects the possibility that when there are two sides to an issue, one of those sides might genuinely suck!

Take the fetishism for a “Grand Bargain” on the national debt a few years ago. By any measure, cutting government spending so deeply as to eliminate Meals on Wheels programs and subsidized school lunches for poor children would mean an inhuman level of suffering for the nation’s poor. But people making above $250,000 a year would see their marginal tax rates return to Clinton-era levels. To the centrists, this latter suffering is just as necessary-if-tragic as the former. Compromise achieved!

There is no reason to think that a Bloomberg presidential administration would be any more successful at bridging these gaps with a recalcitrant Congress than Obama, a moderate technocrat, has been. But it’s a measure of how terrified certain people are of turning the Oval Office over to a radical nutcase like Ted Cruz or Donald Trump or an “avowed socialist” like Bernie Sanders that they are entertaining Bloomberg’s run as a cure for what ails us.