Chief Judge Jonathan Lippman delivers a speech at the Court of Appeals on Wednesday, May 1, 2013, in Albany, N.Y. Associated Press

Doing good is about to get easier for in-house lawyers in New York.

On Monday, New York state Chief Judge Jonathan Lippman announced a rule change that will allow attorneys who work in corporate law departments here, but who are not admitted to practice law in the state, to do pro bono work (so long as they are admitted to practice elsewhere, and are in good standing).

The change could add an estimated 5,000 to 10,000 people to the pool of potential pro bono attorneys, Judge Lippman told Law Blog.

“These are some of the best most talented lawyers in our state, and in our country,” he said. “So many of them are not necessarily from New York or admitted here, but yet their corporations are committed to the work.”

Previously, only lawyers who were admitted to the New York state bar were permitted to volunteer their services to work on behalf of poor or underserved clients. Those admitted elsewhere had to work under the supervision of a locally-licensed attorney or approved organization. The new rules are set to take effect on Wednesday, Dec. 4.

The change taps into a broader shift in the world of pro bono, which is considered a professional obligation for lawyers but sometimes finds itself short of volunteers.

While a few companies have longstanding law department pro bono programs, the idea has gained a lot more steam in recent years, said Randal Milch, general counsel at Verizon Communications There, some company lawyers volunteer their time to help veterans; others donate their services to victims of domestic violence or on educational cases, often working in concert with law firms such as DLA Piper.

Bar rules can complicate the urge to volunteer. Depending on where they are admitted to practice, in-house lawyers who want to donate their time outside the company could find themselves engaging in the unauthorized practice of law.

“I have lawyers in 19 jurisdictions around the country, and many of them do not happen to be barred in the state where they work because they are providing services to us,” Mr. Milch said.

In some jurisdictions, a veteran with years of legal experience might only be able to do pro bono work under supervision. “You might have an incongruous situation where one of my senior lawyers is being supervised by a first-year associate at a law firm,” he said. ”Getting these sorts of rule changes is critical to enabling them to provide locally-based pro bono work.”

Judge Lippman has been beating the pro bono drum for some time. Last year New York instituted a 50-hour service requirement for young lawyers. Earlier on in his tenure, he also helped created an Attorney Emeritus program to make it easier for retired lawyers, and those 55 or older, to volunteer their services to the needy.

Donating one’s time and legal skills is certainly commendable – last year some 14,000 New York litigants were helped by court-based volunteer programs, according to the state court’s Access to Justice Program.

But the need is far greater than that. More than 2.3 million New Yorkers try to navigate the state’s legal system each year alone, something legal experts say can quite dramatically reduce one’s chances of prevailing. Litigants with no legal training can also can clog up already overloaded court systems.

Making it easier for in-house lawyers to help out could help ease the burden, Judge Lippman said. “We think there is the potential for hundreds of thousands of hours of pro bono work.”