The intriguing concept of applying Montessori teaching methods to adults with dementia may sound at first like one more way our culture tends to treat elders as if they were children.

But then you have to consider that Maria Montessori -- an Italian doctor who began to develop her methods in 1900 to unlock the abilities of young students with learning problems -- insisted on treating children as individuals, to be followed and not led. And she quickly realized that encouraging them to explore their world for themselves, at their pace, made even the most challenging children easier to be around.

"When the children had completed an absorbing bit of work," she wrote, "they appeared rested and deeply pleased. It almost seemed as if a road had opened up within their souls that led to all their latent powers, revealing the better part of themselves. They exhibited a great affability to everyone, put themselves out to help others and seemed full of good will."

Doesn't that sound like the very highlight of a week for someone you love who is going through cognitive decline?

Psychologist Cameron J. Camp has seen the same thing happen in memory care facilities and private homes when his Montessori Program for Dementia is put into practice. As director of research and development at the Center for Applied Research in Dementia in Ohio, he travels the world teaching caregivers how to bring out the best in their clients -- and rely less on dangerous psychotropic drugs. Giving a workshop last week at the Pines of Sarasota Education Institute, he urged his international audience to "rediscover the person who may be hidden by a deficit."

Camp is an advocate for purposeful, "resident-led" activities, such as setting up a room for breakfast and cleaning up afterward. Just as in a Montessori kindergarten, there should be an "ebb and flow" of activity and rest throughout the day.

"It's just a matter of modifying the activity so the person can still accomplish things and tap in to that reserve of expertise," he said. "The capacity of a person with dementia to learn new things is still relatively unexplored territory."

Camp told his Sarasota audience the story of a facility where the eight most "stress-inducing" residents were selected to spend their days in a separate room with one staff member. They became so close, he said, that they would fall asleep holding hands during their rest periods.

"When they were given this very structured day, they normalized and this became their group," he explained. "They would go in this environment, and it was like you turned a switch. And when all of those problems were taken out of the system, it basically transformed the nature of the place."

Montessori-based activities also make family visits more meaningful, Camp said. To get a taste of his thinking on this, you can watch the YouTube video his center has produced.

If a loved one or client can no longer make conversation, he suggests, "Take the focus off of conversation; try doing something together instead. You both want to end up looking forward to the next visit."

Follow Barbara Peters Smith on Twitter @BarbaraPSmith.