To Van Jones, Ebola’s the kind of crisis Democrats shouldn’t let go to waste.

Jones, the “Crossfire” co-host and former White House “special advisor for green jobs,” blurted out an inconvenient truth on Sunday’s “This Week with George Stephanopoulos when he told the panel the arrival of Ebola on American shores could be just what the doctor ordered for Democrats facing a dismal election a month from now.

Verging on self-parody, the man drummed out of the White House in the early days of the Obama administration when word got around linking him to 9/11 “truthers” who thought the Bush administration was really behind the terrorist attacks on New York and Washington, declared to the “This Week” panelists that the “Ebola thing is the best argument you can make for the kind of government that we believe in.”

Crazy as it sounds, the big attraction of Ebola as a talking point would be that it distracts from all the other things going wrong.Here’s how Jones explained it.

“We can’t let the Republicans get away with some of the stuff they’re doing this week, just trying to bash Obama,” Jones said. “Hey, you know, government is always your enemy until you need a friend. This Ebola thing is the best argument you can make for the kind of government that we believe in.”

What kind of government would that be?

The kind that scrapped the previous administration’s plan to protect the country from diseases from abroad by making provisions for restricting travel from areas known to be infected, as Obama did in 2010 when he killed a Bush proposal that grew out of the avian flu scare of 2005?

Or the kind of government that has fouled up every major initiative its undertaken on the domestic front since it began with a cascade of incompetence?

The kind of government that’s given us Fast and Furious, the IRS scandal, the Department of Veterans Affairs deadly waiting lists, or the granddaddy of them all, Obamacare?

Jones might have a better point if the Obama administration had not spent the past six years demonstrating beyond a shadow of a doubt that — at least under this president — the only thing the government is truly competent at is wasting money and bullying its citizens.

If that’s the kind of argument Democrats are banking on, it’s going to be a grimmer November for them than even it looks right now.

Check out the Van Jones argument here, via Newsbusters.

H/T: Weasel Zippers