Elsie Amis' daughter: 'It's unreal'

Elsie Amis' room at the Broomfield Skilled Nursing & Rehabilitation Center is decorated with balloons, all deflated and pinned to the walls. Each one has a small number written on it in Sharpie — "101," "102," "104."

The latest balloon, orange, with a cartoon-like cake on it, says "107," because on July 5, Amis celebrated her 107th birthday.

"It's unreal, I just can't believe," said Velda Johnson, who is in her 70s, and is Amis' youngest and only living daughter.

Boulder County does not keep records that would reflect whether Amis is the county's oldest individual.

Johnson, along with Amis' nine grandchildren, eight great-grandchildren and three great-great grandchildren celebrated her birthday at the nursing center with other residents, about 25 guests in total.

Amis was born in Lyons, raised on a farm between Boulder and Longmont, and besides a five-year stint in Kansas where she met her husband, has spent most of her life in Boulder. All of her family currently lives in Boulder or the surrounding area.

Currently, Amis is wheelchair-bound, but she lived with Johnson in Westminster from when she was 85 until she was 101. Up to that time she was very active at the Trinity Lutheran Church in Boulder.

Now, she spends most days within the nursing center, where Johnson visits her almost daily. Amis is mostly non-verbal, but Johnson said she does "carry on conversations and has fun with people," sometimes.

"She likes to sit by the elevator and watch people go by," Johnson said. "All the other residents look after her."

Advertisement

Johnson said Amis enjoyed crocheting and bingo in her younger years, and was always a homemaker.

"She loved taking care of family," Johnson said.

Amis' husband, Charlie Amis, passed away more than 50 years ago at the age of 64, and she never re-married.

Amis, who did not speak at any length to a reporter when she was visited, did say "Yes," when asked if she enjoyed her birthday last week. She also let out a few laughs as her photo was taken.

"There's not much of the family left," Johnson said. "But there were a lot of family and friends and we had (the birthday party) in a special room and it is was really nice."

Isa Jones: 303-684-5274, jonesi@timescall.com or twitter.com/theisajones