Virginians woke up Wednesday to a political landscape nearly identical to the one that for more than a year has pitted Gov. Terry McAuliffe (D) against the Republican-controlled General Assembly.

But with the next legislative session just two months away, both Democrats and Republicans say that McAuliffe will have to decide how he will govern a still very much divided legislative body.

Some Democrats frustrated by Republicans’ opposition to Medicaid expansion and gun control argue that Tuesday’s loss leaves McAuliffe free to blast the policies and politics of his conservative foes. Others say he should work with Republicans and use his coming two-year budget to build a legacy on education, workforce development and economic development.

“This is a fork-in-the-road moment for McAuliffe. Does he continue to try to do both, or does he focus on one?” said David Wasserman, House editor for the Cook Political Report. “There’s no doubt he’s tried to work with Republicans, but he’s also rallied with Hillary Clinton in Alexandria the day after her Benghazi hearing.”

Brian Coy, a spokesman for McAuliffe,said the governor will continue to make a pitch for expanding Medicaid, among other less-incendiary issues.

View Graphic See the full results for statewide and local races.

“He’s going to focus on things like education, transportation, caring for Virginia’s veterans,” he said. “Those things should not be fodder for gridlock or political strife. We expect to have a productive session.”

Virginia Republicans celebrated their win Tuesday night, boasting of a “comeback,” but when it comes to passing legislation, they can’t go it alone, and they will also have to decide whether to compromise with the governor.

House Republicans fiercely opposed to McAuliffe’s priorities will continue to have the power to kill any legislation the governor proposes. Yet even with both chambers in Republican hands, the GOP still lacks a clear path to legislative wins, given the governor’s line-item veto power. The GOP lost its veto-proof majority in the House in Tuesday’s elections, for instance.

“The governor has a veto pen, and the legislature effectively has a legislative veto,” said Virginia Sen.-elect Scott A. Surovell (D-Fairfax), a state delegate who won the seat being vacated by retiring Sen. Linda T. “Toddy” Puller (D-Fairfax).

By the same token, Speaker William J. Howell (R-Stafford) must continue to pacify hard-core conservatives without alienating the establishment wing of the party or giving Democrats fodder in a state that twice elected President Obama.

With a net loss of just one seat in the House on Tuesday night, Howell still maintains a strong majority of 66 Republicans to Democrats’ 34 seats, which he said he’ll use to further education, health-care reform and economic development.

“Virginia really needs to take a look at its economic-development structure,” Howell said in an interview. “We’ve grown very complacent living off the federal government, whether it be military or government jobs or contracting. To a large extent, that’s going away, and it’s not coming back.”

The message sounds a lot like McAuliffe’s pitch to diversify the state economy. In fact, Howell has focused on pocketbook issues rather than hot-button social ones.

This summer, shortly after the Supreme Court’s ruling that affirmed marriage rights for gay couples in all 5o states, Republicans said they would look for ways to protect religious freedom in the coming session. At the time, Howell asked Del. C. Todd Gilbert (R-Shenandoah) to review what other states have done before they decide what action to take in Virginia.

Four months later, Howell said he hasn’t heard much about the issue inside or outside of his caucus.

Instead, Republicans say they want to unite the party in the vein of Ed Gillespie. The longtime Republican operative, who plans to run for governor in 2017, said he hopes that McAuliffe, with whom he used to spar on Sunday political shows, can avoid gridlock and work with lawmakers.

But knowing the Democrat’s connection to Clinton and desire to deliver the key swing state of Virginia for her, Gillespie was skeptical.

“I do worry that Governor McAuliffe is going to be distracted by the presidential campaign and spending a lot of time on his friend Secretary Clinton,” Gillespie said during a call with reporters that was organized by the Republican State Leadership Committee. “As a Virginian, I would like to see the General Assembly and the governor come together to address some of the concerns Republicans ran on.”

McAuliffe could also try to find ways to advance his agenda without the legislature’s consent. When Republicans shot down his efforts to expand Medicaid in 2014, he quietly pursued a plan to expand it unilaterally until the GOP caught wind of it and blocked him. Having failed to persuade Republicans to pass gun-control bills, he issued an executive order to ban guns from most state offices.

Or, he could find ways to make legislative gridlock work for him — and Clinton — politically, using stalemates in the Capitol to whip up the Democratic base. He will face pressure from Democratic legislators and activists to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act — his chief promise in the 2013 campaign.

“I think our continuing failure to deal with Medicaid expansion is political malpractice,” Surovell said. “We have to figure out a way to get health care to 400,000 people that the federal government’s willing to pay for. . . . I’ll be really surprised if the governor were to back down on that.”

McAuliffe spent his first year in office pushing for Medicaid expansion, first by trying to charm Republicans, then by railing against them. After that failed, he shifted his focus to issues with bipartisan appeal, such as economic development. After plugging a projected budget shortfall with the GOP’s help early this year, he acted so chummy with Republicans that Democrats feared he was undermining their case for ousting GOP incumbents in the coming elections.

The love fest did not last. The governor and the GOP fought bitterly with the legislature over a Supreme Court nomination last summer, with that animosity carrying over into elections filled with nasty name-calling.

Some political observers predict that McAuliffe will try to reprise the role he played earlier this year, focusing on things that have a chance of passing — especially since 2016 voters are more likely to reward those who get things done rather than those who fight for the sake of appealing to base voters, according to Quentin Kidd, a political scientist and pollster at Christopher Newport University.

“I don’t know if the governor having a miserable legislative session is all that helpful to Hillary Clinton,” he said. “I don’t think Hillary Clinton can win Virginia because a surrogate wins Virginia for her. McAuliffe is not a powerful surrogate — he demonstrated that yesterday.”