Topics: Conservatism, Donald Trump, Election 2016, Jeb Bush, personal responsibility, Republican Primary, Sarah Palin, Ted Cruz, Track Palin, Elections News, Media News, News, Politics News

Republicans like to think of themselves as the party of “personal responsibility,” The phrase props up repeatedly on conservative websites listing what their supposed values are. In his infamous, supposed-to-be-private, “47 percent” speech to wealthy donors in 2012, Mitt Romney notoriously declared, in reference to Obama voters, that he’ll “never convince them that they should take personal responsibility and care for their lives.”

In 2014, Ted Cruz tried to justify cutting people off from food assistance by saying, “Instead of locking people into an endless cycle of dependence, we should be focused on making it easier for people to stand on their own feet by getting this weak economy booming.” (A fallacious assertion, as food aid both helps people get on their feet and is by far one of the most cost-effective ways to stimulate the economy.)

But what’s become quite clear in recent months is that, for conservatives, “personal responsibility” is for other people. Conservatives love shaming genuinely responsible Americans because they occasionally need some help in hard times, but when asked to take responsibility for stuff that is actually their responsibility to take, conservatives will, more often than not, scream bloody murder.

The most recent example is Ted Cruz, who is a master class in avoiding personal responsibility. Cruz has been running around claiming that the reason he doesn’t have health insurance right now for his family is because of Obamacare. The actual reason is that he’s irresponsible.

Back in July, Cruz’s insurer decided to eliminate PPO plans in favor of HMO-only plans and gave policy holders a whopping five months to make the switch if they wanted to. Cruz apparently just forgot to do it, and now his family is scrambling. But rather than admit that he made a mistake and failed his family, Cruz is blaming the Affordable Care Act, as if no insurance company prior to the ACA ever did anything like adjust their rates or change the insurance options.

“By the way, when you let your health insurance policy lapse, your wife gets really ticked at you,” Cruz cracked at a campaign stop. Ladies are always nagging, am I right, fellas? Sure, Cruz thinks your kids should be hung out to starve if you lose your job due to layoffs that are not fault of your own, but if he just forgets to sign up for health insurance for five whole months, well, don’t be some kind of drag. It’s all Obama’s fault, anyway!

There’s a reason that “Thanks, Obama” so quickly became an ironic expression liberals used to poke fun at conservatives who love blaming the president for their problems when the real culprit is usually best seen in a mirror. But what’s sad is that Cruz blaming Obama for his own failure to use that five-month window to sign up for health insurance is that it wasn’t even the worst example from that week of this phenomenon.

No, that prize goes to Sarah Palin. Her son, Track Palin, was arrested on charges of domestic violence last week and rather than blaming her son for his choices or herself for bad parenting, Palin decided to blame, yes, Obama.

“When my own son is going through what he goes through coming back, I can certainly relate to other families who feel these ramifications of PTSD… our soldiers do return with. And it makes me realize more than ever it is now or never for the sake of America’s finest that we have a commander-in-chief who will respect them,” she claimed, in an extraordinarily maudlin dodge of personal responsibility.