Four people were killed in a fire in Platte County, Missouri that broke out late Friday night, including a three-month-old baby boy.

Authorities say they are treating the fire as a quadruple homicide.

"Based on some of the preliminary investigation by the Sheriff's office and the state Fire Marshal, we have determined that there are suspicious situations around the burning of the building and the deaths of the four individuals. We're going to treat this investigation as a homicide at this point in time," Capt. Erik Holland with the Platte County Sheriff's Department said.

Holland made that statement at a press conference Saturday morning.

As for the victims, KCTV5 spoke with family members Saturday afternoon. They say two women, a man and the three-month-old baby died in the fire.

Earlier, Holland said he wouldn't speculate on any relationships among the victims until identities are confirmed. He also said it appears the structure involved was a single-story, ranch-style home.

Holland said there are mixed reports based on the initial 911 calls in regards to a possible explosion. "Some callers say they heard an explosion, others that we talked to say they did not hear an explosion. So, we can't confirm whether there was an explosion or not and we're hoping to sort that out with fire marshal's as part of the investigation," Holland commented.

Crews have been unable to enter the house at this point. Platte County Sheriff Mark Owen said they are taking the necessary steps to make that happen.

"Contacted the prosecutor's office ,and then we had through of course the legal process with search warrants and things like that just to be sure and we waited quite a while for the search warrant. So, at that point, we had the search warrant; we asked for heavy equipment. Heavy equipment responded to help us dig out the house to be sure if we have another victim or not. We don't know," Owen stated.

Owen said there was no time frame for releasing the identities of the victims.

"I don't know at this point because I don't know who they are. That's due to the fire damage, I can't tell you who they are. Until we get some confirmation, whether it be dental, DNA, something like that, I don't feel comfortable giving those names," Owen said.

Owen and other officials remain concerned that they may be additional victims in the charred rubble and have gotten conflicting reports about how many people may have been in the home at the time of the fire.

Owen said there are no persons of interest or suspects yet.

"This is a very good community, just outside of Edgerton. People work and know each other all the time. Our officers know the people that live here, and, of course, any time you have tragedy with a loss of life, let alone three and an infant, it's a rough day. But, you're professional and we'll get through this and do what we have to do to ensure this is thoroughly and properly investigated and get the prosecutor on scene to help us out as well," Owen shared.

A Metro Squad has been activated to investigate the fire and the four murders.