Sioux Falls, SD

Dusty Coleman's fifth annual baseball clinic took place this weekend in Sioux Falls at the Sanford Fieldhouse. The camp gives the area's young sluggers a chance to improve on their baseball skills.

Dusty Coleman's has spent the last five years living the dream. He travels the country playing baseball for a living. The Sioux Falls native is busy with baseball year-round, but still stays involved in the Sioux Falls community. He talks about why he chooses to give back through a baseball clinic and the value that it brings to everyone involved.

"I just really enjoy working with kids, one day, when my baseball playing days are done, I probably want to get into coaching. And you know, this gives me a chance to give back to the kids and try to teach them a little bit of what I've learned and try to get them excited and ready to play some baseball," Minor League Infielder Dusty Coleman said.

Coleman was drafted from Wichita State in 2007 and works with a staff of five other players and coaches at the clinic. The O'Gorman High school grad talked about the importance of the event and what exactly he will be teaching the youngsters.

"Especially with the young guys you have to teach them fundamentals. I mean, if you don't teach them fundamentals then all the other tough stuff they will not be able to learn. You have to teach them the basics and once they get the confidence and those routines down then the other more complicated stuff will come," Coleman said.

As for Dusty himself, he has had five solid years in the minor leagues and continues to progress. He was an AA All-Star last year and keeps the ultimate dream still in sight.

"Yeah I was excited. Getting the chance to play a lot better in AA and getting the chance to play in AAA. It's a little more professional up there, guys have been up and down and it's just nice to kind of get that taste," Coleman said.

Coleman took a few weeks off to relax with family, but is now back to work preparing for another shot at the majors this spring.