Photo: Getty Images Incentives for healthy behavior have become a critical tool for employers to address rising health care costs. According to a 2015 study from the National Business Group on Health and Fidelity Benefits, jumbo employers spent an average of $878 per employee on heath incentives, an increase from $717 per employee in 2014. The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act provision that increased the amount of allowable incentives from 30 percent (and in the case of 50 percent in the case of smoking cessation) of annual premium was welcomed by employers and opened the door to greater creativity in the use of incentives. The Equal Opportunity Employment Commission (EEOC) saw things differently. Complete your profile to continue reading and get FREE access to BenefitsPRO.com, part of your ALM digital membership. Benefits:

Your access to unlimited BenefitsPRO.com content isn’t changing. Once you are an ALM digital member, you’ll receive: Critical BenefitsPRO.com information including cutting-edge post-reform success strategies, comprehensive service provider listings, educational webcasts and videos, resources from industry leaders, and informative eNewsletters.

Exclusive discounts on ALM, BenefitsPRO Magazine and BenefitsPRO.com events.

Access to other award-winning ALM publications including LifeHealthPro.com, ThinkAdvisor.com and Law.com. Register Now Already have an account? Sign In X Sign in with your ALM Account Remember Me Or... Sign In With LinkedIn

1. If the EEOC makes it too risky or difficult to implement incentive and reward programs, employers are likely to simply drop them. According to a 2015 study from the National Business Group on Health and Fidelity Benefits, the average jumbo employer spent $878 per employee on heath incentives. The proposed regulations would deprive them of the opportunity to earn these incentives. In fact, at its extreme, if employers feel that removing this valuable tool will make it too difficult to drive down costs, some employers may get out of the business of providing health care at all.

2. The EEOC has proposed that the 30 percent limit on the amount of incentives, which under PPACA applies only to health-contingent or “outcomes” programs, would apply to all programs including participatory programs. If this was the case, it is likely that employers will shift their incentive dollars to outcomes programs and away from programs based on only participation.

3. The EEOC has proposed that the limit of 50 percent of premium as provided under PPACA would only be available if smoking status is not verified by an actual test. This has the potential to deprive many non-smokers of incentive dollars.

4. The EEOC has proposed that the calculation of permitted incentive dollars be based on the premium of just the employee and not of the employee and other family members as provided under PPACA. This will likely cause employers to reduce or eliminate incentives for spouses and family members and thus deprive the families of employees the opportunity to earn additional dollars.