JEFFERSON — Transitioning to new requirements under the Affordable Care Act will bring some challenges for school districts, but those planning ahead will be better placed to fulfill those requirements and avoid penalties in the future.

That was the message shared by Greg Kuelz, benefits consultant with Associated Financial Group, as he addressed the School District of Jefferson Board of Education’s Finance and Operations Committee Monday night.

Some requirements linked to the Affordable Care Act are starting this year, while others will take effect in the near future, Kuelz said.

“This is very significant for school districts, as big as COBRA was when that was established,” he said.

The representative said his company works with 90 school districts across Wisconsin, and all are struggling to update their recordkeeping and policies to be in compliance with ACA requirements.

The ACA — commonly called Obamacare — requires every individual to get health insurance, providing “affordable” opportunities for people to do so and setting penalties for those who do not.

Kuelz said that the ACA, which is being rolled out piece by piece, established a new “Patient’s Bill of Rights” prohibiting what the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services describes as “the worst abuses of the insurance industry.”

Among numerous other changes this past year, provisions went into effect prohibiting discrimination due to pre-existing conditions or gender, eliminating annual limits on insurance coverage and ensuring coverage for individuals participating in clinical trials.

Also last year, the ACA established a national Health Insurance Marketplace for those whose employers do not offer insurance.

Kuelz said that health insurance can be paid out of three “buckets.” For those who qualify, there’s Medicare and Medicaid. For those whose employers do not offer health insurance, there’s the health insurance “exchange” where they can compare various companies and plans to find one that fits. The government also provides subsidies to help cover the healthcare premiums of lower-income workers participating in the exchange.

Finally — and this is the part that pertains to school districts — employers with more than 50 employees must offer insurance to all full-time employees (defined as those working 30 or more hours per week) or face a penalty.

One task Jefferson and other school districts face is determining exactly how many people qualify and must be offered health insurance, Kuelz said.

A grocery store, in comparison, has fairly simple calculations, with numerous part-time employees working approximately the same number of hours every week, every month.

But a school district has many categories of part-timers who might or might not rise to that “30-hour-per-week” threshold. Consider a coach or assistant coach helping with multiple sports over the course of a year, or a long-term substitute whose term might not be easy to define at the outset of his or her employment.

Kuelz said that a long-term substitute who works for a few months at the start of the school year (say, September through December) and only one day of the second calendar year (the first day pupils are back at school in January) still would have to be offered health insurance for the full calendar year.

Additionally, while tracking “hours paid” is simple, the ACA asks employers to consider “hours worked” when determining who qualifies for healthcare coverage, and simple recordkeeping systems to verify that are not yet in place in many districts.

“This is a big challenge for school districts,” Kuelz said. “If a person works as a substitute teacher, a bus driver and a ticket-taker at athletic events, all of those hours have to be captured in the calculations.”

He noted that school districts must calculate hours per week only through the school year for regular employees. Time off over the summer cannot count as “hours eligible to be worked.”

In addition, the ACA requires that the insurance employers offer must be “affordable.” If the cost of insurance rises above 9 1/2 percent of a family’s income, the employer can face a fine of $3,000.

One more measure coming down the pike — to take effect in 2018 — is the so-called “Cadillac tax” for excessively expensive plans. The thresholds for this tax are $10,200 per individual and $27,500 per family.

Kuelz remarked that Jefferson is nowhere near these amounts yet, but these totals bear watching, as health insurance costs for school districts have been rising at around 8 percent a year, far ahead of inflation.

He said that some planning will be required to keep Jefferson insurance costs down so they do not rise over this threshold by 2018. After that year, the Cadillac tax threshold will rise in accordance with the rate of inflation.

“One calculation we have been making for school districts is, they are asking, what if you gave the money directly to the employees and let them go on the exchange?” Kuelz said.

Using current figures, districts would incur more costs by giving the money to the employees directly, he explained. For starters, these districts would lose a tax break. Then they would be subject to penalties. In addition, any money given to employees to cover these costs would then be counted as taxable income, which opens a whole new can of worms for both the employer and the employees.

Right now, such a move would drive a district’s costs up significantly, Kuelz said. But this might change as costs go down on the exchange.

Kuelz then outlined how districts are planning to address the changes anticipated due to the ACA.

Many are changing their health insurance plans, he said, noting that one local school district is working with a designated clinic associated with the district, encouraging employees to see a Licensed Practical Nurse for routine health matters rather than a costlier doctor.

Districts also are looking closely at who is eligible for healthcare, setting clear policies that reflect ACA guidelines and stating that those working fewer than 30 hours per week are not eligible for district health insurance.

“Then those who work less than that number of hours can get a subsidy on the exchange,” the presenter said.

He said that some districts are changing the language in coaching contracts, setting an “expected” number of hours per week rather than asking coaches to “punch in” or record their hours when watching game footage.

Many districts are encouraging wellness aggressively, providing incentives and establishing penalties to help employees achieve healthy goals.

“For every dollar a district invests in wellness, it saves $6 in the long run,” Kuelz said.

Other business

In other business, the panel gave a nod to a new contract for Jake Wichman as summer school director for the district.

This year’s pay reflects an increase of $1,400 for a total of $6,500, which puts his pay more in line with summer school directors at other area districts.

Summer school employee pay schedules got a similar boost, again to bring them closer to the pay received by employees at other area districts, said Laura Peachey, director of business services for the Jefferson school district.

Peachey reported that new enrollment numbers show that the district has gained 14 students since the official enrollment count in September. This does not help the district directly this year, but if those students remain in the district, it likely will translate into a boost in state aid and per-pupil allotments in the next school year.

The panel also gave a nod to a new High School Equivalency Degree contract with Madison Area Technical College. This will cost the district $1,886.32, which uses up the rest of the HSED budget for this year. The remaining portion of the cost ($500-plus out of that $1,886 total) will come out of the district’s alternative programming fund.

The panel agreed to send a summer swimming agreement pact with the Johnson Creek school district to the full board with a recommendation for approval.

The agreement has been in place for several years, with 90-plus students from Johnson Creek participating in summer swimming instruction at the Jefferson pool. The fees are going up $5 this year to cover additional staff time at the pool.