Twelve yards from Karl Marx’s grave, in leafy Highgate Cemetery in north London, is a tombstone inscribed with the words “Writer Teacher Socialist.” Beneath it lies the body of Ralph Miliband, best known today as the father of David and Ed Miliband, two key political figures in Britain’s Labour Party. Ralph Miliband was born in Belgium in 1924, to Polish Jews. In 1940, when he was sixteen years old, he fled to Britain to escape the Nazis. He and his father walked a hundred kilometres from Brussels to the coast of West Flanders, where they caught one of the final boats to embark before the Germans arrived. He changed his birth name—Adolphe—because of its new connotation, learned English, and helped his father make a living by removing furniture from houses bombed in the Blitz. He began his schooling at Acton Technical College, and was later accepted by the London School of Economics. His studies there were interrupted by three years spent in the British Navy. After his service, he returned to L.S.E., and went on to teach there and at other universities in Britain, Canada, and the United States, and to be a prominent Marxist sociologist. When he died, in 1994, his obituary in the Telegraph noted that “Though committed to socialism, he never hesitated to criticise its distortion by Stalin and other dictators.”

Miliband and his wife, Marion Kozak, a Polish Holocaust survivor, had two children. David, born in 1965, joined Tony Blair’s government when he was twenty-nine, and served as foreign secretary under Gordon Brown. In 2010, the year Brown left office, Ed, who is four years David’s junior, narrowly beat his older brother out in a vote to head the party. Today, Ed Miliband is the “Leader of Her Majesty’s Most Loyal Opposition,” the Labour alternative to Prime Minister David Cameron, who leads the Conservative Party.

Ralph Miliband died almost twenty years ago. But now he is suddenly a major news story in England. Last weekend, the Daily Mail published an editorial by Geoffrey Levy about Ralph Miliband. The title: “The Man Who Hated Britain.” The occasion was a new memoir by Damian McBride, Gordon Brown’s press chief, that suggested Ed Miliband was attempting to “achieve his father’s vision” by gaining leadership. Levy’s concern, as summarized in a secondary headline: “ RED ED’S PLEDGE TO BRING BACK SOCIALISM IS A HOMAGE TO HIS MARXIST FATHER .”

In the piece, Levy cited a diary entry that Ralph Miliband wrote when he was seventeen years old, having just fled the Nazis, in which he ruminated on the fierce nationalism, even jingoism, of the Brits: “They have the greatest contempt for the Continent. … To lose their empire would be the worst possible humiliation.” Levy wrote, “This adolescent distaste for the British character certainly didn’t stop him availing himself of the fine education that was on offer in this country, or spending the rest of his life here.”

In considering Miliband’s intellectual work, Levy continued, “one is entitled to wonder whether Ralph Miliband’s Marxism was actually fuelled by a giant-sized social chip on his shoulder as he lived in his adoptive country. … Like all Left-wing thinkers, Ralph Miliband knew how to explain away awkward events.”

Ed Miliband immediately objected to this “appalling” characterization of his father, and on Tuesday, the paper published his response, “Why My Father Loved Britain.” It began, “It was June 1944 and the Allies were landing in Normandy. A 20-year-old man, who had arrived in Britain as a refugee just four years earlier, was part of that fight. He was my father.”

Miliband fils went on to explain that Britain saved his father; many members of the Miliband family were killed by the Nazis. “Like most refugees,” Ed Miliband wrote, “the security of our country was really important to him. And like some refugees, he owed his life to it. So my Dad loved Britain, he served Britain, and he taught both David and me to do the same.” As for his father’s influence:

My father’s strongly Left-wing views are well known, as is the fact that I have pursued a different path and I have a different vision. … I want to make capitalism work for working people, not destroy it.

The Daily Mail published Milband’s defense in a spread alongside an editorial called “An Evil Legacy and Why We Won’t Apologise,” and above a rehash of Levy’s earlier piece: “We repeat: This man DID hate Britain.” There was little space on the page, or in the reader’s mind, for the son to define himself in opposition to the father.

This gambit—the father as ideological cryptographic key—will sound familiar to anyone who has watched the response, among a certain sector of the Republican Party, to Barack Obama. In September, 2010, Forbes magazine printed a substantial story by the conservative writer Dinesh D’Souza, called “How Obama Thinks.” It considered the President as a puzzle—mystifying, anomalous, bizarre. D’Souza wrote: “A good way to discern what motivates Obama is to ask a simple question: What is his dream?” He answered: “It is certainly not the American dream as conceived by the founders.” Pointing a finger at the title of Obama’s memoir, “Dreams from my Father”—“Obama isn’t writing about his father’s dreams; he is writing about the dreams he received from his father”—he proceeded:

Incredibly, the U.S. is being ruled according to the dreams of a Luo tribesman of the 1950s. This philandering, inebriated African socialist, who raged against the world for denying him the realization of his anticolonial ambitions, is now setting the nation’s agenda through the reincarnation of his dreams in his son.

Many Republicans adopted D’Souza’s language and theories, in a rash of birtherism. Mike Huckabee insisted that Obama was raised in Kenya, that he “probably grew up hearing that the British were a bunch of imperialists who persecuted his grandfather.” John Sununu, a former White House chief of staff and a close Romney surrogate, mimicked D’Souza’s rhetoric when he said, “I wish this president would learn how to be an American.” And Newt Gingrich gushed over D’Souza’s “stunning,” “profound insight” into the President.

What Gingrich expressed goes, in some way, to the heart of the opposition to Obama. To those like D’Souza, Gingrich, Michele Bachmann, Obama is forever tainted by his father’s heritage and decisions, and there is nothing he can do to lift their suspicions. His ancestors were not all American (whose were?), and it makes him un-American; similarly, Ralph Miliband’s leftism is deemed more suspicious because it is tied to his foreignness.

The scare tactics used by those who oppose the President have been front and center this week in the government shutdown. During his pseudo-filibuster, Senator Ted Cruz, Republican of Texas, said of those Republicans who would not stand with him in his campaign against Obamacare:

Look, we saw in Britain, Neville Chamberlain, who told the British people, Accept the Nazis. Yes, they’ll dominate the continent of Europe but that’s not our problem. Let’s appease them. Why? Because it can’t be done. We can’t possibly stand against them.

It seems, to some, a matter not of policy and congressional order, but of character and contempt.

On Wednesday, the Miliband family gathered in London at a private memorial service for Ed’s uncle, Professor Harry Keen. Reporters snuck in and asked the mourners assembled about Ralph Miliband and whether he ‘hated Britain.’ Perhaps the American experience offers help in maintaining one’s equanimity in the face of encounters like that. Barack Obama has not found a way to entirely shake the smears and fright—over the fact of his birth to a particular man, associations that have been deemed alien, from what they want to see when they look at his face. But he has been elected President of the United States, twice. Does that count as partial liberation from the dreams—the ones disturbing his enemies’ sleep—of his father?

Photograph by Peter Macdiarmid/Getty.