Benny Overton (Photo: Submitted) Story Highlights Diverse stakeholders should come together to discuss how to implement Amendment 3.

When Nashville taxpayers fund a construction project, Nashvillians should be hired to work on it.

Per Amendment 3, Nashvillians must perform 40 percent of work on Metro-funded construction projects.

Re: “Local-hire amendment goes step too far,” by Jamie McGee, Aug. 10.

In this Tennessean column, San Francisco’s Office of Economic Development summed up what Nashville is about to experience.

“There was a lot of criticism early on, but the wheels did not fall off the bus,” said Pat Mulligan, an official at San Francisco’s Office of Economic & Workforce Development.

By passing Metro Charter Amendment 3, Nashville voters have said it loud and clear: When Nashville taxpayers fund a construction project, Nashvillians should be hired to work on it.

When we build something like the new ballpark — or any project receiving more than $100,000 from the city — Amendment 3 will ensure that at least 40 percent of the work hours will go to Nashvillians, not temporary out-of-state hires.

Passage of the amendment on Aug. 6 was just a first step. Now, a newly elected mayor and Metro Council will craft the rules to make Amendment 3 work.

Glenn Farner (Photo: Submitted)

Nashville can learn from Cleveland, Ohio, where a local-hire law has succeeded without increasing costs or causing delays.

Cleveland — with approximately half the population of Nashville — has been able to meet its local-hire requirements. So rather than cast doubt on how to build a local-hire program that works for Nashville, we believe that we should convene in the coming weeks a working group to start the conversation on how we implement a Nashville-focused local-hire program.

From the construction industry to labor and faith leaders to the Chamber of Commerce, we want a diverse group of stakeholders to come to the table.

We want to heed the voters’ call to put in place a responsible and Nashville- focused local-hire program. Let’s bring our collective experiences to the table so we can advise our city leaders on a program that is inclusive of all.

We know that a divide-and-conquer approach will not work given that Amendment 3 passed by almost 20 points.

So let’s take a community-united approach and stay focused on Nashville’s success.

Moreover, according to the Census Bureau, we have 16,000 able-bodied Nashville men and women today who are unemployed, living at or below the poverty line and are the right age for construction work (18 to 44).

So, with some training, we can have the workforce we need to make Amendment 3 work.

This means we have a real opportunity to transform jobs to careers in the construction industry.

This means more Nashville residents are bringing home a paycheck and investing in the local economy.

In the end, there is no smarter investment we can make than local jobs.

Glenn Farner, a Davidson County resident, is the business manager and secretary-treasurer of the Southeast Laborers' District Council. Benny Overton serves as vice chair of Nashville Organized for Action and Hope (NOAH).

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1F4pP4a