Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share USA TODAY's world editor Owen Ullmann details the most important aspects of the historic Iran nuclear deal and how the world is reacting. Robert Padavick, Owen Ullmann, Collin Brennan, USA TODAY

President Obama, standing with Vice President Biden. (Photo: Andrew Harnik, AP)

WASHINGTON — Derided as a lame duck after his Democratic Party suffered losses in last November's midterm elections, President Obama has carved out a series of accomplishments that show he remains consequential despite the fervent desires of his adversaries.

Two weeks ago, Obama announced the United States and Cuba would open embassies in each other's capitals, a move that ended more than 50 years of diplomatic isolation between the two nations.

On Tuesday, with Vice President Biden beside him, Obama endorsed what could be his administration's signature foreign policy accomplishment — a deal that would limit Iran's nuclear program and potential to build an atomic bomb. The negotiations showed the United States could join with a diverse group of allies to reach a potential accommodation with a country that held U.S. diplomats hostage 35 years ago.

"We are stronger not when we are alone but when we bring the world together," Obama said.

The deal announcement continues Obama's recent winning streak, which includes Cuba and the Supreme Court's rulings in support of the Affordable Care Act, his signature domestic accomplishment, and same-sex marriage.

Obama carried that momentum into the White House East Room at 7 a.m. ET Tuesday. He called the Iran deal a triumph of U.S. diplomacy and the linchpin for future peace in the region. He again emphasized the power of the presidency, which he has exerted more forcefully throughout 2015 wit

h executive actions on the environment, law enforcement and pardons.

The deal with Iran involved U.S. negotiators working with Russia, the target of joint U.S. and European Union sanctions because of Russia's aggression against Ukraine, and China, the focus of increasing tensions with the United States and Asian nations because of Chinese expansion in the South China Sea. It involved a group of European nations — France, Germany and Great Britain — that are often reluctant to exert tough economic sanctions.

That represents a multilayered piece of diplomacy not seen since World War II when the United States, Great Britain and the Soviet Union joined together against Nazi Germany and Japan.

Much remains to be done with Iran. Congress has 60 days to review the agreement and potentially block it. Obama has vowed to veto any attempt to do so.

That means he will own the Iranian deal and where it will lead.

This isn't Henry Kissinger and President Nixon going to China in 1971 and 1972, deals that were hatched in total secrecy. For starters, there's no evidence the United States gave Iran classified intelligence information, as Nixon and Kissinger gave China.

This isn't Iran-Contra, in which the Reagan administration traded arms with Iran to help release hostages in Lebanon. Those were done in secret. These talks were held in hotels in Switzerland and Austria as the world press waited outside, burning their expense accounts and watching tired and testy diplomats come and go.

Every time long-standing differences between nations are removed, there are critics. Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu called the deal a threat to Israel. Saudi Arabia and other Sunni Muslim nations fear anything that would strengthen Shiite Muslim Iran.

As Obama said Tuesday, diplomacy means reaching deals with adversaries. And like those earlier agreements, the true measure of whether this deal works — whether or not Iran eventually builds nuclear weapons — will occur decades after he leaves office.

Obama cited President Ronald Reagan's arms deal with the Soviet Union, a nation with thousands of nuclear weapons aimed at the United States. Some of Nixon's top aides complained he sold out to the Communists when he visited Mao Zedong in Beijing. They carped when President Jimmy Carter brought Israel and Egypt together at Camp David or when President Bill Clinton had Israel and the PLO visit the White House.

But all ended periods of diplomatic isolation. So may this deal. Now, as Reagan said to Mikhail Gorbachev, is the time to trust but verify.

Follow @rlocker12 on Twitter.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1IXDjnP