By JOE HEIM

At the National Confectioners Association’s Sweets & Snacks Expo in Chicago, 20 or so of the candy world’s leading taste-makers and buyers have gathered and been tasked with a sugar-spun assignment: to sample dozens of new candies, chocolates and snacks in search of the most innovative new creations.

It’s like a fine wine tasting for 9-yearolds.

Wending from table to table, these industry vets chomp on the best new candy America has to offer: Toxic Waste Goop Gum “Oozing with sour slime!”; Tabasco Spicy Chocolate; Butterfinger Peanut Butter Cups; Dubble Bubble Fizzers Fizzing Bubble Gum; Warheads Sour Dippin’ Pucker Packs; Too Tarts Sugar-Free Spray Candy in Gween Apple, Blu Bewwy and Straw Bewwy flavors; birthday- cake-flavored M& Ms; draft-beer-flavored Jelly Belly jelly beans.

My reporting would be incomplete if I did not also tell you there is a new candy called Sour Farts.

These are my people, I think as I look around the room. My new candy-land colleagues walk about chewing, murmuring, occasionally grimacing. They punch ratings into computer tablets, scoring the marketability, price points and deliciousness of each product.

We take joy where we find it in life, and I’ve almost always found joy in candy. Unwrapping a frozen Charleston Chew, biting into the sweet-salty perfection of a Reese’s peanut butter cup or daintily consuming a handful of unjustly maligned candy corn reaffirms the world’s wonder for me.

When the candymakers tell me their product is about fun and pleasure, I want to be one of them.

And yet.

And yet America is a nation of scale-busters. Two out of every three of us are overweight. We’re No. 1 with a bullet on the world’s obesity chart, and no one is catching us anytime soon. A sugar-fueled diabetes epidemic looms.

Public health advocates long ago took notice of this rising fat and sugar tide and have pushed for changes to stem a health disaster. Soda companies have come under siege; trans-fats were punished into near oblivion. The phrase “high-fructose corn syrup” is now uttered with lip-curling contempt.

ANTI-SUGAR LOBBY

America’s candymakers insist that they aren’t the problem. They point out that Americans get only 2 percent of their daily calories from candy. They argue that Americans understand that candy is a treat to be eaten in moderation. They state that candy can be a part of a balanced diet.

And that may all be true, but the candymakers also sense that sugar is public health enemy No. 1. The health advocates and regulators who went after soda and trans-fats now have candy in their crosshairs.

For 15 years, Margo Wootan, director of nutrition policy at the Center for Science in the Public Interest, has been pushing hard on the anti-sugar front. She worked with a large coalition to bring about the passage of the Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids Act in 2010, which brought vast changes to nutrition requirements at all schools that get federal funding.

A portion of the law that went into effect last month required that all candy, sugary drinks and non-nutritional snacks be removed from school cafeterias and vending machines.

“By taking candy out of schools we’re saying candy is not an everyday food, and it’s something you should be eating a lot less of,” Wootan says.

For a few advocates, the law didn’t go far enough, but with its passage, the anti-sugar forces had notched their first significant piece of legislation.

THE CHECKOUT LANE

Wootan doesn’t want to see the sugar-removal effort stop at the boundaries of schools and public buildings. She is preparing a campaign to rid candy and unhealthy snacks from all checkout aisles of grocery and convenience stores.

This strategy is borrowed from Great Britain, where earlier this year Tesco, the United Kingdom’s largest supermarket and convenience store chain, announced it would remove all candy at checkouts. Other U.K. chains are doing the same, says Malcolm Clark, coordinator of the London-based Children’s Food Campaign.

Could candy removal work on this side of the Atlantic? Currently, most supermarkets in the United States have one or two checkout lanes where candy is not sold. Those are mostly intended for parents who have small children and don’t want to endure the ruthless negotiating of 4-yearolds.

But Wootan isn’t just worried about whiny kids; she’s also thinking about weak-willed grown-ups.

“Companies know that at the end of a shop, your willpower is at a very low point, and then they assault you with this huge display of candy, knowing that it will induce impulse buying,” she says. “Pushing people to buy food that they didn’t want, that is going to harm their health, just doesn’t seem appropriate, given the high rates of obesity.”

Of course, the idea of restricting choice simply because Americans may not want to make a healthy choice is not roundly popular, particularly not with . . . Americans.

THE CASE FOR SUGAR

John Downs took the reins this year as the National Confectioners Association’s new chief executive. Sitting on a couch in his executive suite, the former Coca-Cola executive sips from a Diet Coke and makes candy’s argument against regulation.

“There is so much negative publicity around sugar,” he says. “So we’ve got to do a better job, obviously, in articulating our case in the role that candy plays in a balanced lifestyle. . . . I think our message is clear. It’s about balance and moderation.”

The health and wellness issue is a sensitive topic, and candymakers have become accustomed to playing defense and occasionally giving ground. When criticized for aiming television advertising at children, most candymakers agreed to pull back. Brands have also created sugar-free offerings and reduced portion sizes.

But candy can change only so much before it stops being candy. And the NCA is pushing back against demands to further limit its marketing or availability to customers. Removing candy from all checkout aisles would be a blow to the industry.

“The majority of consumers don’t want government to restrict their access to food; they want education around how to consume indulgent foods,” says Alison Bodor, the NCA’s executive vice president. “Even dietitians will say there’s a role for candy in the diet, albeit a small one. And we’re all fine with that. We agree. But removing access or trying to remove choice is an unfortunate outcome, and I think most consumers reject that policy and feel that they can make that decision themselves.”

A CANDIFIED WORLD

David Kessler, former head of the Food and Drug Administration, wrote the 2012 book “Your Food Is Fooling You: How Your Brain Is Hijacked by Sugar, Fat and Salt.”

Kessler emphasizes that the issue is not simply candy.

“The issue is that all of our food has been candified,” he says. The danger occurs “when you make everything into candy, and you load and layer fat, sugar and salt into everything, and then you eat that constantly.”

If that sounds like alarmist hyperbole, consider a 2012 historical study of sugar consumption in America by obesity researchers Stephan Guyenet and Jeremy Landen. They concluded that in 1900 the average American consumed just over 40 pounds of sugar a year. By 2005 that had increased to just under 100 pounds.

Diving deeper, the pair determined that in 1822 Americans ate the amount of added sugar in a 12-ounce soda every five days. In 2012, that same amount was consumed every seven hours.

“What changed?” Kessler asks. “We would occasionally have candy. Now we have the equivalent of candy all the time, and you can’t walk more than 100 feet in any direction from where you are, certainly in any city, and not be affected by some food or food cue.”

Government has a role, but what doesn’t work, he insists, is instituting laws to change consumption patterns.

“This isn’t about regulation or litigation or legislation,” he says. “This is really about changing social norms. But let’s not fool ourselves; government is a helpful tool in changing social norms. . . . What did we really do when it came to smoking? We demonized the product. We changed the social norm.”

It’s not easy to make candy seem menacing. Even Wootan, the industry critic, says, “If anyone tried to ban chocolate, I would be the first one up in arms to oppose it.”

Candy is simply the visible tip of the sugar iceberg and the easiest place to focus concern about the warped presence that sweetness has assumed in America’s diet. Preaching moderation and exercise hasn’t worked, and the pounds keep accumulating.

INSIDE THAT M&M

M&Ms are a marvel of engineering and taste. Like space exploration, Michael Jackson and the cure for polio, the very existence of M&Ms points to America’s greatness and ingenuity. From my dead hands they will pry not a gun, but a bag of unmelted M&Ms.

So it pains me to use M&Ms as an example, but one ordinary-size packet (1.69 ounces) contains 31 grams of sugar. This year, the World Health Organization recommended that sugar consumption should equal no more than 5 percent of your daily caloric intake. For the average adult, that’s about 25 grams of added sugar per day. The WHO isn’t just worried about the 69 percent of Americans who are overweight or obese. Diabetes and obesity are rapidly becoming a global concern.

My packet of M& Ms already exceeds 25 grams of sugar. If on a day that I eat the M& Ms I also have a 12-ounce Coke (39 grams of sugar), a one-cup bowl of Raisin Bran Crunch (19 grams), one serving of Campbell’s tomato soup (12 grams) and a 6-inch turkey sub from Subway (7 grams), that puts me at 108 grams of sugar, or over 400 percent of the WHO’s daily recommendation.

And that’s in 950 calories.

So either the WHO’s recommendation is ridiculously low or much of the reason the world is getting so fat — and not just fat, but sick — is that we’re swimming in an ocean of sugar and don’t even realize it.

– Joe Heim, The Washington Post