Denver’s high temperature Monday is expected to reach 65 degrees — 22 degrees above normal — before plunging into the single digits by Tuesday night. But the last bit of warmth will be accompanied by heavy wind, according to the National Weather Service.

After the city peaked at 56 degrees Sunday afternoon, cold wind arrived Sunday evening. Loveland Pass was closed Sunday night so crews could do avalanche control in preparation for the storm, according to the state Department of Transportation.

Motorists were being urged to use Interstate 70 instead.

The Front Range mountains and foothills could see gusts up to 70 mph, and Denver could see gusts up to 40 mph Monday.

On the backside of the wind is an arctic cold front that will drop the metro area’s temperature by more than 32 degrees from Monday to Tuesday. The city might only reach freezing Tuesday, but it won’t get nearly as warm in the days that follow, forecasters said Sunday.

Denver is expected to face its coldest temperatures so far this season: forecast lows of 7 degrees Tuesday night, followed by overnight lows of zero or below from Wednesday through Saturday nights.

High temperatures in the city aren’t expected to get out of the teens from Wednesday through Sunday, forecasters warned.

The average daily high for this week is 44 degrees each day, according to weather records.

The Front Range isn’t expected to receive a significant amount of snow from the system, but the mountains could pick up 4 inches to 8 inches, according to the National Weather Service.

Denver normally gets 8,2 inches of snow in December. The city received 5.2 inches last year, and 16.5 inches in 2011.

This week’s inclement weather coincides with the 100-year anniversary of the biggest blizzard in city history — 45.7 inches from Dec. 1 to Dec. 5, 1913.

The second-worst blizzard was March 17-19, 2003, when Denver got 31.8 inches, according to the National Weather Service.

Joey Bunch: 303-954-1174, jbunch@denverpost.com or twitter.com/joeybunch