For almost two years, Colorado and other states have been preparing to implement the Environmental Protection Agency’s Clean Power Plan, federal rules designed to reduce carbon dioxide emissions from the nation’s power sector.

On Feb. 9, in a 5-4 decision, the U.S. Supreme Court stayed the plan, pending the outcome of litigation over the rules. Soon after the court’s decision, Gov. John Hickenlooper’s administration announced the state would continue to work with Colorado utilities and other stakeholders on efforts to reduce emissions. We remain committed to that course of action.

Power plants emit a number of air pollutants that can adversely impact public health and the environment. The utility sector also provides one of our most important and fundamental services: affordable and reliable electricity. Fortunately, minimizing emissions and providing affordable and reliable energy are not mutually exclusive.

Colorado has addressed energy and air quality challenges in a collaborative and comprehensive manner. Through initiatives such as the nation’s first voter-approved Renewable Energy Standard in 2004, the 2010 Clean Air/Clean Jobs Act, and 2013 legislation that expanded the Renewable Energy Standard, Colorado has proven itself to be a national leader on energy policy. Through these measures, Colorado already has reduced millions of tons of pollution per year with minimal electric rate impacts, and will continue to do so into the future.

The court-ordered stay is a temporary measure, and the litigation will take time to run its course. In light of the uncertainty, it is prudent for Colorado to continue stakeholder engagement to ensure the state is not left at a disadvantage if the courts uphold all or part of the Clean Power Plan.

Moreover, the stay provides us with an opportunity to continue to consider Colorado-specific approaches and solutions. Colorado utilities, local governments, nongovernmental organizations and citizens have all provided valuable input on measures the state has taken and can take in the future to reduce power sector emissions. This dialogue should continue.

We will continue to coordinate with stakeholders to assess how the stay might impact the timing and substance of state efforts. Ultimately, Colorado will be in the best position possible, regardless of how the litigation proceeds.

Climate change remains an important environmental and public health and welfare issue. Coloradans have experienced the impacts of a changing climate first-hand, such as drought, wildfires and reduced snowpack. Through a coordinated and thoughtful approach, we are confronting these challenges. Idly waiting for future federal mandates, whether from EPA or the courts, is not the Colorado way.

That is why Colorado utilities have not stopped actively planning for the future. Utilities continue to consider cost-effective strategies to address aging infrastructure, modernize the electrical grid, reduce emissions, diversify energy portfolios, increase energy efficiency and reduce energy consumption. There are tremendous environmental, public health and economic opportunities afforded by deploying multiple energy options across a modernized electrical grid. Colorado should remain at the forefront of a robust energy market that can readily incorporate emerging and increasingly affordable technologies. Colorado has — and will continue to develop — cost-effective strategies to diversify our energy mix, strengthen our economy and lower our emissions. Our department will continue to work collaboratively with other state agencies, industry, the environmental community and other interested parties to ensure emission reductions occur in common sense ways that are right for Colorado.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.