This Week in Crain's New York: December 13, 2015 Listen to the Podcast or Download

See Crain's full Economic Outlook for 2016

What does the health sector mean to the New York economy, and how big a piece of the state budget is it?

The health care sector is the largest employer in most cities around the state. It certainly is in New York City. With federal dollars, the budget is $60 billion for Medicaid alone. In terms of the state budget, it’s roughly equal to the $25 billion spent on school aid. It’s a huge part of the state budget. And the state is probably more responsible for health care than any other sector. It creates health care policy and is the purchaser of health care, through Medicaid, for one out of four New Yorkers.

Health care has so many sectors, among them hospitals, providers, insurers, Medicaid and social services. Is one on your economic watch list for 2016?

We’re in a period of tremendous disruption in health care. We are moving from a hospital-centric model to providing care in the community and coordinating care among providers. Because we are in a time of transition, the state is providing money to a number of hospitals.

Let's take insurers. What are the touch points in 2016?

Health Republic’s failure really was a wake-up call. Thirteen of 23 co-ops created under the Affordable Care Act failed. We want to make sure we understand why.

What will be the lingering impact of Health Republic's failure—both ­financially and from a policy perspective—in 2016?

It’s too soon to tell what the financial impact of Health Republic will be. From a policy perspective, we will really examine what ­decisions were made by the management of Health Republic and what we can learn.

Does consolidation—both among insurers and hospitals—worry you?

It’s something we really have to watch.

PAUL FRANCIS WHO HE IS New York state’s deputy secretary

for health and human services

AGE 61

BORN Santa Monica, Calif.; raised in Chappaqua, N.Y.

EDUCATION Yale College; J.D., New York University School of Law

BONA FIDES A former CFO of Ann Taylor and Priceline.com, Francis served as director of state operations under Gov. David Paterson and director of agency redesign under Gov. Andrew Cuomo.



The five big national insurers are merging to three. New York is fortunate that it has a more robust nonprofit sector than most markets. But there also is consolidation in the hospital industry. We have to balance the positive effects; it can reduce costs if it is done well. At the same time, it can create risk if there is too much consolidation.

Under the pressure of several trends, hospitals are closing, but they are, of course, big economic drivers. Will we see closures next year?

I don’t think we’ll see any closures next year. There is $700 million in funding for a transition. We’ll see over a multiyear period. There will be some transition, but not hospitals disappearing in 2016.

Brooklyn's health care market is a trouble spot that will take lots of money and politics to fix. What's ahead there next year?

You will begin to see the direction of the transformation and concrete progress. Something as big as the transition of health care for 3 million people won’t happen overnight.

What's your worst fear about 2016?

A great question. To a surprising degree, there’s consensus on how to improve health care based on empirical evidence. That’s very different from income inequality or education. I really do believe health care is an area where we will show a lot of positive changes.

That didn't answer the question.

Right. When in doubt, say “cybersecurity.”

Sign Up for Health Pulse Brought to you by Crain's New York Business, Health Pulse is a subscription-only website focused on the business of health care. The site is updated every day with breaking news, research and unique information. Subscribe today and receive access to the site and the daily emails. Plus, twice a week we release a special report called Extra, featuring data and statistics. Subscribe Today

Comments