Parents have a lot of opinions about the children's TV they're forced to sit through.

images from the Thomas the Tank Engine special (to air on PBS and on DVD in September), that will introduce Thomas, for the first time, not only in CGI, but with his own speaking voice. For an upcoming "Coming Attractions" (Via MerlinFTP Drop)

In a column last week, opinion editor Robert Mentzer wrote of the parent's lot of having to endure terrible children's television shows, with most of his ire directed at "Thomas the Tank Engine." In story comments and on Facebook, readers weighed in on their own least-favorite kids' shows:

George Carlin was the best "Thomas" narrator! My kids are beyond children's TV, but for us the worst was "Dora the Explorer." Her voice makes my skin crawl.

— Ginny Bivin Sauer

"Doc McStuffins" must die.

— Rob Owen

I enjoy Thomas, although I liked it much bwtter when I was a kid and George Carlin was the conductor and narrator! I like "Timothy Goes to School"; most of the "children" on that show are rude or have poor manners but if you look at kids today, that's pretty much how most of them are! Personally, I wish "Mr. Rogers' Neighborhood" were still on so my kids could enjoy it.

— Shannon Genrich

What I wish was still around: "Bob the Builder" and "Higgly Town Heroes" (beyond cute, but beyond my kids' ages). What I can't stand: all the junk on Cartoon Network (which my kids love).

— Jen Keller Faust

"The Teletubbies" and "Yo Gabba Gabba" are horrible!

— Angela Baumann

I love "Daniel Tiger's Neighborhood." I miss "Max and Ruby."

— Aimee Gilkenson Fritzel

Column: Mentzer: 'Thomas the Tank Engine' and other awful shows

"Thomas" is awesome; so was "Bob the Builder"! "Dora" is awful and annoying.

— Mark McClure

Keep in mind, they are kid shows. Just because there are hierarchies, it doesn't make it bad. The world is strewn with levels and differences of functionality of which kids need to be aware of, so I don't see that aspect of "Thomas the Tank Engine" as a bad thing. You don't have to extrapolate all aspects of the show to humans.

— Mary Kowatch

My son loves "Bubble Guppies," "WallyKazaam," "Curious George" and "Sesame Street." I refuse to let him watch "SpongeBob Squarepants" or "Dora the Explorer." They drive me insane!

— Sarah Kreager

I love "Thomas"! The shows on Disney Junior, especially "Mickey Mouse Clubhouse," are pretty good, too

— Megan Grossklaus

To join the conversation, leave a comment online or visit www.facebook.com/wausaudailyherald and "like" our Facebook page.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1rIzNWw