Hours after burying his grandmother, Demaryius Thomas found solace in practice, rejoining his teammates after a difficult four-day absence.

Gladys Thomas passed away after bravely battling Alzheimer’s disease the past few years. Thomas arranged and attended her funeral Sunday in Georgia. She helped raise Demaryius as a young child before he moved in with his aunt.

“It was tough. We knew it was coming soon, but we didn’t know how soon,” Thomas said after Monday night’s walkthrough at Dove Valley. “I went home after the Super Bowl and she was fine. She was talking. And then she was gone. But I know she’s in a better place. It was good to get back out here and do something I love.”

Thomas looked weary, understandable given the emotions of the past week. He thanked the Broncos for their compassion.

“I want to take my hat off to them. They sent flowers,” Thomas said. “It was wonderful that they let me go. They were looking out for me and my family.”

It should not take long to catch up, Thomas explained. He watched video of the practices he missed, and has a strong grasp of the Broncos offense.

“I am not behind,” said Thomas, who must participate in two more workouts before practicing in pads, per the collective bargaining agreement. “It was good to be back. All the guys were keeping me smiling.”

Harris passes exam. Von Miller predicted Chris Harris would ace his knee exam with Dr. James Andrews on Monday based on the cornerback’s workouts. He was correct as Andrews gave Harris a clean bill of health following the 30 percent tear of his left ACL nearly six months ago.

“It passed,” Harris said. “Everything’s good. I can feel like a teammate now.”

Harris said he’s not sure when the Broncos will clear him to practice, but he hopes to put on the pads and helmet and start participating in individual and position drills this week. It’s unlikely Harris would play in a preseason game, but he vows to be ready by the regular-season opener Sept. 7 against the Indianapolis Colts at Sports Authority Field at Mile High.

Ware watches. DeMarcus Ware sat out Monday’s morning practice, wearing a protective sleeve on his bruised right lower leg.

“It’s fine,” Ware said.

Ware hurt his leg Sunday and was removed as a precaution halfway through the workout.

Other injured players not participating included defensive end Greg Latta (knee), tight end Jameson Konz (knee sprain) and John Boyett (back).

Music man. Peyton Manning became a “Saturday Night Live” skit on Monday, dancing to one of his favorite songs. As the deejay du jour, Manning chose “Rocky Top” as the the Broncos’ opening stretch music.

“That’s what I am talking about,” Manning said as the tune ended. “Best practice of the year.”

Fellow Tennessee Volunteers Malik Jackson and Britton Colquitt approved.

“I don’t think anybody else enjoyed it but us Tennessee guys. But you can’t deny a good song like that,” Colquitt said.

Off day. The Broncos are off Tuesday, with players free to vacate the nearby hotel.

“It’s a true day off. I am going to wake up around 10:30 a.m., get the mind right, do errands and pay bills,” Jackson said.