Buy Photo Loretta Mester, President of the Cleveland Federal Reserve, talks with The Cincinnati Enquirer editorial board in Cincinnati Tuesday April 12, 2016. (Photo: The Enquirer/Meg Vogel)Buy Photo

On many occasions, Federal Reserve members speak in riddles. Loretta Mester said she wants to be as clear as possible about the role of the Fed.

"People are talking about restricting or auditing the Fed," said Mester, who is president and chief executive officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland and a voting member of the Fed’s policy committee. "I think it's important for members to go out to talk to people, so they understand why we read the economy a certain way."

"We have to be accountable for our decisions," Mester said in a meeting with The Enquirer's editorial board last week.

As one of 12 members of the Federal Open Market Committee this year, Mester participates and has a vote in the formulation of U.S. monetary policy.

The Princeton-educated economist oversees 950 employees, including roughly 23 economists in Cleveland, Cincinnati, and Pittsburgh who conduct economic research, supervise banking institutions and provide payment services to commercial banks and the U.S. government. She assumed her current role nearly two years ago.

Part of her job is outlined in Congress' dual mandate to the Fed: Maintain price stability and maximum employment. Mester, who believes employment is nearly full as measured in the post-recession environment, said those tenets are what influence her judgment that interest rates must rise.

"My view of the economy supports a gradual upward tilt in interest rates over the year, but monetary policy will still remain very accomodative as we move rates up," she said. "We have some insurance towards downside risk."

Her reasoning: "You can't wait until you have price stability; waiting too long wouldn't be good for the future."

Mester spoke on various topics with the board, including the health of Greater Cincinnati. Here are excerpts from the conversation.

Cincinnati's role in the national economy

“I think of Cincinnati as being one of the stronger parts of our region actually or the district (the Cleveland Fed covers all of Ohio, most of eastern Kentucky, much of western Pennsylvania and a sliver of West Virginia). There’s a lot of interesting things going on.… You have manufacturing, but it’s the high-tech kind of manufacturing that I think will be sustained into the future.…

”

Fed accountability

"I like the fact that (the Fed) isn't political. I fundamentally believe it allows us to make better policy.

I think of it as a role that we play that can affect people’s lives, which is important and humbling. It can have a very broad impact and that’s why it's important to talk to people in your district. One of the things I want to do is to go out and explain the rationale for policy decisions. People don’t understand how we're organized and what we do so they can understand what we do better. I think it's important to go out talking to people, so they understand why we read the economy a certain way. Unless we give that information and communicate, we can't hope not to be held accountable. Chair (Janet) Yellen has testified quite a bit and has done press briefings after we've released statements. I think all these things are working towards getting people better insights."

Breaking up the big banks

"The Dodd-Frank Act has a number of provisions in it that help to address some of the weaknesses that we found, that were illuminated during the financial crisis. In particular, capitalization requirements are much higher now. There are extra capital requirements for systemically important institutions. There are stress tests, so the approach to examining banks have changed.

"Under Dodd-Frank there's this living will process, where each of the largest banks would have to submit a plan of how they would unwind. We've gotten wills, we've asked banks to revise them if they were weak.

"We haven't really faced a situation where the orderly liquidation authority has come into play. Even though Dodd-Frank has been passed for a while now, you asked is it foolproof? I don't think we can answer that yet. But I think the financial system is in better shape than we think it was. I think I'd like to see those provisions work themselves out before we move in another direction.

"The other thing we need to think about is, a lot of people want a lot of simple solutions -- just break the big banks up. If you think about it, that could be worse, in the sense that, there's real economic reasons that size can make you more efficient. I don't think it would reduce risk.

"We have seen some banks making choices to become less complex, shedding extraneous parts of their business.

"We're trying to make sure banks are holding enough liquidity. I think there's a structure in place now that's in the right direction that will reduce the probability, if we do have a very negative shock, we can unwind institutions without it having an extraneous effect on the economy."

Labor market levels

"My own view is that we've had good employment, which is half of what it was during the recession. Both nationally and locally. Employment has been averaging 200,000 new jobs a month for the past three months. The employment picture has shown good performance, and the numbers of people who are in part-time work but prefer long-term work have come down. That's not to say there's still issues in the labor market. In Appalachia and in the energy industry, there's a longer-term transformation of the economy. The kinds of manufacturing, in Cincinnati for instance, is different from the old economy and it takes new skill sets. Those transformations are longer term. Government policy should make that transition easier."

The Affordable Care Act's impact on the economy

"I think the ability of people to get health insurance that is not from their employer is a good thing for the economy. There are more people insured now, and certainly labor force mobility is important. It helps people move from job to job. Early on, before I came here, we talked to small businesses and there was a lot of concern, but that dissipated over time. We had employers fill out surveys, asking if they would have to cut hours or workers, and it didn't show up much in our data. So now we don’t really hear from small business that it has had an enormous impact on them."

The decision to delay raising interest rates

"The last time I did a forecast in December, I put in the March forecast that I did lower my growth forecast, I got new information and I did revise it down a little bit and revised down my longer view of the economy, too. So what's the policy path then that’s consistent with that forecast? Even with developments abroad, I still expect at this point, a gradual reduction in monetary policy would be appropriate."

Read or Share this story: http://cin.ci/1NgDjmZ