Topics: From the Wires, News

SYDNEY (AP) — Inside a remote island prison in Indonesia, two Australians facing death by firing squad await word of their fate. To some, they are ruthless drug smugglers who deserve to die. To others, rehabilitated do-gooders who deserve to live. The question of which characterization is correct has threatened ties between two once-close countries, both convinced they are right.

Australia’s fight to save Andrew Chan and Myuran Sukumaran from imminent execution, and Indonesia’s fight to maintain control of its own legal system, has devolved into a diplomatic battle rife with accusations of hypocrisy, power plays and moral superiority. And it serves as a stark reminder of why the death penalty is often considered the ultimate diplomatic challenge: How do you negotiate the non-negotiable?

“For a diplomat, the death penalty cases are always the hardest ones because they involve a supreme act of sovereignty — the foreign state believing it has the right to take the life of someone that’s committed a crime — but also a supreme loss of sovereignty that a country isn’t able to protect its citizens overseas,” said Andrew Carr, an international relations expert at The Australian National University. “You get the greatest clash of moral values in that some states believe this is right and proper to be applied and other states believe it’s quite abhorrent.”

There’s inevitably tension whenever one country tries to tell another how to conduct its business. That becomes even more acute in death penalty cases, which involve the most extreme human emotions and become, unwittingly or not, symbols of a nation’s strength — or lack thereof.

The Australian drug smugglers’ case is a prime example of that. Chan and Sukumaran were arrested in 2005 and sentenced to death for planning to smuggle 8.3 kilograms (18 pounds) of heroin to Australia from Bali. Australia, which long ago abolished the death penalty, pleaded for clemency, arguing the men have been rehabilitated. Indonesia maintains the ultimate punishment is necessary to protect its citizens from a national drug crisis.

Indonesian leaders, meanwhile, bristled at Australia’s attempts to intervene in what they consider a domestic justice issue. “We stress normally that people in foreign countries are subject to that country’s jurisdiction and that its laws may be different from ours. But in this case, we’re saying we find the death penalty so repugnant that we want you to change the application of your law — and that’s not entirely consistent,” said Geoffrey Miller, an Australian who spent 40 years working as a diplomat in Japan, Korea and New Zealand. “The whole issue is so emotive and it’s so final … it’s understandable that our government is making a major effort. But I think there’s a certain awkwardness in it.”

That awkwardness can lead to verbal stumbles that threaten negotiations. Australian Prime Minister Tony Abbott vowed not to let Chan and Sukumaran’s case jeopardize the countries’ close ties. And yet that’s exactly what happened when Abbott suggested the men deserved leniency because Australia gave Indonesia $1 billion in aid after the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami.

The response from Indonesia’s foreign ministry spokesman, Arrmanatha Nasir, was sharp. “Threats are not part of diplomatic language,” he said. “And from what I know, no one responds well to threats.”

But if threats don’t work, what does?

“One challenge is balancing the need to win concessions from local officials, appease foreign outrage, and build political capital to use in future diplomatic negotiations,” Wesley Kendall, author of “The Death Penalty and U.S. Diplomacy,” said by e-mail.

That’s no small feat. Consider the 2011 execution of Mexican national Humberto Leal, which stoked tensions among Mexico, the U.S. government and the state of Texas. Under pressure from Mexico, President Barack Obama had pleaded with then-Texas Gov. Rick Perry to stop the execution of Leal, who raped and murdered a Texas teen. Officials never told Leal he could contact the Mexican consulate for help, which the International Court of Justice later ruled to be a violation of his rights. The Obama administration said Leal should be spared in light of that ruling, though Congress never ordered the states to comply with it.

In a letter supporting legislation that could have given Leal an avenue for appeal had it passed before he was executed, then-Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and Attorney General Eric Holder wrote: “The United States is best positioned to demand that foreign governments respect consular rights with respect to U.S. citizens abroad when we comply with these same obligations for foreign nationals in the United States.”