Montana's Congressional delegation had different views of the budget resolution passed Tuesday evening by Congress, with U.S. Representative Ryan Zinke (R-MT) joining just 18 other House Republicans in opposing it.

Zinke said he supported some elements of the budget resolution, like its aim of ending the Affordable Care Act and balancing the budget within 10 years.

But, he said, it contained vague language that could open the door to the sale of federal lands.

“Repealing Obamacare and balancing the budget remain on top of my list of priorities, however I will never tolerate our land being sold or transferred,” he said in a press release.

The resolution is just the start of Congress' budget process, setting a roadmap for the House and Senate Appropriations Committees.

U.S. Senator Stave Daines (R-MT) voted for the resolution and said he opposes the sale of public lands.

The language Zinke found problematic — an amendment from Sen. Lisa Murkowski (R-Alaska) — allows the chairs of the budget committee to consider revenue-neutral transactions involving lands, excluding national parks, preserves and monuments.

Such transactions would still require the approval of Congress and the president's signature.

Several current laws allow some form of land transfers from federal agencies.

A Daines spokeswoman said in an email that the Murkowski amendment safeguards future locally supported land transfers from budgetary hurdles.

"This budget marks the first time since 2001 that Congress has passed a balanced budget — taking long-overdue steps to rein in our nation's debt and ensure Congress is accountable to the American people,” Daines said in a press release. “I am strongly opposed to any efforts to sell off Montana's treasured public lands and remain committed to finding balanced solutions to increase access and protect our public lands for future generations.”

U.S. Senator Jon Tester (D-MT) voted against the package on Tuesday, saying the resolution “...guts Medicare, increases student loan payments, opens the door for selling off public lands, and gives tax breaks to the wealthy few. … (and) would increase military spending overseas while slashing infrastructure spending here at home.”

He called for a new highway bill; the current highway bill expires on May 31.

“We have folks here in Congress who eagerly swipe the nation's credit card when it comes to investments in the Middle East,” he said on the Senate floor. “But these same members of Congress won't even open up the wallet to fill a pothole next to a school.”