Pizza Hut has always been known for its iconic stuffed crust pizza, but you’ve never seen stuff crust like this. An exclusive Pizza Hut pie has just been released in Hong Kong, called the Flying Fish Roe Salmon Cream Cheese pizza. In this pie’s crust, you won’t find the American version of stuffed crust with gooey cheese, but instead a filling of cream cheese and flying fish roe – aka, fish eggs. The pie comes in two varieties: Crayfish Seafood Deluxe, with crayfish, scallops, shrimp, clams, tomatoes, peppers, onions, and Thousand Island sauce. Or, for something (slightly) more traditional, there’s the Sausage, Pepperoni and Pomelo (an Asian fruit similar to grapefruit), which also comes loaded with peaches, mushrooms, and a berry sauce. Check out the cute commercial for the new pie below:

This new Hong Kong Pizza Hut pie joins a list of other stuffed crust varieties from around the world, with New Zealand offering a cheese and marmite stuffed crust and a cheeseburger-stuffed crust in the Middle East. Apparently stuffed crust is a big deal everywhere else but America, where perhaps the 90s fad of eating the pie backwards has faded away. But just last year, Pizza Hut Malaysia promoted its Super Pan Pizza with an ad that claimed its squirting, cheesy crust was so seductive, it had the power to make a woman’s boyfriend propose.

Why has Hong Kong joined the stuffed-crust worldwide trend? Richard Leong, marketing director of Pizza Hut Hong Kong, says that the chain is looking to adapt to local tastes. Hong Kong is also the only market that operates two completely separate Pizza Hut brands with separate menus – Pizza Hut and PHD, or “Pizza Hut Delivery.” The second brand was developed to compete with the immense demand for fast delivery services in Hong Kong. Richard says that the brand plans to strengthen its mobile market to boost its online business and keep its PHD chain thriving. Hong Kong is behind when it comes to America’s mobile Pizza Hut market, where a new Xbox 360 Pizza Hut app lets you order pizza right from your video game console. The Pizza Hut Xbox app has already earned Pizza Hut $1 million in sales in four months since its debut. Americans might have the dominant control over Pizza Hut’s online market, but new innovations, like the Hong Kong fish egg crust, show that the rest of the world can compete, too.

What do you think of the cream cheese and fish egg stuffed crust? Would you try it out, or is it just a gimmick to boost sales?

Image via YouTube