City studying solar capacity, seeking ways to encourage rooftop panels

Thomas Arnold, lead installer for Custom Solar, installs a junction box for solar panels on the roof of a client's home in Boulder on Friday. The city, as it studies the feasibility of a municipal utility, is looking at how much energy it could generate through solar panels on top of residential homes and businesses. ( Mark Leffingwell / Daily Camera )

Related Stories For utilities, rooftop solar comes with its own challenges

Many of the activists who campaigned for municipalization in Boulder envisioned not just a city-run utility that used mostly renewable energy, but one that got its power from the community.

They were quietly disappointed when Boulder's analysis of the most cost-effective way to reduce greenhouse gas emissions leaned heavily on power purchased from wind farms and natural gas plants outside the city.

The "low cost" option released by the city in 2013 showed Boulder getting 35 percent of its power from wind through power purchase agreements and just 4 percent of its power from local solar.

The city currently gets 15 megawatts of power from solar, about 2 percent of the community's requirements. On average, 1 megawatt can power 632 homes, according to Xcel Energy.

Now Boulder is taking a close look at just how much power the city could get from the sun, and what a municipal utility could do to reduce barriers and encourage more residents and businesses to install solar panels.

Following the recommendations of a working group made up of more than two dozen industry representatives, technical and policy experts, and engaged citizens, city officials are designing a study to determine how much solar can practically be installed in Boulder, and looking for ways to reduce "soft costs" associated with permitting and code requirements.

"How much solar generation should Boulder target as a goal?" was one of the questions the working group tried to answer.

"The short answer is we don't yet know how much we can deploy," the working group says in its report. "There are two critical questions. First, how much solar can be reasonably installed using available rooftops, parking lots and other unused spaces? Second, is there a reliability threshold for solar penetration on Boulder's electric grid?

"While the first question is relatively straightforward, the second is the subject of considerable debate."

Tom Russo, a master electrician with Custom Solar, installs solar panels on the roof of a buuilding in Boulder in 2012. (Jeremy Papasso / Camera file photo)

'Utility of the future'

Utilities and energy researchers around the country are trying to determine what it will mean for infrastructure, rates and resource planning as the percentage of power from local solar — that's the "solar penetration" — climbs into the double digits and higher.

Boulder plans to bring its "utility of the future" online in the midst of tremendous changes in the solar industry and the relationship between solar and utilities.

Utilities are increasingly investing in large-scale solar farms purely on an economic basis. The projects bring tens and even hundreds of megawatts online at much lower per-watt costs than rooftop solar.

The Solar Energy Industry Association found that the average per-watt cost of utility-scale solar projects in 2013 was $1.96, compared to $4.59 for residential rooftop solar.

Last year, Xcel Energy requested proposals for power from all sources, and selected two solar projects — a 120-megawatt project outside Pueblo near the Comanche Generating Station being developed by Community Energy Solar, a company with its Western headquarters in Boulder; and a 50-megawatt project in the San Luis Valley — because they were more cost effective than natural gas.

"What you're seeing is solar projects being selected and added to the system based on economics," Xcel CEO David Eves said.

Eric Blank, co-partner in Community Energy Solar, said he has rooftop solar himself, and he doesn't expect it to go away.

But utility-scale solar projects, with panels mounted on trackers that can follow the sun throughout the day and capture its power well into the late afternoon peak hours, has more potential to reduce dependence on fossil fuels without subsidies, he said.

Boulder is not currently looking at large-scale solar for the municipal utility, with planners and activists more focused on the potential of distributed generation — power from rooftop solar panels being deployed throughout the distribution system — than on utility-scale projects.

Chris Moon, left, and Brandon Linn, of Standard Renewable Energy, install solar panels on the roof of an affordable-housing apartment comples in Boulder in 2009. (Marty Caivano / Camera file photo)

The working group identifies commercial rooftops and community solar gardens as areas of untapped potential, where Boulder could achieve economies of scale and bring relatively large amounts of solar online. Solar gardens, which Xcel also offers, also allow people whose rooftops are shaded or who live in apartments to buy into solar power.

The report identifies "assets" that Boulder has: good sun, an informed and motivated population and a vibrant local solar industry.

"Commercial rooftops and solar gardens offer a largely untapped solar resource with economies of scale more favorable than those in the residential sector," the report says.

Boulder Energy Sustainability Coordinator Yael Gichon said the city may pay a little more per watt for local solar, but there are other economic benefits.

"It's good to have diversity," she said. "Large-scale solar is a good thing. But some of the distributed generation, it's not an apples to apples comparison, because you are doing a lot to help the local economy.

"We're trying to quantify that."

Debate over net metering

Some industry observers are predicting a "utility death spiral" as improved storage allows people with rooftop solar to opt out of the grid entirely, leading to higher rates for those who are still connected, and making solar even more attractive.

Utility companies are taking a second look at net metering, the practice of paying retail rates to customers for solar power produced on their rooftops and fed back into the grid, allowing many customers to zero out their electric bills.

Xcel Energy has asked the Colorado Public Utilities Commission for permission to make changes to the net metering program that would reduce how much the utility pays customers.

That request that has sparked opposition from many in the solar industry who fear that lower payments for solar power would make it harder for homeowners and businesses to justify the upfront investment in solar.

Eves, Xcel's CEO, said the company's concern is how to account for the overall costs of maintaining the grid, which solar customers still use at night and on cloudy days, even if they zero out their electric bill because Xcel is buying their solar power at retail rates.

It's not that much of an issue now — some 20,000 Xcel customers have rooftop solar, out of 1.4 million — but it could be one in the future.

Eves said Xcel is looking for other ways to account for those costs, such as using savings from lower wind costs to redirect some of the renewable-energy fee that customers pay on their bills.

"We think we can solve the net metering problem and create the kind of transparency that is going to have to happen," Eves said. "We can create that transparency while still keeping rooftop solar a viable option"

But it's an issue that every utility will have to wrestle with, Eves said.

Avoiding an 'undue burden'

Obadiah Bartholomy, senior project manager for energy research and development for the Sacramento Municipal Utility District, said his utility also has a working group looking closely at the issues that might arise at higher levels of solar penetration.

"The primary reason (net metering) may not work very well in the long-term is that the retail rate is made up of a lot of different components, some of which are tied to value of power and some tied to other utility costs, some of which are fixed," he said. "We're not capturing other costs not related to power generation, the cost of our infrastructure, the cost of employee health care, cost of debt service. All our customers who don't have solar have to pay for customers who do. We're really trying to do a better job of aligning those costs.

"We don't want to create an undue burden for those who can't do solar."

Advocates for solar say there also are benefits to customers without solar, such as not having to pay for the construction of new power plants.

Willie Mein, owner of Custom Solar in Boulder, said he does have reservations about Boulder's ability to effectively manage its own utility.

But those reservations are balanced against "excitement" that the city-owned utility would have a commitment to net-metering.

"The opportunities will be greater with municipalization," Mein said. "Further adoption of renewables is what they had in mind, so I am optimistic that more opportunities will be available than what we will see under Xcel. ...

"I believe with the city of Boulder, true net metering will remain intact, whereas Xcel has tried to claw back some of the benefits."

In fact, Boulder's working group failed to reach consensus on whether net-metering was the best way to pay for solar power or whether a monetary incentive would be necessary at all.

Calculating 'value of solar'

One alternative is a "value of solar" calculation that seeks to take in all the costs and benefits to the system. The value of solar varies widely depending on the inputs.

Austin Energy, a Texas municipal utility with a strong commitment to renewable energy — Austin's City Council just adopted a new mandate to replace all the power from a 36-year-old natural gas plant with solar by 2017 — moved to a "value of solar" approach because net metering created equity issues and didn't encourage energy efficiency.

Austin has a tiered rate structure where power gets more expensive the more a customer uses. Solar customers who used a lot of power were getting reimbursed at those higher rates because the power was coming off their bill from the top down.

But customers with solar panels who didn't use much power were getting reimbursed at lower rates, and customers with very energy efficient homes didn't have much reason to get solar panels.

That meant Austin Energy's ratepayers were paying a lot for solar power and creating the wrong incentives for its solar customers.

Now the utility does a "value of solar" calculation each year based on the value of power from all sources that it doesn't have to buy because of local solar generation, as well as other factors such as transmission costs, avoided environmental compliance issues and base operations and maintenance costs.

Customers with solar panels are charged for their consumption, like everyone else, and then get a credit for the value of all the solar they produced.

Customers who want a rebate on their solar panels also have to do energy efficiency upgrades, and the utility reassess its rebates every year based on market conditions and to ensure that there is enough money to meet demand.

"We don't want to spend public money to get systems that would have gone in anyway," said Danielle Murray, solar manager for Austin Energy.

Doug Arent, executive director of the Joint Institute for Strategic Energy Analysis, a consortium that includes the Boulder-based National Renewable Energy Laboratory, said the technical solutions are out there for making solar work for utilities and their customers.

"The question becomes whether there is a willing and able financial/policy/regulatory environment to use them," Arent said. "And that's also a customer environment."

'There is a lot of hope'

Looming over the entire solar industry is the reduction of the federal tax credit from 30 percent to 10 percent in 2017, the same year Boulder hopes to bring its utility online.

Some believe there will be just a pause in solar investment, as prices continue to come down, making up for the lost tax credit in a few years. Others think most of the price drop already has been achieved and the impact could be more long-lasting. Or Congress could chose to extend the credit.

Boulder believes it already has the right customer environment and that creating a municipal utility will create a financial and policy environment more friendly to innovation.

Gichon, Boulder's energy sustainability coordinator, said the working group's report raises important questions for the community about how to integrate solar into a city-owned utility, but it is not a pessimistic forecast.

"It's a balance of policy and limitations that we are currently under versus what could or could not be possible in the future," she said. "There is no sense that we would have to limit solar.

"I think there is a lot of hope for the possibilities of expanding solar."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Erica Meltzer at 303-473-1355, meltzere@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/meltzere.