MONTGOMERY, Ala. (AP) - Comedian Steve Harvey and Montgomery business Greg Calhoun have purchased a former latex glove and condom factory in Eufaula.

The factory, now called AmeriTech Glove Factory, reopened last week after being shuttered for five years, Calhoun told AL.com in an interview.

“It is the only latex glove facility in the U.S. We have a commitment from Walmart …. We met with the chairman of Walmart Doug McMillon, me and Steve Harvey, and we strategized on how we could bring jobs back to the U.S.,” he said.

Calhoun said 25 employees are currently working at the factory, testing the new products.

“By January, we will have our first line up and running,” he said, adding he hopes the factory will have 75-100 employees by the end of 2015 and 300 employees by the end of next year.

The Montgomery-based businessman said he is also in talks with and hopes to manufacture gloves for Tyson Foods and the Transportation Security Administration.

Calhoun and Harvey have been friends for 15 to 20 years, Calhoun said, and when the comedian decided to branch out into the business world he asked Calhoun to join him. They formed the investment group, HarCal, which is combination of both of their last names.

“It is an honor to have Mr. Steve Harvey commit to Alabama to do business,” Calhoun said. He looked at a lot of others states, and he chose Memphis, Tenn. and Alabama.

HarCal entered into a partnership with Memphis-based Monogram Foods to launch a new product called Easy Bacon. The product will go on sale in Publix, Kroger and Walmart supermarkets in Atlanta on Oct. 1.

Easy Bacon cooks to a crisp in two minutes, one minute on each side, Calhoun said.

The product will go national in January.

HarCal has also partnered with Vanguard Soap Co. based in Memphis to create a line of soaps called Bilt.

Calhoun has extensive experience in the supermarket industry. He formerly owned two grocery store warehouses in the Dallas area, and four supermarkets in Montgomery.

Calhoun Enterprises still owns stores in Tuskegee and Selma.