The day Denver Mayor Michael Hancock signed legislation expanding the city’s minority- and female-contracting program, a local labor union charged that the city does a poor job of investigating allegations that ineligible firms profit from the program.

In addition, the city’s concessionaire program at Denver International Airport, which also has a minority- and female-contracting program, will receive scrutiny on Thursday with the release of a report from the office of City Auditor Dennis Gallagher.

The audit focuses on whether the airport is doing enough to prevent concessionaires from creating monopolies in the airport’s retail and fast-food establishments. Also at issue is a program that rewards concessionaires for being top performers and allows them to win contract extensions that block others from entering the market.

In the run-up to the City Council’s vote this past Tuesday night expanding the city’s minority-contracting program, African-American, Latino and female business leaders lobbied council members for passage.

Union officials also pressed their issues, arguing that some of those firms benefiting from the minority-contracting program were actually fronts for rich, white businessmen whom they allege have a history of violating city wage laws.

“This issue is pretty big,” said Nghia Nguyen of Local 857 International Iron Workers Union. “What kind of program does the city want to run? Does the city even care? The city seems to think that if it meets its minority-contracting goals, it can rub itself on the back, but if you peel the layers back, the city actually fails this test of promoting minority contractors.”

His union already convinced city officials to kick out one firm from the minority-contracting program. It is gearing up to file a complaint to try to disqualify another firm with ties to prominent Latino business leaders. The union contends white businessmen run that firm, as well.

Chris Martinez, director of Denver’s Division of Small Business Opportunity, said the city’s minority- and female-contracting program struggled to keep pace last year with all the applicants seeking to participate in the minority contracting program. Since 2011, three firms have been investigated for participating in the program on allegations they weren’t really minority owned. He said two of those firms were barred from continuing to participate.

Martinez said the city plans this year to bolster training of the workers who do those investigations and to hire an additional worker, bringing the total number of those who investigate complaints and certify businesses up to five. No plans are in place to randomly investigate participating firms for compliance. Firms will be investigated only when formal, written and signed complaints are filed, Martinez said.

“We have started looking at strengthening our rules and regulations,” he said.

The iron workers union in 2012 filed a complaint alleging that the wife of a top executive of a national construction firm should not be eligible for continued participation in the city’s minority- and women-contracting programs.

In November, the city agreed and removed Stephanie Johnson and her firm, Sandoval Reinforcing LLC, from the programs. Martinez found that Sandoval Reinforcing was not an “independent business enterprise” and actually was controlled by her husband, Rick Johnson, an executive with Great Western Erector LLC, and his associates.

By that time, Sandoval Reinforcing already had snagged more than $3.8 million in contracts from the Regional Transportation District, which relies on Denver’s list of certified minority firms.

Sandoval Reinforcing “performed the work and was paid accordingly,” said RTD spokeswoman Pauletta Tonilas, who added that the firm received the contracts under RTD’s disadvantaged business enterprise program. “We are not in any position to pursue repayment from them.”

Prior to bidding on the RTD projects, Sandoval Reinforcing had scant work in the construction industry, according to the city’s findings. The firm had done only two other projects for which it was paid a total of nearly $600, the city found.

Stephanie and Rick Johnson denied they misled city officials when she applied to become certified as a minority and woman contractor.

Rick Johnson said they produced tax records showing he had done extensive work in the construction industry. He said he also told city officials that Stephanie Johnson was his wife.

“Their requests were astronomical,” Rick Johnson said. “We were going to have to pay $500 an hour to an attorney or drop our appeal. We dropped the appeal.”

But the city’s investigation found that Stephanie Johnson on her application did not disclose her husband’s extensive construction industry ties and did not disclose that the address for Sandoval Reinforcing was the same address as steel and construction businesses her husband owns. The city also found that at least 11 former or current employees of Great Western Erectors worked on Sandoval’s RTD projects.

“They were just rapped on the knuckles,” Nguyen said of the firm. “Sandoval still got millions of dollars. Our industry is small. Everyone sees this stuff. Any of the big dogs can say, ‘Well, Great Western Erectors got away with it, and we might be caught eventually if we’re as stupid as they were, but in the meantime we’ll make millions of dollars.’ “

Christopher N. Osher: 303-954-1747, cosher@ denverpost.com or twitter.com/chrisosher