SAN FRANCISCO -- The challenges of providing high-quality dermatologic care in the current era of healthcare reform will have center stage during the American Academy of Dermatology's 73rd annual meeting, which begins here tomorrow.

The Hot Topics session on Friday afternoon will begin with a discussion of healthcare reform and its impact on the field of dermatology, presented by Brent Moody, MD, of the Skin Cancer and Surgery Center in Nashville, Tenn.

"The future of dermatology and how dermatologists can continue to offer quality patient care remains a key issue for the academy," said AAD scientific assembly chair Joan Guitart, MD, of Northwestern University in Chicago. "With the Affordable Care Act now in full swing and with dermatology undergoing major changes, the talks on healthcare reforms, especially during the Hot Topics Symposium and Plenary Session, should be of great interest to the attendees."

During the Sunday morning plenary, the Clarence S. Livingood Lectureship will focus on the aspects of dermatology that must be emphasized to maintain quality in patient care, presented by Bruce Wintroub, MD, of the University of California San Francisco. Later in the session, American Medical Association president-elect Steven J. Stack, MD, will discuss the medical profession's challenges and opportunities to thrive in the next decade.

Also during the plenary session, Deputy Surgeon General Boris Lushniak, MD, will review the growing problem of skin cancer and dermatologists' role in early diagnosis and treatment. Last year Lushniak identified skin cancer as a national health priority and initiated a "Call to Action on Skin Cancer Prevention," citing the 3.5 million new cases diagnosed each year.

Other presentations during the plenary will focus on use of targeted therapies to treat psoriasis, the role of BRAF and PD-1 inhibition in the treatment of melanoma, and evolving technology for treating hair loss.

"During the plenary, Antoni Ribas will present new exciting data about the treatment of advanced melanomas with various small molecules, antibodies, and tyrosine kinase inhibitors as monotherapy or combined modalities," said Guitart. "These new approaches provide some hope to patients being treated for the most aggressive types of skin cancer."

The scientific program also will reflect the ongoing evolution of healthcare delivery as it pertains to dermatology. A symposium on chronic pruritus will continue the academy's focus on the issue as an area of special interest and need. Led by Gil Yosipovitch, MD, of Temple University in Philadelphia, the symposium will cover topics ranging from the basic science underlying pruritus to practical approaches to evaluating and treating patients with itch.

Workshop sessions will include new programs that address topics such as advanced suture techniques, nail surgery, and use of cosmetic fillers. The program has increased the number of sessions devoted to late-breaking science, a move that supports the AAD's mission to promote discoveries and trends in the field, said Guitart. Five late-breaking science sessions will cover developments in basic science, therapeutics, cosmetics, and dermatologic surgery.

New to the AAD meeting this year, two symposia will focus on contributions from various leaders in the field of dermatology. William James, MD, of the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, will lead a session called "Masters of Dermatology." Christopher Zachary, MD, of the University of California Irvine, will review "Pearls from the Masters of Dermatological Surgery."

The sessions "will allow all attendees to learn once more from these prestigious teachers and revisit their legacies," said Guitart.