Gov. John Hickenlooper requests $20 million cut in state funding to higher education

Tuition is likely to go up at the University of Colorado next year under Gov. John Hickenlooper's budget recommendations, which call for a $20 million cut in state funding to higher education, but CU budget officials weren't ready to say by how much.

The governor's plan for fiscal year 2016-2017 estimates that colleges and universities will institute "higher" tuition increases as a result of the funding cut and increased operating expenses.

Hickenlooper projects average tuition hikes of 8.7 percent based on operating costs increases of about 2 percent, or $56 million. That amount, coupled with the $20 million funding cut, means that an additional $76 million must be generated from tuition next year, according to the governor's proposal.

Todd Saliman, chief financial officer for the CU system, said tuition likely won't go up that much at CU but he wouldn't say what number budget officials expect to bring before the Board of Regents next spring.

"Will some institutions have increases around 8 or 9 percent as indicated by the governor's letter? It's very possible," Saliman said. "Will CU be one of those? Probably not. Just look at what we've done in the past. That's not where our leadership is."

CU has increased resident undergraduate tuition on the Boulder campus by about 3 percent for each of the last two years, coming in under a now-expired 6 percent tuition hike cap set by the state legislature. This year's 2.9 percent increase was the lowest in nearly a decade.

Advertisement

Those relatively small hikes, though, were accompanied by increases in state support. Saliman says there's a direct correlation between state support for higher education and tuition.

State funding makes up about 5 percent of CU-Boulder's overall $1.47 billion budget.

"When state funding is cut, there's an impact on tuition," he said.

The governor's plan features $373 million in spending cuts due to a complicated set of factors, including increased costs for K-12 education and health care, refunds under the Taxpayer's Bill of Rights and a projected deficit.

As budget director under Gov. Bill Ritter, Saliman said he understands the state's budget challenges intimately.

"The big picture is that Colorado is facing significant budget challenges and as the economy does better, the state's budget gets worse, and that's because all of these interacting and conflicting constitutional and spending requirements," he said.

The university has been preparing for stagnant or declining state funding by working to develop nontuition revenue sources, keeping enrollment numbers healthy and through efficiencies.

The university saved $40 million last year through cost avoidances and efficiencies, a number that includes more than $7 million in savings on the Boulder campus.

Sarah Kuta: 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta