Farnam, Ollie

On Monday, May 23, 2016, Ollie Farnam of Vinton, Va., surrounded by his loving family, passed from this earthly life to his Heavenly home and into the presence of his Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ. He was predeceased by his parents, Ollie and Beatrice Farnam; and a brother, Charlie Braxton Farnam.He is survived by his wife of 57 years, Barbara Heldreth Farnam; and their three children, Valerie Steineke (Wesley), Tim Farnam (Veverly) and Chrissy Creese (Rod). Also surviving is a sister, JoAnn Widener (C.H.); and brothers, James (Bud) Farnam and Ronny Farnam (Michele). Grandchildren are Melissa Steineke, Matthew Steineke and Hannah Steineke, Hilary Farnam and Emily Creese.Ollie was born in Perry, Fla., on September 1, 1938. He attended public schools in Florida and graduated in 1956 from Williston High School. He was a 1962 graduate from the University of Florida.In 1965 Ollie and his family moved to the Roanoke area where he worked in the engineering department of Johnson-Carper Furniture Company and subsequently the Singer Company. In 1982 he became the Director of Engineering for the Hooker Furniture Company and held that position until he retired in 2003.In his retirement years, Ollie enjoyed woodworking and crafted many beautiful pieces for his children and grandchildren to enjoy. He was also an avid gardener and liked to travel as long as he didn't have to be away from home for more than a couple of weeks.Ollie served his Lord in quiet ways. He and his wife, Barbara, spent many hours visiting and comforting homebound members of their church. He was also a regular volunteer helping to serve the breakfast meal at the Rescue Mission. Ollie loved missions and supported several ministries, both local and national.A Memorial Service will be held 11 a.m. on Friday, May 27, 2016, in the Faith Chapel of First Baptist Church, Roanoke, preceded by a time of visitation from 10 until 11 a.m.In lieu of flowers, memorials may be made to the Lottie Moon Missions Offering, c/o First Baptist Church, P.O. Box 2799, Roanoke, VA 24001 or to Gideons International. Online condolences may be expressed at www.oakeys.com.