After several years of relative indifference, the Avalanche is the talk of the town again.

Well, sure, Peyton Manning’s new goatee still commands a good deal of Denver’s sports-media attention, but the Avs are officially hot news again.

It will be a sold-out Pepsi Center on Saturday afternoon when the Avalanche hosts the St. Louis Blues, with the teams separated by just three points in the Central Division. Nathan MacKinnon will put his 13-game point streak on the line, which is already the highest in NHL history for an 18-year-old, and the Avs will hope to beat the Blues for the first time this season.

It’s a big game, no doubt, but Avs coach Patrick Roy doesn’t want his team thinking it’s anything more than just one game.

“It’s a great situation to be in,” Roy said. “When we started the season, we had the objective to surprise the world of hockey. We also had the objective to take it one day at a time. We haven’t changed. We’re going to continue to go in that direction. (Saturday), it’s the St. Louis Blues that are in Denver at 1 o’clock. We’re not looking at it any more than that. It is a good test for us. By winning this game, we have a chance to be even closer to them.”

The Avs will start Semyon Varlamov in goal. The Blues recently acquired veteran goalie Ryan Miller from Buffalo, and St. Louis is 3-0 since getting him. The Blues also have handled the Avs easily in their only two matchups so far with Colorado, winning both by a combined 11-4 margin.

But Roy said he thinks the Avs are a “different team since then,” having made some adjustments in their game.

“We’re playing against one of the best teams in the league and it’s a great situation to be so close to them. That means you’ve been doing something good as well,” Roy said.

The Avs did not practice Friday, but did do some off-ice conditioning.

“This is a game we’ve had circled on our calendar for a while now,” Avs center Matt Duchene said. “They’re a real good team, but we’re looking forward to the challenge.”

Adrian Dater: adater@denverpost.com or twitter.com/adater