Pharmacies should play a greater role in providing basic primary health care

By Steve Anderson

They can do more than dispense prescriptions or suggest the best allergy medication. Highly educated pharmacy professionals can serve other important roles to support a patient’s health-care needs. In fact, these professionals are equipped to help with a growing crisis in Colorado and across the country.

Currently more than 1.5 million people in Colorado are uninsured or underinsured, more than 775,600 on Medicare and living in medically underserved communities across the state. It’s hard to imagine that even in Colorado’s flourishing economy, one quarter of the state’s populace lacks adequate access to basic primary care.

But, there is a solution right in front of us. Nearly all Americans live within five miles of a community pharmacy, though not everyone is utilizing pharmacies to their full potential.

If passed, the Pharmacy and Medically Underserved Areas Enhancement Act (HR 592/S 314) would improve access for medically underserved Medicare beneficiaries to receive a variety of health-care services through their neighborhood pharmacy, opening the door for many of these people to live healthier lives. The pharmacy services provided under this bill would be 15 percent less than these same services provided by a physician.

There are currently nearly 4,500 licensed pharmacists in Colorado working in pharmacies across the state. Pharmacists are an important part of the medical community and of our health-care system, rounding out the overall health-care team comprised of doctors, nurses and others who take care of patients every day. To sit for pharmacy board licensure exams, candidates must have a doctor of pharmacy degree (PharmD), which requires a minimum of six years of professional education.

Most people are well aware of pharmacists’ commitment to the vital function of providing medications safely and helping patients understand how to take them correctly. The fact is that the education that pharmacists receive empowers them to do even more, and Colorado state laws allow pharmacists to provide services including vaccination delivery, medication therapy management, and health tests to determine glucose, blood pressure, and cholesterol levels.

However, Medicare does not provide sufficient coverage for these pharmacist-provided services. The Pharmacy and Medically Underserved Areas Enhancement Act would change that, and open to Medicare beneficiaries those pharmacist-provided services already permitted under Colorado law.

If enacted, this bill would allow pharmacists to serve more patients, giving patients additional outlets for quality, affordable health care. There is also evidence to suggest that a change in provider status policy for pharmacists in Medicare could have a strong impact on private sector health plans and how they view pharmacists as well.

The House and Senate bills have bipartisan support from 185 members of the U.S. House and 28 Senate cosponsors. Colorado’s own U.S. Sen. Cory Gardner and members of the House of Representatives, Jared Polis and Mike Coffman, are co-sponsors of this bill, showcasing the importance of ensuring access to pharmacy services for Colorado’s Medicare patients.

The Pharmacy and Medically Underserved Areas Enhancement Act would take our health-care system to the next level, giving people in Colorado and across the U.S. more options to receive quality health-care services, specifically those who need it most.

Steve Anderson is the CEO and president of the National Association of Chain Drug Stores.