Investigators don’t know yet why a 7/8-inch bolt fell from the roof of 7-year-old Lucas Oil Stadium during an Indianapolis Colts preseason game Sept. 3, or whether opening the retractable roof caused the accident. Quarterback Andrew Luck and teammates are shown warming up with the roof open before the start of the game with the Cincinnati Bengals in 2012. (Photo: Mike Fender / The Star 2012 file photo)

The person in charge of building Lucas Oil Stadium said a falling bolt that split into pieces, injuring three people, should not be considered an unusual problem for a 7-year-old stadium.

“It’s a huge building,” said John Klipsch, head of the Indiana Stadium and Convention Building Authority. “All brand new structures have a loose screw or bolt after seven years. It’s not something that’s unusual in all construction or manufacturing.”

Investigators don’t know why the bolt fell — including whether opening the retractable roof caused the accident — and there is no estimate as to when the roof will be cleared to open.

Klipsch said investigators discovered seven other loose bolts out of “several dozen” like the 7/8-inch bolt that fell during the first half of a Colts preseason game Sept. 3. The bolt, described as like a half-roll of quarters, caused only minor injuries, according to officials.

But Barney Levengood, executive director of the Capital Improvement Board, which operates the stadium, reiterated that the building is safe with the roof closed. Two high school games were scheduled for Friday night, with three more Saturday, plus the Colts’ game Monday night.

“We’re making sure that people who do come understand that safety is first for us,” Levengood said.

There are, however, lingering questions. Although Klipsch said problems with bolts are common in 7-year-old stadiums, he did not necessarily agree that officials should have inspected the roof for potential problems before the bolt fell.

“It would be premature for me to guess whether we should or should not have been investigating bolts,” Klipsch said. “There are lots of things on construction projects that are investigated and inspected while they’re built. But you don’t go back and look at them until they’re broken. You don’t go back and inspect a sidewalk every month to see if it has a crack in it. You notice there’s a crack when you walk down it.”

It’s uncertain how much the retractable roof added to the cost of the $720 million stadium, at least $620 million of which came from taxpayers. In 2013, the St. Paul Pioneer-Press reported that the cost of a retractable roof for a stadium in Minneapolis would be $25 million to $40 million more than for a dome.

Klipsch said he didn’t know how much repairs would cost, but added “we’re confident it’s not a huge number. We’re more focused on getting the project completed and making the building safe for our customers, and we’re not going to let cost slow us down.”

Klipsch said the money for repairs could come from several sources, including insurance and reserves from the ISCBA and CIB. The CIB is funded almost completely by a variety of taxes.

“When we are sure the building is safe and it’s operating properly and the costs come in, we will solve that problem,” Klipsch said. “It’s not going to slow us down from making the building safe and operate properly.

“There’s more work to ensure we have a safe building. We can go up there and tighten up bolts. But we want to spend some time with (people who know) engineering science to be sure it’s safe.”

Contact Mark Alesia at (317) 444-6311 and follow him on Twitter: @markalesia.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1Kn7La9