Last month, the Houston City Council approved an ordinance that prohibits discrimination against gay, lesbian and transgender residents, a measure similar to one San Antonio passed last summer. A few days after the Houston ordinance passed, Laredo approved a partial ban on disposable shopping bags, a prohibition similar to one the Dallas City Council passed in March, and a law already in effect in Austin and Brownsville. And cities such as Austin, Dallas, El Paso and San Antonio have imposed heavy regulations on the so-called payday lenders, the short-term lenders that often charge annual interest rates of 500 percent or more if borrowers do not repay their loans on time.

Any chance the Texas Legislature could make any of those measures statewide?

Fat chance, especially now with a more conservative Senate expected when the Legislature is back in session in January.

If anything, a good number of officials in the Republican-dominated state government are highly critical of some of those local laws, particularly of the equal rights for gay, lesbian and transgender people and the shopping bag ban.

Some lawmakers, such as GOP Reps. Dan Flynn of Van and Drew Springer of Muenster, hope the state attorney general or the Legislature overturn the shopping bag bans. And last summer, state Sen. Ken Paxton, now the Republican nominee for attorney general, said on his campaign website that the San Antonio ordinance outlawing discrimination against gays, lesbians and transgender people would infringe upon other people’s freedom of religion and of speech.

“If you pass this ordinance, we’ll see you in court when Ken Paxton is attorney general,” Paxton, R-McKinney, warned Alamo City officials.

What is happening in Houston, San Antonio and other Texas cities is not surprising. Though municipal offices are nonpartisan, five of the six largest cities — Austin, Dallas, El Paso, Houston and San Antonio — are led by Democratic mayors and have Democratic majorities in their city councils.

The role those mayors play should be in the spotlight now that the U.S. Conference of Mayors is holding its 82nd annual meeting in Dallas. The mayors of Amarillo, Lubbock and other West Texas cities are not listed as attendees, but Texas is well-represented, particularly by cities that have made headlines for some ordinances they have approved. In addition, Houston Mayor Annise Parker has made headlines of her own for being the first openly gay mayor in the city’s history. And though he is not listed as attending, San Antonio Mayor Julian Castro — the best-known Hispanic elected official in the state and a rising star in the Democratic Party — has also made headlines of his own: Most recently for being tapped as the next Secretary of Housing and Urban Development in the Obama administration.

The Democratic stronghold in most of Texas’ largest cities is also reflected nationwide.

Last fall, Bloomberg Businessweek magazine called Republican mayors an “endangered species” and noted that “Democrats have a lock on the dozen largest cities in the U.S.,” including Austin, Dallas, Houston and San Antonio.

“While Republicans have focused on gaining governorships and congressional and state legislative seats, middle-class Americans have been leaving cities,” the magazine noted.

“Immigrants and younger voters who have moved in, for the most part, aren’t voting Republican.”

Turning Texas blue has begun in cities like his own, Castro told me last year when he was promoting the Affordable Care Act, President Barack Obama’s signature health care law. But that is as far Texas Democrats will go this year, Republican office-holders and candidates counter.

“It has been 20 years since a Democrat won a statewide election in Texas,” Texas Attorney General Greg Abbott, the Republican nominee for governor, said at the GOP state convention two weeks ago. “We are not going to let that record be broken this year.”

Texas Democrats should have plenty to say about that when they hold their biennial convention later this week.

Meanwhile, let’s see what the mayors say at their annual gathering, which ends today.

Enrique Rangel is AGN Media Austin Bureau chief. His email address is enrique.rangel@morris.com.