Should smokers switch to e-cigarettes?

CHRISTIE ASCHWANDEN

The Washington Post

Q: Am I better off switching to e-cigarettes than sticking with my smoking habit?

A: Electronic cigarettes come in a variety of shapes and models, but most consist of a battery, a heating element, and a liquid that contains nicotine, propylene glycol and flavorings.

The heating element warms the liquid, turning it into a vapor. Smoking an e-cigarette (called “vaping"), gives users a nicotine hit without exposing them — or those around them — to tobacco smoke. The lack of odor is one of the biggest selling points.

Though e-cigarette makers do not make health claims, many users assume that eliminating the smoke of burning tobacco also eliminates the harm.

“There’s no question that e-cigarettes deliver fewer toxic substances than conventional cigarettes, but the question of how much less is still not clear,” says Stanton Glantz, director of the Center for Tobacco Control Research and Education at the University of California at San Francisco. Though sales of e-cigarettes are expected to reach $1 billion this year, vaping is new enough that there haven’t been many studies done yet.

The ingredients can vary greatly from product to product, says behavioral scientist Alexander Prokhorov at the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center.

“The companies improvise to come up with new flavorings and every time they introduce a new flavor, you don’t really know what’s in it,” he says.

An analysis by researchers at the FDA found very low levels of nitrosamines, ethylene glycol and diethylene glycol — chemicals associated with cancer and other health risks — in some products, but the levels were a tiny fraction of what a smoker would get from a tobacco cigarette.

Some e-cigarettes allow users to adjust the amount of nicotine they’re getting, even down to zero over time, and it seems plausible that they could help people cut their dependence, Prokhorov says. However, right now there aren’t good studies to show that they outperform existing nicotine cessation products, nor are they FDA-approved for this purpose.

Lauren Odum, a pharmacist at the University of Missouri who works at a smoking cessation clinic, says patients have told her that e-cigarettes helped them quit or cut back on regular cigarettes.

“One of the reasons that people like them is that they don’t have to stop the smoking habit,” she says. “They still get the hand-to-mouth motion and they still get the nicotine.”

But not everyone who uses e-cigarettes stops smoking — most also use tobacco cigarettes — and some public health researchers worry that vaping may actually prevent some people from kicking their nicotine habit if it allows them to get their fix in circumstances where they can’t smoke.