POLITICO Pro Louisiana Senate debate: 10 quotes that mattered Landrieu debated like the underdog

( Also on POLITICO: Mary Landrieu stands with Obama — or hardly knows him)

Sen. Mary Landrieu (D-La.) debated Monday like an underdog, suggesting her challenger could be jailed for stealing taxpayer money as a result of his $20,000-a-year side job at Louisiana State University. But the three-term incumbent, who trails Republican Rep. Bill Cassidy in the polls less than a week before the vote, also found herself on the defensive for wrongly billing taxpayers more than $33,000 to take chartered jets to campaign events.

Story Continued Below

In the only debate ahead of Saturday’s runoff, Cassidy made no game-changing mistakes. He benefited from the moderators’ focus on issues that play to the Republican strength in the Deep South: guns, abortion, Obamacare, taxes and Landrieu’s failure to pass the Keystone XL pipeline through the Senate.

The Republican congressman acted like a quarterback trying to run out the clock, but he was at times awkward and hard to follow. He copped at one point to reading his opponent’s notes and told an odd story about speaking at a vaccine conference.

Here are the 10 most memorable exchanges from the hour-long matchup, hosted by Baton Rouge CBS affiliate WAFB-TV:

“He’s gonna be fighting more than President Obama. … He will be fighting subpoenas because this is going to be under investigation.”

It’s been nearly a week since a blog called American Zombie posted what it acknowledged was an “opposition research” dump. It was a series of emails and time sheets, obtained by public records requests, about Cassidy’s work as a teacher and practicing physician for Louisiana State University. Landrieu’s campaign has pushed the item relentlessly over the last six days, with limited success, including a conference call with the senator the day after Thanksgiving and a subsequent press conference.

In a state with a long history of shady public corruption, Cassidy is often mocked for being so sober-minded and boring. But Landrieu, who trails by double digits in some polls, has little to lose.

“He’s the only doctor in the Congress that has this sweetheart deal, the only one,” she said. “He is not a doctor for the poor. He’s a doctor for himself.”

“I love treating patients. I love teaching. And I’m the only liver specialist in the LSU system. So I bring value.”

Hours before the debate, Louisiana State gave Landrieu an opening to attack by announcing in an otherwise-bland statement that it would look into the situation based on “concerns” in the media — “just as we would any other employee.”

Cassidy said Landrieu’s charges are “absolutely false” and said he’s proud of the work he’s done, putting in time at the hospital in the morning and flying to Washington for evening votes. He said he’s filled out paperwork to reflect his work.

Most defiantly, he said he would like to continue the $20,000-a-year arrangement if he’s elected to the Senate.

“We don’t allow props.”

The moderator knew Landrieu would hit hard on the LSU issue, so he started the debate by asking her about private charter flights for which she has reimbursed the federal government $33,727, admitting that she had made a mistake.

Cassidy has pushed Landrieu for the past three months to release her private travel records from her first term — the initial disclosures covered from 2002 to 2014 — to show she didn’t do anything improper during that period.

When the moderator asked why she wouldn’t release them, Landrieu held up a sheaf of papers and placed them on her podium. The moderator chastised her.

“Are records props?” she responded.

Landrieu insisted that “nothing was illegal.”

“Actually, it was,” Cassidy responded.

“Just because you disagree with the president doesn’t make you a racist.”

Cassidy attacked Landrieu for telling NBC’s Chuck Todd that racism contributes to President Barack Obama’s unpopularity in Louisiana.

But the Democrat shot back, defending her comments, which came just before the November primary.

“I said the South has not always been the friendliest place for African-Americans,” she said. “I will make no apologies for something that is a historical fact.”

Landrieu treaded carefully when it came to Obama. She needs record turnout among African-Americans to survive, after having won fewer than one in five white votes in last month’s jungle primary.

While she talked up her independence generally, Landrieu took several subtle digs at Cassidy which were clearly aimed at black voters. Her campaign is running a series of ads on urban radio stations that also say Republicans “disrespect” Obama and will impeach him if Cassidy wins.

“He has been very disrespectful to the president and the office of the president,” said Landrieu.

“I was able to get the Cassidy bill through the House.”

Landrieu had made her clout as chair of the Senate Energy Committee a central rationale for her reelection, but that argument carries less weight given the new Republican majority next year.

Cassidy seized on Landrieu’s failure to get the votes she needed in the lame duck session to pass the Keystone XL pipeline. He noted that the House passed what he repeatedly referred to as “the Cassidy bill.”

Landrieu said she hasn’t given up. “I wish it would have passed, but we got it up for a vote in the Senate,” she responded. “That’s the leadership I bring. When I get back to the Senate, we will pass the Keystone Pipeline.”

“I could see from your notes.”

Later in the debate, the candidates got a chance to question one another. As Landrieu got her turn, Cassidy interjected: “I think this is ‘Dr. Double Dip,’ or something.”

“Yes, it is,” said Landrieu.

Then Cassidy announced from behind his podium that he had peeked across the stage at Landrieu’s notes.

“I believe that the government should not make the choice; that’s why I fall more under the label of pro-choice than pro-life. These labels are not very accurate.”

Landrieu reiterated her opposition to a 20-week abortion ban but added that “abortion in almost every case is immoral.” Pro-abortion-rights women’s groups don’t see her as an ally, and the anti-abortion community views her as an enemy.

To have a chance Saturday, she needs to win over a chunk of socially-conservative Catholics who oppose abortion but believe that government has an important role to help the less fortunate.

Cassidy said he supports the ban because, as a doctor, “The child who is born at Week 20 can survive outside the womb.” He said he opposes abortion, except when the mother’s life is at risk.

“I have voted – I think, I have to go back and look – for drug testing for welfare beneficiaries. But…”

Landrieu went on to explain, more forcefully as her answer went on, that she thinks it’s unfair to require parents on welfare to get drug tested. She said there’s “no evidence” that people on public assistance use drugs disproportionately to the rest of the population and argued that rich people who get special tax breaks should get tested too if the needy do.

“Beating up on the poor is not going to solve the problems of our country,” she said, again invoking her “Catholic faith” to say “that just isn’t right.”

Cassidy, again noting that he is a doctor, argued that it’s unfair to the people who get welfare benefits not to test them for drugs.

“If you give a measure of accountability … you save their lives,” he said. “It’s not generous to a person to allow them to continue in a self-destructive lifestyle.”

“It is working.”

Playing offense on an issue that just contributed to the defeat of a few colleagues, Landrieu defended her support for Obamacare. Then she attacked Cassidy for opposing Medicaid expansion and said the health care law is working better in Arkansas, Connecticut and New York — states that expanded the program — than in Louisiana.

Landrieu said moms are no longer being forced to choose between getting a mammogram and feeding their kids. Costs are coming down, the senator argued, and 88 percent of Louisiana’s population qualifies for the insurance subsidy.

“Sandy Hook would not have been prevented by Manchin-Toomey.”

Landrieu said polling shows that more than 90 percent of voters support background checks. “What I have voted for …. is to close the loophole so people with mental illness or criminals cannot get easy access to those guns,” she said.

Cassidy shot back that the failed amendment, sponsored by Sen. Pat Toomey (R-Pa.) and Sen. Joe Manchin (D-W.Va.), would not have stopped the 2012 tragedy in Newtown, Connecticut.

“I have an ‘A+’ from the NRA,” he said. “Sen. Landrieu has a ‘D.’”