Click photo to enlarge «

1

2

»

Christian Saber, born and raised in Buenos Aires, started Rincon Argentino restaurant in Boulder with his wife, Karly, as a way to share their love of empanadas and other authentic Argentine fare.

Since it opened in October 2012, the cozy restaurant off the corner of Folsom Street and Arapahoe Avenue quickly grew its clientele by word-of-mouth. Sales increased monthly on a scale of 20 percent to 30 percent.

As both the in-house and catering businesses continued to grow, the Sabers knew their 1,050-square-foot restaurant needed a little more breathing room.

"When it's super-busy ... I want to see the people stay and enjoy the restaurant," said Christian Saber, who met Karly a couple years back when he worked at a restaurant in Breckenridge.

When Rincon Argentino marks its second anniversary later this year, the restaurant at 2525 Arapahoe Ave. in the Village Shopping Center likely will do so in a larger space.

Owners Christian and Karly Saber are moving forward on plans to expand the restaurant into an adjacent space, effectively doubling the size of the eatery.

Rincon Argentino is expected to take control of Cricket Wireless' neighboring suite on July 1, the Sabers said. Officials for Cricket's local store said the location will remain open through the end of June.

The larger space will help Rincon Argentino provide more seating space to customers and groups and the added kitchen space will help both the in-house orders and off-site catering requests, Karly Saber said.

Advertisement

Perhaps most importantly, she said, the restaurant will be designed to help maintain its cozy atmosphere — a place where customers can stay and have after-dinner conversations.

"We want to have a little more of that kind of Latin hospitality feel," she said.

That Latin hospitality feel has helped cultivate long-time patrons like George Deriso, an adjunct professor of management and entrepreneurship at the University of Colorado's Leeds School of Business.

"My wife and I hosted an Argentinian high school girl a couple of years ago (before Rincon Argentino opened)," Deriso said. "She made us empanadas, and we fell in love with them. I started buying from Rincon Argentino as soon as they opened and have done so almost once per week since."

Deriso later invited the Sabers to speak at the MBA-level course he taught this spring.

"They told their remarkable startup story and had my students absolutely captivated," he said. "On my last class night, I paid to have enough empanadas for my whole class to feast on — they loved them."

The expansion also will include the addition of a small, raised platform that could serve as a stage for some low-key and acoustic performances from local Latin musicians.

The scope of the work includes the enclosure of the concrete patio with a steel, two-rail fence, according to documents filed last month with the city of Boulder.

With the addition of the railing, Rincon Argentino's liquor license can extend to the patio.

Because of the change in use and the potential effects on parking requirements, Rincon Argentino officials had to receive city approval for a minor modification application. City officials approved that and are close to approving the building permits, the Sabers said.

"We can't wait to see what we planned and imagined for so long," Christian Saber said.

Contact Camera Business Writer Alicia Wallace at 303-473-1332 or wallacea@dailycamera.com