Biotech stocks continued with a second day of decline on Tuesday, after prominent Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton outlined her proposal to curb excessive pricing by specialty drug-makers. The biotech index slumped over 3% in early afternoon trading on Tuesday, but later recovered somewhat to close down 1.5%.

Clinton’s Drug Proposal

Mrs. Clinton revealed her drug plans at a forum in Iowa. Among other things, she called for a cap on out-of-pocket drug insurance costs for chronically sick patients at $250 a month. Building up on her presidential campaign to improve life for the middle class, Mrs. Clinton’s campaign said regarding drug costs: “This is an issue that affects every American family and individual. Every month, 90 per cent of seniors and around half of all Americans take a prescription drug.”

She also said that drug-makers should be rejected tax deductions unless they invest more of their profits into R&D instead of marketing. Moreover, Mrs. Clinton wishes to increase funding for the Food and Drug Administration in order to expedite approval of cheaper generic and biosimilar drugs. She also said Americans should be allowed to import approved drugs from outside the US if they can get them cheaper.

What Fueled The Proposal

The iShares NASDAQ Biotechnology Index (NASDAQ:IBB) had tanked over 4.4% on Monday, losing nearly $38 billion in value, after Mrs. Clinton tweeted her intent to deal with the “outrageous price gouging” prevalent in specialty pharma. She cited a New York Times article to build her case, which brought to attention the recent 5000% price hike of a 62-year-old drug used to fight an infection common among AIDS and cancer patients. The drug, Daraprim, was acquired by a small startup, Turing Pharmaceuticals, in August, after which the price of a single tablet was promptly raised from $13.50 to $750. The intense backlash forced Turing CEO Martin Shkreli to say on Tuesday evening that he would reduce the drug’s price, soon after he fervently defended the price hike as just being “business.”

Shares of Valeant Pharmaceuticals Intl Inc. (NYSE:VRX) plummeted over 10% in the past two trading sessions. The Canada-based drug-maker is known to lead the industry tactic of acquiring rivals’ undervalued drugs, only to jack up their prices later. It was also flagged in the said NYT article.

Street Remains Bullish On Biotech

Nonetheless, the Street and drug companies predominantly remain unfazed by Mrs. Clinton’s attempts to rein in pharma costs. Brent Saunders, CEO of Allergan PLC (NYSE:AGN), said Monday that the Daraprim case is nothing but an “egregious one-off,” and that Mrs. Clinton’s proposals may never reach decision stage. “She’s a candidate, a presumptive leader in a primary race — you have to put things in context,” he added.

Note that Republicans are expected to maintain majority in the Congress, no matter which party wins the presidential race. While leading Democratic candidates including Mrs. Clinton and Bernie Sanders have been calling for healthcare reforms to do away with high drug costs, Republican candidates are basing much of their campaigns around repeal of Obamacare. It’s very unlikely that they will allow any new healthcare proposal to pass through. Consequently, Jefferies biotech analysts Brian Abrahams, Eun Yang, and Biren Amin said in a note to clients yesterday that the recent political rhetoric around drug pricing will likely settle down without any major policy changes, which might be detrimental to biotech fundamentals.

Analysts Recommend Buy On Weakness

In fact, Jefferies recommended investors to exploit the biotech sector weakness to their benefit in the meantime. The analysts identified shares of Celgene Corporation (NASDAQ:CELG), BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. (NASDAQ:BMRN) and Alkermes Plc (NASDAQ:ALKS) as good buys during this time. Celgene fell over 4% since the week’s start to close at $117.61 on Tuesday. Apart from being Jefferies’ favorite biotech stock, with a deep, low-risk pipeline boasting multiple potential blockbusters, the company is also expected to conduct a large takeover sometime soon. BioMarin plunged 9.71% since Monday, while Alkermes has lost 7.55%. Both companies have strong pipelines that can yield high returns in near future. Jefferies also recommends investors AMAG Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (NASDAQ:AMAG), Alder Biopharmaceuticals Inc. (NASDAQ:ALDR), and Cempra Inc. (NASDAQ:CEMP).

Meanwhile, Piper Jaffray analyst Edward Tenthoff favors shares of Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated (NASDAQ:VRTX) after last two days’ selloff. The analyst believes that the company’s cystic fibrosis (CF) drug, Orkambi, approved for patients aged 12 or older, will continue to sport premium pricing because it modifies disease treatment. Orkambi costs $259,000 a year, and treats nearly half of CF patients who have two copies of the most common mutation, F508del. The drug is expected to deliver over $3 billion in annual sales. Mr. Tenthoff maintains an Overweight rating on Vertex stock, with a price target of $163 — a 42% premium over last close at $114.41 (the stock fell 7.85% since Monday).

Biotech Sector Can Rebound

This is not the first time that the biotech sector has come under heat. Last year, Fed chairman Janet Yellen called the sector valuations “substantially stretched,” yet the sector has returned over 30% since then. Policy-makers and health insurers have also been rallying against the unnecessarily high pricing of drugs. Last year, the nation’s biggest pharmacy-benefits manager Express Scripts removed formulary access to a $1,000-a-day hepatitis C pill of Gilead Sciences, Inc. (NASDAQ:GILD), and added a heavily discounted rival drug instead. Gilead was forced to subsequently discount its own medicine.

Yet, the biotech sector has remained dear to investors, always jumping back up after a fall. The sector’s reaction is generally more heightened than the overall market. In the market selloff between July 24 and August 25, IBB lost 17.39%, surpassing the 11.16% loss of the wider S&P 500 Index. At the same time, in the last five years, IBB has increased over four times in value, whereas the S&P 500 has gained roughly 70%. Analysts believe that while the biotech sector remains overvalued and vulnerable to temporary selloffs, it will still provide sizeable returns to investors.