A week after the Greenville Health System Board of Trustees voted to move forward on a plan to create a private nonprofit to lead the health system, the president and CEO is explaining the move.



"I would say that for me, this is the most significant strategic issue that I've been involved in," Mike Riordan told WYFF News 4.



The board voted 12-2 on Sept. 7 in favor of moving forward on a plan to create a new board to handle all strategic planning and financial matters.



The two dissenting trustees, Dell Baker and Lewis Vaughn, both criticized the move and said the private board would lead to less transparency and local input in major decisions.



Baker and Vaughn, both former state lawmakers, said the current board is accountable to the Greenville legislative delegation and is required to respond to requests for more information through the Freedom of Information Act. That would no longer be the case under the proposed board, Baker and Vaughn said.



Riordan argued that previous decisions to release information to address public concerns did not happen because of required accountability to the legislative delegation.



"They do it because a board takes very seriously their responsibilities. Our trustees were put in place because they are accountable to the public," Riordan told WYFF. "There is no external accountability that has or has ever come from an elected official. That's our board's responsibility and has been."



Riordan said changing the governance structure of the board would make it easier for GHS to form partnerships with other health systems, which are necessary to keep costs down while meeting the changing demands of health care.



"There is more activity around systems coming together to form groups or partnerships now than at any time in my career," Riordan said. "The smaller hospitals say, "We cannot do this on our own like we used to.'"



Riordan said there is more of a push to form partnerships rather than acquire other health systems.



"We can buy things at a cheaper rate. We can share technology," Riordan said.



Riordan said moving forward on partnerships is not efficient under the current board structure.



"Could you imagine if a Spartanburg (Regional) or an Anmed (Health) came and said, 'Hey, we want to form a partnership with you' and we said, 'Great. Now all of your trustees have to be approved by the Greenville delegation'? They'll say that's sort of a non-starter," Riordan said.



Riordan said the board has been discussing the proposal for six or seven years and a final decision could come before the end of the year.