A fellow mom recently asked me whether cucumbers and celery really count as green vegetables. She had heard they don’t offer much nutritional value because they are mostly water.

Great question. But although these vegetables might not be the MVPs of the nutrition game (we’ll leave that to the dark leafy greens), they all have a place on the team.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says children should eat one to three cups of vegetables every day. This is a significant amount, so perhaps we shouldn’t so hastily dismiss those cucumbers.

Here are 10 common myths that mischaracterize vegetables:

Cabbage: Just a cheap meal filler

Part of the cruciferous family of vegetables that includes kale, cauliflower, broccoli and Brussels sprouts, cabbage is high in fiber for healthy digestion and satiety, vitamin C for the immune system and the absorption of iron, vitamin K for healthy blood and circulation, and cancer-fighting compounds.

Carrots: Too much sugar

Carrots contain high amounts of vitamin A for eyesight and immunity, vitamin C for that strong immune system, and fiber. As for its natural sugar, the fiber in a carrot slows down the absorption.

Corn: Source of high-fructose syrup

High-fructose corn syrup has certainly damaged corn’s reputation, but the vegetable and the sweetener have little in common. All of the nutrition and healthy fiber in the corn plant has been stripped from the syrup. Corn is a high-carbohydrate vegetable, so it shouldn’t be the only one your child eats. But it provides thiamine that helps convert carbohydrates into energy, heart-healthy folate, and antioxidants. Buying organic — always a good idea in the vegetable world — is especially recommended.

Cucumbers: Nothing but water

Yes, cucumbers are 95 percent water, helping our bodies stay hydrated in hot temperatures, but they also provide antioxidants such as vitamin C and beta-carotene that help us fight cellular damage, B vitamins that support nerve health, potassium for heart health, and fiber.

Celery: Ditto

The vegetable provides vitamin K for blood health, folate for red blood cell production, vitamin A, fiber and yes, lots of water. Celery has been shown to lower blood pressure and the risk of cancer.

Garlic: Flavor but no nutrition

This vegetable has been shown to lower blood pressure, protect the heart, fight cancer and regulate blood sugar levels and is antibacterial and antiviral, which means it is helpful during cold and flu season.

Onions: Ditto

Never say no to an onion, especially during allergy season. They are high in quercetin, an antioxidant known for being a natural antihistamine. Onions have also been shown to support heart health, and they provide vitamin C, calcium, iron, folate and fiber.

Iceberg lettuce: No nutrition

Yes, darker varieties of lettuces and greens provide more nutrition per serving, but if iceberg will get your kid to eat salad, embrace it.