President Barack Obama answers a question during a news conference in the East Room of the White House, Wednesday, Nov. 5, 2014, in Washington. (AP Photo/Jacquelyn Martin)

Barack Obama's defining trait as a politician is his total confidence in his own unique abilities. And, for the vast majority of his political career, the belief that he is, more than anyone else in political office, able to solve unsolvable problems and bridge unbridgeable divides has served him very well.

That utter confidence is what fueled his decision to run for the U.S. Senate in 2004 even though the race was seen as a two-man contest between wealthy businessman Blair Hull and then state Comptroller Dan Hynes. And that same confidence -- and ability to see around corners -- that led Obama to not only enter the 2008 presidential race against the frontrunning Hillary Clinton but also to beat her. (For much more on Obama's sense of destiny, you should read David Maraniss' bio of our 44th president.)

It's that same confidence, however, that has also led Obama to badly miscalculate the politics of his presidency -- the latest setback being the Republican takeover of the Senate last Tuesday. In an interview with CBS' Bob Schieffer, Obama, who tends to shy away from any sort of public introspection, broadly diagnosed what had gone wrong in the election (and, I would say, more broadly during his presidency).

He took two bites at that apple. Here's the first:

When you start governing, there is a tendency sometimes for me to start thinking. As long as I get the policy right then that’s what should matter. And, you know, people have asked, you know, what you need to do differently going forward and I think you do that, you got to check after every election.

And here's the second:

I do need to constantly remind myself and my team are is it’s not enough just to build the better mousetrap. People don’t automatically come beating to your door. We’ve got to sell it, we’ve got to reach out to the other side and where possible persuade. And I think there are times, there’s no doubt about it where, you know, I think we have not been successful in going out there and letting people know what it is that we are trying to do and why this is the right direction. So there-- there is a failure of politics there that we have got-- we got to improve on.

Here's what Obama is saying: I just assumed my policies would speak for themselves. I thought that people would see I -- and my policies -- are right, and join me.

Yes, that seems a somewhat outlandish -- and naive -- belief for anyone who has risen as high in politics as Obama. And yet, his entire life leading up to his move into the White House reinforces that narrative. He emerged as a phenom in the Senate race after Hull and Hynes destroyed one another -- and won a contested primary by almost 30 points. In the general election, his opponent was brought down by a sex club scandal and replaced by political gadfly Alan Keyes. As Obama cruised to a victory, he delivered the keynote address at the 2004 Democratic National Convention -- a speech that propelled chatter for the next two years about his future plans. He ran for president against the prohibitive frontrunner and beat her soundly. He took the oath of office at 48 years old, without question the most popular and successful politician of his generation.

You can see why someone with that path to the presidency -- contrast it with the decades of ups and downs experienced by Bill Clinton -- might be convinced that he can do anything by a combination of sheer force of personality and unique position in history. Of course, in retrospect, you can also see the utter folly in believing that policy successes are entirely -- or, at least, largely -- dictated by the relative merits of the proposal and largely devoid of politics and personality.

The selling -- or lack thereof -- of the Affordable Care Act is a perfect example of Obama's confidence in his own ideas failing him. Whether or not you think the law is a good policy, it is indisputable that Democrats badly lost the message war over the law. It quite clearly cost them control of the House in the 2010 election and played a role -- though not the dominant one -- in the party's losses six days ago. And, in this recently-concluded election, there was a sense from the White House that people should be more aware of all the good the Obama Administration had done for them but either an inability -- due the President's low popularity numbers -- or an unwillingness to effectively sell that message.

The question, of course, is whether Obama has learned his lesson. Can he abandon the assumption that people will see things his way simply because, well, he's Barack Obama? That was the same question asked of this White House in the wake of the self-described "shellacking" of the 2010 midterms. But, Obama never really had to answer that question because his reelection effort began shortly thereafter and his convincing victory for a second term seemed to affirm (or re-affirm) that, yes, in fact, voters did see things his way after all.

Now there is no next campaign for Obama. Just his legacy. And, at the moment, a major part of that legacy will be how he never was able to transform his successes in campaigning to governance. ("One thing that I will say that campaigning and governance are two different things," Obama told Schieffer.) Much of that disconnect is built on Obama's complete and total confidence in the rightness -- and obvious rightness -- of the policies he advocates.

But, that's not how Washington -- or politics -- works. Obama appears to now understand that reality -- and the limits on his office it presents. But, can he salvage the final two years of his presidency? Or is it already too late?