Technically Incorrect offers a slightly twisted take on the tech that's taken over our lives.

ABC News screenshot by Chris Matyszczyk/CNET

As Donald Trump has elegantly proved, the Web is where real, grassroots politics is enacted these days.

This means that politicians must show that they're down with the kids and with the adults who pick up Web lingo in order to stay down with the kids.

This trend reached an exalted level on Friday when President Barack Obama invoked neither FDR nor JFK to denounce the Republican Party.

Instead, he compared Republicans to Grumpy Cat.

As ABC News reports, the president was speaking at the Democratic Women's Initiative in Washington, DC where he mused, "Why is it that Republican politicians are so down on America? Have you noticed that? I mean they are, they are gloomy. They're like grumpy cat."

The president didn't merely make the reference to the Internet's most miserable and perhaps wealthiest feline.

He made the Grumpy Cat face too.

It's rare for an opposition party to ever laud the president for, say, anything. Some might agree, though, that the paralysis that's afflicted our political system for the last few years is the apogee of grumpiness for grumpiness's sake.

How many, though, other Internet memes might we see being used as the turgid marathon to become our next president takes place?

After all, Internet memes have been co-opted by many to communicate with the masses. Delta Airlines created a whole safety video entirely based on them.

So might we see Democratic frontrunner Hillary Clinton being compared to the Overly Attached Girlfriend? Could Ted Cruz attempt to soften his sometimes aggressive demeanor by referring to his opponents solely via the medium of LOLcats?

And given Mike Huckabee's musical pretensions, he'll surely be tempted to appear in a Gangnam Style video.

Donald Trump hasn't yet referred to somewhat somnolent rival Ben Carson as David After the Dentist, but it's surely close at hand.

Marco Rubio must have already been tempted to show his youthful credentials by Rickrolling his old mentor Jeb Bush.

If the Democratic race continues to be close, who would be surprised if Bernie Sanders was suddenly likened to either the Dramatic Chipmunk or even the Screaming Goat?

For her part, Grumpy cat has already achieved a high level of stateswomanship. She's been honored by Madame Tussauds. (She wasn't impressed.)

I wonder how many of our current politicians, when we look back on them in a decade or two, will warrant any sort of respect at all.