The Obama administration must be feeling the heat to enroll more young Americans in the Affordable Care Act, as its latest promotional ruse includes a rapping pug and belting parrots.

Called “Take Care, People — Get Covered,” Enroll America, the nonprofit tasked with promoting Obamacare, released a short video starring singing parrots, dogs and cats. The ad seeks to target young women, specifically, by promoting their relationships with their pets, who want their owners to get covered.

Enroll America’s video opens with a sweet beat and a cat encouraging its owner to take care of him or herself. A pair of parrots and some adorable dogs then join in, spreading the joint message, “we want you to get health insurance.”

“So listen to me, / A talking pug, you see, / If you get health insurance / Preventive care is now free,” a pug raps to the camera as the ad continues.

Posted to YouTube on Tuesday, Enroll America President Anne Filipic told USA Today featuring pets in the promotion helps to “break through the clutter.” According to Filipic, more than half of female pet owners would risk their lives for their animals, hence the rapping pug and crooning cats.

But Enroll America’s president concedes that reaching the American people — and “Young Invincibles,” in particular — hasn’t been easy.

“There have been challenges in getting messages out,” Filipic said. “People don’t have the facts they need to know.”

Whether or not singing birds, bulldogs and cats remedy those issues remains to be seen.

As of early January, only 24 percent of those who selected a plan through Obamacare’s health insurance marketplace were between the ages of 18 and 34, according to the Department of Health and Human Services. The Obama administration set a target of 40 percent by March 31, the end of the open enrollment period. But the success of President Barack Obama’s signature healthcare law relies substantially on young people’s participation. If less than 2.7 million 18- to 34-year-olds fail to enroll in Obamacare, the law faces falling into a death spiral, which rises the cost of premiums for all in the pool.

Check out Enroll America’s new ad below. Warning: the tune is catchy and the song will get stuck in your head.