Congressional Republicans are poised to release the details of their annual budget proposal Tuesday, setting off weeks of jockeying in an attempt to pass a federal spending plan for the first time since 2013.

Previewing the proposal Monday, House Republicans said their budget would balance in 10 years by repealing the Affordable Care Act, making changes to the tax code and reducing regulations.

“Our country faces massive challenges,” House Budget Committee Chairman Tom Price, R-Ga., said in a video released Monday afternoon. “But with positive solutions like these, we will overcome them and create an America that is more secure, stronger and full of opportunity.”



The video’s cheery music notwithstanding, Republicans face a serious challenge to reconcile deficit and defense hawks in their party who are divided on whether to eliminate sequester caps that have limited discretionary spending since 2011, particularly to defense funding.

Mandatory spending, including payments for Social Security and Medicare, makes up about two-thirds of the federal budget. Although healthcare cost increases have slowed and the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office again reduced the projected price tag on the Affordable Care Act earlier this month, the federal debt is expected to increase by another $6 trillion by 2025, to $24 trillion.

Discretionary spending, the levels for which are set by Congress and approved by the president through the appropriations process and tax law, is on a downward trend. Federal agencies have mostly been spared the worst of the sequester, thanks to a deal that was part of the 2013 budget, but it would go into full effect starting Oct. 1.

Calls to end those across-the-board cuts, particularly on the Pentagon’s budget, have increased as the military has repeatedly told Congress it will not be able to maintain preparedness if it is restricted to the sequester-mandated $523 billion for the next fiscal year.

Thanks to a tactic unique to the budget process called reconciliation, only a simple majority is needed to pass the budget resolution in both houses. But Senate Democrats will be able to have their say in a rapid series of votes, dubbed a “vote-o-rama,” where each side will attempt to force the other to take uncomfortable votes that they will then try to use to score political points come election season.

“Budgets by their nature are very political documents,” says Maya MacGuineas, president of the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget. “Less important is what’s in the budget than if this is just the first step in the process, kicking off a real discussion.”

Democrats, who broadly oppose the sequester cuts, say they will insist on linking lifting the caps on defense spending with equal relief to nondefense programs. Not only does nondefense spending include programs such as Head Start and food stamps, it supports homeland security tasks like the Coast Guard’s efforts to prevent drug smuggling.

“We cannot just fix one side of the ledger but not the other because they both support our national defense and economic security,” Sen. Jack Reed, D-R.I., said at a press conference last week with Office of Management and Budget Director Shaun Donovan.

Donovan said the president “will not accept a budget that locks in the sequester … [or] severs that vital link between defense and nondefense spending,” but in fact, the budget does not require the president’s signature, nor will it need the support of anyone in the minority.



In his budget, sent to Congress last month, President Barack Obama would do away with the $523 billion sequester cap for defense spending as well as nondefense spending, which would otherwise be restricted to $493.5 billion. According to the analysis released by the CBO last week, eliminating the sequester would add another $42 billion to discretionary spending.

Obama’s budget, according to CBO analysis, would shave $1.2 trillion off the growth of the federal debt in the next decade, primarily through increasing tax revenue. Congressional Republicans said his proposal was a nonstarter.

But their own internal disagreements over whether to keep sequester caps for defense spending will make it difficult for Republicans to cobble together the majority of votes they need to pass their own budget.

One proposal, floated by moderate Republicans, will be to pay for increases in the Pentagon’s funding without rewriting the 2011 Budget Control Act that governs the sequester by closing loopholes in the tax code.

“Both [budget committee] chairs have publicly committed to balancing in 10 years and they’re not going to raise taxes,” says Douglas Holtz-Eakin, a former director of the CBO who is now the president of the conservative American Action Forum. “You fill in the blanks: Everything is now an issue.”