By CHRISTIAN SCHIAVONE, The Patriot Ledger

WEYMOUTH, Mass. — Todd Ruggere has had a beer with a donkey named Maxwell in Mendon, cracked a cold one with the entire population of Gosnold, and shared a brew in the buff with members of a nudist resort in Hancock.

And those are just three of the stops the Weymouth native has made in the last nine months during his mission to drink a beer in every Massachusetts city and town to raise money for pediatric cancer research.

He planned to wrap up the tour with a stop at the Sam Adams Brewery in Jamaica Plain.

"It was a blast," Ruggere said in a recent interview, referring to his tour around the state. "I've met people I'll be friends with for the rest of my life."

Ruggere, 39, grew up in Weymouth and moved to Grafton about four years ago. His family still lives in Weymouth.

He came up with the idea for the tour last fall, after testing himself to see if he could name all 351 communities in the state. He got stuck at 150.

He decided to make the tour into a fundraiser, choosing children's cancer research because of a commercial for the Jimmy Fund he'd seen several times in movie theaters.

"I saw that and said, 'I wish I could help,'" he said. "Then I came up with this idea and I said, 'This is what I can do. This is the idea I've been waiting for.'"

He's raised more than $34,000, he said.

He started with after-work spots around Grafton and close to his job with a mutual fund company in Westboro. As he branched farther afield, he relied on recommendations on his blog, Facebook and Twitter to find watering holes in tiny towns or willing hosts in communities that either don't have a bar or ban the sale of alcohol.

At some stops, he showed up, had a quiet beer and left with little fanfare. At others, especially as his journey started making headlines, he found supporters waiting for him or offering to host his next stop.

"I've learned how awesome and generous people are," he said.

The interest in his effort is simple to explain, he says: "People love beer."

He kicked off the tour with a New Year's Day beer at his apartment in Grafton.

At each stop, he had a Sam Adams — his official drink for the tour — but occasionally sampled other beers. When making multiple stops in one day, he used a designated driver and rarely crossed the line into inebriation, he said.

South Shore stops included Main Street Bar and Grille in Weymouth, the Robert I. Nickerson American Legion Post in Quincy, Players in Rockland and a mini bar crawl in Hingham at the Snug, Square Cafe and Stars.

With his tour nearing its end, Ruggere was already thinking about his next round.

"As far as next year, I really don't know, but I would like to expand," he said. "I'll maybe relax a little bit and then do another state at some point."