U.S. District Court Judge Michael Shipp rules on the dispute with Gov. Chris Christie taking on the NFL and other sports leagues, with sports betting's launch at Monmouth Park at stake.

Gov. Chris Christie. (Photo: AFP/Getty Images )

A federal judge says Monmouth Park can't cash in Sunday on Gov. Chris Christie's plan to launch betting on NFL football at the Oceanport racetrack.

But track officials said they are considering taking bets in future weeks on soccer, NASCAR racing and other sports not covered by the ruling.

U.S. District Court Judge Michael Shipp late Friday put in place a temporary restraining order that will prevent the track from taking bets on this weekend's NFL games, and also applies to NBA, NHL, Major League Baseball and NCAA games.

Track officials said they were expecting a crowd of 10,000 Sunday to bet on Jets-Bills, Eagles-Cardinals and other NFL games. The track was scheduled to open 7 a.m. Sunday in order to accommodate customers wishing to wager on the Lions-Falcons game being played in London at 9:30 a.m.

Christie and the racetrack were named in a complaint filed early this week by the NFL and other sports leagues alleging the state's expanded gambling plans ran afoul of a federal sports betting ban that covers 45 other states.

A spokesman for Christie said the restraining order stops the betting operation from starting on the major sports until the complaint gets a full hearing in the future.

"This is a temporary order while the core issues surrounding sports wagering in New Jersey are fully considered by the court,'' said Christie spokesman Michael Drewniak. "We continue to have full confidence in the strength and appropriateness of our position as we move forward in the litigation.''

Monmouth Park consultant Dennis Drazin said the track will look to conduct wagering on events not covered by the ruling as soon as next week.

"It only applies to complaints so technically we can take bets on soccer, tennis, golf, NASCAR racing, boxing and anything else that is not one of these five," Drazin said.

"We're not going to take bets this Sunday. We're going to regroup and figure it out,'' Drazin added. "I looked at the schedule for Sunday and there's not a lot out there. But we're hoping to do it very soon, maybe this week. For example, if the World Cup was on over the next two weeks we would certainly offer betting on the World Cup. If there was some major sporting event, like a major boxing match, we would certainly take bets on them because we know people want to take bets on them. "

Christie's attorneys claimed operator-regulated sports betting at Monmouth Park comports with a ruling last year by a federal appeals court.

New Jersey has been trying to buck a 1992 federal law intended to restrict sports betting to Nevada, Delaware, Oregon, and Montana.

New Jersey voters by a wide margin approved a sports gambling referendum in 2011 and Christie signed a sports betting bill a few months later, but the leagues successfully sued to stop the state.

The state changed strategy this year after an appeal failed and the U.S. Supreme Court declined to take the case. Christie's attorney general last month said the state would not prosecute racetracks and casinos for taking bets on pro and college sports contests and he signed a revised sports betting bill last week.

Attorneys for the state and Monmouth Park in filings said preventing sports betting's launch would be the "death knell'' for the Oceanport racetrack by cutting off a needed source of new revenue.

Bob Jordan 609-984-4343, bjordan@app.com

10,000

The size of the crowd Monmouth Park officials said they expected Sunday if sports betting was allowed to take place

$1.7 million

The amount of the security bond the NFL and other leagues were ordered by a judge to post if stalling sports betting is found to have unfairly harmed Monmouth Park

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1woYLtH