When we talk about almost any issue, we advocate for what we think is fair. Most human beings have an instinct towards fairness. My idea of fairness may be a redistribution of the wealth and the workers owning the means of production. Your idea of fairness may be a free market “sink or swim” type situation, or somewhere in between.

When we talk about birth control or abortion, it’s the same thing. Tea Party Sen. Mike Lee (R-Your Junk) argued on Monday that it wasn’t fair for people to expect Hobby Lobby to “pay” for a woman’s “recreational activities.” This is how many people see birth control. “Wouldn’t it be nice,” they think, “if these women could just keep their damn legs closed?”

That’s a question that has been asked many times, by many cultures and groups of people men–and many of them have come up their own creative solutions. For instance, women in Ireland (and America) who were deemed “fallen” were sent to live in abusive Magdalene Laundries and convents run by nuns. In some cultures, women are beheaded. In others, they cut off a woman’s clitoris to prevent her from feeling anything but horrible pain during intercourse. In some, they even sew her up until she’s married. Women have been and still are sold into arranged marriages.

Here in America, today, we send them off to purity balls. We teach abstinence-only sex education classes in public schools. All with the same goal in mind as the other solutions–to prevent women from having recreational sex. The idea of women having recreational sex is beyond enraging to some people–so much so that they very much do believe that she needs to be punished for it. With a child.

Keep in mind, the “pain of childbirth” was supposed to be one of the ways women atoned for Eve’s sin in the Garden of Eden. This is a thing a large part of our country very much believes in. If you look at it this way, you might think that women avoiding pregnancy are like criminals avoiding sentencing.

There’s not the same kind of seething rage surrounding the idea of men having sex for recreational reasons. Medicare covers Viagra and penis pumps, and no one except angry feminists like me bats an eyelash. This is because most cultures believe that women are supposed to be the ones in charge of keeping men chaste. Failure to do so is a violation of the social contract- a failure on the part of the woman, not the man.

The debates surrounding free birth control and safe and legal abortions–on a gut level–are often much less about precious fetuses than they are about the idea of consequence-free recreational sex–which many people see as an avoidance of “personal responsibility.” They also, quite honestly, have to do with the fact that widely available birth control and safe and legal abortions have been the biggest factor in women’s liberation. When we got birth control, they lost “woman control.”

We had a comment sometime last week, not unlike many other comments I’ve seen in the past, from a fella who thought of abortion as a “get out of jail free” card. Who thought that it wasn’t fair for women to refuse to live with the “consequences of their actions.” You know, “if you do the crime, you have to do the time”–the crime, in this case, being recreational sex, and the time being giving up your life and your dreams to have a child. Which I’m pretty sure is less “time” than for some instances of homicide.

This mode of thinking is a large part of the reason why some people who are opposed to abortion in other circumstances, will make an exception for rape. Because, you know, in that case, the woman wasn’t necessarily committing a sin herself

What I want to know, though–is who is it that wins in this scenario, where we imagine children as some kind of just retribution? I mean like, in actual reality. Not in some weird made up utopian universe the Christian Right has pipe dreamed up. Not in a schadenfreude or “sense of justice” sense.

It’s not the women, for sure. Duh.

It’s not the kid who’s being raised, possibly, by someone who doesn’t want him or her and can’t necessarily afford to take care of them. Who has to grow up being someone else’s “just retribution.” Even if you firmly believe that children are a just punishment for women who have engaged in the sin of recreational sex, why should the kid be the one to bear that burden? Don’t we already have enough kids in shitty situations? Why do you want more? What is it that you are you getting out of that?

Children aren’t “consequences” of failed morality– they’re human beings. Who deserve to have all the love and care it is possible to give them. In a million years, I would not have a kid if I weren’t prepared to love and take care of that child–not because I’m some evil selfish bitch, but for precisely the opposite reason.

It’s not society. The same people who scream and cry about how birth control and abortion are bad are the exact same people who don’t want to do shit for them the second they’re out of the womb. The people who fiercely loathe and condemn “welfare mothers” and gasp in horror at the idea of universal daycare or preschool. In the years since Roe v. Wade, there has been a drastic reduction in crime. Why? Because children who grow up unwanted are a lot more likely to commit crimes than kids born into a loving family.

As much as the idea of bad sex-having women being punished with children may make you “feel good” or “feel like there is a sense of justice in the world” there is literally no one this works out well for. It shouldn’t be about you or your schadenfreude or your weird god who is still mad at a lady for eating an apple one time. Sure, you can imagine a scenario where a bad sex-having woman is “punished” with a child and learns the error of her ways through hard work and sacrifice and then goes on to be a “scared straight” type example for young women to whom she will teach the important lesson of not having recreational sex, and then they will totally keep their legs closed until their husband says they can open them. But seriously–how often do you think that is actually going to happen?

In fact, our society ought to have an invested interest in preventing unwanted pregnancies. In real ways, not in the dumb “WELL THEN JUST DON’T HAVE SEX” ways. This is why the Affordable Care Act was designed to provide women with free birth control. It’s not only women’s our best interest as human beings (if we count as that anymore), but in society’s best interest as a whole. We’re better off with every child being wanted. We’re better off with allowing people to wait to have children until they can adequately support them and give them a good life.

If you want to talk about “personal responsibility,” fine. So will I. I don’t think “personal responsibility” means having a child you don’t want and can’t afford to take care of. I think kids deserve more than that. I don’t think it’s responsible for a country to just cross their fingers and hope that women will just give up and say “Fine, we just won’t have sex anymore. Happy?” Because unless you’re going to sew our vaginas shut until we’re married, there is not a chance in hell of that happening. Sorry. You have to deal with the reality you have, not the reality you want. For thousands of years, society has been trying to figure out how to prevent women from having sex society doesn’t want them to have. It hasn’t worked. It’s not going to work. I’m sorry.

In the long run, it doesn’t matter if–as Sen. Mike Lee thinks–we are expecting society to “fund” our “recreational activities.” What matters is what’s best for everyone in the long run, and what actually works. What’s best for women, what’s best for children, what’s best for society. I’d rather pay for someone’s “recreational activities” than pay for the actual cost of raising a child. I’d rather pay for “recreational activities” than have another unwanted kid in this world. And I’d certainly rather pay for women’s birth control than men’s Viagra and penis pumps.