Monday night, Oklahoma City police officers converged on the area around S.W. 43rd and Robinson, and arrested nearly a dozen people involved in prostitution.

An area where police responded to a shooting Tuesday afternoon was just blocks away from where police conducted an undercover operation hours earlier.

Monday night, Oklahoma City police officers converged on the area around S.W. 43rd and Robinson, and arrested nearly a dozen people involved in prostitution.

"I love it," said Duane Compton, who's lived there the last 15 years.

Unfortunately, Compton said, the sting won't have a lasting impact.

"It slows ‘em down," Compton explained. "[But] give it two or three days, and it's right back."

Compton and others who live in the area say they are sick of the prostitution and the way that it spills out right in front of them – and their families.

"I have kids out here all the time," Compton said. "I've got neighbor kids that live right behind me, the come up here and play."

The ‘Johns' will often finish their business, Compton said, and drop the prostitutes right in front of his home.

"They let ‘em out right here on the corner, right in front of your driveway," Compton complained – "I have kids out here all the time."

Compton makes it clear that he's not shy about confronting the offenders, when the opportunity arises.

"They pull up out here somewhere, and I say, ‘No, it's not gonna happen right here – you take it down the road somewhere,'" Compton grinned.

Police say they frequently get complaints from the people who live in the area, and respond on a regular basis. Monday night's sting netted 11 arrests.

"Word will spread out on Robinson," said prostitution activist Brian Bates, "and it will probably keep the activity down over the next several days."

Bates captured some of the police operation on camera. He noticed some of the suspected prostitutes are repeat offenders, but said it doesn't usually work the same way with their customers.

"Hopefully we won't see those Johns again," said Bates, "and fortunately I almost never see a John's name twice."

Duane Compton said he'd be happy if the sting kept even one prostitute from doing business on his street. He's realistic, though, about making a serious dent in the illicit activity.

"It won't stop, I don't think it ever will" said Compton. "[But] if they're gonna do it, go somewhere else."