Topics: AlterNet, Donald Trump, Vladimir Putin, Elections News, Social News, Media News, News, Politics News

This article originally appeared on AlterNet

A great deal has been said about just what sort of person Donald Trump is. The consensus seems to be that he’s a narcissistic megalomaniac with a fourth-grade vocabulary. But as fabulous as Trump believes himself to be, he cannot singlehandedly elect himself.

In a fascinating recent poll, a single characteristic emerged as the clearest sign that a voter is a Trump supporter. Contrary to what some might expect, it’s not race, gender, income, age or education level. It’s authoritarianism, clear and simple. Americans with authoritarian personalities (and they are more prevalent than any of us would like them to be) tend to support Trump.

This finding comes courtesy of a poll of 1,800 respondents conducted through the University of Massachusetts in Amherst, by Matthew MacWilliams. “I found that education, income, gender, age, ideology and religiosity had no significant bearing on a Republican voter’s preferred candidate,” MacWilliams writes in Politico this week. “Only two of the variables I looked at were statistically significant: authoritarianism, followed by fear of terrorism, though the former was far more significant than the latter.”

That Trump himself has authoritarian impulses won’t surprise anyone at this point. His call to round up and deport 11 million people, build a giant wall, and flat-out ban an entire religious group, as well as his apparent contempt for the First Amendment are all hallmarks of his campaign. This thin-skinned, vainglorious man has a propensity to eject journalists and protesters who offend him from his events and viciously lash out at anyone who criticizes him. He naively thinks that as president he might be able to just shut down parts of the Internet. He surrounds himself with sycophants. Former White House insider John Dean lays out an excellent case for Trump’s authoritarianism.

But Trump can’t elect himself, and his strong-man style and promises to restore America’s Greatness are obviously resonating with certain kinds of people, and now we know what kinds.

MacWilliams’ poll asked whether it was more important for respondents if their children were “respectful or independent; obedient or self-reliant; well-behaved or considerate; and well-mannered or curious. Respondents who pick the first option in each of these questions are strongly authoritarian.”

No surprise then, that authoritarians yearn for a strong father figure in their leader. And as a quintessential authoritarian personality, Trump is also drawn to other authoritarians, like Putin, especially when they stroke his ego.

Other polls have noted that Trump supporters tend to skew male, older and white. Angry working-class voters are said to be powering both Trump’s (and Sanders’) rise. An article by John Judis in the National Journal laid out the similarity of Trump voters to segregationist George Wallace’s base of support in 1968, then Ross Perot and Pat Buchanan in 1992. Like Wallace did, Trump is polling well with people who are registered Democrats and Independents yet are increasingly identifying themselves as Republican.”