The Rev. Rick Danielson knew he wanted to become a pastor ever since he was a teenager. He attended conservative churches, got married, had kids and was ordained in the United Methodist Church, where he served as a pastor in New York.

The story could have ended there. Then he announced he was gay, and everything changed.

"As I was coming out, I realized there was not a place for me to be" in the United Methodist Church, which does not typically recognize LGBT pastors or gay marriage, he said.

Danielson left the church and was unsure what to do next.

Then he started attending services at a United Church of Christ in New York, and the welcoming atmosphere helped inspire him once again to become a pastor.

At 3 p.m. Sunday, Oct. 25, Boulder Community United Church of Christ officially will install Danielson as its new pastor.

As the church commemorates its 50th anniversary, it also will celebrate its new pastor — and Boulder's first gay senior pastor.

"I'm pleased to be part of it," Danielson said. "It's a highly educated, really committed congregation with a community focus for justice and peace."

Erv Bode, chair of the church's pastor search committee, said Danielson was the best fit for CUCC's liberal, social action-oriented congregation.

CUCC is an "open and affirming" church, which means the congregation welcomes all people, regardless of their sexual orientation. The national UCC church supports LGBT pastors and gay marriage.

Bode said 70 candidates applied for the job, but Danielson's ability to connect with people both young and old is what stood out — not the fact he happened to be gay.

"His love of people is what's great," Bode said. "Community is everything to us. It's in the name of our church."

That CUCC is open and affirming is part of why some people attend the church, so it was only natural they would consider candidates who felt the same way, Bode said.

The church had a gay interim pastor, Benjamin Reynolds, for a time in 2007.

Danielson said CUCC's diversity, ecumenical interests and respect for the community is what drew him to Colorado, despite not having visited the state before he applied for the job.

Danielson, who married his partner, Leroy Lewis, in September, said he's gone through many life changes on his spiritual path. He is excited about worshipping and preaching in an accepting community such as Boulder, whose faith community has a high number of people who support and welcome LGBT people and their families.

Yet the debate over how to treat LGBT congregants and pastors continues to rage in this country, he said.

The United Methodist Church, for example, is in heated discussion about gay marriage and the topic of LGBT clergy, Danielson said. Right now, LGBT people can attend UMC services but cannot get married in the church or become a pastor.

"It's a huge issue right now, one that is threatening to split churches," he said. "I see people taking sides, when it's such a shortsighted matter."

Boulder has several churches that welcome people to participate in all aspects of the church, including marriage or commitment ceremonies and the opportunity to become a church leader, regardless of gender or sexual identity. Among them are First Congregational Church, which was the first UCC church in Colorado to become open and affirming 27 years ago; Cairn Christian Church, a Disciples of Christ church, which is open and affirming, and First United Methodist Church, which calls itself a "reconciling ministry." FUMC supports same-sex marriage and LGBT pastors, despite overarching church policies against it.

Contact Camera Staff Writer Megan Quinn at 303-410-2649, quinnm@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/meganquinn2.