Marin General Hospital has entered into a $90 million agreement with Royal Philips to purchase the bulk of its medical technology over the next 15 years from the Netherlands-based company as well as have it provide service and support for the equipment.

“As an independent community hospital, we have made a conscious decision to partner with Philips, an industry leader, who can support us in taking a long-term view and quickly adopting the latest digital health technologies, while creating an exceptional experience for our patients,” Mark Zielazinski, the Greenbrae hospital’s chief information and technology integration officer, said in a statement.

Zielazinski said under this strategic partnership Marin General will purchase from Philips most of the $30 million of new equipment that will go into the hospital’s new wings, which are under construction. He said that equipment will include diagnostic imaging equipment, such as X-ray machines and CT scanners; patient monitoring equipment including cardiac monitors, ICU monitors and telemonitors; defibrillators; and some respiratory equipment.

Zielazinski said Marin General could realize discounts of up to 50 percent by agreeing to purchase about 85 percent of this type of equipment and attendant services from Philips.

He said much of Marin General’s equipment is old and hasn’t been maintained due to the split with Sutter Health, which formerly managed the hospital.

“We’ve really suffered a bit, and this is going to get us to state of the art very, very quickly,” he said. “We’re excited about that.”

Wanda Jones, president of the New Century Healthcare Institute, a San Francisco-based think tank, said, “It could well be very cost effective for Marin General to get it in one batch. It means they’re going to be paying something every year rather than have a bolus of capital required. This will limit the amount of capital debt they have to acquire.”

Zielazinski said, “The idea is it helps us maintain our costs over time.”

Under the agreement, two Philips employees — a director of client management and a service engineer — will be based at Marin General full time. In addition to servicing the equipment, Philips will provide training and help plan equipment replacements and updates.

The agreement is the first large-scale partnership of its kind for an independent community hospital and the third for Philips in North America in the past six months. Last June, Westchester Medical Center Health Network in New York announced a $500 million, 15-year agreement with Royal Philips to provide equipment and services to the hospital system.

Advertisement

Zielazinski said in addition to the cost savings, the partnership will help Marin General adapt to changes in the health care marketplace occurring as a result of the Affordable Care Act. Health care reform has linked hospitals’ Medicare reimbursements to long-term patient outcomes.

In a statement, Frans van Houten, CEO of Royal Philips, said, “Forward-thinking organizations such as Marin General Hospital understand that for community hospitals to differentiate themselves and to comply with new value based models, they need to focus on the patient experience and team up with a technology partner that has a deep understanding of how a hospital operates.”

Zielazinski said, “These kind of arrangements are going to become more the norm over time as health care evolves due to the reform mechanisms that are happening.”

One type of medical technology that Marin General’s agreement with Philips won’t include is an electronic medical records system. The functionality of the hospital’s Paragon software system, supplied by McKesson Corp., has been a source of bitter criticism by Marin General nurses.

“There is no system out there that people are universally happy with,” Zielazinski said, regarding electronic medical records systems. “Quite frankly, they were built and modeled on some pretty old technology.”