Photo from Boston Children's Hospital

Boston Children’s Hospital, a Harvard Medical School affiliate, on Friday said has acquired Children’s & Women’s Physicians of Westchester, a medical practice with 276 doctors in 57 locations throughout Connecticut, New York and New Jersey.

It’s Boston Childrens’ first acquisition outside of Massachusetts and is aimed at both expanding community-based care and drawing in complex pediatric patients to the 395-bed comprehensive medical center. Financial terms of the deal were not disclosed.

[Also: Tracking 2015 mergers and acquisitions]

“While Boston Children’s has long served patients and families from the tri-state area, the affiliation with CWPW will enable us to better serve pediatric patients, who require highly complex care through improved integration,” said Sandra Fenwick, president and CEO of Boston Children’s Hospital, in a statement.

While more than 1,000 doctors practice across Boston Children’s departments, Children’s & Women’s Physicians of Westchester will also be the nonprofit’s first owned practice. Boston Children’s has an alliance with a 300-physician group at 75 practices across Eastern Massachusetts, but doesn’t own the provider organization.

Like Healthcare Finance on Facebook

Boston Children’s already treats a number of complex pediatric and adolescent patients from south of Massachusetts, as well as international patients from the Middle East, Asia and Latin America, which have helped buoy its finances. Boston Children’s earned $113 million last year on more than $1.5 billion in revenue, 24,000 patients and 551,000 patient visits.

Founded in 2000, Children’s & Women’s Physicians of Westchester led an effort to create the Maria Fareri Children’s Hospital at Westchester Medical Center and now serve as the majority of its physicians. The group’s physicians will remain faculty of New York Medical College, and continue to staff 10 area neonatal intensive care units and maintain their current affiliations across the region.

Twitter: @AnthonyBrino