For the second consecutive year, two perennial powers who have a combined 12 NCAA titles will meet outside Boston in the first round of the 16-team national hockey tournament.

The seven-time NCAA champion University of Denver will again open hockey’s big dance against Boston College, which has won five national crowns. The Pioneers (23-13-2) on Sunday were given the East Regional’s No. 2 seed, and will play the No. 3 Eagles (21-13-3) on Saturday at 1 p.m. MDT in Providence, R.I., which is 51 miles southwest of Boston.

Miami (Ohio) is the regional’s No. 1 seed, and the RedHawks (25-13-1) will play fourth-seeded Providence (22-13-2), which is the No. 15 overall seed with home-ice advantage. Saturday’s winners will meet Sunday for a berth in the Frozen Four at Boston’s TD Garden April 9-11.

“It’s a really good region,” DU coach Jim Montgomery said. “But when we play our brand of hockey we’re tough to beat.”

A year ago, at the Northeast Regional in Worcester, Mass., Boston College pummeled DU 6-2 less than a week after the Pioneers won the inaugural National Collegiate Hockey Conference tournament. Hobey Baker Award-winning forward Johnny Gaudreau had three goals and six points for BC. Gaudreau now plays for the Calgary Flames and leads NHL rookies in scoring.

DU and BC split a nonconference series Oct. 31 and Nov. 1 in Denver this season. The Eagles won 2-1 in regulation before the Pioneers won 2-1 in overtime.

“We’ve played them twice but they’re a much different team than they were last fall,” Montgomery said of the Eagles, who tied Providence for second in Hockey East before losing a three-game conference playoff series to Vermont and failing to make it to the Hockey East finals. “They’ve gotten better but we’ve gotten exponentially better.”

BC, which is seeded 11th overall, will meet Denver after nearly a two-week break.

DU is one of six NCHC teams in the 16-team NCAA Tournament. The eight-team NCHC has six teams among the country’s top 12 in the final PairWise Rankings (PWR).

The NCHC has teams in all four regionals, including two in the East (Miami, Denver) and the West (No. 1 North Dakota, No. 2 Minnesota-Duluth). Miami and Denver finished 4-5 in the PWR, setting up a possible rematch of Friday’s NCHC semifinal game in Minneapolis, in which the RedHawks won 6-3.

DU bounced back by beating North Dakota 5-1 in Sunday’s NCHC consolation game.

Montgomery feared that his team was not prepared to play Miami on Friday.

“Last week we were practicing at three-quarter sweep and it reminded me of how we went into the BC game last year after winning the NCHC,” he said. “Hopefully it’s a lesson that we learned and we won’t have to go through again.”

Miami might face Providence without 20-goal scorers Blake Coleman and Riley Barber. Coleman, who had a hat trick in Saturday’s 3-2 NCHC championship-game victory over St. Cloud State, will serve a one-game suspension as a misconduct-accumulation penalty. Barber has an undisclosed injury and is questionable.

Two former DU assistant coaches will be on the benches at the regional. Miami head coach Rico Blasi and Providence assistant coach Steve Miller worked under George Gwozdecky at Denver, and Miller stayed on at DU under Montgomery midway through last season.

Miller recruited and coached the majority of the Pioneers.

Mike Chambers: mchambers@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikechambers

Mobile users can view the 2015 bracket here.