The Affordable Care Act is going to cost more and enroll less people through its exchanges than previously thought, according to a new Congressional Budget Office report.

The report released Thursday projected 2016 enrollment of 12 million, one million less than the agency’s projection of 13 million just two months ago, and significantly less than a 21 million estimate a year ago.

If enrollment is shrinking, why are costs increasing? As always, you can blame the economy.

One facet of Obamacare is that it expanded Medicaid eligibility. The CBO now expects a bump in Medicaid sign-ups — up to 11 million enrolled this year and 15 million by 2026, per the report — citing new economic projections and “a decrease in the share of future wage growth projected to go to lower-income people.”

In other words: future economic growth isn’t expected to benefit poor people, which will accelerate the ACA’s overall costs.

Yet these increases aside, Obamacare is overall still costing less than was first expected years ago: $157 billion less, or 25%, the CBO report said.

Read more: Will hiking average Obamacare tax penalty to $969 boost enrollment?

Projections have a tendency to change, especially with this sprawling a piece of legislation, said Cynthia Cox, an associate director at Kaiser, but she noted that the new numbers were framed “in terms of economic outlook and wage growth” even as enrollment projections have declined.

See more: This is the fate of Obamacare under the next president

The CBO is now expecting enrollment to max out at 19 million in 2019.

Some experts think even that’s a little high. The Kaiser Family Foundation’s analysis suggests that enrollment would be, at most, 15 or 16 million, and that’s only if all state enrollment rates matched those of the top 10 states now.

Kaiser’s Cox noted that there could be some uptick in the enrollment rates in the next or following years, since a phased-in penalty on being uninsured reached its cap this year. (Households will pay $969 on average for remaining uninsured in 2016, according to a Kaiser Family Foundation analysis.)

But that cost could take some time to change the behavior of consumers, since they’ll only pay the penalty the following year, alongside their taxes, she said.

See: 7 Obamacare failures that have hurt Americans

More from MarketWatch