Please enable Javascript to watch this video

NEWARK (PIX11) -- In the wake of word of federal corruption charges coming down against him, Senator Bob Menendez, (D) New Jersey, made a direct and spirited response Friday evening, but he would not answer any questions.

"Let me be very clear, very clear," Menendez, 61, said from a podium in a hotel ballroom in Newark that was organized specifically to respond to pending federal charges, "I have always conducted myself appropriately and in accordance with the law."

The second-term senator defended himself and his record, citing his support for Superstorm Sandy victims, the Affordable Care Act, first responder funding and port security. He also mentioned his opposition to Iran acquiring nuclear weapons.

He further addressed the main thrust of the potential federal charges: an investigation into Menendez's actions on behalf of a close friend of the senator's, West Palm Beach millionaire eye doctor, businessman and political supporter, Salomon Melgen.

"Anyone who knows us," the senator said in his publicly read statement, "he and his family, and me and my family, have been real friends for more than two decades. We celebrate holidays together, have been there for family weddings and funerals, and have given each other birthday, holiday and wedding presents -- just as friends do."

But federal investigators are saying the exchange the senator offered his friend went beyond just holiday gifts. They claim that Menendez, the ranking Democrat on the powerful Foreign Relations Committee, criminally gave political favors to Melgen.

Investigators contend that Sen. Menendez told authorities in the Dominican Republic to make good on a port security deal his friend had financed there, and that the senator stepped up for Melgen in a dispute with the federal government involving Medicare.

Even though the event might have given him a chance to defend himself more specifically regarding the allegations, the only additional thing Menendez said about them was, "Because there is an ongoing inquiry, as much as I would like to, I cannot make any additional comments or answer questions."

But Justice Department officials have said Attorney General Eric Holder has signed off on an order to bring federal corruption charges against Senator Menendez.

The senator's response to the situation sounded direct, even though he did not go to any great lengths to plead his case. "I fight for the things I believe in and the people of our country every single day," he said, adding, "That's who I am, and I'm not going anywhere."

Formal corruption charges against Menendez are expected to be filed within the next three weeks.