Increasing club presence could de-emphasize varsity season, coaches fear

Pitcher Ryan Madden is competing with his Fairview teammates this summer on the Old School Dirtbags after playing last summer with the club Slammers North ( MARK LEFFINGWELL / Daily Camera )

The more Scott Weiss considers the club baseball scene, the more his blood boils.

The Monarch coach isn't alone. Several other prominent coaches in the area share his concerns, with some believing the club scene soon could invade the varsity season, much like it already has in soccer and hockey.

The value assigned to Colorado high school baseball is in peril, many coaches recognize, and in need of some reconstruction to combat the encroaching club presence.

It's a slippery slope. Clearly, not all club baseball teams are disreputable. But in the shady underbelly of the circuit, deplorable tactics are abundant. False promises of prime exposure, low-brow recruiting measures and several additional dangled carrots designed to lure an athlete away from his team's summer program.

"We've been talking about it the past few years that these club teams, they're getting into these kids' heads, and they're buying into it," Longmont coach Tom Fobes said. "Some of them are good, but the majority, I don't see the benefit."

Monarch is fielding only a Legion B squad this summer, because most of the Coyotes' marquee athletes have fled to the purported greener pastures of the club scene.

"I'm all for our kids getting varied coaching, different points of view and becoming better baseball players," Weiss said. "But what happens with some of these club teams is, they go about their business in a way that they're trying to discredit the high school coaches.

Advertisement

"They tell kids that they need to play with them in order to get better or get a college scholarship. It's a big sales pitch that's put on, and it creates a lot of tension between the high schools and the club teams — and the parents and the kids."

Make no mistake, high school programs are fighting back, with Fairview coach Rick Harig spearheading an effort to overhaul the current high school landscape, which clearly is a decade or two behind states such as Texas and Florida.

In the meantime, teams in the area are aiming to stave off the club scene and keep their summer programs afloat. Longmont and Erie have combated the club concept by putting together a co-op Connie Mack team, coached by Fobes and Erie's Harold Simmons.

Harig instituted a new plan this summer in which Fairview is splitting its season to half Legion A, half Connie Mack. The new Connie Mack squad, which plays as the Old School Dirtbags, can travel to prestigious tournaments and add players from outside the organization, giving Fairview athletes the benefits of private club ball while keeping them in-house.

But even with some programs clawing to keep their players with the program, a look at the forthcoming Boulder NIT reveals a startling picture. Twenty-four of the 32 teams in the tourney are club teams.

Coaches across the board repeatedly insist there are good eggs on the club scene. Fobes, for instance, recommends that his graduated Longmont players compete with the Longmont-based Colorado Twins, a solid, reputable college-prep outlet.

But while the Twins have nobly gone about their business, Fobes also has witnessed countless instances of the flip side. One particular club listed former Longmont pitcher David Pauley, who spent time in the majors, as a player the club groomed for success.

"He might have worked out for them once," Fobes said.

Questionable club tactics aside, Colorado's own varsity schedule might become its worst enemy. In-state teams are afforded only 19 regular-season contests, one of the fewest totals in the nation.

Longmont baseball coach Tom Fobes is leery of the message many club programs are sending to impressionable high school athletes (LEWIS GEYER / Longmont Times-Call)

That's why Fairview's Harig has talked at length with Colorado High School Activities Association assistant commissioner Bert Borgmann. Harig is working with a group of Front Range League coaches, including Weiss, to bring about a proposal to notably increase the amount of games in the varsity season.

"We're probably not going to get 35 games, but the idea is to get more games by a significant number," Harig said. "Bert's positive — and it's not his job to take a position — but he's positive in that baseball's an important sport and we don't want to lose it."

Is there reason for concern? You bet. In South Dakota, for instance, club dynamo Post 22 prohibits its players from playing varsity ball. Other states keep clubs at arm's length by offering almost double the amount of varsity contests as Colorado. Texas lengthens its schedule into June with no provision that the season must end when the school year does.

"In Texas, for example, the club teams don't take the spring over because they have such a relevant varsity season playing 35 to 40 games," Harig said. "Why would anyone not want to be a part of that, where the playoff structure is so good?

"In Colorado, if someone says, 'You can play 40 with us or 19 with your high school,' well, now that's a pretty viable option. But what's a club team going to do in Texas? 'You can play 45 with them or 45 with us.' That's not really a sell. But that's the fear we have here, is that over time, the club teams might just go for it."

Fairview's new summer arrangement has brought one of the program's marquee arms, Ryan Madden, back to the team. Madden played for Slammers North last season, admittedly eyeing the opportunities.

"I think it speaks for itself, me coming back to play here this year," Madden said. "It was still playing baseball, but you miss the guys you played with in the spring."

Longmont's Fobes said that he and his Class 4A Northern League cohorts appreciate the efforts of Harig's group and are on board. Fobes also would like to see the opening day of the spring sports slate pushed back, so players who compete in winter sports, particularly basketball, don't have to miss the first several games.

"There are several states that do that already, where they start the season a little bit later," Fobes said. "It's better for weather purposes and for the two- and three-sport athletes who won't have to miss the start of baseball season."

Weiss makes it clear that he isn't opposed to some of his players competing with different programs. He has no qualms that pitcher-outfielder Logan Soole is with Cherry Creek this summer.

It's the often-empty, money-fueled promises of certain outlets that leave him steamed. And he believes the club-scene invasion is merely a microcosm of a wider-ranging epidemic.

"I think what you're seeing all around is a huge commercialization of youth sports," Weiss said. "Everything is being driven by these commercial organizations that are profit-driven. Basically what's happening is these tradition sports organizations like high school baseball and Little League baseball, they're under the gun as far as remaining competitive with these club programs."

He just hopes Colorado can modify soon enough.

Follow Paul on Twitter: twitter.com/PaulWillis21