She began filming the new series of Shameless last week.

And Emmy Rossum was seen fitting in a visit to the gym on Saturday morning as she stepped out in a simple but stylish workout ensemble.

The 28-year-old brightened up her all-black look with extremely vibrant trainers as she made her way into the Los Angeles venue.

Scroll down for video

Hot stepper: Emmy Rossum was seen fitting in a visit to the gym on Saturday morning as she stepped out in a simple but stylish workout ensemble

Donning a black top by Private Party which read ‘Iced Coffee’, the star showed off her shapely legs in cropped black leggings.

Completing her look with large black shades and a black handbag, she appeared to be make-up free and scraped her brunette locks back into a simple ponytail.

The actress was ready to work up a sweat as she could be seen with a bottle of water in hand to keep her hydrated.

Drink up: The 28-year-old brightened up her all-black look with extremely vibrant trainers as she made her way into the Los Angeles venue

Back to work: Days before, Emmy showed off her toned legs on Instagram as she gave fans a look at her character dressed in a grey tank top and a black mini skirt

Days before, Emmy showed off her toned legs on Instagram as she gave fans a look at her character dressed in a grey tank top and a black mini skirt.

Earlier in the week, she let her 500,000 fans know that she was back to work as she tweeted: 'Running lines for tomorrow first day shooting @SHO_Shameless & cooking healthy food to bring with me! #BackToSchool #Lunchbox #Quinoa'.

Several hours later and she still had the new series on her mind.

'Ruff life': The star has recently found time to rest and relax by the beach

She tweeted: 'I have that gotta-go-to-bed-cant-sleep-day-before-school-starts-energy thing going on. @SHO_Shameless tomorrow.'

Filmed in Burbank, Shameless stars Emmy as Fiona Gallagher, the long-suffering daughter of Frank (William H. Macy), a perpetual drunk and the father to six motherless children.

Based on a British series with the same title, Shameless has received eight Emmy nominations over its years on Showtime.

Shameless' sixth series is due to air in the US in January 2016.