The girlfriend of a man shot and killed by an off-duty metro police officer on Friday spoke out.

The Veteran Affairs officer was on his way to a Garth Brooks concert in Tulsa when he said he saw what looked like a man attacking a woman in the street.

Quinteisha Rice said she does not credit officer Andrew Bryiant for helping her. Rice said she and her family are now fighting for justice.

She said her boyfriend, 23-year-old Rodney Walker, was shot and killed after their fight was over.

The officer and witnesses told a much different story.

“It was a regular day to us,” said Rice. “We didn't think none of this stuff was going to happen.”

Rice admitted she and Walker got into an argument Friday night, but said it never got physical.

1/16/2015 Related Story: Off-Duty Dept. Of Veterans Affairs Officer Involved In Fatal Tulsa Shooting

“As soon as he got out of his car, he had the gun pointed at Rodney. Rodney was trying to walk away. Our argument was over,” said Rice.

Bryiant told police he and his family saw what appeared to be a domestic fight on the sidewalk as they headed to the Garth Brooks concert.

“There's a lot of people around saying there was some sort of disagreement,” said Tulsa homicide detective, Dave Walker.

Bryiant quickly got out to help diffuse the situation, and police said he identified himself as law enforcement.

That apparently started a confrontation between him and Rodney. But Quinteisha claimed that's not how it happened, and Bryiant never identified himself.

“As Rodney was walking away, the officer fired three shots. He missed. He walked up a little bit closer and he hit Rodney three times,” said Rice.

Tulsa police said they have not heard Quinteisha's version of the story.

“The girlfriend told me she blacked out. She didn't know what happened. So now we're hearing a different story,” said Walker.

Police said Rodney was carrying a weapon.

“The officer saw a gun in the waistband. He's already involved in the situation. It rapidly evolves, and it rapidly evolves into a shooting,” said Walker.

“He was innocent, he didn't do anything wrong,” said Rice.

Authorities said the investigation is ongoing, and Tulsa investigators told News 9 there is not enough evidence to arrest the Veterans Affairs officer at this point.