Ohio's Governor spoke at length and with obvious passion Tuesday night in his fifth State of the State address, urging lawmakers to stay with him on budget and tax reforms.

In his 80-minute remarks at the Roberts Centre in Wilmington, John Kasich explored just about every topic, save one.

Watch this story

There was no mention of Medicaid expansion, which he has championed as a way to help struggling Ohio families.

The governor said he picked Wilmington for his address because it's a reflection of Ohio. He considers it a reflection of American grit and economic rebound.

Which is why Kasich sported a 5-year-old gold tie, the one he wore during his 2010 campaign in Wilmington, to symbolize how the sun would rise again over a community beset by hardship. Kasich delivered an impassioned plea to the 131st General Assembly to keep the economic ball rolling.

In doing so, he referred to the state's once-depleted, but now robust rainy day fund.

"From 89 cents and $8 billion in the hole to a balanced budget and a $1.5 billion balanced surplus," Kasich said to swelling applause. He urged lawmakers to avoid punishing risk-takers by cutting another $500 million in taxes.

Critics have complained that his tax reform amounts to tax shifting, because of proposed hikes in sales taxes and consumption taxes. Kasich was unmoved, encouraging the state to lean harder on consumption taxes, such as on cigarettes.

"That is regressive, in nature," countered 31st District House Democrat Denise Driehaus. "It hurts the people that can least afford to pay taxes the most."

But Kasich maintains investment flows to places with lower taxes, mentioning Florida, Texas and Tennessee. He said Ohio needs to be regarded in the same way in order to effectively compete with those states for business growth and investment.

"You know the best single cure for poverty? A job," he said.

Kasich knows some of the same legislators who applauded that line will reshape some of what he's proposing. He implored them to not lose sight of the principle involved and to capture the opportunity to build on the progress he insists has marked the past four years.

He praised university presidents, like the University of Cincinnati's Santa Ono, for innovative reforms that are in the works.

"Well, he's really encouraging us to think of a new Ohio," Ono said after the governor's address. "That includes education. I think it's visionary. We're going to work very hard to make it more efficient, better for the people of Ohio."

Kasich mentioned he knows of no other state where there's a healthier relationship between university presidents and their governor. It was said in the context of trying to retain young people who have a tendency to seek greener pastures out of state once they graduate.

It's one reason why Kasich is a strong and vocal proponent of technological advances, citing cloud computing and fresh IT services.

The governor has carved out time in recent State of the State speeches to recognize Ohioans who inspire others. Three years ago, he started bestowing Courage Awards to those he felt were deserving.

He singled out a huge group -- the state's 200,000 licensed nurses, brought Shane and Brittney Robinson to the stage for their selfless act of risking their own well-being to save others after a traffic crash, and had words of praise for Lauren Hill.

Although not a native Ohioan, her public battle with cancer as a Mount St. Joseph basketball player has inspired and informed. Currently hospitalized, she was unable to be in Clinton County to receive the award.

"I talked to Lauren (Tuesday) and her mother, Lisa," said Kasich. "She said, 'I hope I'm being a good role model.'"

Kasich paused and added "Can you imagine that?"

It was a poignant moment on a night of budget and tax talk that has the governor optimistic. At least, that's what he expressed.

That's why he chose the tie.

He was interrupted numerous times by applause, including toward the end when he told the General Assembly that it's not about serving a party or an ideology, but solving problems.