WASHINGTON — It’s a beautiful late-summer morning in the capital city, with the streets much emptier than usual, thanks to the government shutdown and its thousands of furloughed employees. The cabby who took me to my appointment at House office buildings was none too pleased: “Look at this! It’s a ghost town. empty streets. How can they do this when we are just now recovering?”

The hallways leading to the office of Rep. Jeb Hensarling, R-Dallas, in the Rayburn Building (named after Texas political icon Sam Rayburn) were just about as empty, though many staffers did seem to be at their posts.

I had stopped in to talk about the economic impact of “uncertainty” with Hensarling, who is chairman of the House Financial Services Committee and a leading deficit hawk.

A piece I’m writing for this week’s newspaper deals with the impact on our economy stemming from Congress’s stalemate. Economists say there is a drag on economic growth when investors, companies and others lose confidence that the government will address its long-term fiscal challenges.

It flows from ideas that formed a big part of the Harvard dissertation written by a rising young economics Ph.D. in 1979, a man whose name now comes attached to the title of chairman of the Federal Reserve: Ben Bernanke. You can read the dissertation down below.

At its simplest, the idea is that if a company with options to expand in any of several ways can’t predict what the fiscal policy will be — will labor costs go up, or will tax credits for new equipment go down — the company will sit on its money and choose neither — even if both options would be good for the company.

My interview with Hensarling focused on uncertainty stemming from long-term fiscal challenges. He agreed that businesses are telling him that they are putting off investment because they fear higher taxes or other policy prescriptions when Congress gets around to righting its house. But he pushed back against economists who have told me that a big drag isn’t so much the fear of higher taxes, but fear that the two sides are so far apart they won’t reach a solution at all.

On Obamacare, here’s what he had to say:

“Yes, Republicans don’t want Obamacare that’s clear. But at this point what we are saying is … if Obamacare is going to be law of the land, it at least ought to be applied equally to all Americans. If employers are going to get a one-year reprieve, we believe hard-working Americans ought to get a one-year reprieve. And we certainly do not believe the president has the power unilaterally to give members of Congress a special deal that working Americans do not get to have, an employer contribution to the individual exchanges. If there is anything Americans have cynicism about it is Washington elites making laws that they don’t have to live under.”

I’ve written before about the charge from Republicans that Obamacare is giving “special treatment” to members of Congress and their staff members. It still doesn’t make sense to me. Here’s some background if you’re interested.

But Hensarling said his side has accepted it won’t be able to repeal, delay or defund Obamacare. That doesn’t mean they will stop fighting, he said.

“Listen we get it. We understand the president’s not going to allow repeal. We understand the president’s not going to allow defunding, the president is not going to allow delay. But at a bare minimum shouldn’t all Americans be treated equally and fairly under the law? And in divided government, isn’t that the least we can expect?”

Bernanke’s dissertation is below. Send your thoughts, and look for the broader story in print this week.

Bernanke Dissertation 1979 Harvard