Two Army scientists run tests in a BSL-3 chamber at Utah’s Dugway Proving Ground. This is the same facility that recently shipped live anthrax specimens to as many as 18 labs in nine states, according to CDC officials. (Photo: US Army)

Mistakes happen in any business, but in some workplaces — such as nuclear plants, airlines and laboratories that handle biological agents such as anthrax — the risks to the public are serious enough to require extraordinary care.

Of those three, it's the biolabs that do by far the worst job of admitting and learning from their errors. The Nuclear Regulatory Commission routinely holds utilities accountable by publicly disclosing mishaps and the plants that make them on its website. NASA runs a program that grants pilots absolution if they confess errors for a public database that helps other pilots avoid the same mistakes.

But a USA TODAY Network investigation found that though the elite labs handling deadly pathogens have made hundreds of life-threatening mistakes, the labs and their regulators routinely fight public disclosure and accountability. The investigation showed that there's no universal, mandatory requirement for reporting errors, and no central error database to help identify dangerous patterns or warn other labs against common mistakes.

Some errors are just too big to hide, such as the Pentagon's announcement Wednesday that, in late April, an Army lab in Utah had unwittingly sent live anthrax to 51 other laboratories in 17 states, Washington, D.C., and three foreign countries.

And in a scenario that sounds like a movie script, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention disclosed this year that it had suspended Tulane's National Primate Research Center near New Orleans after deadly bioterror bacteria somehow got loose from a highly secure lab and infected monkeys that had been living in outdoor cages. Tulane will have to spend the next five years monitoring the environment around its facility, which is next door to a residential neighborhood, to make sure the bacteria haven't spread outdoors.

Those episodes were made public, but many more, and the lower-profile labs that make them, are not. The CDC won't name the 33 labs whose sloppiness got them included in a special performance improvement program since 2008. Nor will the CDC reveal the identities of seven problem labs being monitored because they displayed a "repeated failure to correct past observation, biosafety and security concerns." The lack of transparency is deeply troubling, especially for the labs' neighbors.

The CDC and the U.S. Department of Agriculture, which jointly oversee labs that handle substances most likely to be used by terrorists, hide behind a 2002 bioterrorism law to keep lab identities secret and refuse to release detailed reports of incidents.

No one wants to invite terrorists into labs by publicizing details about a lab's security failures. But security and lab safety are different issues. It would be easy to scrub security information from public reports while disclosing the names of labs, their accidents and whether they require special monitoring. As for telling terrorists where labs are, many of the labs already do that themselves, freely putting their addresses and the pathogens they're qualified to handle on their websites to attract business.

A few broad fixes would help. Those who regulate labs and those who fund them — chiefly the CDC, the USDA and affiliated agencies — are often the same entity, a huge conflict of interest if a lab merits being disciplined or closed after funders have sunk millions into research there. There's a desperate need for independent oversight.

Reporting accidents should be mandatory, and publicly disclosing them mandatory as well. Congress would do well to adjust the 2002 bioterrorism law to make it clear that transparency and security can coexist.

So far, recent lab accidents have led to few fatalities and no widespread public health catastrophe. Some of that is because of multiple layers of safety, but some is due to sheer luck. Changes are needed before that luck runs out.

Read or Share this story: http://wrtnews.co/1InCPYH