Aggressively priced smartphones is one gateway for mobile manufacturing companies to increase their hold on the smartphone market share. Lenovo, a company known for manufacturing a large number of desktop and laptop related machines has recently announced its K80, an Android-platform running smartphone featuring an affordable price tag of $290. While the price tag will not cater to the entry-level smartphone markets, Asus' Zenfone 2 (4 GB variant) is going to have heavy competition thanks to Lenovo's offering.

K80 will be available to purchase in the 5.5 inch screen size, which will be rendering the 1080p resolution, along with a 4,000 mAh battery. Additionally, the handset will be powered by Intel's Atom SoC, which is running a quad-core processor at 1.8 GHz. While chipset details have not been provided, the aforementioned clock speed suggests that Lenovo K80 will be assimilated with Intel's Atom Z3560, since that is the same SoC present in one variant of Zenfone 2 functioning at the exact same clock speed.

Other features of the smartphone include 64 GB of on-board memory, with an option to expand that memory through a microSD slot. Wi-Fi adapter details have not been detailed, but Lenovo K80 will feature an LTE modem, along with a 13 megapixel rear camera sensor with an OIS chip to produce more stabilized high-resolution images. Since the company's previous handsets have all been running Google's Android operating system, K80 will most likely come with the Lollipop 5.0 update right 'out of the box'. The handset will be available to purchase in the following colors.

Black

Silver

Red

The handset will be available to purchase in China for a price of 1,799 CNY, (which is equivalent to $290 USD). According to Fudzilla, the company might also have plans to release a 2 GB RAM variant that will carry a price tag of $240. While Lenovo has not stated if its K80 handset will appear in other smartphone markets, chances are that it will gain significant levels of popularity, thanks to its price/performance ratio, which will prompt high levels of demand from other regions.