Politics and the Judiciary: Alaska’s Uncertain Future of How to Select Judges

A new report by faculty of the University of Alaska Anchorage (UAA) Justice Center considers different methods of selecting judges in light of recent legislative efforts to alter the composition of the Alaska Judicial Council (AJC).

Alaska subscribes to a merit-based system of judicial selection, often called the Missouri Plan. Integral to that plan is the Judicial Council.

Because judges are not elected in Alaska, the AJC provides a list to the governor of at least two candidates for every judicial vacancy per the Alaska Constitution. It is engaged in this process now to fill the seat of retiring Chief Justice Dana Fabe.

Among the eight applicants the AJC must consider for the Supreme Court vacancy are three Superior Court judges and an assistant attorney general. Those in private practice include Jahna Lindemuth, currently defending two of the Fairbanks Four, and Kevin Clarkson, who represented Anchorage Baptist Temple in an investigation into potential property tax evasion.

In addition to this constitutional function, statute mandates that the Council evaluate judges when they stand for retention. It may then make a recommendation on retention when it publishes its evaluation prior to an election.

Proponents of this system say it is fundamental to maintaining an independent judiciary, but critics argue that there is insufficient accountability.

Following U.S. Supreme Court decisions that legalized same-sex marriage and upheld federal health care subsidies under the Affordable Care Act, some Republican presidential candidates have made the term “unelected judges” a common epithet.

In Alaska, over the last three years, Sen. Pete Kelly (R-Fairbanks) has led the charge to redefine the roles and makeup of the AJC.

“Everywhere else in their government, [the people] see accountability, and there isn’t in this group,” Kelly said of the AJC last year. “And they’re not getting the results they want.”

Kelly has been most disappointed by rulings in Alaska preserving abortion rights.

“Many American[s] believe that judges should be unbiased and nonpartisan, and not influenced by other branches of government in reaching legal decisions. This, though, can be in conflict with the desire that judges be publicly accountable and render decisions more in line with the values of the average citizen,” conclude UAA’s Ryan Fortson and Kristin Knudsen.

Their report is titled, “A Survey of Studies on Judicial Selection.”

Kelly: Alaska Judges Chosen Without People’s Consent

Kelly’s most recent attempt to make the AJC more accountable, and perhaps improve results, from his perspective, is Senate Joint Resolution 3, a proposed constitutional amendment.

Currently, the AJC is composed of three lay members appointed by the governor, then confirmed by the legislature, and three attorneys appointed by the Alaska Bar Association. In the event of a tie vote on a judicial candidate, the chief justice of the Supreme Court acts as a tiebreaker.

SJR 3 would add three more lay members to the Council and require the attorney members to be confirmed by the legislature. Kelly expressed disbelief in committee this year that attorney members are currently not subject to confirmation.

“I wanted to make sure the people of Alaska understood their judges are not being chosen with their consent. They don’t have any consent in this process,” Kelly said on the Senate floor last year in debate of a similar proposal.

That bill was pulled due to insufficient support in the Senate.

“I hope we all appreciate there’s no elite fraternities that are appropriate for any place,” said Senate Rules Chair Charlie Huggins (R-Wasilla) in a State Affairs hearing, referring to the Alaska Bar and its relationship to the AJC.

Critics of SJR 3, including Nancy Meade, General Counsel for the Alaska Court System, believe unbalancing the AJC with six lay members would inject politics into judicial selection.

“You have six governor appointees who are there because they’re, in many cases, of a similar mind as the governor and, in many cases, similar political mind as the governor,” Meade testified, envisioning the result of SJR 3’s passage. “The governor, as we see in the legislative confirmations currently, often chooses people who think like the governor.”

The Florida Example: Executive Influence in Judicial Selection

“If a hand-picked screening committee assists the governor, it is reasonable to conclude that it will select nominees first for compatibility with the administration’s political, ideological, and religious views, then will narrow the pool based on merit and experience,” agree Fortson and Knudsen in their report

“While on a theoretical level this undermines the ideas of separation of powers and an independent judiciary, it is also not necessarily a negative outcome unless one can point to an undesirable secondary effect from a more politicized judiciary,” they write.

Yet the report recommends a “nuanced consideration of the evidence” before the legislature attempts to make such a change to the constitution.

One state that has made a similar change is Florida. Each of Florida’s circuit and appellate courts has its own AJC-like commission.

Prior to 2001, the commissions were composed of three lawyers appointed by the Florida Bar, three members appointed by the governor, and three lay members chosen by the other six commissioners. Now, the governor appoints five members outright and appoints the remaining four from a list submitted by the Bar.

“After the change in appointment procedures, nominating commissioners overwhelmingly identified with the political party of the governor (Republican at the time of the change in the law) and announced their alliance with, or intent to promote, conservative policies in their applications,” the report reads.

“Not only did the number of judges registered as Republican (as opposed to Democrat) increase from 61 percent to 77 percent with the change in selection process (about 10% of the judges selected were unaffiliated), but judicial applicants increasingly listed in their application prominent Republican politicians as personal references.”

Fortson and Knudsen also report that in Florida’s current system, there have been fewer people willing to serve on the judicial commissions.

Retention Elections

Fortson and Knudsen also looked at the role the AJC plays in retention of judges.

A 2007 study that they cite, published by the National Center for State Courts, reads,

One of the primary functions of a judicial performance evaluation is to provide a neutral evaluation of each judge’s performance so voters can make an informed decision to retain those performing satisfactorily and defeat those performing below standards. The retention election is the mechanism for removing unsatisfactory judges. At least in Alaska, Arizona, and Colorado voters almost never remove a recommended judge from the bench, but to a lesser extent they remove those judged to be unsatisfactory.

The AJC’s recommendation on judicial retention either aids voters or is the sole basis

for their decisions, the study found.

Speaking to the trend of Alaskans overwhelmingly voting to retain judges, Fortson and Knudsen write,

Either voters were satisfied with the existing judiciary, or were heeding the recommendations of the commissions. If the former, then there may be no need to change the judicial selection process. If voters were heeding the commission recommendations, then changing the composition of a nominating commission to increase political influence would likely result in the politicization of the selection process and retention elections.

“Do you think it might be more appropriate to have the Judicial Council be more agnostic and just put the ratings down and not make a recommendation for or against, consistent with neutrality on issues?” Senate State Affairs Chair Bill Stoltze (R-Chugiak) asked AJC Executive Director Susanne Di Pietro earlier this year.

Di Pietro said that making a recommendation on retention was part of AJC’s statutory authority.

“We may have to, given that’s a statutory authority, maybe we’ll look at that in order to keep it pure and agnostic and keep you guys out of politics,” responded Stoltze before moving SJR 3 out of his committee.

Kelly sponsored a failed 2013 bill that would have barred the AJC from making a recommendation on retention.

“Nonpartisan retention elections and selection processes represent an effort to balance the political aim of public accountability with the desire for judicial independence, which is associated with protection of civil liberties and economic opportunity,” report Fortson and Knudsen.

However, they note that efforts to unseat judges have injected more campaign spending and political advertising into retention elections.

This was clear in efforts by pro-life Alaska Family Action to unseat Fabe in 2010 and Superior Court Judge Sen Tan in 2012 for their decisions in abortion cases.

“[I]n an era in which judges’ policy leanings are increasingly important to voters and advertised to them, even retention elections may have unexpected and perverse effects on judicial independence,” reads a 2009 study cited by Fortson and Knudsen. “The findings presented here suggest that future research on this question would be beneficial.”

As for states where judges are elected, Fortson and Knudsen concluded, based on an analysis of previous studies, “the greater the role electoral politics plays in selection, the more likely that the people attracted to judicial vacancies will be locally connected, politically savvy people who will deliver adequate rather than great opinions (as determined by the frequency with which the opinion is cited), without much concern for their long-term reputation among other jurists.”

SJR 3 is awaiting a hearing in the Senate Judiciary Committee.

With Superior Court rulings in August striking down restrictions on state funding for medically necessary abortions, while allowing for the unilateral executive expansion of Medicaid, Kelly and like-minded legislators will be as motivated as ever to continue its advance when the session begins in January.

Like this: Like Loading...