Obamacare was designed to spur competition among insurers—and it has in New York. The estimated 1.1 million New Yorkers who are expected to buy health insurance through the state's online exchange have more options than Americans in any other state: 17 health plans. Whether they will survive will depend on their ability to attract the right mix of health care consumers.



Three of those New York plans are from new insurance companies created just to be able to sell coverage on nystateofhealth.ny.gov, having put up a total of more than $110 million to get started, according to documents filed with the New York State Department of Financial Services.



Each has a distinct approach to health insurance: a hospital system hoping to cash in on the insurance boom, a nonprofit that aims to offer the most affordable plan in the state, and a well-financed tech-driven startup that knows it could take a few years to turn a profit.



"There's been initial enthusiasm," said Kevin Nazemi, co-founder of Oscar, a new plan established by Silicon Alley techies and investors. "We've had 1,600 phone calls and 50,000 visitors to our website."



Though state-exchange officials last month said 37,000 people had enrolled in the 17 plans as of Oct. 23, none of the three companies would divulge its own enrollment figures, or the number of subscribers it would need to become profitable.



Oscar says it plans to be profitable in three years. Headquartered in SoHo, and named after one founder's grandfather, Oscar is the brainchild of three successful tech entrepreneurs. Mr. Nazemi is a former Microsoft customer-relations management director.

Big gamble

Co-founder Josh Kushner is the son of real estate developer Charles Kushner and the younger brother of Jared Kushner, CEO of the family real estate company, owner of The New York Observer and husband of Ivanka Trump. Josh Kushner is also a co-founder of Thrive Capital, a private-equity and venture-capital firm that has raised $200 million since it debuted three years ago.



With co-founder Mario Schlosser, a programmer and Harvard Business School graduate who started Latin America's largest social-gaming company, Vostu, the trio decided health insurance would be their new thing.



Of course, it is a gamble.



As a condition of licensing, Oscar's backers agreed to ante up $44.7 million to cover expenses and reserves for claims, state insurance filings show.



Their marketing pitch is that technology will make it easier to connect with health care providers. The company guarantees that a board-certified physician will return patient phone calls within 25 minutes. Potential customers who are looking to see whether a particular doctor is in the network can search before signing up. They are also pushing low-tech perks, like free generic drugs and a maternity care package that includes home visits by a nurse.



Oscar's network has 35,000 health care providers and 72 hospitals and spans the five boroughs, Rockland and Westchester counties, and Long Island. Its founders hope to expand nationally.



"New York's our backyard, but we know a lot of people are dissatisfied with health care," Mr. Nazemi said.



Among its competitors will be another new entry into the New York City market. North Shore-LIJ Health System, whose 16-hospital network dominates its home turf, has launched North Shore-LIJ Care Connect. North Shore-LIJ put up $27.7 million to cover expenses and reserves, according to the state insurance regulator. The money was raised by creating stock shares purchased by the system.

$110M—Amount Oscar, North Shore-LLJ Connect and Health Republic put up to get started

1.1M—Number of NYS residents expected to buy insurance through the state exchange

Source: NYS Dept. of Financial Services



"Like any business, there is a risk," CEO Alan Murray said. "If something went wrong, the risk would be to the health system."



The system had been contemplating starting an insurance company for years, to get out in front of changes in the way medical care is paid for. The advent of Obamacare and other reforms means doctors get paid more for preventive care and less for emergency care and hospital admissions. The idea behind the new insurance company is to give it the same goal as the health care system: keeping plan members healthier as a way to lower costs, Mr. Murray said.



Money can be invested in making health care more efficient and effective.



"The entire Affordable Care Act is such a tremendous change to the market, for North Shore it made sense to be in the marketplace at this time," Mr. Murray said.



But it's a complex undertaking that requires expertise and money, which is why more insurers and health systems do not form jointly sponsored entities, said Mark Rouck, a Chicago-based senior director of Fitch Ratings.

New entity

"It would be hard to pull off unless a hospital has a big footprint, one that serves a significant portion of a population," Mr. Rouck said. "The big national [insurance industry] players don't do it because it's a local business."



The arrangement works best where all of a plan's policyholders and the hospitals they use are in the same geographic region. It would not be feasible "for a large insurer with its insured all over the country," Mr. Rouck said. That is why these ventures "come more from the hospital side."



The third new entry on New York's exchange received a federal loan to get started. Health Republic, based in Manhattan, is a creature of the Affordable Care Act. It is a so-called consumer-operated and -oriented plan, a new entity created under the law, which allowed it to qualify for a federal loan to get started. There are 23 co-ops in as many states, each one eligible to receive up to $150 million in loans. Health Republic received $38 million to qualify for licensing, according to DFS documents. Its license is held by Freelancers Health Service Corp., a company created by Freelancers Union.



The nonprofit plan, available throughout the state, has a network of 130 hospitals and more than 70,000 physicians, and offers the lowest premiums of the three newcomers. "We not only have the lowest rates," said Debra Friedman, Health Republic's chief executive, "we have the largest network." The plan, like Oscar, also offers 24/7 phone access to medical advice.



Like its competitors, Health Republic is optimistic it will do well. But all will depend on whether people who purchase the plans will spend more on premiums than they cost in medical care.



"In general, the more people who come into the system, enrollment will grow," Mr. Rouck of Fitch said. "That's the upside. The risk is that no one knows what the utilization trend will be."

Sign Up for Health Pulse Brought to you by Crain's New York Business, Health Pulse is a subscription-only website focused on the business of health care. The site is updated every day with breaking news, research and unique information. Subscribe today and receive access to the site and the daily emails. Plus, twice a week we release a special report called Extra, featuring data and statistics. Subscribe Today

Comments