Q: Why does it cost so much to be treated for a snakebite?

A: Every once in a while somebody will go and get themselves bitten by a venomous snake, and come home with an outrageous hospital bill that makes headlines.

Nobody expects anti-venom to be cheap. Making the most common rattlesnake anti-venom, for instance, involves injecting sheep with snake venom and then harvesting the antibodies produced by the animals’ immune systems. But does that process add up to the estimated $2,300 per vial that hospitals pay for the stuff?

Dr. Leslie Boyer wanted to find out. She’s the founding director of the VIPER Institute at the University of Arizona, a research group studying ways to improve the medical treatment of venom injuries. As she writes in an upcoming issue of the American Journal of Medicine, the cost of actually making the anti-venom added up to roughly one tenth of one percent of the total cost. Clinical trials accounted for another 2 percent. Other miscellaneous costs, including licensing fees, wholesaler fees, regulatory, legal and office costs, and profit, added up to 28 percent.

Finally, more than 70 percent of the cost — responsible for most of the “sticker shock” — comes from hospital markups that are used in negotiations with insurance providers.

“It’s a markup intended to be discounted back down,” Boyer explained.

But if you don’t have insurance? The negotiating is all on you. And if you happen to have a high deductible for medications, your payment can add up to thousands.

Setting aside the huge hospital markups, Boyer says there’s a lot going on in the “other” cost category as well.

“The lion’s share of expected payment on behalf of insured patients was attributable to analysts, attorneys, consultants and business activities that set the U.S. bureaucracy apart from its neighbors,” she writes in the journal.

She points to the fight between rival rattlesnake anti-venoms currently winding down before the International Trade Commission.

“Rather than bringing the price of anti-venom down, competition drove it up, as millions of dollars in legal costs had to be distributed across a few thousand patients,” she writes.

According to Boyer’s model, a single vial of anti-venom that would cost over $14,000 in the United States would cost one or two hundred dollars in Mexico. Same medicine. Same manufacturer. But a totally different pharmaceutical market.

In Mexico, Boyer says, authorities determined some time ago that treating venomous snake and spider bites was a public health issue.

“Their policy has always been that the government will provide adequate amounts of anti-venom via a massive purchase of the drug which it distributes to health clinics.”

We could try to implement something similar here, but it would require an act of Congress to do so.

— Christopher Ingraham, The Washington Post