Photo

Who has the edge in November’s congressional elections? According to the fund-raising emails being sent out, no one does.

Instead, both parties claim to be on the brink of defeat. Fund-raising pleas from political figures ranging from the House minority leader, Nancy Pelosi, to Senator Rand Paul tell voters that the campaign is close but their side is losing.

“With this new Republican outside spending, we’ll still need 28,000 more online donations to be able to compete,” Ms. Pelosi wrote in one email. “Can you please donate to President Obama’s call-to-action, and help us limit the damage?” As Politico noted, “Democratic and Republican operatives are dashing off Chicken Little emails at a dizzying rate” for the purpose "of leveling the playing field with the other sides’ relentless billionaires.”

The Upshot In a weekly e-mail newsletter, get the best of The Upshot's analysis about politics, policy and everyday life.

Why do campaigns keep saying they’re losing? These doom-and-gloom messages seem to be effective at motivating donors. The best evidence to support this claim comes from a new study by the social scientists Todd Rogers of Harvard and Don A. Moore of the University of California, Berkeley.

In other contexts, they note, projecting confidence is often a successful leadership strategy. But in politics it may serve to demobilize potential donors by convincing them that their contributions are unnecessary. Why give if your preferred candidate is going to win anyway? By contrast, people are often more motivated to act when trying to avoid an undesirable outcome — in this case, losing an election.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

To demonstrate this point, Mr. Rogers and Mr. Moore conducted experiments in which they showed that online survey participants are more supportive of hypothetical preferred candidates if they are just behind in the polls instead of just ahead.

These differences matter in the real world of campaigns, as the two professors show using fund-raising experiments conducted by the Democratic Governors’ Association and Anne Lewis Strategies, Inc. Emails from the D.G.A. saying that Rick Scott, the Republican candidate for governor in Florida, was ahead of the Democrat Charlie Crist in the polls were almost 50 percent more likely to result in a donation and raised approximately 60 percent more than those saying Mr. Scott was behind.

Paradoxically, the best way to win in politics may be to tell everyone you are on the verge of losing.