After the Supreme Court delivered another victory for Obamacare on Thursday, Glenn Beck said “the country as you know it, and as it was designed, is done.”

“The system that our founders put together, which was follow the Constitution and three equal but separate branches of government that each have their own specific role, is over,” Beck said on his radio program. “We no longer live in that America. That is done now.”

In a 6-3 decision on King vs. Burwell, the Supreme Court handed President Barack Obama his second major win on his signature health care law, upholding nationwide tax subsidies for millions of Americans.

Justice Scalia, reading part of his dissent from the bench, said, “We should start calling this law SCOTUScare” because of how the Supreme Court has repeatedly changed aspects of the president’s law in order to uphold it.

“I don’t know how you get around it, guys,” Beck’s co-host Stu Burguiere agreed, arguing that the Supreme Court has become both judicial and legislative. “They’re freaking inserting words into laws after they’re passed. They’re putting words into laws that aren’t there. The design of this country with this system is completely gone.”

Beck said America needs a “reset” because there is “nothing left” of the system as it was created.

“It will get a reset because they have violated mathematical principles,” Beck argued. “They violated $18 trillion in debt and printing money. It will reset because there’s nothing left of this. So now the question is, when we reset, do we, A, tear each other apart, B, do we go to a new Constitution, or, C, do we hang on and reset to the original Constitution and become much more free and Libertarian in our nature?”

Your browser does not support iframes.

The full episode of The Glenn Beck Program, along with many other live-streaming shows and thousands of hours of on-demand content, is available on just about any digital device. Click here to watch every Glenn Beck episode from the past 30 days for just $1!