Photo

Good morning.

Here’s what you need to know:

• Co-pilot had medical condition.

German investigators said today they found documents in the home of Andreas Lubitz, who is believed to have deliberately crashed a jet into the French Alps on Tuesday, that show he was hiding a medical condition from the airline Germanwings.

The documents, which were found in his home, included a torn-up doctor’s note allowing him time off from work because of an illness. Investigators did not find a suicide note.

• Harry Reid is to retire.

Senator Harry Reid, who has led Senate Democrats since 2005, said today he will not seek re-election next year, bringing to an end a three-decade congressional career.

He said the decision was because of neither a recent accident nor his demotion to minority leader after the November elections.

• Voting by dawn’s early light.

At 3:28 this morning, Senate Republicans squeaked through a budget blueprint that would repeal the Affordable Care Act, remake federal health care and push the country’s deficit toward zero. The legislation is nonbinding.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The House on Thursday overwhelmingly approved sweeping changes to Medicare. It is the most significant bipartisan legislation to pass through the House since Republicans regained a majority in 2011.

• A year in space.

The American astronaut Scott J. Kelly and two Russians are set to launch on a Soyuz rocket bound for the International Space Station this afternoon.

Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox. Monday – Friday.

Mr. Kelly and one of the Russians will have a one-year mission. Until now, stays at the International Space Station have lasted about six months.

• Amanda Knox awaits Italy’s decision.

Italy’s highest court is set to issue a final ruling today on the conviction of Amanda Knox in the killing of a British student in 2007.

The ruling was delayed from Wednesday. A confirmation of the guilty verdict could set off an extradition process for Ms. Knox, who lives in Seattle.

• Africa’s largest democratic election.

Nigeria closed its borders after reports that foreigners were planning to vote in presidential and parliamentary elections on Saturday.

The votes are expected to be the closest since military rule ended in 1999.

• At the White House.

President Obama has separate meetings today with his Council of Advisors on Science and Technology and the Treasury secretary.

• Two are missing in New York blast.

At least 19 people were injured, three critically, and two were reported missing after an explosion and fire brought down two buildings in the East Village of New York on Thursday.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

MARKETS

• Wall Street stocks are tiptoeing ahead. European indexes are mixed, and Asian shares closed widely varied.

• A jury of six men and six women start their third day of deliberations in a high-profile gender discrimination case in Silicon Valley.

• Pepsi outsold Diet Coke last year to become the No. 2 U.S. soda, while Coca-Cola stayed No. 1, a trade publication reported.

NOTEWORTHY

• New on the silver screen.

Jennifer Lawrence and Bradley Cooper star in “Serena,” a drama set in Depression-era North Carolina that’s opening today. In it, the future of a family timber empire falls into doubt when the wife cannot have a child.

Also new: Ben Stiller and Naomi Watts are in the relationship comedy “While We’re Young,” and Will Ferrell and Kevin Hart team up in the comedy “Get Hard.”

And the teaser trailer for the new James Bond film “Spectre” is out.

• A night of no upsets.

Kentucky improved to a 37-0 record with an easy 78-39 victory over West Virginia on Thursday night. Wisconsin, Arizona and Notre Dame also advanced to the round of 8. (Earlier, we incorrectly said Xavier advanced.)

The men’s round of 16 schedule tonight includes U.C.L.A. vs. Gonzaga (7 p.m., CBS) and Utah vs. Duke (9:30 p.m., CBS). The women’s slate includes Stanford vs. Notre Dame (10 p.m., ESPN2).

• Popular reads.

Dennis Lehane’s novel “World Gone By” enters our hardcover fiction best-seller list at No. 8 this week.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The ESPN anchor Stuart Scott’s “Every Day I Fight” (he died in January of cancer) is new at No. 3 on the nonfiction rankings. Get an early look at our best-seller lists.

• Look who’s No. 1.

Kendrick Lamar’s album “To Pimp a Butterfly” opened at the top of Billboard’s album chart this week.

It had the second-best start for any title so far this year, behind Drake’s “If You’re Reading This It’s Too Late.”

• Tech tips.

This week, we look at messaging apps that are becoming more powerful.

We also try the app versions of classic board games like Monopoly.

BACK STORY

Whatever the comic adventures in the “Night at the Museum” movies, museums often seem to be viewed as musty places filled with skeletons and suits of armor.

The Smithsonian Institution, made up of 19 museums and galleries, is one of many trying to address that stereotype.

Today, it hosts two events in Washington that are intended to broaden its appeal.

A portrait of the comedian George Carlin is being unveiled in the National Portrait Gallery.

Mr. Carlin, who died in 2008, was chosen by a public vote, edging out Groucho Marx and Ellen DeGeneres as the comedian who most influenced American politics, history and culture.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Over at the National Museum of American History, stars of “Mad Men” are donating costumes and props from the show in advance of their last episode, which will be broadcast in May.

They include Don Draper’s charcoal gray suit and Cordova fedora, and Betty Francis’s yellow dress.

They will become part of an exhibit opening in July called “American Enterprise” that looks back at U.S. industry, including advertising of the 1950s and 1960s, the milieu of “Mad Men.”

Victoria Shannon contributed reporting.

Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.

Want to get the briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.