Brian Zahn The Middletown Press USDA Undersecretary Kevin Concannon discusses federal programs addressing food insecurity in the nation at Middlesex Community College in Middletown.

MIDDLETOWN >> In the ongoing effort to end hunger, a state coalition is partnering with the medical community to bring an end to food insecurity.

USDA Undersecretary Kevin Concannon said at a conference Friday held at Middlesex Community College that, short of the Great Depression, the nation has never needed programs to provide food to underprivileged communities than ever before.

Although Concannon applauded Congresswoman Rosa DeLauro on her advocacy and championing of federal aid, he said the state is 46th in the nation in providing school breakfast programs to children in need.

“Breakfast is one of the strongest interventions we can provide,” Concannon said, at The Connecticut Food Policy Council’s workshop.

Advertisement

State hospitals, food policy councils, public health experts, medical professionals and other community-based organizations heard from leading national experts on the subject of “Hospital-Community Collaboration for Community Health: Expanding Access to Nutritious Foods.”

According to Concannon, breakfast has a positive impact on focus and academic performance, but also factors into attendance.

Several speakers acknowledged that, as the food budget dwindles at the end of every month, there are higher rates of hospitalizations for things like hypoglecemia and diabetes.

Concannon said the summer is also when children are most likely to go hungry, as 21 million children receive free or reduced meals during the school year, and only 4 million receive those services over the summer.

Marydale DeBor, founder of Fresh Advantage, said including the medical community in discussions of food insecurity is exceptionally important, as there is a corrolation between poor nutrition and risk factors for several illnesses.

Seth Berkowitz, a faculty member at Massachusetts General Hospital, said food insecurity is strongly correlated with HIV treatment nonadherance and diabetes treatment nonadherance.

Judith Felton, coordinator of the Center for Civic Engagement and a professor at the college said food insecurity is an issue that affects many at the school, with many students coming from underserved populations or being first-generation college students.

Seth Berkowitz, MD, MPH, faculty member of Harvard Medical School and Massachusetts General Hospital who will speak on the health impacts of food insecurity, malnutrition and population health.

The statewide meeting, the first in the nation, is in response to the Affordable Care Act and the Internal Revenue Service final ruling onnonprofit hospitals’ community health needs assessment obligations allowing for issues regarding food security, and to explore opportunities to strengthen collaboration at the community level, according to a press release.

Other speakers included:

Kim Gans, professor of Human Development and Family Studies at the University of Connecticut

Gemma Gorham of “Fresh to You” Rhode Island, who spoke on their research on mobile farmers’ markets

Kola Akindele, community relations manager at Hartford Hospital

Martha Page, executive director of Hartford Food System and Chair of Hartford Advisory Council on Food Policy presentd the “Hartford Mobile Market,” a “community benefit” project of the hospital, in collaboration with HFS, Hartford Hispanic Council and Harvard Pilgrim HealthCare Foundation

For information, see 1.usa.gov/1QzbxzC.