U.S. Rep. John Yarmuth and Michael Macfarlane, his Republican opponent in next month's election, took shot at one another during a testy one-hour debate on Kentucky Educational Television on Monday.

The two disagreed on a wide range of issues from health care to college and early childhood education. They argued over immigration as well as the impact of government programs on those who live in western Louisville.

But as the debate wore on, the arguments seemed to get personal, with Macfarlane essentially accusing Yarmuth of being a hypocrite, saying that a business of which he is a part owner doesn't pay minimum wage or offer health insurance to all its workers.

At one point, while discussing race relations, Macfarlane, a Louisville urologist, said about one third of his practice is made up of African-Americans.

"I deal with them in the most difficult times of their lives, when they have cancer and so forth. I don't think you see many of those people on the fancy golf courses you go to," he told Yarmuth, who was ranked the 3rd best golfer in Congress by Golf Digest in 2011. "Those people want the same things you and I want."

He went on to say, "We continue to make a situation where we're breeding people who continue on these (welfare) programs."

"You know, I never talk about 'those people' as 'they' or 'them,'" Yarmuth fired back. "These are people that are my neighbors, my fellow citizens, my constituents and I consider them an important part of my life and I work every day to make sure their life is better."

On several occasions, Yarmuth told Macfarlane that he was mischaracterizing statistics or misquoting him.

The debate, on KET's Kentucky Tonight, was moderated by host Bill Goodman, who moved the two candidates from one issue to another – most of which they found little agreement.

MORE YARMUTH

Small races hurt under McConnell, Grimes focus

Yarmuth backs Obama's strategy against ISIS

Forum Oct. 11 in Louisville congressional race

Macfarlane has raised about one dollar for every five dollars that Yarmuth has raised in his campaign and four weeks before the election is yet to air a single ad.

On health care, Yarmuth defended the Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare, saying the program has helped hundreds of thousands of Kentuckians.

Macfarlane, however, said that the law has been a failure that should be repealed – but he said he wouldn't kick people off out of their health insurance policies if the law is repealed. Furthermore, he argued that many of the benefits of the ACA could have been achieved simply by expanding Medicaid.

On raising the minimum wage to $10.10 per hour, Yarmuth said it would raise about 4.5 million people out of poverty and reduce reliance on food stamps.

He went on to say that keeping the minimum wage low forces taxpayers to essentially subsidize businesses by giving their employees food stamps and medical care when their earnings follow below the poverty level.

Macfarlane argued that the minimum wage is for entry-level jobs and is not intended for people who are trying to raise families. "Anybody who thinks you can support a family of four on the federal minimum wage is just nuts. That's not what it's for," he said.

Yarmuth countered that there are more people over the age of 50 earning the minimum wage than there are teens who are trying to survive on it.

The two also argued whether Sonny's Barbecue restaurants that Yarmuth owns with his brother pay above minimum wage. Macfarlane said they don't but Yarmuth said that corporate-owned restaurants, of which he is part owner, do but that some franchises pay minimum wage.

On immigration, Yarmuth argued for a pathway to legal status and potentially citizenship for people who entered the country illegally or stayed past their visa as long as they turn themselves into authorities, stay out of trouble and have a job for five years.

Macfarlane argued that nothing should be done until a fence on the U.S. border with Mexico is built and existing laws are enforced.

They also disagreed on whether laws prohibiting wage discrimination need to be toughened. Macfarlane said wage discrimination is not a problem.

Buy Photo Rep. John Yarmuth and Michael Macfarlane debate on KET. (Photo: C-J)

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1vKFgfI