Cover Oregon logo (Photo: Provided)

The director overseeing Cover Oregon's technology transition projects has resigned, effective Monday. In a memo to Oregon Health Authority leadership dated Nov. 18, three days after the second open enrollment date under the Affordable Care Act, Tina Edlund said she will be "taking time off and then will enjoy part-time retirement."

Edlund was picked to head the transition by Gov. John Kitzhaber's office after Cover Oregon chose not to pursue finishing its incomplete health insurance enrollment system. Instead, the state exchange piggybacked on the federal system via HealthCare.gov, and the Medicaid enrollment system was moved under Oregon Health Authority and is still awaiting completion.

As of Nov. 15, the first part of the transition project was complete, as Oregonians began applying for and enrolling in health insurance through the federal website with few reported complications. The Medicaid part of the project had run into a few bumps, as the state and technology vendor Oracle had difficulty agreeing on solutions while the two are embroiled in lawsuits against each other.

The federal government agreed to let Oregon use HealthCare.gov for automated Medicaid enrollments this year, but only as a stop-gap measure. Meanwhile, the state in October gave up trying to work with Oracle to complete the Medicaid project.

The goal is to complete the Medicaid project by fall 2015.

Gov. John Kitzhaber said through a statement that he appreciated Edlund's work.

"I asked Tina to lead the charge on a complicated and essential transition to the federal website to ensure people have access to health insurance coverage," Kitzhaber said. "I'm grateful for her leadership on this project and for her many years of service at the Oregon Health Authority where she was an integral part of creating Coordinated Care Organizations that have improved health outcomes for Oregonians."

Besides Edlund's resignation, other changes are afoot with the transition project. It is moving out from under Cover Oregon and into Oregon Health Authority.

Linda Hammond is now heading the project as chief sponsor, Sarah Miller is the project director and Judy Mohr Peterson will act as the business lead, according to the memo.

"I want you all to know how much of an honor it has been for me to work with each of you," Edlund wrote in the memo. "We've accomplished great things together since 2009 when OHA was created."

syoo@StatesmanJournal.com, (503) 399-6673 or follow at Twitter.com/syoo.

Read or Share this story: http://stjr.nl/1ye6JUX