Sen. Ted Cruz, who’s hovering in the middle of the Republican pack for president in recent primary polls, sent out a mocking message about John Boehner’s announced resignation to a crowd of Values Voter Summit attendees – but then quickly wondered if a shady motive had prompted the speaker’s departure.

First, the joke.

Get the hottest, most important news stories on the Internet – delivered FREE to your inbox as soon as they break! Take just 30 seconds and sign up for WND’s Email News Alerts!

Cruz said to the crowd: “You want to know how much each of you terrifies Washington? Yesterday, John Boehner was speaker of the House. Y’all come to town and somehow that changes. My only request is – can you come more often?”

The crowd cheered and applauded. But in a follow-up impromptu chat with reporters, Cruz’s reaction to Boehner’s resignation drew darker.

What do YOU think? Will you miss John Boehner? Sound off in today’s WND poll.

He said, the Washington Examiner reported: “I will say, the early reports are discouraging. If it is correct that the speaker, before he resigns, has cut a deal with Nancy Pelosi to fund the Obama administration for the rest of its tenure, to fund Obamacare, to fund executive amnesty, to fund Planned Parenthood, to fund implementation of this Iran deal — and then, presumably, to land in a cushy K Street job after joining with the Democrats to implement all of President Obama’s priorities, that is not the behavior one would expect of a Republican speaker of the House.”

Boehner’s resignation takes effect Oct. 30.

Get your copy of “Takeover: The 100-Year War for the Soul of the GOP and How Conservatives Can Finally Win It,” and find out what Richard Viguerie believes is a winning formula for conservatives, and the U.S., at a special price right now!

And toward Cruz’s point: CNN reported House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi said she hasn’t yet spoken with Boehner, but she will continue to press negotiations with him directly, in order to win full funding of Planned Parenthood.

Related stories:

Boehner fallout: ‘D.C. status quo is crumbling’

Tea-party chief: Boehner exit marks ‘great day for freedom’

Boehner ‘fine human being’ but ‘couldn’t deliver’

Ann Coulter: ‘Not sorry to see Boehner go’

Boehner basher: Cruz accuses speaker of selling out

Boehner foe: New speaker must represent ‘voices of people’

Boehner to resign from Congress

Boehner buddies come out of closet