Topics: American History, Andrew Jackson, confederate flag, Connecticut, Democrats, Editor's Picks, John Bailey, Race, slavery, Thomas Jefferson, News

The Democratic Party of Connecticut has announced that its annual fundraiser, the “Jefferson Jackson Bailey Dinner,” will be renamed, keeping only the “Bailey” in its reconstitution. John Bailey, a Connecticut New Dealer and JFK supporter, never owned slaves and never fought Indians. The other two­­ — Democratic presidents — were imperfect in the extreme and, presumably, no longer worthy of being honored.

Like removal of the obnoxious Confederate flag, symbolic acts in favor of historical fairness and social justice can do much good. But they obviously do not provide full answers. American slavery, a longstanding evil in a nation ostensibly dedicated to enlightened concepts of individual freedom and human rights, was succeeded by cruel decades of Jim Crow injustice. We are rightly embarrassed by blackface “comedy” and other such holdovers of past insensitivity. We nod agreeably as each generation of American liberals congratulates itself on overcoming one or another prejudice that beset an ancestor. As the job of erasing hatreds based on superficial differences carries forward, the well-intentioned sometimes bring up Band-Aid solutions to set the moral calculus aright. The Jefferson-Jackson Dinner does not rise to the level of racist iconography that the Confederate flag does.

That does not mean the Connecticut Democrats are misguided. Prodded by the NAACP, they are clearly reflecting on the recent Charleston shootings. And no one should forget such a tragedy. But why Jefferson-Jackson Day? And is the message they’re trying to convey at all meaningful?

First, let us explain, as far as the record is recoverable, the history of Jefferson-Jackson Day. In the first half of the nineteenth century, Jefferson’s birthday (April 13) was celebrated with public dinners and grandiose toasts to the Union — though the birthday boy himself humbly remarked that the only anniversary he cared to celebrate was the Fourth of July. At a Jefferson Day dinner in April 1830, in Washington, then-President Andrew Jackson famously took on the “nullifiers” of South Carolina, who failed to honor the cause of national unity. His toast: “Our Federal Union, it must be preserved.”

The first political gathering to be called a “Jackson Dinner” took place across several states in 1825, directly after the presidency was “stolen” by John Quincy Adams when, due to a four-way split of electoral votes, the second-place Adams was elected president in the House of Representatives. Democrats organized a fête for the general to ensure his victory in the next national election. Jackson’s primacy is also reflected in unofficial celebrations that took place every January 8, in honor of the hero general’s defeat of the British at the Battle of New Orleans on that date in 1815.

But Democratic Party dinners were not designated “Jefferson-Jackson.” Over time, the Democrat Jackson took priority over the Democrat Jefferson in party circles. William Jennings Bryan, who ran unsuccessfully for president, regretfully declined an invitation to speak at the Jackson Club of Omaha in 1895, at what was billed as a “Jackson Dinner.” The candidate remarked, however, that was encouraged to learn that the legacies of both Jefferson and Jackson were to be equally celebrated at the event.

Each generation of Democrats has manipulated the origins of their party to suit the spirit of the times. All, unfortunately, sidestep historical fact. Jefferson headed what was most often called the Republican (not Democratic) Party; its radical wing in the years immediately after its formation met as “Democratic-Republican” clubs. James Madison was the most visible and active member of Congress in the 1790s, when opposition to the Washington-Hamilton Federalists emerged as a recognizable political party; because Congressman Madison took the lead before obliging Jefferson to speak out, to be truly accurate these party gatherings should be called Madison-Jefferson dinners. Latecomer Jackson is the least democratic of symbols: he never sought an extension of suffrage rights in his home state of Tennessee or anywhere else. More verifiable Democrats of the early republican period are New Yorkers Aaron Burr and Martin Van Buren, both of whom restructured the party in their state so as to increase participation of ordinary people. The problem with our “greatness” measures — the academic equivalent of the current GOP candidates polling — is that a general lack of historical knowledge gives credit to some who don’t quite deserve it and denies credit to others who do.

The modern Jefferson-Jackson Day Dinner, that is, the Democratic fundraiser, dates to the era of Franklin Roosevelt when separately named Jefferson and Jackson Dinners were gradually merged. The principle behind these dinners — before the history of slavery and racial injustice preoccupied Democrats — centered on the cause of the “common man,” as traceable to the third and seventh presidents.

Here is FDR at the time of Jefferson’s birthday in 1932: “What is the real reason that Jefferson Day Dinners are being given throughout the length and breadth of the land, a century and a quarter after Thomas Jefferson was at the height of his career?” Other than the practical goal of electing Democrats, it was “to give renewed allegiance to the foundational principles of which Jefferson was the chief builder.” Roosevelt again, this time defending the New Deal in 1940: “Thomas Jefferson is a hero to me despite the fact that the theories of the French Revolutionists at times overexcited his practical judgment. He is a hero because, in his many-sided genius, he too did the big job that then had to be done — to establish the new republic as a real democracy based on universal suffrage…. Jefferson realized that if the people were free to get and discourse all the facts, their composite judgment would be better than the judgment of a self-perpetuating few.”