Value-Based Payment Models — Online Training Program

Four user-friendly training modules on the most powerful health care payment trend in a generation

Value-based care — a payment model under which health care services are paid for based on quality rather than quantity — has proliferated since passage of the Affordable Care Act. Whether they’re accountable care organizations, medical homes or bundled payment initiatives — or Medicare’s Next Generation and other shared savings programs — value-based arrangements among providers and health plans are becoming the norm rather than the exception. AIS’s value-based care training modules are a terrific introduction to this transformative health business trend. They are ideal for sales and customer service staffs; product design, marketing and business managers; new or reassigned staff members; and others at health plans; hospitals, medical groups and pharmaceutical manufacturers. Value-Based Program Design • Private Payers • Role of Pharma • Single-Specialty Models

Four Informative Value-Based Care Training Modules ...

One Low Price Place your order through our secure shopping cart TP62E-11WEB: * 4-Module Training Program $ 750.00 Call 800-521-4323

Print a form to fax or mail

Up to 5 users are permitted to use the training program without a site license. Contact Bailey Sterrett at 202-775-9008 x 3034 to review our very reasonable rates for site licenses for more than 5 users. Individual modules may be purchased separately for $250 (see below).

Take a quick look at the DEMO for this highly informative, user-friendly training program.

Online training on one of the most complex and critically important issues in health care today:

Easy-to-access ... available 24/7 where and when members of your workforce will find it most convenient

... available 24/7 where and when members of your workforce will find it most convenient Up-to-date ... to make sure your team has the latest trends and strategies in this fast-changing field

... to make sure your team has the latest trends and strategies in this fast-changing field Authoritative ... prepared by experts at Atlantic Information Services, Inc., a leader in health business information solutions for the past 25 years.

... prepared by experts at Atlantic Information Services, Inc., a leader in health business information solutions for the past 25 years. Scorable … with True-False “Knowledge Checks” that conclude each module, permitting users to assess their understanding of the subject matter.

Training Module #1 — Program Design and Characteristics

Training Module #2 — The Role of Private Payers

Training Module #3 — The Role of Pharma

Training Module #4 — Single-Specialty Payment Models

Training Module #1: Program Design and Characteristics

Your entire team will benefit from easy-to-follow explanations of ...

How different payers — Medicare, Medicaid and commercial insurers — are investing in innovative value-based payment models.

The impact value-based deals are having on utilization of drugs, devices and other treatments.

Strategies payers are using to entice providers to accept risk for unfavorable outcomes and rewards for strong results.

How payers are attracting more specialists to value-based pay arrangements.

Why some insurers are bypassing patient-centered medical homes to focus on more intensive models like bundled payment programs ... and the results they are achieving.

Section 1: Introduction

Objectives

Welcome

Payment Models Continuum

Trend Toward Value-Based Payments

Impact on Utilization

Section 2: Patient Centered Medical Homes

Patient Centered Medical Homes

Payers Support Patient Centered Medical Homes…

But Support May Come With Strings Attached

Section 3: Accountable Care Organizations

Accountable Care Organizations

ACOs and Risk

Distributing ACO Savings

Medicare Shared Savings Program

Medicare Shared Savings Program Success

Medicare’s Pioneer Program

Commercial ACOs

Medicaid ACOs

ACO Quality Measures

ACO Cost Measures

Section 4: Bundled and Global Payment Models

Bundled Payment Model

Advantages of the Bundled Payment Model

Medicare’s Bundled Payments for Care Improvement Initiative

Bundled Payment Programs in the Private Sector

Global Payments

Global Payment Models Reward High-Quality Care

Section 3: Knowledge Check

Section 4: Conclusion

Order Training Module #1 (single module only)

Training Module #2: The Role of Private Payers

Learn all the details of ...

The role that private payers are playing in the growth of new payment models.

How value-based payment models are flourishing in exchanges and among Medicare Advantage and large commercial groups.

How these efforts are affecting overall care patterns and the utilization of drugs, devices and treatments.

The supports that successful payers are offering to providers in information technology, data analysis, training and other areas.

Section 1: Introduction

Objectives

More Flexibility, Deeper Experience

Section 2: Current Landscape

Value-Based Providers Are More Sophisticated

Value-Based Contracts Aren’t Widespread Yet

ACO Contracts With Private Payers

ACOs on the Public Health Insurance Exchanges

ACOs in the Medicare Advantage Program

Section 3: Future Projections

Payers Push for Providers to Take More Risk

Employers’ Growing Acceptance

Section 4: Insurer Supports and Program Impact

Impact on Care Patterns and Utilization

Impact on Drug and Device Utilization

Payer Support for Value-Based Payment Models

The Drive to Involve More Specialists

Section 5: Knowledge Check

Section 6: Conclusion

Order Training Module #2 (single module only)

Training Module #3: The Role of Pharma

Among the valuable takeaways you will benefit from:

Why providers have been slow thus far to partner with drug companies, PBMs and retail and specialty pharmacies.

The details of which payment models, clinical conditions and populations are the focus of early pharma/provider partnerships.

What services specialty pharmacies, PBMs and retail chains can offer to providers looking to strengthen value-based care programs.

Which types of providers are most likely to build protocols and pathways for specific conditions and negotiate outcomes-based contracts with drugmakers.

How rapidly risk-sharing contracts between drug manufacturers and providers are expected to develop.

Section 1: Introduction

Objectives

The Slow Move to a Pharma Focus

Provider Capabilities Vary Widely

Provider Needs Vary as Well

How One Value-Based Provider Partners to Manage Drug Costs

Section 2: Partnership Models

Partnering With Drug Manufacturers

Sharing Risk With Drug Companies

Examples of Drug Manufacturer Partnerships

Partnering With Specialty Pharmacy Providers

A Good Starting Point

Performance Monitoring

Health System Ownership

Are Value-Based Providers a Threat to Specialty Pharmacies?

Partnerships With Retail Pharmacy Chains

Case Studies of Retail Pharmacy Partnerships

Section 3: Knowledge Check

Section 4: Conclusion

Order Training Module #3 (single module only)

Training Module #4: Single-Specialty Payment Models

You’ll benefit from clear explanations of ...

Why some commercial and Medicaid payers are developing value-based programs for patients with a single condition rather than an entire population.

How payers select conditions or patient groups to focus on ... and which are most common.

The outcomes that single-condition value-based programs are experiencing.

The success these programs are having in getting specialists involved in value-based care.

Section 1: Introduction

Objectives

Focus on a Single Condition

How Payment Models Work

Goals

Section 2: Specialties

Why Oncology?

Oncology Programs in the Commercial Sector

Oncology Programs in Medicare

Pediatric Value-Based Payment Models

Challenges Facing Pediatric Programs

Partners For Kids Pullout

Diabetes

Asthma

Maternity Care

End-Stage Renal Disease

Section 3: Knowledge Check

Section 4: Conclusion

Order Training Module #4 (single module only)

Prepared By A team of AIS health business writers led by Executive Editor Jill Brown, who manages AIS’s entire line of health business newsletters and is the lead editor on AIS’s Value-Based Care News, which covers the latest news, trends and strategies on accountable care organizations (ACOs), medical homes, bundled payments, global payments and the Medicare Shared Savings Program. Designed Especially for ... Sales and customer service staffs; product design, marketing and business/financial/clinical managers; new or reassigned staff members; and others at Health plans

Hospitals and health systems

Medical groups and other providers

Pharmaceutical manufacturers

PBMs and pharmacy benefit administrators

Other health care organizations. Shipping Information Immediately after submitting your order through our secure shopping cart, you will receive an email with a link directing you to your training program. If you place your order via phone, fax or mail, the link will be emailed to you when your order is processed (usually within 1 business day). Shipping costs will not be charged for this item. Take a quick look at the DEMO for this highly informative, user-friendly training program.