Broncos quarterback Peyton Manning left the team’s practice Thursday almost as quickly as he arrived. Manning participated in the team stretches before heading to the locker room for treatment on his strained thigh. He later returned and was formally listed as limited on the injury report.

“At this time of year everybody, not just me, is dealing with different things physically,” Manning said after Thursday’s practice. “So if you can get a little extra time to take care of your body, treatment or what not, I think guys take advantage of that, and hopefully that will pay off for us.”

Manning, who played while sick with flu symptoms Sunday at San Diego, appeared to be injured on the last drive of the second half. Backup quarterback Brock Osweiler finished the first half for the Broncos before Manning returned in the third quarter and finished the game, something even he wasn’t sure would happen at the time.

“I was in some discomfort and had some limitations, so obviously if you feel like you can’t do your job and you can’t move to protect yourself, you’re going to hurt the team,” Manning said after the victory Sunday. “I felt I got a little relief there at halftime and was able to go the second half.”

Thursday, Manning said he no longer is experiencing the flu symptoms, but remained tight-lipped about the health of his thigh, offering only, “I feel OK,” and, “I certainly hope so,” when asked if he’ll be ready to play Monday.

Although Manning is known for adhering to a strict practice regimen, a day off for him isn’t unusual. He did not participate in padded Wednesday practices the latter part of last season after injuring his ankle.

The Broncos travel to Cincinnati for a Monday night game against the Bengals, a matchup that has playoff implications for both teams. A victory would clinch a bye for the Broncos in the playoffs. A victory for the Bengals, who lead the AFC North with a 9-4-1 record, would likely seal a postseason berth.

“This game means a lot to us, but it means a lot to them, as well,” Manning said. “They’re playing at home, Monday Night Football, it’ll be a great atmosphere, so, yeah, I definitely think it’ll be rocking there, and both teams have a lot on the line.”

The Bengals are coming off a 30-0 rout of the Browns in Johnny Manziel’s first game as a starter, having shown their defensive tenacity in holding Cleveland to only 107 yards, picking off Manziel twice and sacking him three times.

“They played really well,” Manning said of the Bengals’ defense. “Dominating is a good word. From the start, defenisvely they didn’t give Cleveland any type of momentum, barely let them move the ball.”

While Manning was open to looking back into the Bengals’ past, the same did not apply to the Broncos. There will be no more talk about his thigh and his teammates’ bruises and rest: “We’re full speed ahead, trying to win this game, he said. “That’s really all we’re thinking about.”

Manning masterfully deflected questions about Terrance Knighton’s recent guarantee the Broncos will win the Super Bowl: “Terrance has a lot of confidence, that’s a good quality about him. As far as me though, I’m on to Cincinnati.”

And enough with the flu questions.

“I’m past talking about it,” he said. “We’re on to Cincinnati.”

Nicki Jhabvala: njhabvala@denverpost.com or at twitter.com/nickijhabvala