Topics: AlterNet, Ferguson, Florida, michael brown, Missouri, Politics News

This article originally appeared on AlterNet

Her sign read, “I CANNOT BELIEVE I STILL HAVE TO PROTEST THIS SHIT!! #toomanynames #ferguson #dontshoot #mikebrown.”

So far, one version of the photo has been retweeted more than 3,600 times and has more than 3,500 favorites on Twitter.

Francois, 28, told AlterNet she’s surprised that her photo resonates with so many people online, but doesn’t want it to divert attention from Mike Brown and the reason she attended the National Movement Of Silence 2014 gathering: to mourn the deaths of black people who have died at the hands of law enforcement.

“I’m glad it sparked some conversation because I think, throughout the nation, we’re all asking ourselves this question,” she said. ‘How did we come here again? How did we find ourselves in this very same space?'”

Francois said the sentiment behind the sign comes from her days as a student at Florida State University when she protested the death of Martin Lee Anderson, a 14-year-old who died after being beaten by boot camp personnel. After months of silence from authorities over his death, Francois, along with other students from Tallahassee Community College, Florida A&M University and Florida State University staged a 34-hour sit-in at then-governor Jeb Bush’s office in Tallahassee.

She took to Twitter to explain her feelings further: “A feeling of rage and powerlessness gripped us in Tallahassee, and students and citizens marched into the streets, and sat down. We shut down the busiest street in Tallahassee with dozens of students linking hands and forming a circle. The police came and the black police chief soon followed. He said to me, ‘I understand how you guys feel. I’m going to LET YOU do this.’ He didn’t realize we were ready then for whatever they had planned; we’d been preparing for jail, dogs, anything for over a year. He could not have stopped our civil disobedience even if he had tried.”