Bill O’Reilly sent Jesse Watters to Vermont over the summer to see just how liberal the Green Mountain State is. The state legislature has a handful of elected officials from the “Progressive Party,” a political party further to the Left ideologically than even the most liberal Democrats. In Congress, Vermont sends an avowed Socialist and one of the most liberal Democrats to the Senate. And, of course, Vermont is well-known for having elected Howard Dean, a laughably-liberal governor-turned-presidential candidate.

So when Vermont went even further than Obamacare and enacted a single-payer system for health insurance, liberals nation-wide looked to that state as a beacon of hope for socialized medicine.

Writing in The Atlantic in December 2013, Sean McElwee notes:

Governor Peter Shumlin signed a revolutionary single-payer plan, Green Mountain Healthcare—the culmination of decades of work by progressive politicians in the state—into law in May 2011. The new system aims to guarantee universal insurance coverage, improve benefits for those who are currently underinsured, include universal dental care and vision care, and increase the Medicaid reimbursement rate to doctors in order to avoid cost-shifting. In some ways, the system resembles the ACA, but the the most consequential difference is that Vermont’s law will end employer-provided insurance. “God didn’t create the fact that employers are responsible for healthcare for their employees,” says Bernie Sanders, the state’s stalwart socialist senator.

Barely a year later, the state has scrapped its single-payer plan. Forbes published a list of six reasons why the Vermont plan failed, including a massive 160% tax hike that would have to have been implemented to cover the costs. Even in liberal Vermont, there’s a boiling point when it comes to people’s pocketbooks.

POLITICO dug into the details:

“It is not the right time for Vermont” to pass a single-payer system, [Democrat Governor] Shumlin acknowledged in a public statement ending his signature initiative. He concluded the 11.5 percent payroll assessments on businesses and sliding premiums up to 9.5 percent of individuals’ income “might hurt our economy.” Vermont’s outcome is a “small speed bump,” said New York Assembly member Richard Gottfried, who’s been pushing single-payer bills for more than 20 years. But opponents says it’s the end of the road. “If cobalt blue Vermont couldn’t find a way to make single-payer happen, then it’s very unlikely that any other state will,” said Jack Mozloom, spokesman for the National Federation of Independent Business. “There will never be a good time for a massive tax increase on employers and consumers in Vermont, so they should abandon that silly idea now and get serious,” Mozloom added.

Supporters of the single-payer system offered up plenty of excuses as to why the Vermont plan ultimately failed: it wasn’t truly single-payer; it was tied too closely to the governor’s political persona; it’s state-based, rather than a national framework; there were too many exemptions.

According to POLITICO’s account, the Vermont failure hasn’t stopped pro-single-payer politicians in nearby New York from attempting to implement a similar plan. And in Hawaii — a state as liberal as Vermont — it seems progress has stalled on a single-payer plan.

According to Gallup, support for the idea that the federal government should be responsible for Americans’ health care has been on the decline since 2007 — before Obamacare became a topic of national discussion. If the federal government can’t subsidize the cost of health insurance, state budgets certainly won’t be able to handle the costs.

Conservatives should work to advance market-based policies that bring the cost of healthcare down while empowering individuals to select policies that cater to their individual needs, rather than a federal (or even state-run) system that forces people into one-size-fits-all plans that really seem to fit no one at all and cost too much to implement.

Even in ultra-liberal Vermont, residents and elected officials are rejecting the practical implementation of big government liberal policies.