Republican presidential candidates have almost uniformly declared their intentions to unravel Barack Obama’s nuclear accord with Iran if elected to the White House in 2016.

But according to numerous foreign policy experts their bold campaign pledges might be difficult to keep 18 months from now.

Republicans have thus far had little power to scuttle the agreement, reached last week between six world powers and Iran after nearly two years of negotiations and designed to restrict Iran’s nuclear programme in exchange for sanctions relief.

The party has thus set its sights on the power of the presidency to reverse course, with vows from the top brass of presidential contenders to reimpose US sanctions on Iran – as early as on the first day in office.

“I’m telling everyone now that, if I’m elected president of the United States, we will not use the national security waiver to hold back US sanctions against Iran, especially not as a result of this flawed deal that he’s pursuing,” Florida senator Marco Rubio, a Republican who has made foreign policy a central theme of his campaign, said on Sunday.

The Wisconsin governor, Scott Walker, said he would terminate the deal “on the very first day in office, put in place crippling sanctions and convince our allies to do the same”, while former Florida governor Jeb Bush said he would “begin immediately” the process of pulling the US out of the accord.

The statements are not surprising in an election year where national security has emerged as a highly potent issue among Republican primary voters, who view the Iran deal as the latest in a string of foreign policy failures under the Obama administration. But political reality could force the next president to uphold the agreement regardless of how sceptically they view it – especially if Iran appears to be complying with its terms come January 2017.

“If there is a relatively good record of compliance with the deal for the next year and a half or so, it would be quite challenging for the next president, whoever that may be, to actually throw that out,” said Liz Rosenberg, a senior fellow and director of the energy economics and security programme at the Center for a New American Security.

Although a future president technically has the power to reimpose sanctions for which Obama has offered relief, such a move would come with all sorts of challenges to international and diplomatic relationships with both allies and adversaries, she added.

The US and European sanctions were successful in bringing Iran to the negotiating table due in no insignificant part to the fact that they operated in tandem. Without buy-in from Europe to also reimpose its own sanctions on Iran, such action by an American president would serve as more of a symbolic move than one bearing substantial leverage.

“There is a mistaken belief amongst many that the US has an overwhelming and punishing amount of economic pressure that it can turn on whenever it wants, against whomever it wants in any circumstance,” said Rosenberg.



Indeed, the European Union has already telegraphed its approval of the deal to the US Congress, where lawmakers have 60 days to review the terms before holding an up-or-down vote to either approve or reject it. The Senate foreign relations committee will hold its first hearing on Iran on Thursday, and a vote is not anticipated until after Congress returns from recess in September.

Obama has said he will veto any efforts to block the agreement, and Republicans would need 43 House Democrats to band with them in order to achieve the two-thirds majority required to override a presidential veto. Although Democratic lawmakers were cautious in their reaction to the deal last week, it’s unlikely that many of them would buck their own president on what is being viewed as a legacy-defining moment for the Obama White House.

In a bid to persuade sceptics of the deal, EU foreign ministers emphasised that there was no better alternative following a unanimous vote by the UN security council that endorsed the nuclear accord.

How much international support there would be if the US walked away from the deal and called for the restoration of sanctions would be a critical factor in any new administration’s assessment of how to proceed, said Robert Einhorn, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution who served on the US delegation to the Iran nuclear negotiations from 2009 to 2013.

“If the assessment was that no one would follow the US in striking the sanctions, that would be a factor arguing against walking away … If Iran is complying with the deal and is not making trouble in the region, then the administration may well find it may not have support,” he said. “On the other hand, if Iran is dragging its feet and compliance problems have arisen, that would make it much easier for a new president to walk away from the deal.”

Einhorn also expressed doubts that a Republican president, for all of the bluster among the current crop of candidates, would actually turn his back on an agreement if it appeared to be working.

“Whatever candidates may say today, his administration will take a look at the situation prevailing at the time. It won’t rely exclusively on what was said a year and a half earlier,” he said.

Bush has conceded as much in recent days, pointing out in what was seen as a thinly veiled shot at Walker that a day-one promise to rescind US support for the deal would be impractical.

“One thing that I won’t do is just say, as a candidate: ‘I’m going to tear up the agreement on the first day.’ That’s great, that sounds great but maybe you ought to check in with your allies first, maybe you ought to appoint a secretary of state, maybe secretary of defence, you might want to have your team in place, before you take an act like that,” Bush told reporters after a town hall in Carson City, Nevada, on Friday.

He later expanded upon those comments amid criticism from some on the right that he was weakening his position, reiterating his belief that the deal must be revoked – but again taking a more nuanced approach that acknowledged the role that must be played by US allies in order for a new round of sanctions to be impactful.

“As president I would begin immediately to responsibly get us out of this deal, with a comprehensive strategy that is responsive to the conditions at the time and confronts Iran’s continued pursuit of a nuclear weapons capability, its support for terrorism and instability, its ballistic missile proliferation, and its horrific human rights record,” Bush said in a statement to the Weekly Standard.

“Such a strategy will require a new national security team that is committed to rebuilding our defences and restoring our alliances, starting with our relationship with Israel. It will require sustained diplomatic efforts to put significant financial, diplomatic, and military pressure on Iran to change its behavior. And because of the massive sanctions relief provided by this terrible deal, the impact of unilateral US sanctions will be limited and it will be important to work with our allies to reimpose multilateral sanctions and pressure.”

Rubio took an opposing view during an interview with CNN on Sunday when asked what he would do as president if allies refused to go along with the US.

“Our foreign policy as a nation is not subject to what China wants to do or Russia wants to do or the EU wants to do or anybody wants to do,” he said. “We have our own foreign policy. It needs to be in the national security interests of the United States.”

But in charting its own course of action, irrespective of whether Iran was complying with the deal or not, the US might only be inflicting harm upon itself.

“The US would be in a situation where it would presumably then say we’d reimpose sanctions which would only hurt, for the most part, US businesses, which would then turn on whichever administration,” said George Perkovich, vice-president for studies at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.

Pushback from the business community, which traditionally favours Republicans, would be especially salient. Perkovich, an expert on Iran who focuses on nuclear strategy and nonproliferation, added that the US acting alone to dismantle the deal would also do little to change Iran’s behaviour if they’re already complying with the agreement and not beholden to similar threats from other supporters of the agreement.

If anything, he said, it could backfire and energise moves by other countries to become less dependent on the US financial system.

“The only thing that it could accomplish is to make Republican primary voters feel better that their candidates are expressing their fears and passions,” Perkovich said. “One of these people might get elected … the question will be, do they feel like they’re obligated to do something just because they said it at this moment.”

Polling at this particular moment finds that a slim majority of Americans, at 56%, supports the Iran deal but remains sceptical that it will succeed.



Views differ sharply when broken down by party affiliation, offering further rationale for Republican candidates blasting the agreement - just four in 10 Republicans support it, while 54% are opposed. Democrats, on the other hand, support the deal by a 69 to 25% margin.

Obama, for his part, projected confidence last week that history was on his side as far as how the deal would ultimately be viewed – as would efforts to squander it.



“If we don’t choose wisely, I believe future generations will judge us harshly for letting this moment slip away,” he said.