Once leery about the supposed evils of unlimited campaign cash, liberals are now embracing a larger view of money's role in politics, the Washington Free Beacon's Lachlan Markay reports for the February issue of Townhall Magazine.

October 28, 2013 the governors of California, Oregon, Washington, and the premier of British Columbia signed a pact pledging to take a variety of actions to reduce carbon emissions.

Supporters hailed the agreement as a landmark effort to move away from fossil fuel-based energy and “green” the states’ various economies.

California already had a cap and trade regime, and British Columbia had imposed a carbon tax in 2008. Supporters of the plan worried that the actual policies it called for would get tied up in Oregon and Washington.

Republicans controlled the Washing- ton state senate, supporters noted, and they’d been cool to some of the more am- bitious emissions reduction ideas.

Billionaire environmentalist Tom Steyer was no doubt aware of the dynamics and the stakes when he began pouring money into a pivotal special election for a single state Senate seat in Washington.

DADDY GREENBUCKS

Steyer cut his teeth at Farallon Capital Management, a massive hedge fund that he founded and led until 2012. He has since become the most politically potent environmentalist moneyman in the country.

Farallon has come under fire for what critics say are environmentally destructive business practices, but Steyer is a darling of the environmental Left (Bill McKibben calls him “daddy greenbucks”) for the money he has poured into the cause.

In Washington, Steyer’s group, NextGen Climate Action, funneled money through two other independent expen- diture groups to support the reelection campaign of Democrat state Sen. Nathan Schlicher, and to attack his opponent, Republican state Rep. Jan Angel.

The race, Democrats in the state predicted, would decide which party enjoyed a de facto majority in the state Senate (two Democrats caucused with Republicans at the time, effectively giving the GOP its majority).