—The West squad defeated the East, 39-7, in front of a crowd of 39,121 at the 2016 U.S. Army All-American Bowl in San Antonio, Texas. The West team’s win put them up two games with nine wins to the East’s seven in the Army Bowl series. The West team’s QB Shea Patterson (Bradenton, FL) was named the game’s Most Valuable Player.

“We are proud to be able to continue to showcase and recognize the talents of America’s youth while celebrating the team that makes a difference every day for the Nation – the U.S. Army,” said Mark S. Davis, deputy assistant secretary of the Army for marketing. “We congratulate the West team on their win, but really it was America who won today. The players, musicians and Soldiers who participate each year in the U.S. Army All-American Bowl represent young men and women of character who have dedicated themselves to excellence.”

Scoring Recap: Baylor commit Tren’Davian Dickson took the opening kickoff across the 50 to the opposing 45 to start the game. The West offense, led by Ole Miss commit QB Shea Patterson, started off with a quick 15 yard pass to Simi Fehoko. After a six yard tackle for loss by Georgia native Josh Brown, Patterson took a shot to the endzone which was broken up by Miami commit Tyler Byrd at the last moment. However on the following play, The West team pulled a trick out of their hat and scored on a double reverse pass which eventually found Simi Fehoko’s hands in the back of the endzone for the touchdown. After an incomplete pass on 1st down, Georgia commit Jacob Eason bobbled the snap and was strip sacked by DE Mark Jackson Jr. which was recovered by Miami commit ILB Shaq Quarterman on the 1 yard line. Sewo Olonilua capped off the drive with an untouched run up the middle for a touchdown. The PAT was missed by K Skyler Southam… After the punt by Marshall Long, Michigan commit QB Brandon Peters took the field but couldn’t get anything going through the air. The west team was forced to send out Ohio State commit P Drue Chrisman who skied a punt to the 14 yard line which was fair caught… The field general, Shea Patterson, took the field again after the turnover and started with a 30-yard completion on a post route across the middle. Next, he dumped the ball off to his Oregon bound RB Vavae Malepeai who scampered around the left edge for 15 yards. The officials tacked on another 15 yards to the play for a facemask penalty. On the next play, Patterson hit Notre Dame Commit WR Javon McKinley breaking back from a comeback route at the front pile on for another touchdown making the score 19-0. However, the East squad turned the PAT into a scoring opportunity when they blocked the kick and returned it for the 2-pt conversion. The East team’s next possession started at the 35 due to the ball going out of bounds on the kickoff. Louisville commit QB Jawon Pass entered the huddle and seemed poised throughout the drive. He completed multiple first downs, most important being, the 4th and 11 conversion to Austin Mack for 18 yards that brought them to the West 20 yard line. Once in the red zone, Demario McCall was responsible for back-to-back eight yard runs that lead the East down inside the 5 yard line. Eventually McCall served as the decoy when Jawon Pass faked a hand-off to him and kept it himself around the right edge for the East squad’s first TD. The PAT by K Connor Culp was good. California commit RB Melquise Stovall faked the reverse on the next Kickoff and return the ball 54 yards to the East 41 yard line, giving QB K.J. Costello and the West offense great starting position. Costello and WR Tyler Vaughns did not let the opportunity go to waste as they hooked up for a 12 yard first down pass and the 18 yard touchdown pass that capped off the drive. Costello also converted the 2-pt conversion by hitting RB Sewo Olonilua on an arrow route out of the backfield. After a failed East attempt to put points on the board before half, they were forced to punt back to the West team. The West team managed to bring the ball down into the red zone under the command of K.J. Costello and settled for a Skyler Southam field goal with two seconds left in the half. After back to back three and outs by both teams, QB K.J Costello led the West offense to another scoring drive by hitting TE Devin Asiasi on a seam pattern to put them up by four touchdowns. (Final game stats attached)

Notes from Game Day

West Takes an Advantage: With today’s win, the West earned a two game advantage with nine wins in the Bowl series.

Five Players Commit Live During Game: Five players committed to their respective universities during the live broadcast on NBC: Dylan Crawford (University of Michigan), Ross Blacklock (Texas Christian University), Donnie Corley (Michigan State University), Javon McKinley (University of Notre Dame) and Isaac Nauta (University of Georgia).

Through the Air: Game MVP QB Shea Patterson completed six passes for 90 yards and two touchdowns. U.S. Army National Player of the Year QB Jacob Eason completed six of his 13 passes with 71 yards.

On the Field: West’s Vavae Malepeai (Mililani, HI) had eight rushes for a net of 66 yards; East’s Mecole Hardman (Elberton, GA) finished the game with 143 all-purpose yards. East punter Marshall Long went for 148 yards with four punts.

For 16 years, the U.S. Army All-American Bowl has been the nation’s premier high school football game, serving as the preeminent launching pad for America’s future college and NFL stars. Andrew Luck, Odell Beckham Jr., Jamaal Charles and Derrick Henry made their national debuts as U.S. Army All-Americans, and a total of five U.S. Army All-American Bowl alumni were drafted in the first round of the 2015 NFL Draft. The 2015 U.S. Army All-American Bowl drew a crowd of 35,687 to the Alamodome.

The U.S. Army All-American Bowl is owned and produced by All American Games, a New Jersey-based sports marketing and event management company. The U.S. Army is the title sponsor of the U.S. Army All-American Bowl, and American Family Insurance is the lead national sponsor and presenting sponsor of the telecast on NBC. Other national sponsors include adidas, Gatorade, San Antonio Visitors Bureau, 247Sports, XOS Digital, NCSA, Lockheed Martin, Xenith, Battle Sports Science, NewTek and Football University. National sponsors of the U.S. Army All-American Marching Band include: The National Association for Music Education, Drum Corps International, Jupiter Band Instruments, Mapex Marching Percussion, Majestic Concert Percussion and DeMoulin Uniforms.

For more information on the U.S. Army All-American Bowl and its related events visit www.usarmyallamericanbowl.com and www.goarmy.com/events/aab or the official Facebook and Twitter pages.