A WINTER WEATHER ADVISORY is already in effect for Monday night and Tuesday, thanks to our first widespread winter weather event…

10 PM UPDATE

The models are consistent on the upcoming brush with wintry weather, so I am not going to announce any major changes to the forecast. I don’t foresee a massive inconvenience with this storm because the ground is so warm. People have sent in pictures showing forsythias blooming; it’s my understanding that they won’t bloom unless the ground is at 50 or 55 degrees. So, I think that we will have slush, but that the slush will melt fairly quickly.

--Mike Cameron

***Previous Discussion***

NEAR RECORD WARMTH TODAY

Today was mighty warm, but just shy of record warmth. At Bradley, the high was 59 degrees, preserving the record of 60 from 1949 by the slightest amount. In Bridgeport, the balmy 55 degrees was shy of reaching the 1973 all-time record by eight degrees. This warm air is going away as we speak…

TONIGHT

You will need an umbrella tonight because rain showers are crossing through the state. These showers are in response to “lift” in the atmosphere ahead of a cold front that will pass through the state sometime after 9 PM. Once it’s passed, colder air will filter into the area on a northwesterly breeze. By morning, lows will be in the upper-20s and lower-30s. Right now, we think there will be enough of a breeze to keep fog to a minimum and dry a lot of the moisture that will come from the evening showers. This wind, therefore, should limit the problem of icing.

COLD & DRY MONDAY

You will need winter clothes Monday. An area of high pressure centered in Canada will be nosing its expanse south into New England. It will keep the air markedly colder than we experienced Sunday, with morning temperatures in the 20s and 30s hardly changing much by afternoon: highs will be in the upper-30s to near 40. Bright sunshine will come with this system early in the day. Clouds will start to stream into the sky during the afternoon as a large area of low pressure develops in the southern plains and advances closer to the state. The higher clouds from this storm will glide over the shallow area of high pressure by sunset, providing a beautiful sunset, but also a foretelling of a troublesome commute by Tuesday morning…

WINTRY WEATHER ADVISORY MONDAY NIGHT & TUESDAY

Be prepared for a possibly frustrating, longer, slushy morning commute by Tuesday. Shortly after midnight, our first widespread accumulating snow and sleet will break out across the state, starting in Fairfield County first, then quickly spreading northeast. This precipitation will begin as snow and sleet near the Shoreline, but will be a wet snow inland. By dawn, any snow will have changed to sleet or freezing rain in the Hartford area and plain rain will already mix in points south, especially along I-95. At dawn, there may still be wet snow in areas north of the city, especially in the northern Litchfield Hills. During the course of the morning both lines, the snow-to mix line and the mix-to rain line, will move north. By noon, most parts of the state will have seen a switch to plain rain as readings go from 20s during the morning to the mid-30s by lunch time. In the towns flanking Massachusetts – particularly the deeper valleys in the hills both east and west of Hartford – enough cold air may stagnate that an icy mix will persist during the afternoon. By the evening commute, all of the state will be having just plain rain.

Accumulation forecasts are still prone to error due to uncertainty in timing of precipitation onset and questions about the depth of cold air. Right now, the models suggest that we’re not going to have anything impressive. The interstate 95 Corridor will probably get very little; areas just inland, including Greater Hartford, could get a coating to an inch and the hills northwest and northeast of Hartford may get a slushy 1”-2”. A few locations near Massachusetts may get a little more, especially in northeastern Connecticut, if the cold air can hang on long enough and there is localized enhancement.

By afternoon, very warm air will be present at higher altitudes, while colder (but above-freezing) air remains locked tight at low altitudes. Highs will only be in the upper-30s to near 40 degrees whereas temperatures aloft at some levels could warm into the low-50s. This “overrunning” will continue to create “lift” that will make rain into the afternoon and evening, tapering off during the late night. An inch or more of liquid is possible with this storm: welcomed rain during a time when we are still running a deficit of seven to nine inches for the year.

Our inclement weather is coming from the same storm that gave parts of Texas tornadoes and other parts a blizzard. Our version of this storm will be mercifully weaker, thank goodness! The system will come from the southern plains by loosely following I-40 into Tennessee and then turning northeast. At the same time, a dome of cold air locked tight by Canadian high pressure supplies enough could air to make rain snow, sleet and freezing rain at the start of the event. Warmer air will have a tough time scouring the cold air which is why we will only have highs in the upper-30s to near 40.

THE WEATHER INTO 2016

Wednesday will be quiet and sunnier with highs back in the mid-40s, thanks to a high pressure system that will come from the Great lakes in the wake of Tuesday’s storm. More rain will arrive Thursday due to a low pressure system that will come from the Ohio Valley. There won’t be as much cold air available with this storm, so rain will be the only precipitation type, rain. We still think that the rain will likely be be done by the time close out 2015 and the ball drops to usher in 2016. A healthy half inch or more of rain is possible with this storm. Friday and Saturday will be cool and bright as another dome of high pressure has at least a two-day stay in New England. A modified Arctic front will surge south early Sunday, renewing the colder air while also bringing a few scattered snow showers and flurries during the day Sunday.

Have a fantastic end to 2015!

Merry Christmas!

Meteorologists Mike Cameron

“Copyright 2015 WFSB (Meredith Corporation). All rights reserved.”