On Lip Sync Battle this Thursday May 28 at 10:00pm ET/PT on Spike TV, the inimitable Queen Latifah will be on the show, in the lip sync battle of her life against comedian and actor, Marlon Wayans! Fans of the show wonder if the Jester, Marlon Wayans, or the Queen, Queen Latifah, will win. It will be the very first time that royalty, of a sort, graces the Lip Sync Battle stage. Host LL Cool J and his lovely color commentator and co-host, Chrissy Teigen, will also be on hand, explaining the rules, offering the competitors advice, and cracking jokes.

Each of the worthy competitors will be performing to two songs on Lip Sync Battle. The first song is one which they will lip sync to without the use of costumes, backup dancers, special effects or props. Some performers in the past, like actor John Krasinski, cheated a bit by having on a costume (he had on a silvery-colored dress like Tina Turner’s) underneath their regular clothes, but that was for his second song, and it was pretty cool. He did great, but he did not end up winning, despite an AMAZING performance of Proud Mary.

The second song that Queen Latifah and Marlon Wayans lip sync to on Lip Sync Battle can incorporate costumes, backup singers and dancers, and special effects. Almost anything goes as they try to convince the studio audience members that their ability to lip sync makes them deserving of the Lip Sync Battle Championship Belt. At the end of the half-hour-long episode, LL Cool J will ask the audience to applaud if they thought that Queen Latifah did better, or if they thought that Marlon Wayans won the overall lip sync battle.

Only the names of one of the two songs Queen Latifah and Marlon Wayans will each be doing on Lip Sync Battle have been released. The names of the second songs that the Queen and Jester will be performing, however, have become a matter of public record. For her second song, Queen Latifah will be singing the LL Cool J song, Rock the Bells, the first time this season that a competitor has chosen a song by him.

For his second song, Marlon Wayans will be borrowing a Pharrell song, his big hit, Happy, to lip sync to in his efforts at trying to be the Jester who defeats a Queen. In the short clip below, Wayans tries to do his best Pharrell Williams impersonation, but his legs get a little bit crazy, as if they had minds of their own. Wayans even wears a hat as he lip syncs that looks similar to the fashionable hats that Pharrell often has worn in the past.

The winner of tomorrow’s Lip Sync Battle competition will get the joy and privilege of rubbing their victory in the face of the person he or she defeats, as well as the sense of pride and bonus style points for being able to pull off wearing the wide sort of belt usually only champion boxers or wrestlers get to win and wear.

One thing for sure is that both Queen Latifah and Marlon Wayans, the Jester, will give it their all tomorrow night on Lip Sync Battle, and the trash talk is likely to be flying. Will the Jester take down the Queen, or will Queen Latifah still be reigning the supreme ruler over her Lip Sync Battle Realm at the end of the half-hour-long show? Tune in tomorrow, to find out! In the meantime, check out the two cool preview clips below, to get an idea about what is to come during the heated competition.

Written By Douglas Cobb

Queen Latifah Rock the Bells [Preview]



Marlon Wayans Happy [Preview]



Share this: Print

LinkedIn

Pinterest

Pocket

Reddit

Email

Twitter

Google

Facebook

Tumblr