Photo

SAN DIEGO — Like many American colleges, the University of West Florida has seen significant growth in recent years in its international-student enrollment.

But another trend alarmed Rachel Errington, director of the university’s Office of International Students. The number of foreign students leaving the university, a public institution on Florida’s Gulf Coast, without earning a degree was also on the rise.

In 2008, West Florida’s retention rate for international students was 95 percent. Three years later, it was 83 percent. What, Ms. Errington wondered, was going on?

She is not the only one who has been asking. Late last month Nafsa, the association of international educators formerly known as the National Association of Foreign Student Advisers, released the findings of a United States survey on international-student retention at its annual conference in San Diego.

While research has looked at the retention and academic success of foreign students on individual campuses or within university systems, the Nafsa study was the first to do so across many institutions. And the survey, conducted by World Education Services, a private organization that studies trends in international education, includes the perspectives of both international undergraduates and the college administrators who work with them.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

It turns out the two groups view retention issues quite differently.

Educators attributed to a variety of causes foreign undergraduates’ decisions to drop out or transfer, including financial and academic issues; English-language problems; and the desire to attend an institution that is a “better fit.”

By contrast, the factors most cited by students were squarely financial: access to jobs or internships; affordability; and availability of scholarships. Rounding out the top five: dissatisfaction with the food and the dormitories.

Neither perception is necessarily wrong, said Rahul Choudaha, the project’s lead researcher. Rather, the survey results, based on responses from nearly 500 educators and 500 students at more than 100 colleges, underscored that “there may be a gap in understanding about what students want and what they’re getting,” he said. “And students may not understand what institutions want and what they’re getting.”

The results also show some variability between different types of colleges. Administrators at doctorate-granting institutions, for example, were more likely to say academic and English-language difficulties were at the root of retention problems. Meanwhile, students at baccalaureate institutions were more concerned about affordability but reported greater satisfaction with the availability of scholarships than did their peers at other colleges. Baccalaureate institutions are defined as colleges where bachelor’s degrees represent at least 10 percent of all undergraduate degrees and where fewer than 50 master’s degrees or 20 doctoral degrees are awarded annually.

The research did not examine the full range of foreign students in the United States. It did not include graduate students or students who transfer to four-year institutions from community colleges, intensive-English courses, or so-called pathways programs.

Yet over all, the findings do suggest that American colleges need to do a better job of dealing with the mismatch between the expectations international students have of studying in the United States and their experience once on an American campus, said Sheila Schulte, Nafsa’s senior director for international enrollment management and international student and scholar services.

College recruiters should be upfront about academic requirements and about what it takes to succeed in an American college classroom, Ms. Schulte said, especially with students who come from very different educational backgrounds. They should also be transparent about college costs and financing, she said. If campus jobs are limited, for instance, international-admissions officers should make that clear to foreign students, who are forbidden under United States law to work off-campus.

In addition, international-student advisers may need to collaborate more with other campus offices, such as career services, to make sure those offices are prepared to handle the special needs of foreign students, Ms. Schulte noted. More than a third of the students surveyed singled out access to jobs and internships as one of the most effective ways to retain students.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Despite those concerns, retention and graduation rates for international students remain high — in many cases, higher than those of American students. More than 60 percent of the baccalaureate and master’s institutions surveyed and more than half of the doctorate institutions said their retention rates were higher for foreign than for domestic undergraduates.

Still, as the number of students from overseas continues to increase — the Institute of International Education reports there are 40 percent more foreign students at American colleges than a decade ago — their retention rates bear watching, Ms. Schulte said.

And the Nafsa data hint at a lack of satisfaction even among international students who choose not to leave their institution. Just 60 percent of students who said they did not plan to transfer reported being satisfied with their experience.

Jill Munro, director of international student and scholar services at the College of Wooster in Ohio, said that while international retention rates remained strong, “I don’t want to lose the few that I do or have those who stay have a less-than-great experience.”

Wooster will begin offering a course this fall to new international students to help them adjust academically and culturally to American higher education. Ms. Munro said she hoped the class would allow her and other instructors to spot students who are struggling early, instead of “when they fail their classes first semester.”

At West Florida, Ms. Errington has conducted her own surveys to determine why retention rates fell.

She has used the findings to craft some possible fixes: Among them, starting a voucher program to cut the cost of taxi rides from the college’s relatively isolated campus into downtown Pensacola and encouraging other offices and departments to offer more on-campus jobs and internships to foreign students. Her latest effort is a mentoring program that connects international students with American classmates.

West Florida’s retention rate, she said, has now rebounded.