Despite already having one of the NHL’s highest salary structures, the Avalanche is prepared to continue to devote paychecks to three goaltenders by keeping rookie Calvin Pickard.

Pickard, 22, has earned a roster spot, Avs coach Patrick Roy said Friday, after coming off the bench and leading the team to two consecutive comeback victories and giving Colorado a chance to beat the mighty Chicago Blackhawks on Wednesday. Pickard’s .933 save percentage leads the team.

“He deserves to play,” Roy said of Pickard, who is in his two-way, entry-level contract that pays him $67,500 for a season in the minors and $810,000 in the NHL. “We always say to our players: It’s up to them to force us to make (difficult) decisions, and that’s what he’s been doing.”

Pickard will start Saturday against the visiting Dallas Stars, and likely back up Semyon Varlamov on Monday against the Montreal Canadiens at the Pepsi Center. Varlamov has missed the past four games with a groin injury.

Reto Berra, who began the season as Varlamov’s backup and who will be paid $1.4 million wherever he plays this season, has stopped just 12 of his past 18 shots and has a save percentage below .900 in his past four games, including a season-low .625 in his last start.

Berra could be traded or waived, but he would likely end up clearing waivers and report to the Lake Erie Monsters of the American Hockey League. The Avs are responsible for his full salary but, according to capgeek.com, his cap hit while playing in the AHL would be $525,000.

“It’s a great opportunity for me to play at this level,” Pickard said Friday. “I’m just taking it day by day. (Friday) I wanted to have a good practice, which I did, and going into (Saturday), I’ll start visualizing and thinking about the game.”

Roy said Pickard could still get sent down.

“We’ll see (Saturday). Things could change. But right now he deserves to stay,” Roy said.

Meanwhile, the Avs sent defenseman Karl Stollery and forward Paul Carey back to Lake Erie on Friday and will welcome defenseman Erik Johnson (neck) and forward John Mitchell (leg) back to the lineup against the Stars.

Veteran forwards Jarome Iginla and Daniel Briere, both 37, did not practice Friday for maintenance purposes.

Mike Chambers: mchambers@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikechambers

DALLAS AT COLORADO 7 p.m. Saturday, ALT; 950 AM

Spotlight on Tyler Seguin: Since the Olympic break last season, Seguin leads the NHL with 30 goals and is second with 56 points. He has an NHL-most 17 goals this season, including two in Tuesday night’s 3-2 victory over the Edmonton Oilers. Last season against the Avalanche, Seguin had eight points (four goals) in five games.

NOTEBOOK

Stars: They hosted the Minnesota Wild on Friday night to conclude a five-game homestand. Dallas was 0-5-2 against Central Division teams entering its game against the Wild. … Goalie Kari Lehtonen was scheduled to make his ninth consecutive start Friday and might serve as a backup against the Avs. … Defenseman Jordie Benn, brother of Dallas captain Jamie Benn, was a healthy scratch for the fourth straight game Friday. … Rookie John Klingberg has eight points (three goals) in his past five games and is the first Dallas rookie defenseman in team history to record a five-game point streak since the Stars moved from Minnesota in 1993.

Avalanche: This is the first of five games against Dallas this season. The Avs won four of five in 2013-14. … Center John Mitchell will play after missing the past three games with a leg injury, and defenseman Erik Johnson is back from a one-game hiatus because of a stiff neck. The Avs continue to carry just six available defenseman, with Karl Stollery being sent to the AHL on Friday along with forward Paul Carey. Forwards Jamie McGinn and Patrick Bordeleau remain out with long-term back injuries, and defenseman Brad Stuart is also not skating with the team. Forward Jesse Winchester is practicing but continues to struggle with concussion-like symptoms.

Mike Chambers, The Denver Post