By Max Bomber

TheStatehouseFile.com

Editor’s note: This story is a part of a question and answer series covering the Indiana primary. All candidates in this race have been invited to interview. Some responses have been edited for brevity and clarity.

INDIANAPOLIS — Monroe County Council member, Shelli Yoder, is running as a Democrat in the 9th Congressional District. Yoder, a former Miss Indiana, won the Democratic primary in this race in 2012, but went on to lose to Republican U.S. Rep. Todd Young. However, this race can’t end up a rematch because Young has stepped away from this seat to run for the U.S. Senate.

Current hometown: Bloomington

Age: 47

Occupation: Educator at the Kelly School of Business at IU Bloomington

Fun fact: I love outdoor camping, tent camping. My husband and I, we have three kids and ever since we had our first newborn—she was just a few weeks old—we started getting outside and going camping with her and now as a family it’s part of who we are.

What’s one of your main goals if you’re elected?

From day one serving the 9th District, I want to create an environment of good paying jobs throughout the 9th District. Too many families continue to live paycheck-to-paycheck and too many more still looking for work. Work that is more than just making a living, but making a life. I want to work to create an environment that encourages the growth of small businesses by cutting red tape easing tax burdens on small business owners, and increasing access to capital for entrepreneurs.

What gives you a different perspective than the other candidates?

I’m not a career politician, but I am finishing a four-year term with the Monroe County Council. And serving in local government, that experience has taught me what bipartisan cooperation looks like. At a local level, we don’t get caught up in partisan bickering that I feel is so much a part of Washington.

In addition to that, my years of experience in budgeting and fiscal oversight as a nonprofit executive. I had to listen and follow the mission of the organization and be very cautious and care-filled in a way we spent donors’ money.

Now as an educator at the Kelly School of Business, having my finger on the pulse on the next generation of business leaders and entrepreneurs, and seeing the concern they have for college debt, college tuition and whether or not jobs will be available to them upon graduating, I feel those real concerns and maybe feel them even more so at a very personal level as a mom of three kids.

Where do you stand on:

Obamacare

I think that affordable health care is a basic human right and while I support the Affordable Care Act… I want to make it better and that affordable piece, I want to continue working on to make sure that we are addressing the growth of out of pocket health care costs for families.

Raising the federal minimum wage

I support the Raising the Wage Act, which is a gradual increase of the minimum wage to 2020 to $12 and at that point reevaluating and seeing the impact. One of the ways that we need to get more people engaged in the economy is addressing this systemic problem that wages are not keeping up with the cost of living.

Resettling Syrian refugees

We have legislation that’s built into how we go about the process of legally helping those around the world in need. And growing up watching my church support and sponsor a Cambodian family when I was young when they were seeking refuge, made a huge impact on me and I hope that Indiana stands firm in how we have been a place of refuge for those who need it.

I know that if we stand firm with the guidelines and the policies and procedures that are already on the books, we can help Syrian refugees find a place they can call home and to bring with them a desire to reengage this economy and help our state in a way that will help them.

Raising the retirement age for Social Security

There are many ways that we can address strengthening Social Security, but raising the retirement age, for me, puts that responsibility on the backs of our seniors. I feel we need to be doing more to get younger people into the economy and supporting our seniors in the years where they can retire and enjoy the years of labor….

I look at my parents who are both now in their 70s and they both work. They have to work because the cost of Social Security isn’t keeping up.

Whether the Senate votes on President Obama’s Supreme Court nominee

I am not a career politician, but I am finishing my four years serving on the Monroe County Council. If I just refused to do something for the taxpayers, what I was elected to do and why I was elected to serve, the reason why I was given this incredible responsibility—I absolutely would show up to my job and do it. I think it’s outrageous that there are those who refuse to do their jobs.

Trans-Pacific Partnership

While I support free trade, I also want to make sure that it’s not creating an environment that is undermining hard working men and women here in the United States. My concern is that the TPP has yet to address this component.

Why should you be elected?

I bring to this job a background of both private sector experience, nonprofit management, serving in a capacity at a local elected official on the Monroe County Council and a sensibility of a mom. And a real desire to serve the people of the 9th District. Having grown up in rural Indiana wanting to listen to the voices of those in the district and take their concerns to Washington in the people’s house, the House of Representatives.

Max Bomber is a reporter for TheStatehouseFile.com, a news website powered by Franklin College journalism students.