Fashion model Jourdan Dunn, 23 years old, said she wasn't expecting the reaction she got from a tweet she sent earlier this summer. Ms. Dunn, who has about 107,000 followers on Twitter, posted, (with some creative grammar): "Ahahahahahaha I just for canceled from Dior because of my boobs! I❤ fashion #Couture."

Models Take to Social Media Cara Delevingne modeled a look in Oscar de la Renta's Fall 2013 show. Oscar de la Renta

Models, paid to be expressionless, are finding a new way to express themselves.

Social media is also giving brands that select models for lucrative marketing contracts a way to gauge their influence—and to see who is witty, wild or a bit of a loose cannon. As hundreds of models arrive for New York Fashion Week, which starts Thursday, their Twitter followers will get virtual front-row seats to the world of high fashion.

Ms. Dunn's Dior post was retweeted and picked up by fashion blogs. New York magazine's lifestyle blog The Cut's headline read "Jourdan Dunn's Breasts 'Too Big' For Dior Couture. " Soon Us Weekly and E! weighed in and media commentators used the opportunity to talk about models and body size.

ENLARGE Jourdan Dunn has about 218,200 Instagram followers and is known for her sometimes provocative tweets.

"My agency was screaming. They didn't know how Dior would react," said Ms. Dunn, who pronounces her first name Joor-DAHN, in a recent telephone interview from London. "They said you don't want to upset the client." (Her agency, Women Management, declined to comment. Dior declined to comment.)

Runway models, long cast as expressionless figures showcasing Fashion Week's finest wears, are finding their own voice on social media. Sometimes that can land them big endorsement deals. Or, it can backfire. Leslie Yazel explains. Photo: facebook.com/officialKateUpton.

Ms. Dunn's Twitter feed is often jokey and ribald: "I'm trying this new thing [where] I have green tea in the morning instead of a good brew." Moments later she tweeted, "It's bloody horrible," adding three disgusted faces.

She has also weighed in on issues such as race: In February, Ms. Dunn, a black West Indian, tweeted: "This industry is NOT a walk in a park for black models and even when you make it they will always make you feel like you should be grateful."

Ms. Dunn said while she doesn't regret anything she has posted on social media, "maybe I shouldn't have brought attention to Dior." Social media is "all about branding. People will forget about your talent and talk about your tweets. I feel you have to be careful."

Stephan Moskovic, co-founder and editor of Models.com, a website that ranks models, said, "It can be a big plus for a brand if they sign up a model that has a large following." Models.com began running models' latest tweets on the models' profile pages at the end of last year.

"When you walk into a brand and you say 'what about her, what about him?' they now ask 'how many followers do they have?' " said Ivan Bart, senior vice president and managing director of IMG Models. The agency represents Joan Smalls and Karlie Kloss, the No. 1 and No. 9 runway models as ranked by Models.com, as well as Kate Upton, who appeared two years in a row on the cover of Sports Illustrated's swimsuit issue. "When you want a spokesperson or face of your brand, you want to know they will sell the brand," he added. "Are they connecting, are they relevant, who are they relevant to? We have that information now," said Mr. Bart.

ENLARGE Karlie Kloss has about 245,900 followers on Twitter and 342,500 on Instagram. Michael Kors

The agency has been encouraging and training its new models to use social media, Mr. Bart said.

In the past year or so, models including Cara Delevingne and Ms. Smalls have taken followers with them from show to show, chronicling their commutes, their hair and makeup preparation sessions, and giving hints of what they'll be wearing down the runway. Some also tweet a lot about food. And there are at least two Twitter accounts dedicated to Ms. Delevingne's signature, thick eyebrows.

Ms. Delevingne, who has about 2.4 million Instagram followers, appears in a DKNY print ad standing atop a taxi. The brand says it considers the model's social-media profile a bonus factor. "Cara has the same energy and spirit that DKNY embodies. Her dynamic personality comes through in her pictures and her social presence is simply another way that she shares it," said Patti Cohen, executive vice president for global marketing and communications at Donna Karan Co.

At the Society Management, Elite World's New York division, marketing coordinator Vicky Yang, advises models on their social media activities and created written guidelines. These include backstage etiquette: "We encourage them not to share too much backstage," out of respect to the design house, Ms. Yang said. Ms. Yang asks models to consider if what they're posting is something they'd regret 20 years from now.

The firm also encourages models to post about their nonwork interests, too, so that they are "not just mannequins and they potentially reach an even vaster audience than just followers of fashion or modeling," said Ms. Yang.

The agency represents model Liu Wen —the first Asian model to be a face of Estée Lauder Cos. cosmetics, who has more than 100,000 followers on Instagram. Ms. Liu, who is Chinese, also has a large following on Weibo, a social media site in China, making her more attractive to brands who want to reach Chinese consumers. "I think a great part my current success was due to my presence on social media," she said via email.

Model Coco Rocha, widely considered a social media pioneer among models, said she is glad to see more models using Twitter and the like. "Celebrities have taken so many of our jobs. Now you can see how many people are following a model. It means something to a company."

Roman Young, director of women and image at Wilhelmina International, and one of Ms. Rocha's agents, said "five or 10 years ago, models were only judged on their looks or if they were cool on set. Now you can find out how cool they are from social media. So [brands] can find a model that fits their brand in a very real way. They don't have to fake it."

ENLARGE Joan Smalls for Estée Lauder Estee Lauder

For Ms. Smalls, social media "gives us our platform. The world is getting to know the model's personality through the way they look at life."

The surge of models on social media coincides with what some are calling the return of the supermodel ideal of the late 1980s and early '90s, embodied by models with outsized personalities and antics, such as Naomi Campbell and Linda Evangelista. More recently, runway models were more seen than heard and magazine covers used actresses and celebrities on their covers.

In the past year, three of this new generation of runway models have appeared on the cover of W, while Vogue and Elle put Ms. Upton on magazine covers this year. Interview magazine devoted its September issue to supermodels.

James Scully, a casting director for runway shows, says the fashion runways are slowly starting to use models with more personality, which he endorses.

While Ms. Dunn doesn't like the word supermodel, she said, "The models of this generation have more personality. People are seeing that."

Write to Ray A. Smith at ray.smith@wsj.com