NEW YORK (AP) - The Associated Press is all over New York Fashion Week, from its runway fashions to celebrity-packed events. Here’s what some AP writers are seeing:

____

ALEXANDER WANG, HEAVY METAL AND KANYE TOO

As Alexander Wang took his victory jog up and down the runway after his packed show on Saturday, he ran by a set of special guests and blew them some kisses: the Kanye West family, including Mom, Dad and little North.

It was two days after West’s own high-profile show featuring his collaboration with Adidas, and he was relaxed and smiling as he sat between wife Kim Kardashian and singer Nicki Minaj. North, too, very hip in all black for a Saturday night out, was relaxed and happy, after fussing during Dad’s show. Clearly it’s much less stressful when someone else’s designs are being scrutinized.

As for those designs: Wang offered his usual highly conceptual show, focusing on a theme of heavy metal - both in music, and in clothes.

“There’s always a musical component to my collections, and we loved the idea of AC/DC and Kiss and Led Zeppelin,” he said in a backstage interview. “And then we were extracting the idea of metal both in a literal sense, and how do we apply it to clothing - whether it’s fabric or metal trimming or hardware, and also the mood of metal and the attitude.”

What this all meant was black - lots and lots of it, almost exclusively - and studs or chains on almost every garment, whether sleek pantsuits or long skirts or heavy black boots.

There was also a nod to Victorian codes of dressing - articulated waists and corsetry - and, of course, some sheer chainmail. Because, noted Wang: “How can you have a metal collection without chainmail? But we wanted it to feel really slinky, so we finished the hems of skirts like T-shirts and gave some velvet to it, for sensuality.”

Wang said that fall and winter clothes don’t necessarily make him think black, black, black; Last winter, for example, he presented a colorful collection of heat-activated garments. But he said that people always ask for clothes they see in his collections to be made in black. “So this time we said, why don’t we start the collection in all black?”

So everyone still wants black? “At least our customer does,” he said.

In keeping with the heaviness of the theme, models had appropriately scowls and hair in their eyes. And speaking of the models, one of them had a special connection to the front row: none other than Kendall Jenner, half-sister of Kim Kardashian.

-Jocelyn Noveck

____

COCO ROCHA’S BABY BUMP

Coco Rocha’s baby bump has caught up with the limelight and the proud supermodel mama couldn’t be happier.

The redheaded beauty was backstage Saturday at Christian Siriano’s New York Fashion Week show, posing for cameras and chatting about her spring arrival - a girl!

No names yet, but five or six are on the table.

“I hope that I’ll be the type that once I see her I’ll know, but I haven’t been able to hone down on one. It’s hard when you haven’t met a human being and then you think that’s going to be the name for the rest of her life,” said Rocha, dressed in a tight high-neck, black-and-white print Siriano dress - her bump on display.

“I’m not hiding. I’m so excited. It took a while for the bump to show so now that it’s showing it’s been fun,” a beaming Rocha said.

Siriano sent out an African jungle-inspired collection of florals and animal prints, including a muted tiger stripe cashmere coat, against a welcome backdrop of potted green foliage. He sweated out the snowy weather with a nervous smile after making contact with clients and buyers.

“It’s really hard. It’s snowing and it’s Valentine’s Day and it’s later, so it’s a challenge for people to get in,” he said of his afternoon show in an industrial space downtown, away from the hustle of the Lincoln Center tents.

Among his backstage guests were Brad Goreski, the celebrity stylist and fresh face with Kathy Griffin on “Fashion Police” as the E! show regroups after the passing of stalwart Joan Rivers. With Joan’s daughter Melissa Rivers still behind the camera, how is he settling in?

“Everyone’s been so welcoming,” Goreski said. “We’re having the best time and, you know, Kelly Osbourne and Giuliana (Rancic) and Kathy and myself are just getting naughtier and naughtier as the weeks go on.”

So who does he have his eye on to shine at the Academy Awards?

“I have very high hopes for Emma Stone. She’s been my favorite this year so far at every awards show and I feel like the Oscars are going to be no exception.”

-Leanne Italie

____

RIHANNA’S GOT IT IN THE BAG

Rihanna won’t let Kanye West take the style spotlight at New York Fashion Week.

The Grammy Award winner introduced a new one-off bag she designed for Fendi at the brand’s first store opening in New York on Friday.

She praised West’s Yeezy Boost sneakers, rolled at the day before at a runway show that included Kim Kardashian, Beyonce and a crying North West in the front row.

“I think it was amazing. I love that he takes risks. I love that he pushes boundaries and it was very Kanye,” she said of his effort.

Rihanna’s Fendi baguette bag is part of a larger project in which five different women try their hand at accessory-designing for charity.

The five baguette purses will be displayed in Fendi’s new flagship store until 13 March and will be up for auction. Proceeds will benefit five charities chosen by the five designers.

-Cristina Jaleru

____

Follow AP Fashion at twitter.com/AP_Fashion