She's definitely out of line but doesn't justify the officer throwing her like that.

Editor's note: The above video is the original video posted to Facebook. Viewers should be advised it contains strong language.

Brittnie Fails admits to being drunk across the street from Dixie Roadhouse early Sunday and has no problem with being arrested for it.

But she does have a problem with what she says was excessive force used to detain her.

Fails is scratched and bruised following the altercation, which was caught on a bystander's camera. It shows Fails arguing with her boyfriend when a police officer approaches her from behind and grabs her, throwing her to the ground.

You can hear reactions from those gathered at the scene, most of them telling the officer it was "uncalled for."

"The next thing I remember is waking up on the ground," Fails said.

Fails said she was arguing with her boyfriend, "demanding my keys ... I was a little drunk so I was pushing pushing him lightly."

ABC7 showed the video to residents around Cape Coral.

"Looks like the cop cold cocked her. She was clearly intoxicated, but she didn't see it coming," said Bob Keezel.

What Fails said she also didn't see coming was the officer's reaction you can hear in the video.

"If there's anything that makes me mad about the entire video it's not even being thrown on the ground, it's how he just nonchalantly like 'oh my God, get over it, you're faking it.'"

Some people are defending the officers' split-second decision to break up the argument.

"I know a lot of people who do that get drunk, they act a fool and you know what, if they get to somewhere you should've controlled yourself better," said Cameron Tille.

Fails, charged with disorderly intoxication, bonded out of jail hours after her arrest and is filing a complaint against the officers involved.

Cape Coral Police said they have seen the video and will begin an internal affairs investigation. The officer has been placed on administrative duty pending the outcome of the investigation.