WASHINGTON — Gary M. Cohen, the official in charge of the federal health insurance marketplace, who repeatedly told Congress before its troubled rollout that it would work well, said on Thursday that he was resigning.

Mr. Cohen is the chief architect of federal rules regulating the operations of private health insurance under the new health care law. He said he would leave his post to return to California at the end of this month, when the open enrollment period closes for individuals and families shopping for insurance.

When Mr. Cohen addressed a conference of insurance company executives here on Thursday, he was asked about problems that continue to bedevil the new federal marketplace.

One health plan executive asked why the Obama administration kept extending the deadline for existing health plans to comply with more rigorous insurance standards set by the Affordable Care Act. Federal officials said this week that they would allow the renewal of existing policies for two more years, through 2016, averting a wave of insurance cancellations that could have done political damage to Democrats in this year’s midterm elections.

Mr. Cohen said the administration provided the reprieve for these policies because “we wanted to give people as many options as we could to be sure they stay in coverage.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“There were people who had insurance who felt that the cost of moving into a new plan was going to be prohibitive for them,” Mr. Cohen said. “We are trying to provide a transition. We are making a lot of changes in the market all at once. The last thing we want is for anybody who had health insurance coverage to not have it.”

Insurers at the meeting expressed concerns about President Obama’s decision to let some people renew insurance policies that do not comply with the new law. Insurers worry that healthy people will tend to stick with the older policies and not join the new marketplaces.

Mr. Cohen said that, under a new rule issued this week, the administration would spend more than originally estimated to compensate insurers for financial losses they might experience as a result of the president’s transition policy.

His remarks came as Mr. Obama was making an appeal for Latinos to take advantage of the coverage available through the exchanges until March 31. Mr. Obama assured them that signing up for insurance would not lead to deportation for any relatives in the United States illegally.

“None of the information that is provided in order for you to obtain health insurance is in any way transferred to immigration services,” Mr. Obama said at a town-hall-style meeting held by Spanish-language news media outlets. Illegal immigrants are generally not eligible for health benefits, but many of their children are United States citizens eligible for subsidized coverage.

As director of the Center for Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight, Mr. Cohen has worked closely with insurers, consumers, health care providers, state insurance regulators and Congress.

In April of last year, he told Congress that “we are on schedule and on track” with information technology to run the federal website, HealthCare.gov, starting on Oct. 1. “I’m very optimistic and confident at where we are at this point,” he said then. In September, less than two weeks before the start of open enrollment, Mr. Cohen testified that consumers “will be able to choose a plan and get enrolled in coverage beginning Oct. 1.”

Mr. Cohen will be replaced at least temporarily by Dr. Mandy K. Cohen, who is now in charge of consumer assistance efforts at the insurance oversight office in the Health and Human Services Department. (The two officials are not related.)

Before joining the government, Dr. Cohen was executive director of Doctors for America, an advocacy group that campaigned for passage of the health care law. Mr. Obama’s nominee for surgeon general, Dr. Vivek Murthy, was a founder of the group, started as Doctors for Obama in the 2008 campaign.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Senator John Barrasso, Republican of Wyoming, said Mr. Cohen was “leaving the Obamacare exchange in complete disarray.” But Marilyn B. Tavenner, the administrator of the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, said he had “made the promise of the Affordable Care Act a reality for millions of Americans.”