A largely bipartisan bill to fund the nation’s transportation projects for the next five years garnered the support of half of Kansas’ six-member congressional delegation Thursday as Congress sent the measure to President Barack Obama, who signed it.

The $305 billion legislation, commonly called the Fixing America’s Surface Transportation Act, cleared the U.S. House 359-65. All 181 voting Democrats in addition to 178 Republicans supported the bill, including Rep. Lynn Jenkins.

“This long-term transportation bill, the first since 2005, includes increased funds for infrastructure construction, including local highways and bridges,” Jenkins said in a statement. “Now, states will have the flexibility they need to address improvements to roads, highways and bridges to ensure the safety of all drivers and strengthen our local economy.”

Reps. Tim Huelskamp, Kevin Yoder and Mike Pompeo of Kansas were among the 65 Republicans voting against the bill.

“The FAST Act throws fiscal responsibility and smart policy-making out the window,” Pompeo said in an email Friday. “This bill funds non-highway-related projects with dwindling gas tax revenues and increases spending through unrealistic funding gimmicks that will ultimately never be realized.”

Pompeo and Yoder said they are in favor of a long-term highway bill but the FAST Act fell short of their expectations.

“The bill is paid for by a series of complicated budget gimmicks instead of simply using gas tax revenue to pay for our highways and continues the policy of paying for programs like ferries, trolleys, mass transit systems, and historical preservation programs,” Yoder said in an email Friday.

Highway spending has been complicated in recent years by the insolvency of the Highway Trust Fund. The federal government generally allocates about $50 billion annually for transportation but the nation’s 18.4 cents-per-gallon gas tax only brings in roughly $34 billion. As a result, the FAST Act includes $70 billion in offsetting cuts from other portions of the federal budget.

Later in the day Thursday, the legislation passed through the Senate by a wide 83-16 margin. Both senators from Kansas, Republicans Pat Roberts and Jerry Moran, voted in favor.

“This bill finally ends the cycle of short-term extensions and threats of devastating shutdowns to transportation programs that have hurt the nation’s ability to complete highway projects for the past 10 years,” Moran said in a statement. “By cutting red tape and accelerating project delivery, the FAST Act will help address deteriorating infrastructure — like Topeka’s Willard Bridge — and Kansas’ other failing roads and bridges.”

The legislation was staunchly opposed by some conservative groups, such as FreedomWorks, due to its cost and renewal of the Export-Import Bank’s charter. FreedomWorks has aired ads supporting Huelskamp’s re-election and named him one of its FreedomFighter Award winners.

“There are already serious problems with the highway bill, but its reauthorization of the Export-Import Bank makes this already bad deal for taxpayers even worse,” said Noah Wall, the group’s grassroots director. “This is blatant pandering to special interests on K Street and another knife in the back of the conservative grassroots.”

The all-Republican Kansas delegation has been split on the Export-Import Bank issue for years. Roberts and Moran have tepidly supported the bank while Huelskamp and Pompeo have been outspoken critics of it. On Friday, Pompeo called the bank “corrupt” and said it “must be drastically reformed.”

“While the bill had some merits, I couldn’t support 1,300 pages of budget gimmicks, union earmarks, and the revival of Obama’s Ex-Im Bank," Huelskamp said Friday.

A long-term transportation bill has eluded Congress in recent years, forcing federal representatives to pass a series of unsatisfying short-term fixes. Thursday’s bill, which Obama signed Friday, is the longest-ranging transportation bill passed by Congress in 17 years.

“I look forward to signing this bill right away, so that we can put Americans to work rebuilding our crumbling roads, bridges, and transit systems,” the president said in a statement.

Jenkins was the target of a two-week radio advertising campaign this summer urging her to vote for a long-term transportation bill. The 30-second ads, which aired in Topeka, claimed that 50 percent of Kansas’ annual capital investments in highways and bridges depend on federal funding.

In addition to providing money for road and rail projects, reauthorizing the Export-Import Bank and funding mass transit systems, the legislation will restore a $3 billion crop insurance subsidy that was cut as part of a Republican budget agreement. Roberts has been a defender of the subsidy.

“When the cuts to crop insurance were announced earlier this year, the message from farm country could not have been clearer: do not target crop insurance,” the senator said in a statement Thursday.