Rural health care is in crisis. In small towns and farming communities across our state and nation, the options for primary health care are dwindling.

Patients are driving farther than ever for the care they need. Like much of the country, Oklahoma is facing a shortage of primary health care providers that will only worsen as the population ages.

A bill introduced in the state Legislature this year would have taken a step toward addressing this problem. House Bill 2841, by state Rep. Jonathan Echols, would have granted nurse practitioners full practice authority in Oklahoma. Simply put, that would allow nurse practitioners to practice in Oklahoma without a collaborative agreement with a doctor.

That bill appears unlikely to pass from committee, but I hope it begins a conversation.

Our state ranks 49th in physician-patient ratio, with only 80.2 physicians for every 100,000 Oklahomans. When many new doctors are drawn to larger cities and choose to be specialists rather than enter family practice, the health care shortage in rural Oklahoma only becomes worse.

According to figures from the Oklahoma State Department of Health, 64 of Oklahoma’s 77 counties, including my own Washita County, are designated as primary care Health Professional Shortage Areas.

As the executive officer of Cordell Memorial Hospital, I have been trying unsuccessfully to recruit a second doctor for 18 months. Even offering compensation and benefits that exceed that of hospitals in larger cities, I’ve had no takers.

Nurse practitioners are an obvious solution to fill this gap. They are highly trained and educated, each having a master’s degree or doctorate and clinical training. They are qualified to treat and manage a range of chronic and acute conditions, order and interpret tests, and more. They are a lifeline for rural health and a resource this state should utilize.

Nurse practitioners are granted full practice authority in 21 other states, including neighboring New Mexico and Colorado. Numerous studies have found that the primary care provided by nurse practitioners produces outcomes similar to care from physicians.

Granting nurse practitioners the authority to practice to the full scope of their education would breathe life into Cordell Memorial Hospital and other small hospitals across the state. More importantly, it would improve the quality of life for thousands in rural Oklahoma.

Even though it looks like HB 2841 won’t make it through this legislative session, I urge lawmakers to keep it in mind when they convene in 2017.

Landon Hise is the chief executive officer of Cordell Memorial Hospital and a member of the Oklahoma Hospital Association’s Council on Rural Health.