Pittsburgh police arrested two men early this morning after they led officers on a chase from Homewood into Wilkinsburg.

Officers on foot patrol in the 6500 block of Hamilton Avenue in Homewood noticed a gun and other “contraband” in a parked car, police said in a news release this afternoon.

About 3:15 a.m., officers saw four men get into the vehicle and drive away, turning onto Putnam Street without using a turn signal. A police car began following the vehicle, with officers watching while it traveled on Hamilton Avenue, Enterprise Street, Frankstown Avenue and into a parking lot of a gas station in the 6400 block of Frankstown.

At the lot, the officers attempted to stop the vehicle, but it sped off, the police news release said.

The driver led police on a chase through Homewood, going through stop signs, driving over curbs, and driving in the wrong lane of traffic. Police said the vehicle drove over spike strips officers put out to puncture its tires, and continued through a red light at the intersection of Bennett Street and Brushton Avenue before turning onto the Martin Luther King Jr. Busway into Wilkinsburg.

The vehicle struck a parked car in the 800 block of Wallace Avenue near the intersection of Center Street, and all four men then jumped out and ran, police wrote.

Officers ran after and arrested the 18-year-old driver, whose identity was not released. He was charged with reckless driving, fleeing a police officer, escape, and various traffic violations.

Officers saw one of the passengers, identified as Desean Thomas, 21, of Wilkinsburg, throw something into a trash bin before they caught him. The news release said officers went back to the bin and found a firearm that later was determined to have been stolen.

The two other passengers were caught in a yard in the 700 block of Wallace Avenue but were released, officers said.

The news release said the officers also took five stamp bags of heroin, a small amount of marijuana, some cash and three cellphones from Mr. Thomas. He was charged with carrying a firearm without a license, possession with intent to deliver a controlled substance, possession of a controlled substance, receiving stolen property and escape.