Doug Diny is a candidate for Wausau City Council District 4. (March 2016) (Photo: Courtesy of Doug Diny)

I agree with my opponent! Wausau City Council's 4th District incumbent, my opponent Tom Neal, dedicated a recent column to the “earful” he’s getting from constituents about the “dysfunction” in City Hall. He’s been “pleading” with staff, council and the mayor to get along.

Musings on decorum are nice newspaper fillers, but they’re not a solution. We need fresh faces and leadership, I will provide both.

People ask me how I differ with Neal on the issues. Here are just a few examples: I favored a better deal than to risk $4.1 million on an unsecured taxpayer-funded loan to CBL & Associates Properties for the Wausau Center mall. My opponent spent the money, and now he has his fingers crossed in hopes CBL can change its stripes. That action passed, but we can’t just spend it and forget it. We still need a plan for the re-purposing of the empty space. We will need solid leadership to help the mall buck a seismic shift in 21st century retail buying habits.

Tax incremental financing is a great tool, but I favor using TIF money for the intended purpose; stop the musical chairs TIF redirections. Let’s retire them and put money back into the general fund when they’ve succeeded.

My opponent’s economic development committee negotiated a deal to move Wausau Chemical from the river to the industrial park, then 30 minutes later, he flipped his vote in the Council meeting to block the very deal he approved in committee. It gave Wausau another black eye for hasty and disingenuous negotiating with a good Wausau employer; taxpayers and Wausau Chemical were made pawns.

I would have voted against spending $95,000 to build an unnecessary foot-bridge over the Stinchfield Creek (dubbed Wausau’s “bridge to nowhere”); instead, I would have used that money to pay for two years of large-item pick-up. More re-use, recycling and less landfill are no-brainer, good-steward decisions.

I would call for a gain-sharing effort for city workers; employee and department actions that save the city money should be rewarded, with a portion of that savings rolled into a performance pay allotment. Instead, my opponent advanced a plan to furlough and freeze city workers’ pay. As a result, morale has suffered and we are losing highly skilled and expensively trained workers. For example, the city had been without a qualified licensed plumbing inspector for months.

I will communicate in a 21st-century fashion. My opponent’s Facebook page lay dormant for the two years between campaigns. I’ve articulated position papers on my website, www.wausaudistrict4.com about transit, large-item pick-up, jobs, crime, the mall and more. I have more content in one spot than you will find in two years online from the incumbent.

See for yourself at dougdiny.com and compare to what you might find buried in committee meeting minutes or through open records requests. I will give you concise reasoning for decisions; I will not pander and play to the sympathies of both sides of the argument. Hard decisions no doubt will need to be made, but you can trust that I will not openly agonize for effect.

My leadership tenets are: vision, direction, candor and stewardship.

Doug Diny is a candidate for Wausau City Council District 4. His website is www.wausaudistrict4.com.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1psoF13