Transcript for Newt Gingrich: 'Hysteria' on Left on Hobby Lobby 'Unbelievable'

Twitter. Work even stopped at the white house today. About 200 white house staffers gathered to watch the game when lo and behold their boss walked in and began to lead them in cheer. I believe that we will win. I believe that we will win. I believe that we can win. Well, he believed in a lot of things that didn't quite work out. Just put that one on the list. Okay, we'll get to soccer in a moment but back with our roundtable, and we want to start with the supreme court and, donna, hobby lobby, a fierce divide in the supreme court this week. Earlier they sided with hobby lobby in a 5-4 decision that says that the company does not have to provide contraception because of their religious beliefs. Later in the week they issued an order providing temporary relief to a nonprofit college that also objected. This provoked the female justice to issue a statement saying "Those who are bound by our decisions usually believe they can take us at our word, not so today." Well, let me tell you, this was a tough week because the supreme court -- And very hard to follow. What does that mean? It is. But the bottom line is, the supreme court basically ruled that bosses can tell women what they can and cannot do with their body. They can control our reproductive health care. This has something to do with religious freedom. It has everything to do with the supreme court now saying corporations are people. Well, corporations have no soul, they're legal entities and now our bosses can tell us what we can and cannot do in order to maintain our own health and reproduction. Something tells me that's not the way you're Reading it. The hysteria on the left about this is unbelievable. First of all, Hillary care 20 years ago had a broader provision, the bill that senator Moynihan introduced for Hillary had a broader provision in favor of corporate right to opt out. Second, the hobby lobby provided 16 out of the 20 contraceptions. The only four they didn't provide are abortifications. They're a fundamental fortification for those who believe life begins at conception. Nobody says they can't use their own money to buy contraceptions. In the case of hobby lobby they're provided 16 of the 20. And they provided all 0 before the affordable care act. Matt dowd, what are the implications here. That's what happens and happened in the last 10 or 15 years is we drop these kind of things in the toxic environment we're in, and then we have two sides that respond basically overstating. Most people that have read this case and read all the briefs surrounding this, this is a very limited case. But we have the left that say it's a war on women. We have the right that says this is a war on religion. And both sides in this case which is very limited, and I agree with the speaker on this, this is not about banning, this is not about banning contraception. This is about saying we as a company don't want to pay for these four. So it's not banning it and each side is overstating the case on this which happens every time we throw these issues in the midst of this environment. Matt Bai, we like to think that the court is above the divisions in the country. Still? But it didn't seem that way. It didn't seemhat way this week. No, I mean, look, the court has always been a political and a social and a cultural institution. I was struck this week by how much, what's happening on the court reflects what's happening in the rest of the society. Because you didn't just see -- it's not just a breakdown of justices on the left and on the right but women. All the women on the court. Now for years we had one woman justice, she was a republican and now you have three women justices all of whom sided against the men on the court. It's to some extent demographic. All three from New York City originally. You have a much more, you know, suburban or other, you know, western or midwestern representation on the rest of the court, so I think, you know, you're seeing the cultural divisions at large in the country play out as you always -- It is a problem because people now take the court decisions and are now viewed in a nonpartisan way. That never used to be the case. We accept or reject what the court says based upon our partisan leanings and that's never happened before. But we don't pick and choose among what services or what health care services men use but do them on women and birth control, contraception -- Who's -- Women's health. Nobody is banning it. Nobody is banning it. The supreme court -- You are saying if I work and I contribute, my health care now has to be basically tailored by my boss. Okay, I'm going to switch this onto a pleasant topic. The affordable care act. No, it says -- Donna, Matt, hang on. Because we're going to talk about the world cup, whether you like it or not. All right. And I know you want to talk about the world cup. Okay, we lost, we lost. But so many Americans watched this game. Will this continue? I mean it was so surprising how many tuned in to this, and it says something about this nation and how it's changing. Well, I think we love -- I think that we love the idea and every time we come around it's like the olympics. We have this. I still have some doubts whether how much this will attach to the American public over time. I think part of the problem is we're used to a different kind of game. We're used to a game where you can have breaks and go to the bathroom and you can have breaks and go get something to eat and there's more activity and there's more conflict on the field, much more conflict even though we saw a lot in the brazil/colombia game. I think it's going to take a while because this is not a sport the American public really tunes in to. I disagree. I love the athletes. All those sweaty -- Oh, yeah, we had all the athlete stories. I enjoyed it. I enjoyed it. Donna is definitely going to keep watching. Keep going. Thanks to all of you.

This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.