Lawsky. | AP Photo/Mike Groll Schneiderman, then Lawsky, seek insurer contraception data

ALBANY—In a sequence of events described by one insurance industry official as a "playground shoving match" between state officials, both Attorney General Eric Schneiderman and Department of Financial Services superintendent Ben Lawsky are seeking information from insurance companies about how their plans cover contraception, after receiving information that some insurers may be improperly charging consumers for birth control.

Under the provisions of the Affordable Care Act, health plans are required to provide full insurance coverage for any birth control methods approved by the Federal Food and Drug Administration, without requiring patients to share in the costs.

Story Continued Below

In a letter sent May 7 this year, Schneiderman said his office had received complaints that “some insurers are violating coverage requirements by improperly imposing cost-sharing for some methods.”

Schneiderman said his office has also received complaints that insurers are attempting to skirt the coverage requirement through "medical management," imposing cost-sharing requirements for non-generic brands of contraceptives, although federal law allows patients to continue receiving brand-name contraception if they are able to demonstrate a medical need.

On Friday, the day after Schneiderman’s office sent a letter to insurers about their contraceptive coverage, the Department of Financial Services also sent a letter to insurers seeking information about the claims they’d received for contraception between January 1, 2014 and March 31, 2015.

In the letter, D.F.S. said a survey the agency had already conducted of insurers, health maintenance organziaions and Prepaid Health Services Plans found that some companies “impose cost-sharing for certain contraceptive drugs and devices, while others indicated that certain contraceptive drugs and devices were not covered.”

Leslie Moran, senior vice president of the New York Health Plan Association, the trade group for New York's insurers, said insurance plans, which have already been approved by both DFS and the state Health Department, already comply with Affordable Care Act requirements, and said she was not aware of any complaints about New York state health plans.

"Medical management is not used to limit or otherwise hamper access to contraceptives. One of the key reasons for applying medical management criteria is for quality assurance and patient safety. For example, a woman seeking hormonal therapy who is a smoker who would be at increased risk for stroke ...medical management could catch that," Moran said.

Schneiderman will introduce legislation on Monday that will require insurance companies in New York to cover all the methods of birth control approved by the Federal Food and Drug Administration, a provision that is already part of the Affordable Care Act, the Daily News reported Sunday.

Read Schneiderman’s letter to insurers here: http://bit.ly/1PB1s2O

Read Lawsky’s letter to insurers here: http://bit.ly/1PB1CY2

Authors: