NORFOLK, Va. (AP) - The images of Granby Street’s long-gone arches of light have found their way onto many a postcard.

The views show the port city’s bustling downtown around the turn of the 20th century; row after row of big, beaming lights, each arch stretching above and across Granby.

Norfolk wants that scenery back.

Problem is, it’s not cheap to re-create the past. So, city leaders are rolling out a less expensive version of the arches.

For about $565,000, you’ll soon see steel cable arches. They won’t look as hefty as those of yesteryear, but city leaders hope they’ll give Granby some new and, at the same time, throwback personality.

Construction began earlier this month; crews are digging holes for the foundation, city spokeswoman Lori Crouch said in an email.

A total of 11 arches, between 300 and 500 feet apart, will run from Brambleton Avenue to Main Street. Six will be completed by March, Deputy City Manager Ron Williams Jr. said. They will be composed of 42-foot stainless steel cables connected to 24-foot poles on either side of Granby. The light bulbs, 40 on each cable, are two and a half inches wide.

The additional tax revenue that downtown property owners agreed to pay in exchange for enhanced services is covering the cost, Crouch said.

The original arches would’ve cost the city millions, Williams told several council members during a committee meeting earlier this month.

“Really, that image was about a $3 million image,” Williams said during the meeting.

The arches first lit up Granby on Sept. 1, 1909, according to a front-page story in The Virginian-Pilot that dubbed them “The Great White Way.”

It stated that Norfolk was “the most brilliantly lighted city in the United States.”

“A more decided tone of metropolitanism hung in the air and the beauty of it all was that everybody was happy and all smiles,” the article read.

By 1924, the lights had become a source of displeasure.

An article in June 1924 stated that the lights, once “the pride of Norfolk … have dropped so in public estimation with the passing years.” Norfolk’s then-City Manager Charles E. Ashburner called them “small town stuff” and reported that they were going to be taken down.

The idea to re-create them started a couple of years ago and resulted from “two parallel visions that collided in a great way,” Williams said.

At the time, Mayor Paul Fraim and then-Councilman Anthony Burfoot advocated for better lighting on Granby Street, Williams said.

Around the same time, a small group of downtown stakeholders seized on the idea of re-creating the historic arches they saw in photos.

One of them was Kevin Murphy, president of the Downtown Norfolk Civic League.

“The historic pictures just look wonderful,” Murphy said.

But he was underwhelmed, he said, by a demonstration of the lights a couple weeks ago. They weren’t as large as Murphy had hoped, and did not have the same dramatic effect.

“Hopefully, the final product will be more impactful,” Murphy said. “Either do it right or don’t do it at all.”

Deborah Thorpe, a board member of the Downtown Norfolk Council, also witnessed the demonstration.

“The concept, I think it’s great,” said Thorpe, assistant director for the Governor’s School for the Arts, which is also on Granby.

“It will look very cool as you’re looking down the street.”

Pilot news researcher Jakon Hays contributed to this report.

___

Information from: The Virginian-Pilot, http://pilotonline.com