Risk Corridor Payments way short of request

With help from Brett Norman, Erin Mershon and Rachana Pradhan

NOT EXACTLY A "BAILOUT" — Insurers have learned just how much money they'll be receiving from the ACA's risk corridors program this year — and it's a whole lot less than they had requested. HHS officials announced last night that the government will pay insurers $362 million from the program for 2014 — or 12 percent of the $2.9 billion they sought. Under the law, the government is required to eventually make the full requested payments. But as Pro’s Paul Demko notes the “huge shortfall raises questions about where the funds for the program will come from and whether some insurers will encounter cash-flow problems.” More from Paul here.

Story Continued Below

ICD-10: SO FAR, SO GOOD — It turns out that the world didn’t end on day one of the ICD-10 transition (which you'll no doubt remember falls on the second anniversary of the HealthCare.gov fiasco.) In fact, according to CMS, ICD-10's start went ok. CMS’s Lauren Shaham told our eHealth team that “CMS and Medicare fee-for-service claims processing systems are reporting business as usual with no reports of unusual activity at this time.” She added that the ICD-10 Coordination Center is continuing “to monitor for any provider issues across the country and will address concerns as they arise.” If you haven’t had a chance to poke around the nearly 70,000 ICD-10 codes, check out Healthcare Dive’s roundup of some of the more amusing entries: http://bit.ly/1r3Z0IV

ANOTHER MASS-SHOOTING, ANOTHER CALL FOR MENTAL HEALTH REFORM —As the news filtered in of the mass shooting at an Oregon community college, Rep. Tim Murphy, who has been pushing for an overhaul to the mental health system since the 2012 massacre at Sandy Hook Elementary School, urged congressional leaders to take up his bill — the Helping Families In Mental Health Crisis Act, which he reintroduced earlier this year. “In moments like this, leaders take action - and there have been far too many moments like this since Newtown. Put up a vote on my bill and we’ll see who is serious about crisis mental health reform,” Murphy told PULSE. … The House Energy and Commerce Committee is expected to consider Murphy’s bill later this year. Meanwhile, the Senate HELP Committee could mark up a similar measure, sponsored by Sens. Chris Murphy and Bill Cassidy this month.

ADVOCATES URGE CONGRESS TO PASS REFORM BILL NOW — Before news of the shooting surfaced, more than 20 advocacy groups wrote E&C Chairman Fred Upton and ranking member Rep. Frank Pallone on Thursday calling for action on Rep. Murphy’s legislation. "The Congress and your Committee regularly act to ensure that Americans with heart disease, cancer or any other medical illness have access to care. The same should be true for those with schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and other serious mental illness,” the groups write. The letter is the latest push from advocates who see this year as the best chance yet to pass reform. The letter here.

… Advocates have been making a big push on the Hill this week — members from the National Council, Mental Health America and National Alliance on Mental Illness, among others met with Upton, Pallone, both Sen. Murphy and Rep. Murphy, and other lawmakers who have been advocating for mental health reform. The groups have a “fly in” day scheduled for Tuesday with advocates from across the country on the Hill pushing for action.

HAPPY FRIDAY MORNING and welcome to PULSE, where we are ready to bunker down and brace for whatever portion of Hurricane Joaquin hits us … and all of the groan-worthy Joaquin Phoenix jokes that come with it. Send tips, scoops and best ways to ride out the storm to behley@politico.com and emershon@politico.com.

"Here comes the story of the Hurricane … "

MEET THE NEWEST MEMBER OF OUR TEAM — Say hello to Nancy Cook, our new senior health care reporter, who joined us this week from the National Journal where she covered economic and fiscal policy for four years. She’s covering the economics, business and of course the politics of health care for us. Be sure to send her tips, scoops and a warm welcome to ncook@politico.com and follow her on Twitter @nancook

ICYMI: CONGRESS OK’s ACA TWEAK TO SMALL GROUP MARKET — The Senate approved legislation Thursday rolling back Obamacare’s expansion of the small group insurance market. The House-approved measure passed on a voice vote and now heads to the president’s desk. Under the ACA, the small group market was slated to expand to businesses with up to 100 employees — compared to the current threshold of 50 workers. Opponents of that provision argued that the change would cause disruption in the market and force mid-sized businesses to seek out new coverage. This bill allows states to decide whether or not to expand the small group market

BIG RATE HIKES FOR MINNESOTA? YOU BETCHA — The state that claimed the lowest Obamacare premiums in the country two years ago is getting slapped with steep rate hikes in 2016. Premium increases for individual plans will range from an average of 14.2 percent to 49 percent, Pro’s Paul Demko reports. Six of the eight plans competing for customers will increase rates by more than 25 percent. That's for plans sold both on and off the state’s Obamacare exchange. Paul’s got more for here.

UTAH’S GOV. HEDGES ON MEDICAID SPECIAL SESSION — Gov. Gary Herbert says he still hopes to call a special session “probably the latter part of October” for the Utah legislature to again consider Medicaid expansion, but he wouldn’t say definitively that he was going to. “That’s what we’ve been pointing towards, and the question will be whether [the legislature] can get it passed,” he said in an interview in Washington on Thursday, two days after lawmakers were briefed on the state’s new expansion plan. The level of support — or lack thereof — may be more apparent next week, when a legislative task force considers the proposal during an Oct. 6 meeting. Opposition is strongest in the Utah House, which earlier this year shot down Herbert’s previous proposal.

** A message from American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network: Palliative care is about treating the patient as well as the disease. It’s a big shift in focus for health care delivery — and it works. Supporting palliative care legislation (H.R. 3119) will help bring quality of life and care together for the millions of families facing cancer. Learn more: http://www.acscan.org/qualityoflife**

100+ LAWMAKERS TO CMS: DON'T CUT COLORECTAL CANCER SCREENING —Nearly 100 members of the House and 27 Senators of both parties wrote to CMS today with concerns about the proposed Medicare reimbursement rates for colorectal cancer screening. CMS earlier this year proposed cuts of 10 to 20 percent for those rates, according to the Digestive Health Physicians Association, which encouraged the letters. Colorectal cancer is a big problem for Medicare beneficiaries especially, the lawmakers write — and while rates are improving thanks to increased prevention and detection efforts, the proposal could "jeopardize recent progress and a budding public health success story." The letters are here: http://bit.ly/1OaTGRb and here:http://bit.ly/1OaTEsp.

GAO: VALUE-BASED PURCHASING HARDER ON SAFETY NETS — A new GAO report confirms what many in the health care world have been saying for a while: safety net hospitals are getting hurt by value-based purchasing programs. They got smaller bonuses or larger penalties than hospitals overall, the report says, although the gap narrowed over time. Small urban hospitals, in contrast, did better than hospitals overall.

— GAO didn't see any noticeable shift in hospital performance on quality measures — but it says that could change as new measures are added and weighted differently. One exception: hospitals did improve on readmissions, which GAO said signals financial penalties might, "under certain circumstances," promote enhanced quality. Hospitals told GAO that the Hospital Value Based Purchasing Program reinforced their ongoing quality improvement efforts, but didn't really change their focus. The most commonly cited barrier to improving quality? Challenges with IT systems. The full report: http://1.usa.gov/1iOY3DU

UNIONS RATIFY DEAL WITH RED CROSS — For the first time ever, eight national unions ratified a collective bargaining agreement with the American Red Cross, our Labor team reports. The three-year national agreement will cover an estimated 4,000 workers, represented by the American Federation of Teachers, the American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees, the Communications Workers of America, the Teamsters, and other unions.

FIRST IN PULSE: CVS GETS A NEW VP OF GOV AFFAIRS — CVS Health has named Melissa Schulman the new senior vice president of government and public affairs. Schulman joins CVS from the Generic Pharmaceutical Association. Before that she was with the Bockorny Group. She also served on Rep. Steny Hoyer’s leadership staff as Executive Director of the House Democratic Caucus, among other roles on the Hill.

NEW GROUP TARGETS ADULT VACCINATION RATES — The Adult Vaccine Access Coalition launched a campaign to boost vaccination rates, which lag far behind rates for children who generally need them in order to attend school. The group includes vaccine makers, public health organizations and health care providers who want to raise awareness that, for instance, less than 40 percent of adults get the flu vaccine and only about 20 percent of adults over 60 get the shingles vaccine. An estimated 50,000 adults die of vaccine-preventable diseases each year, according to the AVAC. Their website: http://bit.ly/1heCknR

FDA IS HIRING — The FDA is looking for a new director for its Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, according to a notice posted on its website. The current director, Karen Midthun, is retiring after working for the agency since 1993.

THIS WEEK'S LYRICS

Monday: The Beatles, “We Can Work It Out”

Tuesday: Sugarcult, “Bouncing Off the Walls”

Wednesday: Beyonce’, “GIRLS”

Thursday: Death Cab for Cute, “The New Year”

Friday: Bob Dylan, "Hurricane"

WHAT WE’RE READING by Sarah Karlin

Hillary Clinton talks opioids at a campaign event in Boston, saying she would require FDA to review the manner in which the drugs are prescribed, the Boston Globe reports. http://bit.ly/1KUlh31

In the Daily Kos, T. R. Reid describes how a focus on more primary care doctors over specialists could be the secret to lowering U.S. health care costs. http://bit.ly/1FK5FT1

Michael Bloomberg and World Health Organization Director General Margaret Chan say the United Nations should press for higher taxes on tobacco in a Washington Post op-ed. http://wapo.st/1WAR800

The Atlantic takes a look at the misery of residency and whether there’s a way to fix the training of new doctors in the U.S. http://theatln.tc/1L8bdHj

When children in foster care turn 18, many don’t realize they can still get health care through Obamacare, NPR reports. http://theatln.tc/1L8bdHj

NOW AVAILABLE: POLITICO PRO EUROPE BRIEF –POLITICO Pro, POLITICO’s premium subscription service, has launched a new product dedicated to making sense of European policy and politics through an American lens. Drawing on POLITICO resources in both Brussels and in DC, POLITICO Pro Europe Brief will track and analyze European policy from taxes to trade to mergers and acquisitions, energy and financial services as well as pull back the curtain on who’s influencing who when it comes to politics and regulatory issues. Contact us to learn more about POLITICO Pro Europe Brief.

** A message from American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network: A serious illness, like cancer, isn’t just a condition to be treated. It changes a person’s life, and the lives of everyone close to them. Palliative care sees the person beyond the cancer treatment. It gives the patient control. It brings trained specialists together with doctors and nurses in a team-based approach to improve quality of life during serious illness, explain treatment options, and manage symptoms like pain, nausea, and fatigue. It’s a big shift in focus for health care delivery — and it works. The evidence is clear that including palliative care with disease-directed treatment improves quality, reduces costs, and may even increase survival. The American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network (ACS CAN) is calling on Members of Congress to support palliative care legislation (H.R. 3119) to help reduce suffering and improve the quality of life of the millions of families facing serious illnesses. To learn more, visit http://www.acscan.org/qualityoflife **

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): Many Medicare drug plans effectively require the use of “preferred” pharmacies that are inconvenient for patients. That means a long trip or higher copays to stick with the pharmacies that patients like. In urban areas, these plans often fail to meet the government’s standard for pharmacy access. In rural areas, “preferred” pharmacies are often 20+ miles away! Support H.R. 793 / S. 1190. This bipartisan legislation is supported by leading consumer advocates and would let patients use any pharmacy willing to accept the “preferred” pharmacy terms and conditions. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacychoice. **