Two heroes — one from Texas — on gay marriage





Photo: William Luther /AP Image 1 of / 2 Caption Close Image 1 of 2 U.S. District Judge Orlando Garcia administers the oath of office in 2007 to Rep. Ciro Rodriguez, D-Texas. Garcia was appointed by President Bill Clinton in U.S. District Judge Orlando Garcia administers the oath of office in 2007 to Rep. Ciro Rodriguez, D-Texas. Garcia was appointed by President Bill Clinton in Photo: William Luther /AP Image 2 of 2 Justice Anthony Kennedy, shown here in 2010 with wife, Mary, is often the swing vote in Supreme Court opinions. He didn’t disappoint in the recent ruling on gay marriage. Justice Anthony Kennedy, shown here in 2010 with wife, Mary, is often the swing vote in Supreme Court opinions. He didn’t disappoint in the recent ruling on gay marriage. Photo: JIM WATSON /AFP / Getty Images Two heroes — one from Texas — on gay marriage 1 / 2 Back to Gallery

There are two heroes among the many who merit mention in this long march to marriage equality for gay Americans. One will always figure prominently in the tellings ahead. The other likely not. But in Texas, he will deserve an honored place there, nonetheless.

As with Justice Anthony Kennedy, he said yes to an expansive, inclusive Constitution rather than the restrictive version preferred by the many around him.

Let’s start with Kennedy

The confirmation hearings in 1987 for Robert Bork gave a strong hint of the partisan and ideological rancor still ahead for this nation. The Senate denied Bork confirmation.

And then came Kennedy.

I was working in Washington, D.C,. at the time, and the Sacramento, California, newspaper I wrote for considered him a hometown boy. Yet I don’t remember much detail from those Kennedy hearings except that after the pugnacious, in-your-face conservatism displayed by Bork, Kennedy’s low-key, reasonable demeanor seemed just the balm for a nation divided on whether it had just been rescued or mugged by the Senate’s rejection of Bork.

The Supreme Court’s recent decision on gay marriage — written by Kennedy in soaring prose and with ironclad legal construct — lays that argument to rest in my humble opinion. Bork died in 2012. But it’s hard to imagine him, or anyone with his views, being the swing vote with liberal colleagues as Kennedy has done when warranted. In Bork, think Antonin Scalia’s combativeness — but scarier.

Yes, the country is divided again, this time on whether the court rescued or mugged the nation, though the folks on the “mugged” side are becoming a distinct minority. It’s getting harder to argue with the quintessentially American concept that equal protection under the law applies to everyone. Even when it comes to marriage.

Kennedy’s place in history is cemented simply because he said the Constitution is for everyone.

Back in 1988, when he was confirmed, Kennedy would have seemed an unlikely candidate to be in such honorable company when it comes to gay rights — not because, in retrospect, his scholarly understanding of the law pointed in a different direction, but because gay rights were not even close to being on the national radar in the way they are today. Back then, survival was a primary issue. This was the time of the AIDS epidemic.

Judges by their natures resist such labels as hero. I’m not asking permission. Kennedy is one. But let me nominate another for that exalted position in Texas. That would be U.S. District Court Judge Orlando Garcia in San Antonio. Last year, he ruled Texas’ ban on gay marriage, embedded in the Texas Constitution in 2005 by voters, unconstitutional.

Yes, he was among more than a few lower court judges in the nation who came to such a conclusion. For forcing the U.S. Supreme Court to decide, they, too, are heroes. Garcia was among them — and he’s ours. Our hero.

Wrap your head around that. A judge in Texas, the state that provided the test case for both Roe vs. Wade and the one that resulted in the high court decriminalizing homosexual acts. Garcia, once a member of the Texas House, ruled that the state was grievously and constitutionally wrong on gay marriage. He placed a stay on his ruling pending appeal to the highly conservative 5th Circuit Court of Appeals, a case that Texas was all set to carry all the way to the Supreme Court, if necessary. The high court’s ruling on June 26 takes all the steam out of that.

One thing to keep in mind here is that federal judges, unlike our state judges, are not elected. Texas Sen. Ted Cruz, whose notions of fairness test and twist the meaning of the word, would like to tinker with that. He proposes a constitutional amendment to allow retention elections for justices. Oh, yes. He wants to be president.

This is a breathtakingly bad idea, tinkering with lifetime appointments for federal judges, too.

Both Kennedy and Garcia demonstrate the wisdom of unelected judges, though I recognize this conclusion does not come easily to those who feel stung by the high court’s ruling on gay marriage. I would just remind them that the same job protection that applies to Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Elena Kagan, Stephen Breyer and Sonia Sotomayor apply to Scalia, Samuel Alito, John Roberts and Clarence Thomas. Political winds are ever shifting.

Whatever their partisan proclivities, we are better served by judges whose jurisprudence can’t be influenced by mob rule, what I think is a fair description of that vote in Texas to ban same-sex marriage. It so clearly departed from any logical understanding of equal protection even then.

Yes, nominations by presidents partisanly elected also denote preferences of nominees when it comes to constitutional interpretation. But as presidents have learned — David Souter and Sandra Day O’Connor, anyone? — nominations don’t always result in slavish adherence to the nominator’s views. If you want that kind of loyalty, get a golden retriever.

President Bill Clinton appointed Garcia. But conservative icon Ronald Reagan nominated Kennedy. Two judges, appointed by presidents of different parties, and on gay marriage, they essentially agreed. This wasn’t partisan on either of their parts. It was about constitutional fairness.

Federal judges who are not hyper-partisan have the luxury of more wiggle room in their legal interpretations. Which is to say they have the luxury of actually interpreting the law, not having to think also of that next election. State judges, I’m sure, will cry foul here. But, sorry, judicial campaigns that feature donations from those who come before the court simply make such complaints less credible, and not just a bit.

“Just who do we think we are?” Chief Justice Roberts asked in his dissent. A legislature? No, appointed federal judges free to reach their own conclusions without fear of removal from office. Roberts, by the way, has also had his swing moments, most recently in his Affordable Care Act ruling.

And I note the electorate’s definition of “judicial activism” swings, too, depending on whether folks adore or detest an opinion. Which is to say that when it comes to court opinions, today’s hero is tomorrow’s goat. And the same will be — and has been — true of Kennedy. Ditto for Garcia. Which is to say that everyone’s past is a mixed bag, but it is how one acts at crunch time that counts most.

Both Kennedy and Garcia rose to an occasion. Perhaps, they considered the judgment of history — and, more important, what the Constitution represents — but not the wrath of the mob. Because they didn’t have to.

Texas elected officials are, unfortunately, some of the folks with torches and pitchforks.

Gov. Greg Abbott and Attorney General Ken Paxton view themselves as standing for the rule of law, but their immediate reaction to a ruling that confers equal rights was to look for the loophole. It appears religion — which, like states’ rights, has been the default position of civil rights deniers before — will be the loophole of those who want to maintain a status quo of inequality on gay marriage.

It won’t work.

History has a way of sorting these things out. Think George Wallace and Lester Maddox in the civil rights era. Abbott and Paxton will not be alone on that list of folks in Texas on the wrong side of history — on the wrong side of equality.

Kennedy no doubt still views himself as a conservative jurist. Properly framed, this has a different meaning than when the adjective is applied to politicians. But any movement — or ideology — that takes so much pride in its static immovability is on borrowed time ultimately.

In any case, Kennedy’s opinion is completely consistent with conservatism, as was Garcia’s. There is no selling out here by the one whom conservatives were claiming as their own. Overweaning government intrusion is a standard conservative complaint. Can government be any more intrusive than when it is telling you that you can love and marry this person but not that one?

The justice who delivered the opinion decriminalizing sodomy in Texas in 2003 — 12 years to the day that he delivered the one on gay marriage — was, by the way, Kennedy. Right then and right in 2015, but he might not have been in a position to write the latest opinion if he were elected.

History, I have no doubt, will be complimentary of both these heroes of the moment — Kennedy and Garcia. That’s because when our grandchildren are no longer children, equality under the law will mean even more than it does now. And conservatives, I am certain, will embrace that.

o.ricardo.pimentel@express-news.net

Twitter: @oricardopimente