WASHINGTON — U.S. Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack on Thursday plans to announce a new round of funding for a program not usually associated with the farm-focused agency: saving the greater sage grouse.

The $211 million initiative, which will run through 2018, builds on years of work the Department of Agriculture already has done to encourage landowners to protect the rare Western bird.

Notably, it continues a process in which the USDA pays ranchers to make improvements on their property to make it more hospitable for the grouse, such as cutting down invasive conifer trees.

“We know what works,” said Vilsack in a phone interview ahead of the rollout in Portland, Ore.

But the announcement has another, subtler purpose too.

By the end of September, officials with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service are expected to decide whether the grouse population is still in trouble.

The looming verdict has prompted a few last-minute volleys in the debate, including from other policymakers. Thursday’s rollout serves as a closing argument that enough has been done to help the grouse and that it no longer needs to be included on a federal watch list.

Asked specifically about the Fish and Wildlife decision, Vilsack was circumspect. “I’m going to stay in my lane,” he said.

But he touted the success of the USDA’s Sage Grouse Initiative as one way to improve the bird’s chances of survival — as well as spare Western landowners from potentially onerous regulations.

“I think it’s had an impact on the bird,” he said. The USDA program is “the best of all worlds: better habitat, better protection and better assurance for producers.”

Since its launch in 2010, the Sage Grouse Initiative has partnered with more than 1,100 ranches across 11 Western states to help conserve an estimated 4.4 million acres of land, according to the agency. It spent nearly $300 million through 2014.

But significant questions remain about the overall health of the grouse, which Fish and Wildlife in 2010 decided was worrisome enough to include on a list of animals that needed protection, but was not in so much danger that the bird needed to leap ahead of other species to get priority.

Agency officials now have two options: keep the grouse on its watch list or make the call that conservation efforts have been sufficient.

What is not on the table, however, is the possibility of listing the bird as threatened or endangered, prompting new regulations on how landowners must deal with it.

Congress expressly forbid Fish and Wildlife from taking either step in legislation it passed last year, although the ban was temporary.

For its part, Fish and Wildlife has recognized the ongoing effort to save the grouse.

“There has been a tremendous amount of conservation done between 2010 and 2015 at the federal, state and private level,” said agency spokesman Theo Stein.

But he said next month’s decision would hinge on the overall status of the grouse and its sagebrush habitat, as well as whether there were adequate regulatory protections for the bird.

“This is an ice-age bird that got run over by the 20th century,” Stein said.

Two studies this year have come to different conclusions on the health of the greater sage grouse.

Last spring, a survey commissioned by the Pew Charitable Trusts found the bird had experienced a 56 percent drop in breeding males in 2013, to 48,641 from 109,990 in 2007.

“Concerted efforts across both public and private land ownerships that are intended to benefit Greater Sage-Grouse show little current evidence of success but more will be required to stabilize these declining populations,” wrote the study’s authors.

But a report this month by the Western Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies, which represents U.S. and Canadian departments from across the region, found the number of male birds had rebounded significantly from a recent low in 2013.

“This latest report shows sage grouse populations are still doing well across much of their range,” Virgil Moore, director of Idaho Fish and Game, said in a statement.

The dueling reports reflect, in some sense, the divisiveness of the issue and the tough decision ahead for Fish and Wildlife officials.

Erik Molvar, with the environmental group WildEarth Guardians, said the uncertainty was one argument in favor of keeping a federal eye on the bird.

It’s the wrong approach to see how little can be done to “protect the sage grouse and get away with it,” he said. Instead, regulators should seek a “balance between human activities and corporate profits and (also) sage grouse survival.”

Mark K. Matthews: 202-662-8907, mmatthews@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mkmatthews