On Wednesday, April 27, at the NJ Adventure Aquarium in Camden, the New Jersey Council on Developmental Disabilities (NJCDD) honored individuals and organizations that have shown leadership in promoting community inclusion for people with developmental disabilities at its eighth annual Community Building Awards Luncheon.



The Community Building Awards are intended to show encouragement, support, and recognition to those who have exhibited an exceptional commitment to promoting community inclusion for people with developmental disabilities in New Jersey. Eight award categories were created to honor the hard work and dedication of these community leaders.



This year, Ellie Byra, a resident of Flemington, was awarded the Council's Elizabeth Boggs Family Member Advocate Award for her outstanding advocacy efforts as a family member of an individual with a developmental disability. The Elizabeth Boggs Award honors a family member who has been instrumental in leading or implementing disability advocacy activities in their community or on the state or federal levels.



Ellie Byra has been an advocate for families of children with disabilities for decades. Though her own son, Matthew, has settled into a successful living situation outside the family home, Ellie is still advocating for all other families.



Her volunteer work began in 1981 when Matthew was attending the Warren County Day Training Center. Ellie became president of their parent association and helped to organize the NJ Day Training Coalition, which helped to increase opportunities for children with disabilities to attend Day Trainings. Later, because of the national movement toward community inclusion for children and adults with disabilities, she saw the opportunity for her son to leave his Day Training Center and attend his local school district.



At a time when classroom inclusion for children with intellectual and developmental disabilities was virtually unheard of in New Jersey, Ellie fought hard to have her son included in general education classrooms. As a result, Matthew was regularly included in classes with his typically developing peers from middle school on through high school and was the first student with developmental disabilities to graduate alongside his fellow classmates.



On a larger scale, She joined family advocates from around the state to lobby for the development and passage of the NJ Family Support Act of 1993 and then went on to work on the issue of inclusive education for all children. Among her many leadership and advocacy roles, she has been a member of the Hunterdon County Planning and Transition Team, Chairperson of the NJ Special Education Advisory Council, and a member of former US Congressman Rush Holt's Education Committee.



Ellie is well known amongst family advocates for her extensive work on the Regional and Statewide Family Support Planning Councils, where she has held leadership positions on both the local and state level. Additionally, Ellie has served on many committees working with The Division of Developmental Disabilities on a variety of issues. Ellie has never been too busy to help individual parents with their problems and has accompanied numerous parents to IEP and IHP meetings.



In addition to serving as a member of the New Jersey Council on Developmental Disabilities since 2007, Ellie serves on both the Board of Directors and the Protection and Advocacy Advisory Council for Disability Rights New Jersey, and the Elizabeth Boggs Center's Consumer Advisory Council. She is also a dedicated member of the NJ Family Support Coalition, where she has been active since its inception.



In addition to honoring nine award recipients, The council was pleased to welcome Allan I. Bergman, President and CEO of High Impact – Mission-Based Consulting and Training as this year's keynote speaker.



Bergman is an accomplished executive in non-profit community agencies and associations, and an internationally recognized thought leader in influencing the development of federal and state policy reflecting "best practice" community supports and services for persons with disabilities and their families. Allan is also a national expert in Medicaid policy and practice in primary care and long-term services and supports for children and adults with disabilities and their families, and has extensive knowledge of the Affordable Care Act.



Each year, the NJCDD looks to the public to help us identify visionary public policy makers, inclusive media outlets, diligent advocates, and devoted educators from all across our state. The Council believes such individuals or organizations should be commended and given the acknowledgment they deserve.



The Recipients of the 2016 Community Building Awards were: Colleen Frasier Self Advocate Award – Evelyn Ramundo (Manville); Elizabeth Boggs Family Member Advocate Award – Ellie Byra (Flemington); Lifetime Achievement Award – Joseph Amoroso, Director, NJ Division of Disability Services; Distinguished DD Systems Change Award – Karen Weidner, Program Director, Camden County DisABILITIES and Special Needs Program; Access Above and Beyond Award – Joseph Nasto, Board President, Build Jake's Place (Pennsauken); Joseph Colalillo, President, ShopRite of Hunterdon County (Flemington);

Exceptional Policymaker Award – NJ State Assemblywoman Pamela R. Lampitt (D-06);

Inclusive Education Award – Donna Gelegonya, Morristown High School (Morristown);

Multi-Media Award – John Mooney, Founding Editor & CEO, NJSpotlight.com (Montclair)



The NJCDD is a federally mandated organization that advocates for persons with developmental disabilities and their families in New Jersey on issues that affect their ability to live, work, and learn as included and valued members of our communities. Additionally, the council provides programs and resources that empower such individuals to advocate on their own behalf.



For more information about the NJCDD, as well as the Council's Community Building Awards, visit www.njcdd.org.

This item was submitted byThe NJ Council on Developmental Disabilities.