With the prospective 2016 election coming up this fall, Ohio University’s Athens campus has been abuzz with political support, particularly for the college favorite candidate, Bernie Sanders. As the primaries wrap up, however, we students who chose to “feel the burn” may need to apply some ice and reconsider our options.

Bernie Sanders couldn’t beat out his opponent, Hillary Clinton, and we Sanders supporters are left to make a decision: does Hillary deserve my vote? As a left-leaning citizen myself, Bernie was definitely my top choice, but now it’s time to look at the big picture: Sanders is down for the count, and some of his strongest supporters are considering a Trump vote.

Using information from InsiderGov.com, here are five reasons why Bernie supporters should rally behind the presumptive Democratic nominee, Hillary Clinton.

1.) She supports same-sex marriage. Donald Trump is against the recently legalized right of same-sex marriage, something Hillary Clinton strongly agrees with. Not only has Trump openly hated on gay people (as well as disabled people, women and ethnic minorities), but he doesn’t believe they deserve a right given by none other than the Supreme Court. We Bernie supporters know that basic human rights are of the utmost importance; Trump does not seem to agree.

2.) She supports women’s rights to choose. Though the false claim that Clinton supporters late-term abortion has been circulating in the media, Clinton has voiced her opinion on abortion: it will remain legal with federal regulation. (These regulations also debunk the myth of late-term abortion). Sanders may have been more lenient with the idea of regulation, but Trump? Trump wants to deny another Supreme Court decision that women deserve their own right to privacy. Clinton’s solid proposal on federal regulation holds more precedent (and consistency) than Trump’s wavering policy.

3.) She disagrees with stricter punishment on crime. Clinton and Sanders both agree that stricter punishment serves no purpose in reducing crime rates. On the other hand, Trump provokes — and even encourages — violence among his supporters and protesters. Since he declared his presidential campaign, the most racist, sexist, and violent voters came out of the woodwork to cause commotion. Trump’s promotion of violence accompanied by his policy of stricter punishment is not only contradicting, but goes against basic Bernie ideals.

4.) She wants to help immigrants gain citizenship. It’s no secret our country has millions of illegal immigrants (11 million, according to the Pew Research Center); and it’s also no secret that the immigration process is long, difficult, and slanted against them. Anyone in favor of Bernie Sanders knows he is in favor of easier access to citizenship for immigrants. Trump is entirely against improving citizenship access. In fact, he would rather build a wall with American tax dollars than create a reasonable plan for the process. Clinton, however, is on Bernie’s side.

5.) She wants to expand and improve social programs. Trump is a businessman. (The details on whether or not he is successful or self-made are still unclear). He has grown up wealthy and knows no other way of life. Clinton is not new to a life of wealth, but understands the value of social programs. She wants to expand and improve the Affordable Care Act, reform welfare, and go against privatized Social Security, all points of interest for Sanders as well. Trump has made clear notions he is against both reform and expansion of any social welfare programs, especially that of the Affordable Care Act.

The 2016 Presidential Election has already proven to be the most non-conventional and controversial, with Trump throwing political scientists off kilter every time he opens his mouth. With someone as inconsistent and temperamental as the presumptive Republican nominee, the Democratic Party must remain stronger than ever. A fierce Democratic leader to take the White House and stop Trump from entering political office is exactly what we need to survive this election and finish with the best possible outcome. If Bernie can’t be our guy, it’s time Hillary became our girl.