The prospect of a contested Republican National Convention in Cleveland brings a debate over rules and concerns over protests. Meanwhile, the Senate race sniping between the Rob Portman and Ted Strickland camps is heating up. Read more in Ohio Politics Roundup.

Rules were made to be broken: Get ready to hear more about Rule 40 – Rule 40(b), to be precise – as we prepare for a possible contested Republican National Convention in Cleveland.

The rule, added in 2012 as a means to prevent Ron Paul's name from being placed in nomination, essentially requires a nominee to have the support of a majority of delegates from at least eight states. (You can read it here, beginning on page 44 of the document.)

In other words, this would block Texas Sen. Ted Cruz and Ohio Gov. John Kasich from denying front-runner Donald Trump the nomination. And it might have put an end to speculation about unity candidates – think House Speaker Paul Ryan – who never entered primaries.

"However," writes the Washington Examiner's David M. Drucker, "Rule 40(b) only applied to the 2012 Republican convention in Tampa, Fla., that nominated former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney. Party officials and knowledgeable sources have confirmed over the past few days that Rule 40(b) doesn't exist for the purposes of the upcoming convention."

This could be good news for Kasich. The governor will struggle to win eight states over the remaining caucuses and primaries. His best hope – as he and his aides have acknowledged – is breaking through a deadlocked convention on the strength of his electability argument.

He forgot the sarcasm font: "I'm 'shocked' that some campaigns are trying to mislead on this," Kasich communications director Mike Schrimpf tweeted Monday. "More underhanded tactics."

Schrimpf is talking about Cruz, who emphasized the rule over the weekend.

About Kasich's electability argument: "At this stage ... Kasich is the Republican who does best against [Democratic front-runner Hillary] Clinton, edging her out by four points," according to a new CBS News/New York Times poll. Forty-seven percent of voters nationwide are excited or optimistic about a Kasich presidency – the highest of any candidate."

A new CNN/ORC poll also shows Kasich beating Clinton in a general election. But he's far behind Trump and Cruz in the GOP horserace. And 70 percent of Republican and Republican-leaning voters, when told Kasich cannot win enough delegates in the caucuses and primaries to clinch the nomination before the convention, believe Kasich should drop out of the race.

Kasich at AIPAC: cleveland.com's Sabrina Eaton has a recap from the pro-Israel lobbying group's conference Monday in Washington, where Kasich and his rivals spoke.

Trump stands by 'riot' remark: Donald Trump said Monday that he doesn't want riots at the Republican National Convention this summer in Cleveland. But the GOP presidential front-runner, in an interview televised by CNN, declined to make a strong statement urging his supporters against violence if he does not emerge as the party's nominee. My story.

Prepping for protests: "Demonstrations sparked by the Black Lives Matter movement are informing local activists' plans for the upcoming Republican National Convention in Cleveland, according to public talks on Saturday attended by dozens of legal workers – and potential protesters," cleveland.com's Andrew J. Tobias reports. "Speakers at a Saturday conference, organized by the local chapter of the left-leaning National Lawyers Guild, also invoked the political unrest and activism of the 1960s – and the efforts by the federal government at the time to undermine the movement through surveillance and undercover infiltration."

As the Bern turns: "Bernie Sanders hasn't lost the Democratic nomination yet," cleveland.com's Jeremy Pelzer writes. "But he will unless there's a major shift in the race, political experts say. ... 'He needs Clinton to get indicted, let's be blunt here,' said Kyle Kondik, managing editor of Sabato's Crystal Ball blog at the University of Virginia."

Supreme Court fight hangs over Rob Portman's re-election run: "A coalition of liberal groups staged rallies around the country on Monday targeting Republican senators who oppose confirmation hearings for President Barack Obama's Supreme Court nominee Merrick Garland," the Associated Press' Julie Carr Smyth and Alan Fram report. "More than 50 of the events – with the theme 'Do Your Job!' – were scheduled. Some 25 to 30 people turned out in Ohio, where Sen. Rob Portman has stood firm with other Republicans in arguing that the next president should fill the court vacancy after American voters weigh in this November."

Portman faces Democratic former Gov. Ted Strickland in the fall.

Judicial Crisis Network has Portman's back: The group, as part of a $2 million advertising push nationwide, is cheering the Republican incumbent's opposition to an election-year appointment. The Ohio ad will air on radio and online. See the 30-second spot here.

More Senate race sniping: Senate Majority PAC, a Democratic group, launches a $640,000 television ad campaign against Portman in Ohio today. The 30-second spot blasts Portman over his past support for international trade deals. You can watch the ad here.

Meanwhile, the Portman campaign is going the social media route today with a Snapchat geofilter targeting Cincinnati-area users as Vice President Joe Biden raises money for Strickland at a nearby hotel. The ad deems Strickland a "rubber stamp" for Democratic foreign policy.

Weak tea: "Tea Party leaders and social conservatives recruited dozens to run against current members of the [Ohio Republican Party's] 66-member governing body, seeking to monopolize on the anti-establishment feelings among Republicans nationwide," the Cincinnati Enquirer's Jessie Balmert reports. "They were angry at Kasich for supporting nationwide Common Core education standards and expanding Medicaid to lower-income Ohioans.

"But last week, Kasich won Ohio's presidential primary over front-runner Donald Trump and Sen. Ted Cruz, and the move to reshape the state central committee ended in a draw."

In one small moral victory, Westerville Tea Party leader Jim Burgess ousted close Kasich adviser Doug Preisse, who chairs the Franklin County Republican Party.

Mike DeWine weeds out another medical marijuana push: The Ohio attorney general on Monday rejected a legalization proposal from Grassroots Ohio, cleveland.com's Jackie Borchardt writes. This is the third medical marijuana ballot issue DeWine has sent back. He found at least two defects with the proposed 'Medicinal Cannabis and Industrial Hemp Amendment' and summary language that will appear on petitions."

Legislature soon could weigh in on medical marijuana: State Sen. Kenny Yuko, a Cleveland-area Democrat, "plans to introduce a bill in the next few weeks based on medical marijuana laws in 23 other states and the District of Columbia," Borchardt reports. "People with specified medical conditions, including seizure disorders and post-traumatic stress disorder, could buy and consume marijuana if approved by a doctor who has a history of treating the patient."

From the Dispatch to Dave Yost: The Republican state auditor, who is weighing a run for attorney general in 2018, has hired former Columbus Dispatch editor Ben Marrison as his communications director, the Dispatch's Alan Johnson reports. Yost is also a former newspaperman. He wrote for the now-defunct Columbus Citizen-Journal.

Marrison replaces Carrie Bartunek, who becomes a senior policy adviser for Yost.

Portman has a new talker, too: Emily Benavides, an Ohio native who worked on Jeb Bush's presidential campaign, joins his office as press secretary, the Dispatch's Jack Torry writes. Benavides replaces Christyn Lansing, who left for a communications job with Politico.

It all comes down to Cuyahoga County ... "Cuyahoga County Board of Elections Director Pat McDonald wants to speed up the process of counting votes during the Nov. 8 election," cleveland.com's Karen Farkas reports. "He has proposed having pairs of 'civic-minded' county residents pick up poll books, ballots and memory sticks at voting locations after polls close and bring them downtown to be counted. That would eliminate drop-off locations – which made the county among the last in Ohio to provide final results in the March 15 primary."

Get Battleground Briefing, our FREE politics newsletter, delivered to your inbox: Sign up here. Tips or links? Send here. Follow along on Twitter: @HenryJGomez.