Cardin, the ranking member of the Foreign Relations Committee, objected to Rubio's request to bring up his amendment, saying he and Committee Chairman Bob Corker (R-Tenn.) are looking for an "orderly way" to bring up amendments.

"We have two pending amendments," he said. "We are trying to work through, Senator Corker and I, many amendments that we can clear that members have brought forward. ... We need to make sure we have an orderly way to consider these amendments and vote on these amendments."

ADVERTISEMENT Rubio's amendment would require President Obama be able to certify that Iran has publicly supported Israel's right to exist as a Jewish state. It's unlikely the president would be able to make that certification.

Cardin called Rubio's amendment a "poison pill" and noted that if it passed, it would be "virtually impossible" for negotiators to reach a final deal.

"The unintended consequences of this amendment would make it virtually impossible to have that agreement completed. So, yes, we can get into a debate on the specifics of your amendment," he said. "I'm more than happy to do that. But we have an orderly process here, and there are a lot of amendments that have been filed."

Rubio said he was happy to work within that process, but he wants a vote on his amendments.

"I didn't think coming to the floor and try to get my amendment pending somehow unravels this orderly process, but I'm more than happy to work within the orderly process as long as I can get a vote on my amendment," he said. "Whatever that process entails. I'd be happy to have it explained to me."

Rubio's amendment, if brought up, would be a tough for vote for Democrats, forcing them to choose between looking soft on Israel and potentially losing White House support of the legislation.

The Florida Republican said he thinks his amendment is relevant to the debate on Iran's nuclear program.

"If you disagree with me, stand up and say you disagree and you vote no. If you agree with the amendment but you're going to vote against it because you think it unravels this agreement put in place, say that," he said. "If you don't want to vote on things, don't run for the Senate."

But, Rubio added, "don't tell me we can't have votes on these things."

Sen. David Vitter (R-La.) echoed Rubio's frustration, saying that while he backs an "orderly process," he didn't believe that was currently happening.

"I'm all for a productive, orderly process," he said. "But I want it to be productive, to be inclusive and to get going."