U.S. Congress, Texas District 19

What would be your priorities; what do expect to be the top issues?

JODEY ARRINGTON: Unquestionably, the most important issue facing our nation is strengthening national security, securing our borders and protecting our nation. Under the Obama administration, our nation's military has been terribly weakened, our border has been overrun, our enemies no longer fear us, and our allies don't trust us. We need a new resolve in Congress to bring back Reagan's "peace through strength" philosophy that won the Cold War. National security starts with true border security where we enforce all of our immigration laws, use the military to help control who is coming into America, and empower our intelligence and armed services to do their jobs and protect Americans by eliminating threats before Americans are harmed. The next most important issue to address is reining in the federal government, which includes reducing spending and our national debt, cutting taxes and regulations, reforming welfare programs, and returning to the principles of our Constitution.

GLEN ROBERTSON: My priorities are national security, immigration reform, securing the border, restoring solvency to the Social Security fund, repeal and replace Obamacare with a free market based system, simplify the tax code with an emphasis on rewarding savings and investments, reduce the debt, shrink the size of the federal government by ceding more power back to the states, sunsetting numerous administrative agencies, reform welfare and entitlement programs to stop the growing abuse and dependency on government, encourage small business growth, and strict adherence to the Constitution. District 19 priorities are protecting agriculture and energy producers by addressing bad trade polices, bad tax policies and overregulation, addressing rural health care issues, emphasis on transportation, and addressing critical cross-state water issues.

For years, the public's view of Congress has been extremely low. How would you distinguish yourself from "the crowd?"

ARRINGTON: I'm running for office to be the voice of the 19th Congressional District because our nation is at a tipping point where future generations, my children and children across our area will be handed a country that is in worse shape than our generation inherited. The best way to distinguish our District is by sending conservative leaders to Washington who don't just talk and make empty promises, but who have a record of achieving results and solving problems. Whether it was my time serving in the George W. Bush Administration, as Vice Chancellor at Texas Tech, or as President of Scott Laboratories Inc., I have a record of cutting spending, reducing regulations, shrinking bureaucracy and creating growth and opportunity for our hardworking families. We need people in Washington who have the leadership experience to get government out of the way so Americans and their families are empowered to prosper.

ROBERTSON: The biggest problems with Congress are career politicians and special interest groups. I fully support term limits for all of Congress and believe that members should have to go back home after serving and live under the very laws they created. We need to address the "dark money" in campaigns, understanding that anonymous donors contributing mass sums of money to a candidate expect a return on investment. If a candidate is willing to sell out to special interest groups during an election, we can be sure they will continue to be "for sale" once in office. Super PACs formed to handpick a successor will only result in more Congressional puppets that must answer to their masters. We need to force our elected officials to participate in the same failed programs they force on us; Social Security and Obamacare are prime examples. Congressmen should not receive a lifetime annuity after serving only six years.

What would you expect to accomplish as a first-term member of Congress?

ARRINGTON: If elected, I will be a strong advocate for industries important to our region's economy. I will work tirelessly to: promote the importance of our agriculture sector, expand American energy development, strengthen our institutions of higher education, repeal Obamacare, and support Dyess AFB and our veteran community so we can protect America and care for our men and women in uniform. I am a proven leader in the public and private sectors and a lifelong conservative who will fight for the families and businesses of West Texas. My mission will be to tackle the tough issues like border and national security, reining in the federal government, ensuring we have long-term food and energy security, and returning America back to the Constitution and "We the People." West Texans deserve a congressman who will deliver conservative solutions to strengthen our nation's security, spur economic growth and restore our freedoms.

ROBERTSON: The first accomplishment I would strive for would be to earn the reputation of being the hardest working person on Capitol Hill. My goal the first year would be to earn the respect of my fellow legislators, by never lying to or blindsiding anyone. I will stand firm on my convictions and core values, but work to build relationships with other legislators that have opposite views. It is only after strong relationships are formed that a legislator can be effective in securing support and votes. I would immediately place myself on a path to achieve leadership roles on the committees that impact our district the most. If elected in May, I will immediately go to work building a strong team and developing relationships with other legislators.

What is keeping members of Congress from working together in a more productive, amicable fashion?

ARRINGTON: Both sides of the aisle have been guilty of putting politics and self-interest ahead of our country's best interest. However, in 2009, after his election, Barack Obama told Republican leaders that elections have consequences and "we won." Then House Speaker Nancy Pelosi famously stated about the impending Obamacare bill, "We have to pass the bill before you can see what is in it." These raw political acts have poisoned the well in Washington and created a culture of partisanship. Therefore, we need a new generation of conservative leaders with new ideas and a strong resolve to implement those ideas that are important to our families and small businesses. Congress needs to stop focusing on scoring points against each other and instead rededicate its focus on strengthening our nation. Congress needs to put our country's interest first and solve the problems that will severely hamstring the next generation of Americans.

ROBERTSON: Two of the biggest struggles that Congress faces is bitter partisan politics and politicians that put the party over the people. The burning desire to have a long and profitable political career overrides the basic responsibility of a congressman to represent the people of his district. We must start electing individuals that are not beholding to special interest groups, are not seeking a new career or retirement package, but rather are going to Congress to try to make a difference within their district. Only when we get special interests out of Congress can we achieve good results. We can no longer afford to send men and women to D.C. that are either bought and paid for, or are simply going to Washington to pad their own pockets. We need representatives that have the necessary skills to cross partisan lines and effectively communicate and negotiate with all members of Congress.

What expertise would you take to Washington on behalf of the 19th District?

ARRINGTON: I have deep roots in West Texas and agriculture. I grew up in a farming community where my dad sold tractors for 40 years. I have broad leadership, public service and business experience. I spent 10 years serving alongside President George W. Bush helping him assemble his leadership team in agriculture and energy. As Chief of Staff at the FDIC, I successfully applied my conservative principles by cutting tens of millions of dollars in federal spending, reducing regulations and shrinking bureaucracy. Later, as Vice Chancellor at Texas Tech University, I led entrepreneurial initiatives to attract private sector investment for new technologies and startup companies in agriculture, energy and health care. Today, I am President of a health care company that uses technology to provide access to health care for rural communities in West Texas and lower costs by monitoring chronically ill patients from their homes. I am currently serving on an energy-related board.

ROBERTSON: I bring 38 years of small business experience combined with 25 years of public service. I have built and grown four successful businesses and currently employ over 70 employees. I have negotiated with Fortune 500 companies for 27 years, providing multistate logistic services to the largest agriculture chemical manufacturers in the world. I have served on two school boards, the Garza County Tax Appraisal Board, Mayor Pro-Tem of Ransom Canyon, the Lubbock Zoning Board of Adjustment, the Electric Utility Board of Lubbock, and I am currently serving in my second term as the Mayor of the city of Lubbock. I have made very tough decisions at the public level and have a proven track record of lowering debt and voting against tax increases. I have learned the skill of bringing people together, building coalitions and achieving positive results. I have stood against special interest groups, corruption and wasteful government spending.

What are the differences and the similarities from east end to west end in the district? Is there a perception that Lubbock dominates the district due to population; if so, how does that change?

ARRINGTON: First, having met with people across the District, the biggest similarity is that people are fed up with Washington! They feel the tyranny of a big, oppressive federal government that is not working for "We the People." They are tired of being overtaxed and over-regulated while Washington politicians play by a different set of rules. Secondly, I believe the District is unified around conservative values, Constitutional-minded principles and advancing our key economic drivers such as agriculture, energy, higher education and health care. The most notable uniqueness of the eastern part of the District is Dyess Air Force Base, which is important to both our regional economy and national defense. I believe most people in the District understand that both Abilene and Lubbock as well as the surrounding rural communities have a significant economic impact on each other. We must work together to keep West Texas and the Big Country strong and prosperous!

ROBERTSON: District 19 is heavily dependent on agriculture, energy, military, health careand small businesses. We are all concerned about water, national security, health care, job growth and our children's future. I believe the entire district has more in common than differences. We share the same values; hard work ethic, strong faith in God, fiercely independent and the willingness to help our neighbors. More than half of our district is outside of the two largest cities, Abilene and Lubbock. We must find a way to put the perception to rest that this is a battle between these two cities. It is time to heal the old wounds created by the "Texas Eleven" that led to the effort to redraw the district, pitting Charlie Stenholm against Randy Neugebauer. I believe that in order to change this perception, we must elect a native West Texan that has spent his entire life living, working, raising a family in this great area. Someone that understands the value that every community and every citizen brings to the District.