A Democratic candidate for Kansas Insurance Commissioner has emerged, while a Johnson County commissioner has added his name to an increasingly crowded GOP field for the same position.

Dennis Anderson intends to run in November for the position to be vacated when Sandy Praeger, a Republican who isn’t seeking re-election, finishes her term at the end of the year.

According to his campaign website, Anderson, a Democrat from Overland Park, started an insurance education business with his parents and sisters in 1979. The business focuses on training insurance providers for licensing exams and to meet continuing education requirements.

"Providing education about insurance regulations, policies and practices became a successful family business," the website says.

Anderson raised about $50,000 in 2013, most of it in the month of December.

Anderson has a clear path to the general election right now, and his opponent in that race could be any one of almost a half-dozen Republican options.

John Toplikar, a former House member who now serves as county commissioner for Johnson County's 6th District, added his name to that list last weekend.

In his campaign announcement, Toplikar pointed to his experience as an elected representative who worked on insurance laws.

"It has been an honor to represent over 150,000 Kansans during my time as an Olathe city councilman, a state representative, and a county commissioner," Toplikar wrote. “While elected 10 years as a Kansas legislator (four of those years having served on the House leadership team as Majority Caucus Chairman) I had the opportunity and experience of reviewing the insurance business in Kansas, and the Kansas Insurance Department operations and budget, including laws regarding regulating and reviewing companies, educating consumers, assisting consumers, and licensing agents, and over the years, passing reforms and updates to Kansas insurance law.”

To reach the general election, Toplikar would have to prevail in a primary field that also includes David Powell, an El Dorado insurance broker whom Praeger defeated in 2010; Beverly Gossage, a health insurance consultant from Eudora; Clark Shultz, an insurance agent and state representative from McPherson; and Ken Selzer, an accountant from Leawood.

Aaron Jack, former Kansas Securities Commissioner, has dropped out of the race.

All have voiced strong opposition to President Barack Obama's health care reforms, after Praeger enraged conservatives by supporting them.

Toplikar left no doubt about his feelings on the law in his campaign announcement.

"Obamacare is a clear and present danger to our health care, our liberty, and our economy," Toplikar wrote. "We’ve got to stop it. It is an inherently flawed program. Just like an uninhabitable or unsafe house is condemned and demolished for protection of the public there is no 'fixing' Obamacare. You stop it, you end it, and you repeal it."

Bob Beatty, a political science professor at Washburn University, said the Kansas Insurance Commissioner doesn’t have authority to repeal the federal health care law, but the office does interact with the law passed by Congress through provisions like the state-based health care marketplaces.

He said the Republican candidates may be attempting to burnish their conservative credentials in anticipation of high primary turnout with Milton Wolf attempting a right flank challenge of longtime U.S. Sen. Pat Roberts, R-Kan.

"The potential is there for a very conservative electorate in the primary," Beatty said. "So what we may see in the insurance commission (race) is a fight over who can be most vitriolic against Obamacare.”