FORT COLLINS — The irony may have evoked a chuckle from Colorado State athletic director Jack Graham if he hadn’t viewed the perception as off base.

On Dec. 1, Graham will reach his two-year anniversary as CSU’s leader of athletics. During his reign, Graham has been viewed as something of a dreamer, most notably because of his push to get an on-campus football stadium built.

Graham’s predecessor with the Rams, longtime college administrator Paul Kowalczyk, had developed the reputation as a bean-counting realist.

Graham, a quarterback for CSU during the early 1970s, is quick to point out that he spent 35 years in the private sector, where he formed, operated and, yes, capitalized businesses in the field of international insurance.

“The way I would characterize myself as a business leader is, I do have a vision,” Graham said in an interview with The Denver Post. “Throughout my career, I have always thought big.”

Thinking big in college athletics, and specifically at Colorado State, means having a top-25 football team, going to the NCAA Tournament in men’s and women’s basketball, “and doing what our women’s volleyball team does: win,” Graham said.

“There’s no reason why that can’t happen in a place like Fort Collins, one of the nicest places in the world to live, and with Colorado State being such a great university,” he added. “For us to limit the scope of our success, I think, is ridiculous.”

Immediately after his hiring by his alma mater, Graham announced that he would drive an initiative to replace the now 45-year-old Hughes Stadium, which is located 4½ miles west of the university proper. The proposed 40,000-seat, on-campus facility carries a price tag of $227 million.

The first big fundraising goal, $100 million, must be reached by October 2014 in order to be able to host games beginning in 2016.

CSU president Tony Frank said recently that the project’s initial fundraising goal is about at the one-third mark.

Graham said “great progress” is being made and the number of potential donors with relationships to the CSU athletic department has been increased from a small number when he arrived to almost 1,000.

“And people are giving, there is no question they’re giving,” Graham said. “It’s not a linear type of effort, where the progress is linear. It’s like a hockey stick, where the momentum really takes off. I think we’re at the point where it really starts to take off. But there is a lot of work to be done.”

Graham believes an on-campus stadium would benefit the entire university as a vehicle for alumni “to re-engage,” allowing for, say, the business school or veterinary school to have functions for current, former and prospective students during football weekends. And, of course, it would also benefit recruiting by all CSU teams.

CSU is averaging fewer than 20,000 fans per home football game this season, and just 15,234 showed up for the Nov. 9 home game against Nevada despite beautiful fall weather. But Graham believes low attendance at Hughes Stadium has “no correlation” to what would occur with the new facility. An on-campus stadium will, in itself, help boost attendance, he said.

“It may not be the biggest venue,” Graham said, “but people are going to come and have a fun time and see the great traditions at Colorado State. That attracts great coaches. It attracts great student-athletes. When you have those, the product goes through the roof.”

Even during his days in the business world, Graham said he has functioned by the mantra that three things matter most: people, capital and culture. His first order of business was to work on the people aspect. Graham has hired eight coaches. And he “pretty much flipped” the leadership team of the athletic department with more than half a dozen hires in upper management.

CSU is becoming more competitive. The football team is in contention for its first bowl game in five years. The women’s basketball team is competitive again. The women’s volleyball team is ranked No. 10 in the nation.

As for the capital required to take Colorado State to new heights, Graham reverts to his business sense. His department has a $32 million budget this fiscal year. He believes CSU can do everything it needs by getting that budget up another $18 million or so.

“We need about $50 million (annually) of revenue and budgetary dollars to enable us to compete at any level,” Graham said. “Let’s have great traditions and highly functional facilities and the resources to enable our coaches to recruit effectively and to travel effectively.

“Do you really need $70 million or $90 million to run a successful athletics program? My answer to that is no, you don’t.”

“But you have to have a plan,” he added. “We do have a plan. It’s people, capital and culture. We’ve got the people. We’ve got the culture. And we’re working to raise the operating capital so that we can run this thing the way we want.”

Tom Kensler: tkensler@denverpost.com or twitter.com/tomkensler