Credit: WABC

The Latest on two NYPD officers shot in a confrontation early Saturday with a gunman who crashed his car into a police vehicle, according to police (all times local):

1 p.m.

Authorities say one of two New York City police officers shot in a confrontation with a gunman is the son of another officer who also survived a gunshot to his bulletproof vest.

Police say Officers William Reddin and Paul Yurkiw are in stable condition and expected to recover. Police say they were shot early Saturday as officers engaged the suspect, who had crashed his car into a police vehicle in Brooklyn after pointing a gun at officers.

Police say suspect Jamal Funes is in critical condition with multiple gunshot wounds. No phone number for his family can immediately be found. It's unclear whether he has a lawyer who can comment.

Yurkiw was shot in his bulletproof vest -- 27 years after a vest saved his father, Officer Paul Yurkiw.

Reddin was shot in the hip.

9:30 a.m.

Officials say two New York City Police officers have been injured in a shootout with a suspect who crashed his car into a police vehicle.

NYPD Commissioner William Bratton says the officers were hurt in a confrontation in Brooklyn just before 3:30 a.m. Saturday. One officer was struck in his bulletproof vest and suffered blunt force trauma. The other was shot in the hip. Both are in stable condition and expected to make a full recovery.

Officials say the suspect, Jamal Funes, was shot multiple times. He was in critical condition.

Officers had heard gunfire and as they approached Funes, he pointed a revolver and fled. Officials say Funes rammed his vehicle into a patrol car. Officers opened fire, striking Funes several times. A .357 revolver was found in the front seat of his car.

8:30 a.m.

Officials say two New York City Police Department officers have been injured in a shootout with a suspect who crashed his car into a police vehicle.

NYPD Commissioner William Bratton says the officers were hurt in a confrontation in Brooklyn just before 3:30 a.m. Saturday. He says one officer was struck in his bulletproof vest and suffered blunt force trauma, and the other was shot below his vest, in the right hip. The officers are in stable condition at Kings County Hospital and expected to make a full recovery.

Officials say the suspect, 34-year-old Jamal Funes, was shot multiple times. He was taken to Brookdale Hospital. There was no word on his condition.

Officials say officers had heard gunfire and as they approached the suspect, he pointed a revolver and fled. The suspect, traveling the wrong way on a street, rammed his vehicle into a patrol car. Officers opened fire, striking Funes several times. A .357 revolver, containing five spent shell casings, was found in the front seat of his car.

8 a.m.

City officials say two New York City Police Department officers have been wounded in a shootout with a suspect who crashed his car into a police vehicle.

NYPD Commissioner William Bratton says the officers were shot in a confrontation in Brooklyn just before 3:30 a.m. Saturday. He says one officer was struck in his bulletproof vest and suffered blunt force trauma, and the other officer was shot below his vest, in the right hip. The officers are in stable condition at Kings County Hospital and expected to make a full recovery.

Officials say the suspect, 34-year-old James Funes, was shot multiple times. He was taken to Brookdale Hospital. There was no word on his condition.

6:15 a.m.

Authorities say two New York City Police Department officers and another man have been shot in Brooklyn.

A spokesman for the NYPD says the officers were shot just before 3:30 a.m. Saturday and transported to Kings County Hospital. The officers' injuries were not believed to be life-threatening. No other information was released.

Officials said the other shooting victim was transported to Brookdale Hospital. There was no word on his condition.

Police did not immediately release details about the shooting.