Lyons artist Ruth Wilson in her studio with Willy Wonka, her bichon. The painter's East Coast eyes have responded to Mountain West vistas. ( Lewis Geyer / Staff Photographer )

Ruth Wilson made her presence known in her adopted hometown of Lyons pretty soon after she arrived in 2013. An artist, she made the painting that Planet Bluegrass used on posters and printed material for its 2014 Folks Festival.

She was one of the residents who was forced out of town by floodwaters but came back to her home as soon as she could, even before running water and gas was restored. She'd been a Lyons resident less than half a year when the flood hit.

Ruth Wilson Age: As old as my tongue and a little older than my teeth. Occupation: Painter Years in the St. Vrain Valley: 1 ½

"I just needed to settle down," she said. "I was tired of drifting around."

She grew up in Montreal, where at 18 she met the young William Shatner, whom she dated and who once, to her puzzlement, took her to an adult entertainment club in New York City (the two remain friends and last saw each in 2012). She worked in the fashion field as a model, consultant and coordinator in Florida, California and New York. Her twin sister, Ann-Marie Haley, was a model, too.

"It was a very glamorous time," she said.

For many years she lived in New Jersey, where she pursued a painting career and was an art instructor. Her husband, James, died in 2010. Her son, who lives with his family in the Boulder County town of Ward, said something to her that she took to heart — he told his mother in New Jersey, "You can stay here and grow old or you can come west with us and stay forever young."

She came west. At first she lived in Ward, but then she bought her home in Lyons. A burst pipe flooded the place in the middle of a renovation project before she moved in, according to her neighbor, Dan Ballard. He's the one who noticed the accident. He walked into the home after water had flowed into it for perhaps more than a month, he said. It was winter and the water had frozen.

"It was like going into a cave," he said, adding, "Ruth bought a home that was flooded before the flood."

Things are back to normal these days, Wilson said, and she has settled into her a Colorado lifestyle. She's effusive about her new community.

"It's just loaded with artists and music," she said. "Something creative is happening here all the time. It's an exciting town to belong to."

Her East Coast eyes have responded to the Mountain West vistas, as comes through her recent work, especially landscapes. Her paintings have appeared on cover of the The Mountain Pages, the phone directory for the Peak to Peak region.

"This is the most glorious place to paint," she said.

She likes to paint scenes from the Brainard Lake area and up and down local canyons. Her typical method is to make a small sketch in the field and complete a painting in her home studio. The final product doesn't always resemble the scene she saw.

"I change the coloring according to what I think it should be," she said.

Wilson was a member of the New Jersey Watercolor Society and other artist associations in the East, and her work is part of several corporate and private collections, including that of a doctor who commissioned a series of paintings on the subject of his chateau in France.

She has exhibited her work in several local venues, and it's currently displayed at Red Canyon Art Company on Main Street in Lyons. She also offers cards and prints of her work. If she has a complaint about the local scene, it's that she'd like to see more places for art to be exhibited and more awareness of local artists.

Wilson's creative talents extend to her voice. She sings in the choir at Lyons Community Church, where she's known to be accompanied by Willy Wonka, her bichon, she said.

"He loves the music and he never makes a sound," she said.

Wilson thinks she's in Lyons to stay.

"I love Lyons," she said. "It has everything to offer."

Quentin Young: quentin@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/qpyoungnews