Joseph Heselton, Jr. was arrested on complaints of possession of child pornography and is now out on $20,000 dollar bond.

A local attorney is in trouble with the law tonight, arrested for possession of child pornography.

Joseph Heselton, Jr. practices out of an office on Northwest Expressway, but it was just across the parking lot where police officers said they found him, after hours, in a hotel room with a naked teenager, sex toys and camera equipment.

"I can't believe that he was involved in something like that," said Patsy Acers. "I knew he was an attorney."

Acers lives across the street from Heselton, Jr. and said she's long been suspicious of her neighbor.

"I felt something, because everyone else is so friendly and, really, he is very withdrawn," Acers said.

No one at Heselton's home would comment on his arrest for child pornography, but neighbors said they've speculated he was involved in some sort of illegal activity.

"We have not really spoken in years because of it," Acers added.

2/25/2014 Related Story: Nicoma Park Man Arrested On Child Pornography Charges

Even with her suspicions, Acers was shocked to learn that police officers found Heselton in a hotel room with a naked 17-year-old girl early Saturday morning. Officers also discovered a tripod, camera and several sex toys in the room. He is accused of videotaping the teenager performing sex acts.

"There was another 17-year-old female found in the parking lot, and [she] admitted to have sex with Heselton the night before," Oklahoma City Police Captain Dexter Nelson said.

According to court papers, both teenagers admitted they had sex with Heselton, and that the act was videotaped. They claim it happened several times, often at Heselton's home in Edmond. The teenagers also told officers that Heselton was well aware of their age.

Heselton was not at his law office today to answer questions about the allegations.

He was not at home either, and Acers and others neighbors said that's fine with them. They don't want that type of activity in their neighborhood.

"The neighborhood kind of stops right there across the street when it starts with his house," Acers said.

Heselton was arrested on complaints of possession of child pornography and is now out on $20,000 dollar bond.