PLYMOUTH is the 82nd most deprived community in the country, according to new figures.

Research published by the Department for Communities and Local Government identified many communities suffering as a result of the affordable homes crisis and poor services.

Plymouth (82nd) and Torbay (46th) were revealed as the most deprived districts across the whole of the South West.

But Exeter was well outside the top 150 out of 326 locals councils (165th), and East Devon was the least deprived area in the South West (246th).

The report reveals that coastal towns and mining sectors are among the most likely places to be categorised as a deprived.

Plymouth was named among the ten areas of the country where deprivation figures had increased the most.

Leader of Devon County Council, John Hart said: "Devon's beauty can often mask the fact there is real deprivation in our county.

"Unlike urban areas where deprivation can be concentrated in specific pockets, in Devon deprivation is often spread out across our sparsely populated rural communities as well as in our cities and towns.

"That means it is more difficult to provide services to the people who need them but who cannot access help in far off centres of population.

"Low wages are also a major problem, particularly when set against our high property prices.

"One of our key aims is to boost wages by attracting higher-paying jobs.

"Our devolution bid to the Government identifies our desire for more powers to help our young people and families remain in the places where they grew up in decent, affordable homes.

"Affordable housing is a key issue for Devon."

"We have a higher than average level of self-employment in Devon and we want to do all we can to aid our entrepreneurs whose companies will be the employers of tomorrow.

"We will continue to press the Government to help us improve our transport infrastructure so that communications between our businesses and key markets in the South East, the Midlands and the North are swifter and more resilient."

The English Indices of Deprivation 2015 measures levels of deprivation in 32,844 small areas or neighbourhoods across England. The results have presented by breaking the country down into 326 local authority areas, or 39 Local Enterprise Partnerships.

The investigation combined the results from seven different categories -– income, employment, education skills and training, health deprivation and disability, crime, barriers to housing and services, and living environment – to produce the Index of Multiple Deprivation.

The results for the Local Enterprise Partnerships showed the Westcountry is relatively less deprived compared to other areas of the country.

The national ranking of Westcountry local authorities (out of 326 councils) (1=Most deprived)