LARGO — Florida Sen. Marco Rubio, who campaigned throughout the Tampa Bay region Saturday, said this election cycle seems more like a volatile online comments section of a blog than a race for president of the United States.

The Republican presidential candidate began his day with a rally in Largo as part of a push for support as Florida’s primary election looms Tuesday. Businessman Donald Trump is leading in polls of the state’s voters.

“Our politics have become Twitter trolls,” Rubio said. “Acting the same way, the outrageous comments people make on Twitter and about life in general. That’s now bled into our politics.”

If Trump becomes the nominee, the Republican party will fracture, Rubio said. Political movements based on anger, he said, historically have been “dangerous and disastrous.”

“The job of a true leader is not to stoke people’s anger,” Rubio said.

Many of Trump’s supporters like the candidate because he says what is on his mind, Rubio said, but that isn’t a good attribute for a president.

“There is an appeal to that; people find it appealing and refreshing that a political candidate says whatever’s on their mind,” he said. “President’s cannot say whatever’s on their mind.”

Rubio condemned protests that broke out at a Trump rally in Chicago on Friday night, which led to the event’s cancellation. He said the GOP frontrunner is not doing enough to control the campaign’s tone and aggressive words coming from his supporters at such events, and instead is capitalizing on people’s anger for his political gain.

“Leaders cannot say whatever they want, because words have consequences,” he said.

In a push to win Florida, the Rubio campaign planned stops in Largo, Hudson, Tampa, Lakeland and Pensacola on Saturday. Rubio stopped by Oxford Exchange on West Kennedy Boulevard for a meet-and-greet Saturday afternoon, and encouraged his supporters to get as many people as possible out to the polls Tuesday.

He didn’t give a formal speech during the roughly half-hour stop, instead posing for photographs with attendees and signing autographs inside the packed coffee house.

Rubio told the hundreds of people who came to his morning rally at Beckwith Electric in Largo that the viability of his candidacy always was going to come down to Florida. The state awards 99 delegates in the winner-takes-all contest on Tuesday.

“That’s how high the stakes are,” Rubio said. “That’s why I need your help in this election.”

As president, Rubio said, he will work for every American — even those who don’t support him in the election. He joked with the crowd about one attendee who was wearing a Florida State University shirt. As a University of Florida alumnus, Rubio said, he wasn’t going to ask the man to leave — only to turn his shirt inside-out.

Beckwith Electric gained notoriety when owner Tom Beckwith, a devout Southern Baptist, fought against the Affordable Care Act provision requiring employer-sponsored health-care plans to cover costs of contraceptives. Beckwith was granted an exception to the mandate in 2013.

Before the rally Rubio told members of the media he plans to support the eventual Republican nominee — even if it’s Trump — but that doing so gets harder every day.

kmitchell@tampatrib.com

Twitter: @Kristenreports