The Republic | azcentral.com Sun Nov 3, 2013 12:25 AM

Carol Sedges has been without health insurance for about two years, so she pays $150 out of pocket each month for nine medications to treat a variety of ailments, including diabetes and thyroid disease.

She’s eager to find a health plan through the Affordable Care Act’s online marketplace, but she walked away from Flagstaff’s North Country HealthCare on a recent morning with a paper application and an appointment to come back in a few weeks.

By then, she hopes, the glitch-ridden healthcare.gov enrollment website, which launched Oct. 1, will be functional.

“I’m so sorry,” Bria Sherinian told her. Sherinian is one of the center’s health-benefits advocates trained to help people enroll. “I have absolutely no idea when this is going to work.”

Sherinian has yet to enroll anyone in health insurance through the federal marketplace despite more than a month of trying.

The frustration that has characterized the first weeks of enrollment is more pronounced in and around Arizona’s smaller towns and communities, like Ash Fork, Bullhead City or Flagstaff, where the need for coverage is acute.

Rural Americans are more likely to be uninsured and have higher rates of chronic disease, disability and mortality than people in urban areas. They have more difficulty finding health-care services, and they often travel much farther for specialty and emergency care.

Rural Arizonans are more likely to be self-employed or in low-wage or seasonal jobs that make it harder to take time off. Many travel 50 miles or more for appointments with health-insurance counselors, only to make another appointment because the website isn’t working.

Health experts say, however, that people who may seem off the grid by city standards already are familiar with the Affordable Care Act, and most are eager to learn more.

Rural health officials, some aided by federal grants, are spreading the word through direct mail, door-to-door canvassing and health fairs, setting up tables at local hospitals and community events, visiting Head Start classrooms and enlisting libraries to help people without Internet access learn more about the health-care law.

They’ve encountered pushback, but by and large, outreach and enrollment workers say, people in rural communities are excited about getting health insurance and regular access to health care.

Counselors such as Sherinian have full appointment schedules from now until the end of the year in community health clinics around the state. Since enrollment began, North Country’s 14 clinics, which cover northern Arizona from Bullhead City to Round Valley, have reached out to 8,000 patients by mail, enrolled nearly 100 people in the state’s Medicaid program and set up 350 appointments. About 40 workers have been trained to help people navigate the online application process.

The law requires nearly every American to have health insurance next year or pay a penalty. The penalty in 2014 is the greater of $95 or 1 percent of income. By 2015, the fee increases to $695, or 2.5 percent of income.

Rural Arizonans are more likely to qualify for Medicaid under Arizona’s expanded eligibility for the low-income health-insurance program, another provision of the Affordable Care Act. Thousands of people have enrolled in the Arizona Health Care Cost Containment System in the past month, and the agency’s new Health-e-Arizona Plus website has been operating almost glitch-free.

Kathy Trammel, who coordinates North County’s health-benefits advocates, travels throughout northwestern Arizona trying to get more people insured. Like Sherinian, she has yet to complete a single healthcare.gov application, and she knows the needs are great.

“That’s why we’re here, to help our communities,” Trammel said. “And it is frustrating when we can’t help them.”

More barriers

Although roughly three-fourths of the state’s 1 million uninsured live in metropolitan Phoenix and Tucson, rural Arizona is proportionally poorer, older and sicker, experts say, with access to a fraction of the medical specialists and other health-care providers in urban areas.

National studies show that difficulty accessing health-care providers and facilities can lead to poorer health outcomes, increasing stress and reducing the likelihood that patients will keep follow-up appointments. Rural residents are less likely to be enrolled in Medicaid, even if they’re eligible, or have employer-provided health coverage or prescription drug benefits.

Former state Sen. Amanda Aguirre has been working on Arizona rural and border health issues for decades. Aguirre, CEO of the San Luis Walk-in Clinic and president of Yuma’s Regional Center for Border Health, began outreach over the summer to some of the state’s most medically underserved areas in anticipation of Medicaid expansion, which takes effect Jan. 1.

“We see a lot of chronic illnesses. They’re more advanced because people have had minimal access to health care for quite some time,” Aguirre said. “They come to us when they’re really, really sick.”

People try home remedies, travel to Mexico to get cheaper prescription drugs and other treatments, or wait in the hope that their illness will resolve itself. When none of that works, Aguirre said, they come to the clinic.

“They don’t have insurance. They don’t have the money. They don’t know what to do,” she said.

Unlike the marketplace enrollment, which ends March 31, Medicaid has rolling enrollment. That means anyone who is eligible, with individual income below about $15,000 and higher income levels for families, pregnant women and children, can enroll at any time.

Aguirre’s staff has been signing up 40 to 50 people a week for Medicaid over the past month.

Fear of deportation also presents barriers to health care. In Yuma and elsewhere, parents who are undocumented — and who are ineligible for Medicaid coverage — may delay care for their U.S.-born children or not seek health insurance for them because the parents are afraid of being taken away from their families.

Federal programs already provide health insurance to poor and low-income children. Among its many provisions, the Affordable Care Act expands eligibility for children ages 6 to 18, which is expected to add 29,000 kids to the state’s rolls by 2015.

“We want to make sure that children are completely immunized and they have access to good health care,” Aguirre said.

Parents also can get treated through the clinic on a sliding-fee scale.

Clinic outreach

Community health centers and clinics play a key role in getting people enrolled in Medicaid and trying to get them insurance through the marketplace.

Arizona health-care and non-profit groups have received $4.4 million for outreach, education and health-care “navigators,” or guides, to help people enroll. The resources are being used roughly in proportion to the population, health officials say, with rural Arizona getting a fraction of the paid staff.

Aguirre and other rural health agencies use U.S. census data to target medically isolated and low-income areas. Trained workers and student interns, who are familiar with the area and some of the families, canvass neighborhoods and isolated housing settlements to educate people about health-care options and encourage them to visit the clinics.

In some tightly knit rural towns, health-care advocates enlist prominent community members to talk up the Affordable Care Act and the local health centers. But what works in one town doesn’t always work in another. “We’ve realized that we have to take it clinic by clinic,” Sherinian said.

Health clinics are spread throughout Arizona, but transportation remains a challenge in rural areas, where there is no mass transit and weather and road conditions can make travel difficult.

North Country has two clinics along Interstate 40 between Kingman and Flagstaff, but depending on where they live, people can still have a long trip to Ash Fork or Seligman. Outreach and enrollment workers, already frustrated by the website failures, have the added worry that some people may not be willing to make the trip again.

“The more rural you are, the harder it is to get into town,” Sherinian said. “When you’re trying to help an impoverished community, (the website problems) are just creating more barriers. And that’s what we don’t want.”

People also can be harder to find. Much of Arizona’s wide-open spaces don’t lend themselves to door-to-door canvassing. Public libraries will be key links, with computer access, workshops and counselors available to help.

Pushback on law

Some of Arizona’s smallest communities are among its most politically conservative. Outreach workers have faced pushback from residents angry about what they perceive as a government takeover of health care.

The workers say they avoid shouting matches and try to educate people about the law.

“Everybody that I’ve talked to so far has heard about it,” Trammel said. “They might not agree with it, but they’ve heard of it.

“One woman flat out told me they could arrest her, but she was not investing in Obamacare,” Trammel said. “But overall, people want insurance. They want to see a provider.”

Health insurance help

While the marketplace website, healthcare.gov, is having problems, here are other ways to find help getting signed up for health insurance:

Go to localhelp.healthcare.gov and enter your city or ZIP code to find local organizations with staff trained to help you compare options under the Affordable Care Act and enroll.

To apply for Medicaid, go to healthearizonaplus.gov or call 855-432-7587 during business hours.

Even if you’re not ready to apply, healthcare.gov has lots of FAQs and other information about plans available in your area. Or call 800-318-2596 to speak with someone 24/7.

Reach the reporter at maryk.reinhart@arizonarepublic.com.