Betty Jean (Noblin) Gobbell, beloved wife, mother, grandmother and great-grandmother died Monday, Jan. 6, 2014 in Columbia, Tennessee.

Betty was born in Manila, Arkansas on November 10, 1934 to William Henry Hugh and Lillian Elizabeth (Kerr) Noblin. She was 79. Betty married Bruce Gobbell in 1953 and began her full time role as a minister’s wife. During the 61 years Bruce served as minister, Betty was by his side. She retired in 1996 from Muscogee County School District where she worked for 15 years as a cafeteria cashier. She was considered to be “one of the most gracious and sweetest people you will ever meet” by all that knew her. She will be greatly missed by her family and friends.

Betty was predeceased by her husband, Bruce Willard. She is survived by four children: Debra (Johnny) Steele of Columbia, TN, Bruce Wayne Gobbell (Debra Fincher) of Columbus, GA, Laura Beth (Steve) Keehn, of Columbus, GA, and William Bradly (Stephanie) Gobbell of Cataula, GA. She is survived by eleven grandchildren: Jonathan Steele, Jessica (Todd) Baker, Maranda (Jarod) Price, Drew (Lexi) Keehn, Jennifer (John) Tabler, Ben Steele, Steven (Maria) Keehn, Nichole Gobbell, Beth Keehn, Kelsey Gobbell, and Natalie Gobbell. She was also blessed with eight great-grandchildren: Haley, Hunter, Landon, Jason, Tyler, Mackenzie, Alayna, and Leah. Betty was proud of each of her grandchildren and great-grandchildren.

Betty is survived by one brother: Don H. (Gracie) Noblin, one sister-in-law: Frances Noblin, and one brother-in-law: Hubert Burkhalter as well as many cousins, nieces and nephews.

The family would like to thank Olivia Whiteside and Hospice Compassus for the kindness shown to us. A special thanks to Rita and Michelle for your gentleness in helping care for our Mom.

A memorial service will be held to celebrate her life at the Cataula church of Christ in Cataula, GA on January 18 at 1:00 p.m. with Jerry Noblin officiating. Oakes &Nichols Funeral Directors are assisting the family with arrangements.