Election Day: 3 days to go (Photo: USA TODAY)

This weekend will be anything but relaxing for candidates in tight races. There are just three days left to make a final pitch to undecided voters and to encourage supporters to turn up Tuesday.

Here's the election buzz for Saturday.

Obama message targets women

With many in his party facing tough races, President Obama is appealing to a group that has been critical to his electoral success: women. Obama carried 55% of the female vote in his 2012 re-election bid against Mitt Romney and 56% in 2008 when he defeated John McCain.

President Obama campaigns with Rhode Island Democratic gubernatorial candidate Gina Raimondo on Friday in Providence, R.I. (Photo: Evan Vucci, AP)

During a swing through Rhode Island Friday, the president talked up issues like paid family leave, day care and equal pay, saying: "When women do well, everybody does well."

Mobilizing female voters will likely be critical for Democrats locked in tight races.

Ernst to pull an all-nighter

Republican Joni Ernst is leaving nothing to chance in the battleground Senate contest in Iowa. She announced that she's embarking on a 24-hour blitz that will run until Tuesday morning to wrap up her campaign. Ernst is facing Rep. Bruce Braley in the race to succeed Democratic Sen. Tom Harkin.

Joni Ernst, Republican candidate for Senate in Iowa, waves to supporters on Oct. 30 in Ames, Iowa. (Photo: Steve Pope, Getty Images)

Our Catalina Camia notes that Ernst's campaign finale is hardly a first — or the longest. President Obama finished 2012 with a 72-hour marathon, while Bob Dole wrapped up his unsuccessful 1996 presidential campaign with a 96-hour tour across the country.

Oh what a tangled voting web we weave

Here's another wrinkle for Election Day: Several recent court decisions have changed voting regulations in key states, modifying laws ranging from the length of early voting periods to measures on showing ID at the polls.

Voters at the polls Nov. 6, 2012, in Columbus, Ohio. (Photo: Jay LaPrete, Getty Images)

Republicans have pushed voter ID laws and measures limiting early voting, with Republican National Committee Chairman Reince Priebus in 2011 calling the former "common sense, widely supported" policies against fraud. Meanwhile, Democrats are relying on boosting turnout and have expressed concern about confusion at the polls and voters being turned away on Election Day.

Weiland vs. Reid

Rick Weiland isn't running against Harry Reid in South Dakota's Senate race, but you'd be hard-pressed to tell. Weiland, a Democrat, has started a national petition to encourage another Democratic senator, such as Massachusetts Sen. Elizabeth Warren, to challenge Reid for party leader.

Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev. (Photo: J. Scott Applewhite, AP)

Weiland's beef is likely based on the fact that he wasn't Reid's preferred choice in the open-seat Senate race. After the race briefly appeared to become competitive, Republican Mike Rounds is pulling away from Weiland and independent Larry Pressler, according to recent polls.

It doesn't sound as if Weiland is going to call a truce with Reid anytime soon. "This is a fight I intend to continue no matter how long it takes," he said.

Saturday surrogate highlights

President Obama is in Michigan on Saturday to stump for Rep. Gary Peters, the Democratic candidate in the state's open Senate race, and Mark Schauer, the party's candidate for governor. Meanwhile, first lady Michelle Obama will be in Illinois to boost Democrats, including Gov. Pat Quinn who's in a tight race.

On the GOP side, Florida Sen. Marco Rubio, a potential 2016 contender, will stay in his home state and lend support to Gov. Rick Scott. Texas Sen. Ted Cruz, another possible 2016 candidate, heads to Alaska to boost Dan Sullivan, who's trying to unseat Democratic Sen. Mark Begich, according to The Washington Post.

Hanging chads

The 2014 election could bring about several milestones. Here are a look at five.

USA TODAY politics editor Paul Singer brings you the top 3 politics headlines of the week.

If you haven't signed up for election night Yo! Senate alerts, what are you waiting on? Subscribe to YOGOP and YODEMS on the Yo! app: justyo.co/YOGOP and justyo.co/YODEMS.

Jenny Sanford appears in a video targeting a South Carolina candidate named Mark — no, not that one.

Elsewhere on the trail

Mark your calendars: The first Republican presidential debate has been scheduled.

For those of you already gearing up for recounts, Roll Call has a helpful state-by-state guide.

Is Iowa the key in the battle for the Senate? The Hill examines.

The New York Times looks at how the Affordable Care Act isn't a dominant issue in the campaign for Republicans like it once was.

Follow @coopallen on Twitter

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1tKUvoE