An excerpt from POLITICO's interview with Ann Romney. Ann Romney: 'We made the right decision' to skip 2016 race In an interview with POLITICO, Romney also said Jeb Bush and his backers played no role in her husband's decision.

Don't expect Mitt Romney to rescue a fractious Republican Party.

The former Massachusetts governor and 2012 GOP presidential nominee has no regrets about skipping a third run for the White House, even after witnessing the chaotic turns that have landed outsiders Donald Trump and Ben Carson atop the GOP field, his wife, Ann Romney, said Monday in an interview at POLITICO headquarters.

Story Continued Below

"We thought about it for 20 seconds, put our toe in and then quickly withdrew," she said. "It was really — it just didn’t feel right."

"People say, ‘well the Bush people pushed you out,’ and all that," she said, referring to suggestions that former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush's backers elbowed Romney out of the race in January of this year. "It’s just not true. I mean, if anything, that would’ve made us fight harder. That’s just not true. We together just came to the conclusion that it just wasn’t — the timing wasn’t right."

Romney flatly rejected the notion that they have any regrets about not running in this unpredictable cycle. "We made the right decision," she said.

Romney was in Washington to promote her new book, "In this Together," a memoir about her two decades living with multiple sclerosis and how she coped with the disease. Among other revelations, Romney admits in the book that her husband's embrace of a near-universal health care law in Massachusetts helped sink his 2012 presidential campaign. But in the interview, she also described her struggle with MS as part of the inspiration for the law, which in turn inspired the framework of President Barack Obama's health law.

"My illness had a lot to do with Mitt making health care available to all of Massachusetts. I think it was a piece of his heart that was important to him," she said in the interview. "I feel like my life had some impact on health care and availability for all."

Romney adds that the fight over Obamacare shouldn't overlook the importance of preserving health coverage for people with preexisting conditions.

"People like me would never be able to get health care coverage if that were the case," she said, adding that even if the health law is changed, "that's the really good piece we need to preserve."

Among the more revealing passages in the book was the revelation that her mother nearly went through with an abortion when she was pregnant with Ann.

"It was just one of those sort of shocking moments in my life – kind of 'What?!' I mean — how close it was for me to not even to be here," she said. "I think it does flavor how you think about how precious life is and how we should look at it. Of course, you know, I am pro-life. Maybe that had a lot to do with it. I don’t know. But that’s just sort of where my heart is. But I also understand that women have very difficult choices to make in life, and I just thought when sharing that story that this is just one consideration that they should consider when they have to make those difficult choices."

Romney said she and her husband never talked about the episode in the context of their views on abortion. Her husband, until 2005, described himself as pro-choice, a stance that helped him win the governorship of deeply Democratic Massachusetts in 2002, and he later said his anti-abortion views strengthened over time.

The bulk of Romney's book focuses on her daily struggle with MS — from the constant fatigue she feels to her coping mechanisms during grueling gubernatorial and presidential campaigns. She praises the virtues of holistic medicine — as a complement to, not a substitute for, Western medicine — and delves deeply into her dependence on horseback riding and dressage as a therapy for the pains she felt as a result of her disease.

Full interview: Ann Romney on new book 'In This Together' POLITICO's full interview with Ann Romney.

She noted that shrinking public funding of disease research — some of it a casualty of Washington funding fights that have left discretionary spending on the chopping block — has left it to philanthropic donors to fund early research to make breakthroughs.

"Heart and lung and cancer [researchers] have kind of had their day," she said, describing scientific breakthroughs that have helped make dramatic improvements in patients' outlook.