The U.S. and the European Union on Sunday immediately rejected the results of Crimea’s referendum, saying the international community should respond with concrete measures against Russia for its actions in Ukraine.

Officials in Washington and Brussels released statements just after voting ended in the troubled peninsula on the Black Sea. Exit polls reported by Russian news outlets said 93% of voters supported moving the region’s allegiance to Moscow from Kiev.

The U.S. and the E.U. reiterated their position that the referendum violates both Ukraine’s constitution and international principles, and they attacked Russia for its military intervention.

The U.S. statement called on the international community to “take concrete steps to impose costs,” while the European statement said officials in Brussels would meet Monday to “decide on additional measures.”

Officials have paved the way for targeted, individual sanctions against Russians who played a role in the military intervention in Ukraine and related events this year.

Here are the full statements.

Statement by the White House Press Secretary Jay Carney on Ukraine:

The United States has steadfastly supported the independence, sovereignty, and territorial integrity of Ukraine since it declared its independence in 1991, and we reject the “referendum” that took place today in the Crimean region of Ukraine. This referendum is contrary to Ukraine’s constitution, and the international community will not recognize the results of a poll administered under threats of violence and intimidation from a Russian military intervention that violates international law.

No decisions should be made about the future of Ukraine without the Ukrainian government. Moreover, this vote was not necessary. The Ukrainian government has made clear its willingness to discuss increased autonomy for Crimea, and the presidential elections planned for May 25 provide a legitimate opportunity for all Ukrainians to make their voices heard on the future of their country.

In addition, Ukraine, the United States, the EU, the OSCE, the U.N., and others have called for Russia to allow international monitors into the Crimean peninsula to ensure that the rights of ethnic Russians in Ukraine are being upheld. Russia has spurned those calls as well as outreach from the Ukrainian government and instead has escalated its military intervention into Crimea and initiated threatening military exercises on Ukraine’s eastern border.

Russia’s actions are dangerous and destabilizing. The U.N. Security Council recognized this in a vote yesterday that only Russia opposed. As the United States and our allies have made clear, military intervention and violation of international law will bring increasing costs for Russia–not only due to measures imposed by the United States and our allies but also as a direct result of Russia’s own destabilizing actions.

In this century, we are long past the days when the international community will stand quietly by while one country forcibly seizes the territory of another. We call on all members of the international community to continue to condemn such actions, to take concrete steps to impose costs, and to stand together in support of the Ukrainian people and Ukraine’s territorial integrity and sovereignty.

Joint statement by President of the European Council Herman Van Rompuy and President of the European Commission José Manuel Barroso on Crimea:

Brussels, 16 March 2014 – As stated by all 28 EU Heads of State or Government on 6 March 2014, the European Union considers the holding of the referendum on the future status of the territory of Ukraine as contrary to the Ukrainian Constitution and international law. The referendum is illegal and illegitimate and its outcome will not be recognised.

The solution to the crisis in Ukraine must be based on the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, in the framework of the Ukrainian Constitution as well as the strict adherence to international standards. Only working together through diplomatic processes, including direct discussions between the Governments of Ukraine and Russia, can we find a solution to the crisis. The European Union has a special responsibility for peace, stability and prosperity on the European continent and will continue pursuing these objectives using all available channels.

We reiterate the strong condemnation of the unprovoked violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and call on Russia to withdraw its armed forces to their precrisis numbers and the areas of their permanent stationing, in accordance with relevant agreements.

In advancing these goals, the Ministers of Foreign Affairs will evaluate the situation tomorrow in Brussels and decide on additional measures in line with the declaration of the Heads of State and Government of the EU of 6 March.