After a last-minute extension, midnight Tuesday is the deadline to sign up for health care if you want coverage starting Jan. 1 under the terms of Obamacare. (At least for now it is. These deadline things seem to be written in sand.) Key to making the whole program work is getting healthy people in their 20s, a.k.a. the “Young Invincibles,” to sign up.

Yes, The Young Invincibles sounds like a bad boy band. Just move along.

So a couple of days ago, in an attempt to goose Young Invincibles to sign up, Organizing for America (a.k.a. the former Obama campaign arm) tweeted this to its followers:

Response was swift and brutal. And for the past several days, there has been no shortage of abuse raining down on the so-called Pajama Boy — most of which, predictably, came from the same conservative folks who aren’t big fans of Obamacare. Haters created an entire backstory for PJ Boy, like Rich Lowry, who said, “Pajama Boy is about as threatening as Michael Cera and so nerdy he could guest-host on an unwatched MSNBC show.”

There’s a whole ‘nother discussion about PJB’s “metrosexuality,” etc., which we’re not touching because it’s irrelevant … because, you know, he’s an image in an ad.

What is relevant is this: It is TERRIBLE ADVERTISING.

That’s coming from San Francisco ad exec Jeff Goodby, the man behind the “Got Milk” campaign. He’s an Obama fan — he wrote a song with his partner Rich Silverstein in support of him last year — and wants the program to succeed.

But the PJ Boy image doesn’t work, Goodby told me.

“I don’t think it works because there’s nothing in it for you. There’s nothing in it for the person to respond to except that you should get on with your day and don’t forget to apply for your healthcare,” he said. “They have to make an incentive for people to sign up early — they have to make it worth their while. And right now, no one is doing it and it’s dead in the water. It’s a real problem for the program.”

And at this point, the clock is ticking to make Obamacare work and get young people signed up. And they’re not. As Goodby said, they don’t even know what it is.

The new health care system is “like the Higgs boson — the God particle,” Goodby said. “Everybody has heard of it but nobody knows what the hell it is.

“Someone has to take more aggressive action,” he said. “It’s not just a matter of making a cool and funny ad — which I would love to help with — it’s a matter of having a reason to do it. They have to feel that it’s going to benefit you in some way. I don’t think the program has been properly explained to everyone in any age. But especially to people with the attention spans of nanoseconds.”

Goodby said using the image of a guy in his pajamas to connect with young people “is the most disingenuous part, I think.

“There’s a problem in advertising in general — show the target audience in the ad instead of actually understanding the target audience and saying something that would be meaningful to them,” he said. “In this case, you show them in a way that’s a little bit cynical. As in, ‘Hey, these guys are all slackers.’ It’s not a very becoming way to talk about them.”

As for the use of the much-mocked onesie: “He looks like a guy who doesn’t have his act together,” Goodby said. “We want people to sign up for health care who do have their act together and this guy doesn’t look like he does. It’s not a compliment.”

Earlier this year, Obama reached out to Silicon Valley techies to help repair the health law website. Maybe it’s time he reached out to a San Francisco ad exec to help repair its outreach.

“I would be happy to do that, if asked,” Goodby said.