Much has been made in these pages, virtual and otherwise, about NorthPark Center’s 50th, which officially kicks off today with a “Fifty Years of Excellence” daylong wingding featuring a celeb DJ, fashion shows, a retrospective art exhibit, free cake (!) and other classy distractions perfect for the day before the day before it’s back to school. But I’ve seen nothing in our coverage about the mall’s most landmark moment: its appearance in the one and only film ever directed by David Byrne, the head Talking Head.

NorthPark is actually one of two local malls in True Stories, which was released in 1986 and set during the Texas Sesquicentennial (in a place called “Virgil, Texas”); the other was Big Town in Mesquite, razed in 2006 to make room for development that never developed. In the movie, The Mall represents the new town square of small-town Virgil. “Shopping,” says Byrne’s nameless Narrator, “has become the thing that brings people together.” Big Town served as the exterior; NorthPark provided the interior.

The movie, inspired by tabloid items clipped and collected during the Heads’ Stop Making Sense tour, is less a cohesive plot than an unstructured “time line,” as Oak Cliff’s own Stephen Tobolowsky put it in his podcast about the making of True Stories. Byrne — who wrote the film with Tobolowsky and his fellow SMU Mustang and longtime girlfriend Beth Henley, then ditched about 94 percent of the first draft — didn’t even intend to set the film in Texas, much less shoot it here. But as he writes in the companion book, long out of print, Byrne ultimately decided it was the only place in which to shoot True Stories.

“After the first trip it was hard to think of the story as taking place anywhere else,” he writes in the intro. “The people in Texas and the people who gravitate there have always had this fiercely independent spirit. While they may not be tolerant of a lot of things, they seem to be fairly tolerant of personal eccentricities. There’s enough room in Texas for people to live their personal lives any way they want.” [Editor’s note: It’d be interesting to see if he still agrees with that sentiment.] “Whatever works for you is OK. This leads to a lot of excess … Most of all, Texas looked great.”

He goes on for a while about the landscape, about our highways, about how “the modern urban center is a hole.” He writes about how we abandoned the city for the suburbs and abandoned the urban core, and about the city center’s slow rebirth — from “disrepair and decay to a state of … cute.” And he writes about how, while he was here, Trammell Crow was putting the finishing touches on the Infomart on the site of the old Cobb Stadium on Stemmons. Byrne was bemused by its gleaming presence: “It’s one of the weirdest pieces of architecture ever, a huge trade mart devoted to the microelectronics industry modeled after the Crystal Palace or maybe it was the Brighton Pavilion. It’s like trying to make a computer look like a grandfather clock.”

He never wrote about NorthPark, but the book does feature an excerpt from Michael Ennis’ November 1985 Texas Monthly about NorthPark — the one bearing the headline “Post-Modern Times: NorthPark dared to be different. It dared to be good.” You can read the story here. This is one of the lines Byrne chose to pull from that piece: “[Ray] Nasher believed that a mall could be the nucleus of something that could eventually rival the great city centers of the Old World. The roads were leading away from Rome, so move Rome.”

The very sentiment echoed by the Talking Head’s Narrator below as he and, eventually, John Goodman stroll through NorthPark:

That scene leads to the second one below — the runway show, a surreal spectacle filmed outside the old Lord & Taylor once next to the NorthPark I & II cinemas. Somewhere in that scene, you might be able to spot my oldest friend, Michael Thum, who called me after he’d returned home from shoe-shopping with David Byrne. I asked Michael to recap that night.

“We were looking at shoes — it was the shoe store where Eiseman Jewels is now,” he says. “It was at night. We were both sitting there, next to each other, waiting for someone to come help us, but no one came. Finally, Byrne got up, walked to the back and, in a pretty rude tone, asked if someone was there and could someone come help us, then he sat back down. Finally, someone came out and said, ‘Who said that?’ Byrne pointed at me.

“Anyway, the next day they were shooting the runway scene, so he invited me to come be an extra, a mall shopper in the background. So I skipped football practice to be an extra in the movie. But I’ve never been able to find me in the scene.”

Look again, Michael.

There are two great pieces about True Stories, if you’re so inclined: Nathan Rubin’s 2014 appreciation for The Dissolve, and Rick Poynor’s for the Design Observer two years earlier. The latter addresses the scene above, and returns us to The Mall:

In his song “The Big Country” (1978), Byrne had looked down from his seat on a plane at the folksy communities of Middle America and seemed to be eulogizing the homeland, until he declared, “I wouldn’t live there if you paid me.” Now, visiting Virgil’s mall, he paints a sympathetic picture of consumers choosing to shop where it is convenient, clean and there are bargains to be found. “People here are inventing their own system of beliefs,” he explains. “They’re creating it, doing it, selling it, making it up as they go along.” Kay Culver, the immaculately groomed wife of Earl Culver, a civic leader, introduces the mall’s fashion show — “Shopping is a feeling,” she lilts. “Sometimes I get a wobbly feeling. I have a commercial feeling. Be sexy in business. Be successful at night” — before launching into “Dream Operator,” a song full of silky-sweet yearning.

Which is so NorthPark.

True Stories was made available on DVD 16 years ago as a dreadful pan-and-scan — suitable only for viewing on a tube TV, perhaps as God and David Byrne intended.