Just a few weeks ago, President Obama addressed the nation on immigration reform.

Now, 16 states have filed a lawsuit against this executive order, and on Wednesday, West Virginia was added to that list.

Attorney General Patrick Morrissey joined a lawsuit filed in the U.S. Southern District Court of Texas, challenging the Obama administration's decision on immigration.

President Obama's plan to defer the deportation of nearly five million illegal immigrants was announced as an executive order a few weeks ago.

Because of the party split between the House and Senate, Congress has been unable to come to any agreement, so the president decided to take matters into his own hands as every president who came before him has.

This has been met with a lot of opposition, and political experts say its not the immigration reform that's the problem, it's just simply politics.

"Texas has, I think, a legitimate challenge based on what they deal with on a daily basis," said Dr. Greg Noone, Political Science professor at Fairmont State University. "I do find it hard to understand why West Virginia is involved in this lawsuit, although the fact the Attorney General is a Republican. I think it really looks to me to be purely political because we don't have this immigration issue some of these other states, can at least make a tolerable claim that they're going to bear undue burden based on this executive order."

5 News also spoke with Attorney General Patrick Morrissey on why West Virginia was joining Texas and the 15 other states in this lawsuit, and he said it's to show the president he cannot overstep his power.

"There's a consistent theme that runs through President Obama's actions. He believes he's above the law. That's why West Virginia stands up and says that the rule of law and ensuring that the separation of powers is respected is critical, because while this deals with an immigration issue, the same type of issue could occur, whether it comes to Obamacare, or environmental policy or across the board," Morrissey said.