Bill Farrell, 56, works out in Dawson School's gymnasium Wednesday. Farrell attends a fitness boot camp at the school. Farrell has had both of his knees replaced and still remains active. ( Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call )

Click photo to enlarge «

1

2

»

These days, Bill Farrell jokes about his old place between chimpanzees and modern humans on the Evolution of Man chart.

"I was that Cro-Magnon man. I was always hunched," he said.

He stooped before his total double knee replacement just over a year ago because severe arthritis in both joints made it impossible for him to straighten either knee enough to stand tall.

But more than 10 years of chronic knee pain — not poor posture — drove him to seek the surgery he underwent on Dec. 5, 2013.

"By then, I was icing my knees almost every day, and I said (to the surgeon), 'Look. I'm taking enough Aleve that I should have bought stock in it,'" Farrell said.

Bill Farrell works out in Dawson School's gymnasium Wednesday morning, Jan. 07, 2015. Farrell has had both of his knees replaced and still remains active. (Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call)

He popped between 10 and 15 of the name brand, over-the-counter pain relief tablets every day to help him referee boys basketball and umpire competitive softball.

But by then, the pain had sidelined him from playing those sports and forced him to quit alpine skiing both competitively and recreationally 18 years earlier for the same reason.

All the usual, less invasive methods to relieve knee pain — anti-inflammatory pain medication, cortisone and/or lubrication shots, physical therapy, and weight loss — either didn't apply or proved unsuccessful long term in Farrell's case.

Still, the surgeon hesitated to replace both knees at the same time as Farrell requested because of the risk of a longer surgery, greater blood loss, and more difficult recovery.

"Then, he looked at my X-rays, and he said, 'You don't have a good leg to stand on,'" recalled Farrell, 56.

Technology comes of age

In spite of how pain eroded his active lifestyle, Farrell said he put off the surgery in order to wait for technology to advance.

For instance, when the total knee replacement surgery debuted in the early 1970s, some surgeons used a titanium device with an actual hinge, said Dr. William P. Cooney, Farrell's surgeon at Front Range Orthopedics & Spine in Longmont.

"Now all of it — the surgical technique, anesthesiology and post operative pain management and rehabilitation — has come 360 degrees. Those improvements have made it an increasingly reliable operation," he said.

"... The biggest misconception is that we chop off the bottom of the thigh bone and the top of the shin bone," Cooney continued. "What we do is remove what is worn out, bone on bone arthritis, and replace it with a metal on plastic implant. ...

"And this is not just a bone operation. It is an operation that preserves as much of the ligaments and other soft tissues around the joint as possible."

Cooney begins by carefully pushing aside the knee cap and soft tissue to recontour the bottom of the thigh bone and top of the shin bone. Typically, he removes about inch of bone from each tip.

Then, he cements a highly polished cobalt chrome metal cap to the new surfaces — eight standard sizes are available to fit knees from petite to burly — and inserts a very hard plastic bearing between them made from polyethylene to fill the space where cartilage had worn away.

Such an implant allows the knee to flex in the most anatomically correct way, which — when combined with the improved low-friction artificial surfaces — makes movement more natural and sustainable over time, Cooney said.

The implant's extended durability explains the trend of replacing knees sooner than later, he added. For instance, the age of a typical knee replacement patient in his practice is shifting from between ages 65 and 75 down toward ages 65 and 55.

A year after undergoing a successful double knee replacement, Longmont resident Bill Farrell referees a varsity boys high school basketball game on Dec. 16 in Golden between Golden High School and Fort Collins High School. (Front Range Orthopedics & Spine / Courtesy photo)

Improved anesthesia and pain management post surgery continues to improve as well and enhances how quickly a patient can literally get on his feet, Cooney said.

Patients now walk on their new knee or knees within 24 hours of the operation — something Farrell's wife, Tina Farrell, witnessed in her husband's room at Longmont United Hospital shortly after the 3-hour surgery.

"It probably felt like a football field, but he did it. He took five or six steps then," she said.

The patient "x" factor

Those half-dozen steps launched Bill Farrell's intensive, 10-week rehabilitation under the care of FROS physical therapist Deirdre Weber.

After three days in the hospital using a walker and seven days using crutches at LUH's transitional care unit, he headed home and started outpatient rehabilitation with her.

His first goal entailed graduating from the hospital bed he rented and put in the family's front room in place of their Christmas tree in order to keep his first week at home on one level.

Weber confirmed that the range of motion in his knees would not allow him to safely navigate stairs when he began his therapy with her Dec. 19, 2013.

Her chart shows that Farrell's his right leg flexed 65 degrees versus a healthy 120-plus degrees and his left knee allowed for 75 degrees of flexion.

If you go What: "Innovations in the Treatment of hip and knee arthritis: a Patient oriented approach," presented by Dr. William P. Cooney of Front Range Orthopedics & Spine When: 6 p.m. Tuesday, Jan. 20 Where: Longmont United Hospital, 1950 Mountain View Ave., Longmont Cost: Free More information: Visit http://frontrangeorthopedics.com

His right leg came within 5 degrees of fully straightening, and the left leg straightened completely.

By his Feb. 18, 2014, discharge and return to work, Farrell accomplished full range of motion and the freedom to play sports again — but only because he asked Weber to push him, and because he pushed himself.

"Just sitting down is squatting, if you think of it," she said. "And when I first saw Bill, he couldn't squat to sit into a chair."

He needed to relearn how to walk — they practiced to smooth his gait— and, eventually, to run.

Before his surgery, he eased into running by sidestepping and gradually turning into forward motion.

Two new knees let him pivot.

"But at first I was afraid that I would stop too fast and my legs would just shear off, that I would just fall apart," Farrell said.

He eventually trusted the knees and pressed harder to get back to the sports he has enjoyed since childhood.

Though Farrell was a younger, more physically fit patient than she often sees, Weber said his mindset made him successful more than anything else.

"If you come in with a positive attitude and want to achieve certain goals like Bill did, you will succeed," she said. "If you come in with a negative attitude, therapy is going to be much more difficult, and it's going to take longer to attain your goals. I am not a magician."

Farrell never expected her to be, and he hopes other prospective patients remember their role in the success of today's knee replacement surgery.

"Before, I would feel the grind in my knees with every step. I would hear it. I could feel it through my bones," Farrell said. "Now, I don't feel the grind in my knees. And in a game, when I am running the court with 5A varsity boys in high school basketball, I am able to keep up."

Pam Mellskog can be reached at p.mellskog@gmail.com or at 303-746-0942.