Payers, payment & cost of care: 10 statistics from gastroenterologists

Here are 10 statistics on gastroenterologist payment methods and cost of care based on data from the Medscape Gastroenterologist Compensation Report 2016.

1. A growing number of gastroenterologists are joining accountable care organizations; 34 percent report participating today and another 9 percent report planning to participate in the coming year.

2. Only around 4 percent of GI physicians are in cash-only practices; another 3 percent are in a concierge practice.

3. Most gastroenterologists — 56 percent — haven't seen an influx in new patients due to the Affordable Care Act.

4. Eleven percent of self-employed gastroenterologists and 6 percent of employed gastroenterologists plan to stop taking Medicare or Medicaid patients going forward.

5. Most gastroenterologists — 68 percent of self-employed and 84 percent of employed — will continue taking new and current Medicare and Medicaid patients.

6. Ten percent of gastroenterologists said they would drop poorly-paying insurers.

7. Seventeen percent of gastroenterologists say they won't drop poorly-paying insurers because they need all payers; another 29 percent won't drop insurer because they feel it's inappropriate.

8. Most gastroenterologists are willing to discuss the cost of treatment with patients, although only 32 percent regularly talk about costs with patients. Another 33 percent will discuss cost with patients in certain circumstances.

9. Seven percent of gastroenterologists don't discuss costs with patients because they don't know the cost of treatment while 4 percent don't have the cost-discussion because they don't feel it's appropriate.

10. More than half — 62 percent — of employed female physicians feel fairly compensated; 36 percent of female gastroenterologists feel the same. Male gastroenterologists are split more evenly with 49 percent of self-employed and 48 percent of employed gastroenterologists feeling fairly compensated.

More articles on gastroenterology:

GIQuIC registry hits 3M colonoscopy cases: 5 things to know

5 findings on IBD patients & food-related concerns

Exercising may induce GERD symptoms—5 points





© Copyright ASC COMMUNICATIONS 2016. Interested in LINKING to or REPRINTING this content? View our policies by clicking here.