Buy Photo Gov. Bill Haslam (Photo: File / The Tennessean)Buy Photo Story Highlights Bill Haslam and I agree on a lot, but this privatization plan does not pass the smell test at all.

In this state, with its political climate, it is rare when Democrats and Republicans agree on anything. When they do, it must be pretty bad. Such is the case with Gov. Bill Haslam’s privatization plan and its direct aim at the jobs of thousands of dedicated Tennesseans.

Gov. Haslam says he and his administration are on a fact-finding mission, exploring the option of privatizing thousands of jobs across Tennessee at our state parks, state properties and colleges and universities. However, those who have followed the governor since taking office know of his administration’s fondness for privatizing state operations and the missteps made along the way.

We saw it when they controversially paid private Chicago-based firm Jones Lang LaSalle to study state buildings, which led to the suggested demolition of the Cordell Hull building and subsequent public outcry.

After that information finally became public, outcry from Tennessee residents forced the governor to halt his demolition plans and pay nearly $100,000 more to a new company only to find that it would be cheaper for the state to renovate the Cordell Hull building.

Now the governor and his team want us to trust them again to privatize thousands more jobs across the state, with the help of more consultants being paid with state money.

Again, they say they are just looking at the option, but as uncovered by NewsChannel 5’s Phil Williams, we now know a detailed report is in place to finalize a full privatization plan by August. In that report, it details how management of thousands of state jobs would be handed over to a private company and the supposed need to “build momentum” and “compress” the timeline of implementing the plan.

Bill Freeman (Photo: Submitted)

There also have been directives for those involved with the study to not speak of the plans over email, to keep those from being made public.

I have agreed with the governor on many things during his time in office, but this privatization plan does not pass the smell test at all.

If it were truly just a fact-finding endeavor to examine possible cost savings, why the need to “build momentum” and “compress” timelines? Why is there a plan in place for full implementation in less than a year that would have gone unnoticed without investigative reporting?

The bigger question is why the privatization of state jobs is even something being looked at again. We have seen how ineffective that model can be.

The governor has used services like custodians at our colleges and universities as an example of where costs could be reduced. We have already seen that attempted, in the governor’s backyard, in fact. At the University of Tennessee, the private company GCA Services Group was contracted to take over UT’s custodial duties.

GCA was a company facing accusations across the country for low pay to its employees, and it had numerous documented instances of employing people with violent criminal histories — even wanted criminals on the run — and placing them in schools, including here in Tennessee.

At UT, after GCA’s initial contract expired in 2012, the university was so dissatisfied with GCA's performance it decided not to renew and brought the services back in-house.

In this one example, hundreds of dedicated Tennesseans' jobs were handed over to a company with a poor record of paying its employees and providing safe environments. Now the governor wants us to trust him and his administration to do this across the state?

There are many ways the governor can help higher education, but filling our campuses with employees brought in by the lowest bidder is not one of them. Our campuses and state facilities across Tennessee are filled with dedicated employees who care deeply about where they work and deserve to be treated with dignity and respect by their state’s top leaders.

We as Tennesseans were able to tell the governor not to tear down the Cordell Hull building; now we must do like the League of Women Voters recently did and tell him again not to tear apart the lives of thousands of dedicated Tennesseans.

Bill Freeman is the chairman of Freeman Webb Inc., a real estate investment, management and brokerage company based in Nashville and that he co-­founded in 1979.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1OA5qaW