The American Journal of Managed Care (AJMC) will bring together stakeholders from across the healthcare spectrum for the fourth annual meeting of Patient-Centered Diabetes Care, which will take place April 7-8, 2016, outside New York City at the Marriott at Glenpointe in Teaneck, New Jersey. To register or find more information,click here.

Lonny Reisman, MD, the founder and chief executive officer of HealthReveal, will offer the keynote address, and Robert A. Gabbay, MD, PhD, FACP, chief medical officer at Joslin Diabetes Center and editor-in-chief of Evidence-Based Diabetes Management, a publication of AJMC, will serve as meeting chair.

Dr. Reisman, who was formerly the chief medical officer at Aetna, recently authored a commentary, which was part of the AJMC 20th anniversary guest commentary series in, titled, “Clinical Efficacy: A Cost-Containment Weapon for the 21st Century.”

The unique format of Patient-Centered Diabetes Care brings together providers, payers, and leaders from the world of policy, pharmaceutical manufacturing, academia, quality measurement, patient education, and advocacy. Over two days, healthcare leaders who might not typically cross paths are asked to share ideas on care delivery, reimbursement, and other “real-world” issues in diabetes care. The hope is that the conversations continue after the meeting ends.

“A meeting like Patient-Centered Diabetes Care has never been more important,” said Brian Haug, president of AJMC Managed Markets Network. “Reimbursement will be more focused on alternate payment models in 2016, and those who fail to engage patients in their own care will suffer the consequences. Diabetes management is ground zero for the new reality. This meeting provides a critical forum to share strategies to help patients and providers navigate the new landscape.”

The 2016 meeting will feature new sessions on obesity and the use of technology in health management, Haug said.

About the Journals and AJMC.com

The American Journal of Managed Care celebrates its 20th year in 2015 as the leading peer-reviewed journal dedicated to issues in managed care. AJMC.com distributes healthcare news to leading stakeholders across a variety of platforms. Other titles in the franchise include The American Journal of Pharmacy Benefits, which provides pharmacy and formulary decision-makers with information to improve the efficiency and health outcomes in managing pharmaceutical care, and The American Journal of Accountable Care, which publishes research and commentary on innovative healthcare delivery models facilitated by the 2010 Affordable Care Act. AJMC’s Evidence-Based series brings together stakeholder views from payers, providers, policymakers and pharmaceutical leaders in oncology and diabetes management. To order reprints of articles appearing in AJMC publications, please call (609) 716-7777, x 131.

CONTACT:

Nicole Beagin (609) 716-7777 x 131

nbeagin(at)ajmc(dot)com

http://www.ajmc.com