Insurance premiums will be going up 4.5 percent in starting Jan. 1 in Naperville School District 203 because of uncertainty of medical costs.

The District 203 School Board agreed to raise the premiums for its self-funded insurance program Monday based on the recommendation of the district's Health Insurance Committee.

Chief Business Official Brad Cauffman said the Health Insurance Committee works hard to ensure the district's program operates efficiently.

He said based on inflation trends, the district is projecting an average 9 percent increase in the medical, prescription drugs and dental costs, so the committee recommended the 4.5 percent increase in medical and prescription premiums and holding rates flat for vision and dental. Premiums are split with the employee paying 15 percent and the district funding 85 percent.

For a person on the employee-only Platinum plan, the premium would rise from $6,900 to $7,200 annually. The employee and family Platinum plans would rise to $21,500 from $20,000.

On the Gold and Silver plans, the cost would rise from $5,500 to $5,700 for employee only and from $16,500 to $17,200 for employee plus family.

The District 203 School Board was looking at a lower increase because of the amount of money in the health insurance fund. The district is expected to end 2015 with a balance of more than $11 million.

Because the fund balance was too high in the eyes of many of the board members, Cauffman was asked to run figures for a 2.25 percent increase. A 2.25 percent hike was projected to result in a $1.5 million decrease in the overall balance in the health insurance fund.

Board members Jackie Romberg and Donna Wandke said they'd like to hear the committee's rationale behind the 4.5 percent.

Cauffman said that while in the past the district tends to trend below medical inflation rates, District 203 in the last few years introduced a new insurance plan and met the requirements of the Affordable Care Act so past trends might not be applicable.

Mark Bailey, a member of the Health Insurance Committee and president of the Naperville Unit Education Association, said the uncertainty was in the minds of committee members.

Bailey recalled when the district had to borrow $250,000 because the plan had gotten so far behind.

"I don't want to get the fund balance down to the point where it's near zero like we had several year ago, and I really don't want the board and the taxpayers etc to have to shoulder a 10-12 percent because we missed the mark," Bailey said. "I would rather have us go with the increase that we suggested from the committee and then take a look at it next year because we'll have some data on the three plans and what we've done with the Rx and those kinds of things."

Both Romberg and Wandke said they would be willing to take the committee's recommendation because of all the hard work that went into the plan.

Board President Terry Fielden said he doesn't want to see the fund balance creep up to $20 million. "We want to give you the good benefits that you deserve, and that's our goal. We want to give them to you at a fair cost," he said. "We also don't want to have so much money in reserve where it hurts us."

Board member Mike Jaensch said even if the district doubled the cost there would still be a fund balance. "I think the balance is still way too high...I can go with either one," he said.

subaker@tribpub.com