A surprisingly strong finish in the Iowa caucus focused increased attention on the candidacy of Senator Marco Rubio. While Republicans have an impressive array of candidates, this youthful, intelligent and articulate first term senator, with a minority working class background, could make a compelling presidential nominee.

Yet, these qualities also draw negative comparisons between Senator Rubio and another youthful and inspiring presidential candidate, Barrack Obama. In Republican circles, this comparison often ends with a statement to the effect of: “We all know how that worked out.” In Saturday night’s New Hampshire debate, Governor Chris Christie took full advantage of this line of attack.

While I have yet to endorse and would be proud to support a number of Republican candidates, I find this line of attack feeble and misleading. In reality, Senator Rubio and President Obama are very different people. While President Obama is rigidly committed to the mistaken notion that big government can best solve our problems, Senator Rubio is an advocate of limited government, individual responsibility and free markets. However, Christie’s implication was that, like Obama, Rubio would be ineffective as president because of his youth and lack of executive experience.

While Senator Rubio’s executive experience as Speaker of the Florida House of Representatives and founder of his own law firm is far greater than President Obama’s pre-presidency experience, anyone seriously considering this attack should first ask: Has President Obama actually been ineffective?

In fact, although an admittedly uncomfortable and difficult admission, it’s hard to deny that Obama has been very effective at implementing policy (albeit bad policy). His progressive ideology has consistently led to damaging policies, particularly damaging economic policy. On that score, he and Senator Rubio are polar opposites.

But, President Obama has been very effective in implementing his progressive policies to this Nation’s great detriment. This is why Senator Rubio responded to Christie’s attack stating: “Let's dispel with this fiction that Barack Obama doesn't know what he's doing. He knows exactly what he's doing,”

Obama’s record supports Rubio’s response. He managed to pass sweeping and unpopular health care reform, an accomplishment that eluded Democrat presidents from Franklin Roosevelt to Bill (and Hillary) Clinton. With the Dodd-Frank legislation, he imposed federal regulatory control over the financial sector at a level unseen since President Roosevelt’s depression era legislation.

He also has a very contemporary understanding of, and willingness to employ, the power of the modern presidency. Beginning with the Great Depression, Congress has created and progressively enlarged a massive legislative bureaucracy consisting of regulatory and quasi-government agencies. The executive branch controls this bureaucracy through direct authority and appointments.

With little constitutional authority and less self-restraint than any of his predecessors, Obama has manipulated this bureaucracy to implement policies governing our daily lives and business decisions without meaningful congressional oversight or resistance from the courts. He has also used executive orders to make policy across a wide range of areas to not only reshape the face of American public policy, but also the face of how policy is made. His actions have left an indelible mark.

For example, the EPA has interpreted and rewritten the laws governing the environment to advance the President’s climate change agenda. HHS has rewritten and ignored key provisions of the Affordable Care Act as best suited the administration’s political goals. The NLRB has overridden existing precedents and rewritten the rules governing collective bargaining while the DOL has interpreted and rewritten the wage and hour laws all to strengthen unions and big labor whose political contributions overwhelmingly support Democrats.

These policies have consistently and seriously damaged our potential for economic growth. But, it’s hard to ignore how effective President Obama has been at implementing them despite his youth and complete lack of prior executive experience.

Republicans will need a president who understands that it has always been President Obama’s intent to remake American consistent with his progressive ideology. Our nation desperately needs a president who believes in limited government and free markets, who can effectively undo the damage Obama has caused while implementing policies that will rebuild our economy. We need a president who understands that Obama has done real damage to our nation and is willing to admit that he did so both intentionally and effectively. Senator Rubio could well be that president.

One other similarity to President Obama that Republicans should unquestionably view as a positive is Senator Rubio‘s ability to position the Republican Party as the party of the future. His relative youth allows him to mount a compelling generational challenge, particularly when running against Hillary Clinton whose very name speaks to an entrenched and tired establishment.

According to media reports, a Rubio/Clinton match-up is a “scary thought” for Democrats. No less a political observer than Bill Clinton has been reported describing Senator Rubio as a “young, Hispanic, and a good speaker. He'd pose a generational challenge [to Hillary, who turns 69 this year] and a challenge for the Hispanic vote, which we need to win . . . . We've got to destroy him before he gets off the ground."

While it’s still early, he may already be off the ground. Unless, of course, the Republican circular firing squad does the Clinton’s dirty work and brings Senator Rubio down for them.