(publ. 8/13/2014, pg. A4)

SAN MATEO -- As transformational health care laws take root in California and across the country, one Silicon Valley startup is trying to change the broken industry by becoming what may be the first high-tech health insurance provider.

San Mateo company CollectiveHealth launches Tuesday with a new way to deliver health insurance -- tossing the complicated explanation of benefits and indecipherable bills, and replacing insurance paperwork and administrative red tape with software.

CollectiveHealth joins a vibrant health tech scene, which has exploded in the last year and benefitted from millions in venture capital money, but the startup isn't another Fitbit or doctor-recommendation app. Led by an ex-Google engineer and a Stanford University doctor, CollectiveHealth is an insurance company, selling policies to small- and mid-sized companies that are willing to trade their traditional plans for a scrappy startup.

Advertisement

"Most of these other health tech companies are creating nice gadgets," said Rajaie Bantiji, CollectiveHealth co-founder and former internal medicine physician at Stanford University Medical Center. "But none of them are trying to create an alternative system that is driven by technology, data and design."

CollectiveHealth will offer health plans to companies with about 100 to a few thousand employees and that want to self-insure, meaning the employer will pay directly for employee health care bills as the services are provided, rather than make a fixed monthly payment on a pre-packaged health plan. The startup is riding a health insurance movement that worries some health policy experts, who say that businesses are opting to self-insure to avoid complying with Affordable Care Act requirements and will instead offer plans that fall short of ideal standards of care -- marking a detrimental step backward in health care reform.

"The move to self-insurance is going in the opposite direction of the Affordable Care Act," said David Chase, California director for the Small Business Majority.

CollectiveHealth says its services are about 20 percent to 25 percent cheaper than buying from traditional insurers that charge a fixed rate, because it's a lean startup with just 25 employees and its software replaces much of the administrative work traditional insurance companies pay people to do, and charge employers for.

"It's sort of like how E-Trade replaced human stock brokers," said Ali Diab, CollectiveHealth co-founder who had stints at Yahoo, Google and Microsoft. "Insurance companies aren't actually insuring your health. They are middlemen, and all they do is make money off of the difference between premiums they charge and the claims that are paid. We are making software that replaces their paper-based manual process and extracting them from the equation."

The startup will begin providing health benefits on Jan. 1 and said it has already sold insurance plans to five companies. One of those companies, said Bantiji, will save about $1 million in its first year by switching from its old insurance plan.

Some are skeptical, though, that CollectiveHealth will differ much from the many insurance companies already vying to sign up small businesses. "Is it really a market segment that is currently underserved?" asked Dallas Salisbury, president and CEO of Employee Benefit Research Institute. "CollectiveHealth is moving into an extremely competitive and relatively full field."

Traditionally, while most large companies with at least 5,000 employees self-insure, smaller companies have found it too risky and too much of a hassle to attempt, fearful they could be on the hook for millions of dollars if an employee had a catastrophic accident or debilitating illness. But with rising insurance premiums -- about 14 percent on average each year since 2000 -- and costly requirements under the federal health care law, more small businesses are looking to scrap their old plans and self-insure. CollectiveHealth charges employers $50 per month per employee for using the software, and doesn't make or lose money no matter how sick or healthy that employee is.

"It's not going to solve the health care-cost problem," said Daniel Kessler, a health care law expert at Stanford University and CollectiveHealth adviser. "Nobody thinks that's going to happen. But health care is so expensive that even a small percentage can result in tremendous savings, and that can be passed onto the employees in terms of lower contributions."

Self-insured companies are also regulated under a 40-year-old federal labor law and do not have to comply with many of the federal health care law requirements, which are mostly directed at individuals and employers who buy health care from the group market, and also do not have to pay certain state taxes.

CollectiveHealth has signed a deal with Blue Shield, whose doctors will accept the insurance. But the company first has to convince risk-adverse employers to ditch the familiar insurance names in favor of an unknown startup.

"Just turning on and going head to head with the incumbents is a really hard thing to do," said Jonathan Levin, chair of the Department of Economics at Stanford University. "Health insurance is sort of a one-year product. CollectiveHealth has to convince them that they will be there for the full year."

Contact Heather Somerville at 510-208-6413. Follow her at Twitter.com/heathersomervil.