BOISE, Idaho (AP) — The Latest on Idaho’s Republican presidential primary (all times Mountain Standard Time):

8:11 p.m.

Polls are closed in the southern half of the state but voters in northern Idaho still have some time to cast their vote for a GOP presidential candidate.

That’s because voting booths close at 8 p.m. local time, and Idaho crosses two time zones.

In Nampa, Tawnie D’Brot said she voted for Marco Rubio because he seemed the most evangelical out of the four candidates.

“I think (Trump) would make a deal with the devil and not even know it,” she said.

Another Nampa voter, 43-year-old Tina McKnight, chose Ted Cruz on her ballot. She said she didn’t like Trump’s boisterous and bullying approach.

———

5:34 p.m.

Just a few hours are left for Idaho Republicans to cast their ballots for who they would like to see as their party’s presidential candidate.

The polls close at 8 p.m. local time. Because the northern half of the state is in the Pacific time zone and the southern half is in the Mountain time zone, election workers won’t start counting votes until 9 p.m. Mountain.

Fifteen counties still count at least some of their paper ballots by hand. Ada County — Idaho’s most populated county — is using new optical scan equipment for counting the votes, which officials hope will speed up the process.

———

2:50 p.m.

Donald Trump’s Idaho website contains wording copied from a 2012 Boise State Public Radio story with no attribution.

As first reported by Idaho Reports, the radio station’s story contains information on where and how to vote. It also quotes then-Idaho Republican Party executive director Jonathan Park and Ada County Chief Deputy Clerk Phil McGrane.

Peter Morrill, the radio station’s interim general manager, says no one from the Trump campaign requested permission to use the story.

“We would have denied their request if they asked,” he said. “It’s a four year old story. We are very concerned about people looking at that story that does not reflect today’s election changes.”

He has reached out to the campaign through the Idaho Republican Party to remove the plagiarized copy immediately.

A Trump spokeswoman did not immediately return requests for comment.

———

2:28 p.m.

Veronica Alotta, a nurse from the Boise region, doesn’t think the Affordable Care Act is working and fears the health care industry is controlled by pharmaceutical and insurance companies. She wants a president who will change that.

“I think what matters to me is something different right now, so my choice is going to be with Donald Trump,” Alotta said while she waited at a local polling site.

Alotta and members of her extended family are all middle class, Alotta said, and they are frustrated because they feel like they don’t have a voice.

“You can serve God or you can serve money, and most people in this country are serving money,” she said.

That makes Trump appealing, Alotta said, because he’s paying his own way and she doesn’t want someone who is bought.

———

12:53 p.m.

Some voters in Idaho’s GOP presidential primary are already facing long lines at the polls.

Election workers at one site in Garden City — near the state’s capitol of Boise — said they had people waiting in line when the doors opened at 8 a.m. Another polling station in Nampa had to call in extra workers to help after more voters than expected showed up to cast their ballots.

The primary is closed to everyone except for registered members of the Republican party. Idaho residents can register as Republican at the polls, however, right until they close at 8 p.m.

———

Thousands of Idaho Republicans are expected to head to the polls Tuesday to take part in the state’s GOP presidential primary.

Republican front-runner Donald Trump, Texas Sen. Ted Cruz, Florida Sen. Marco Rubio and Ohio Gov. John Kasich are competing for Idaho’s 32 delegates. Mississippi also is holding its primaries Tuesday, while Hawaii will have its GOP presidential caucuses.

Idaho has far fewer delegates than states like Texas, which boasts 155. But it plays a bigger role in the GOP presidential selection this year because state lawmakers bumped up the primary from May to March.

Idaho’s Republican primary is open only to GOP-registered voters.

The Constitution Party also holds its primary Tuesday. Like the GOP event, Idahoans must be registered member of the Constitution Party to participate.

The Idaho Democrats will caucus March 22.