U.S. Surgeon General Vivek Murthy said health insurance coverage is one of the most important factors for better community health during his stop in Birmingham, which is the first in a cross-country listening tour.

The meeting at Bethel Baptist Church, 1708 Spencer Avenue, was closed to the media, but Surgeon General Murthy took questions from the press after the event. During the meeting, he met with directors of health centers, pastors and community officials. Dr. Murthy was confirmed as surgeon general a little more than a month ago.

"I see Birmingham as a great place to start this tour," Dr. Murthy said. "This city represents history, hope and strength. But Birmingham has also seen a lot of hardship, and nowhere is that more clear than with healthcare."

Dr. Murthy said community leaders had two main areas of concern: Mental health and chronic disease. Alabama struggles with high rates of obesity and diabetes.

One of the goals of the tour is to find solutions and spread them to other parts of the country. He mentioned a program in Birmingham that trains cosmetology students to talk to customers about health, and said it could be a model for other communities.

One of Dr. Murthy's biggest initiatives is spreading the word about the Affordable Care Act. Open enrollment ends in February, and he is a big supporter of the president's signature healthcare bill.

"I heard a lot about the importance of coverage," Dr. Murthy said.

Dr. Murthy was joined by community members Jefery and Norma Howell. Jefery Howell was able to get coverage under the Affordable Care Act that costs $57 a month.

"There are a lot more people now who are able to get coverage like that," Dr. Murthy said.

Dr. Murthy said the goal of the tour is to learn how communities are tackling health problems, and connect them to each other. He said he would like to focus on lifestyle and preventive healthcare during his tenure as Surgeon General.

The National Rifle Association opposed his appointment based on comments he made about gun control. Dr. Murthy has said he believes gun violence is a public health issue. At this stop, he steered away from focusing on gun violence.

"My concern has always been about violence of all kinds, not just gun violence," Dr. Murthy said. "We want to reduce violence in our communities."

After Birmingham, Murthy will travel to Anniston to meet with officers in the U.S. Public Health Service who will be traveling to West Africa to fight the Ebola outbreak.