Last week, for grins, I clicked on one of those quizzes that pop up occasionally on Facebook, each claiming to disclose, based on a handful of carefully crafted questions (pause to laugh), some deep and compelling secret about the quiz-taker.

This one promised to be as utilitarian as it was entertaining because, rather than unearth my inner dog, who I was in a previous life or my celebrity soulmate, this quiz vowed to reveal something I truly did not already know: Which candidate for president has staked out positions that most closely match my own.

(As for the others, they are border collie, Edmund Burke and none of your business.)

The poll — take it yourself at isidewith.com — covers the usual bases, and some, unless you are deeply familiar with the candidates’ backgrounds, that may seem to come out of nowhere.

Again, the poll is a tool; it is not the final word. For openers, I took it before former Virginia Gov. Jim Gilmore announced his presidential bid, and as this is written, the webmasters have not added him to the list of possible ideal matches. For all I know, Gilmore could be a game-changer.

Or not.

Anyway, at this early moment in the campaign, I am most aligned with ... Marco Rubio. That’s right. The junior U.S. senator from Florida.

I was surprised, initially, by this outcome. My sense of the 2016 election, then and now, is the Republican nominee should emerge from its stable of past and present state governors, not simply because they tend to make superior candidates, but because, after eight years of Barack Obama’s uncompromising demagoguery, the nation will need a president who knows, from Day One, the weight of public-policy decision-making.

An absence of such experience in Rubio’s resume probably goes a long way toward explaining why the two of us are so philosophically suitable. Like me, he has not had to endure the consequences of being The Decider.

This does not mean I could not make a spirited defense of his White House aspirations. Rubio, by word and deed, makes plain that his forward-looking vision of an America renewed and flourishing is deeply rooted in its traditions: limited government that places individual self-determination first among domestic virtues and a projection of no-nonsense strength abroad.

Rubio has demonstrated, also, in the wake of his perplexing role in the Senate’s “Gang of Eight” immigration debacle, he learns quickly. No longer a fan of so-called “comprehensive reform,” Rubio begins with securing the national borders. And then? We’ll see. Perfect.

However, those infected by Trumpmania notwithstanding, it is not nearly enough for a candidate to share our views on a basket of current concerns. He — or she — must have demonstrated a temperament for leadership. On that front, Rubio is insufficiently tested. Also on that front, being famous for growling, “You’re fired!” also is not a CV-enhancer.

Happily, closely trailing Rubio on my issues scorecard are precisely those I would expect to see, all in a statistical tie: Scott Walker, Rick Perry and — despite rejecting with vigor and prejudice the poll’s question on common core — Jeb Bush. Successful governors all, with track records of facing down formidable, entrenched opposition, and doing so without abandoning certain core conservative principles (such as throwing open the gates to fiduciary ruin by expanding Medicaid under Obamacare, and then — hello, John Kasich — getting all preachy about it).

Could I live with a GOP ticket that had any of my top three governors at the top and Rubio as the veep? (The way around the Electoral College problem for a Jeb-Marco pairing goes through Maine, by the way.) To quote another unyielding conservative, you betcha.