Anna Hracohovec introduced many new people to her Mochimochi figurines for the first time.

Buy Photo Anna Hrachovec introduced new readers to her wonderful world of Mochimochi at Vogue Knitting Live. (Photo: PAMELA MacKENZIE/STAFF PHOTO)Buy Photo Story Highlights Vogue Knitting Live in New York last weekend was a good chance for Pam to catch up with friends in the industry.

Carol Sulcoski and Brooke Nico shared a booth to sell their custom-dyed yarns and their pattern books.

Cornelia Hamilton was selling her own line of yarns.

North Lights Alpaca Farm was selling yarn and promoting its knitting retreats with leading designers, including some new one-day retreats in June with Melissa Leapman and Patty Lyons.

I hope you have been reading my blog posts about Vogue Knitting Live over the past several days. For those of you who didn’t get to go, I wanted to share with you what a treat this event is.

One of the best parts of my job is the friendships I’ve made over the years as I cover stories. This is especially true in the knitting world. Whether I have interviewed a designer or a vendor, or I have purchased a special yarn from someone, they often recognize me and we become friends. This year, I was able to catch up with some of them at the Vogue Knitting Live Marketplace.

I like to think that by sharing reports about these friends, they become your friends, too.

For example, I interviewed Carol Solcoski at Vogue Knitting Live in 2012, and Brooke Nico in 2014. I also have reviewed Brooke’s book and made a hat that Carol designed. So now, although we aren’t in touch all that much throughout the year, whenever I see them at an event like Rhinebeck or Vogue Knitting Live, I get a big hug and an update on what they’re doing. Although Carol lives outside Philadelphia and Brooke lives outside St. Louis, they are fast friends. This year, they teamed up to sell their custom dyed yarns in a booth at the Marketplace. Carol has been selling her yarns under the Black Bunny Fibers brand for years, and Brooke’s brand is Kirkwood Knittery.

Carol also has a book coming out with Lark later this year. Like her previous book, “Sock Yarn Studio,” the new book will be about using lightweight yarns. She promised to send me a review copy soon.

Another friend at the Vogue Knitting Live Marketplace was Cornelia Hamilton, who was selling her own line of yarns. When I took her class in December, I said that I would probably use her technique as a border on a sweater. She had a sample sweater in her booth that was just the sort of thing I wanted to make, so I bought three hanks of her yarn so that I could use them in a border just like she did.

In previous years I've seen other designer friends in the Marketplace, such as Nicky Epstein and Melissa Leapman. Maybe they were too busy teaching and lecturing this year, but I really missed seeing them.

However I did get to see Sven Risom from North Lights Alpaca Farm on Block Island. This is the farm where Melissa Leapman. Deborah Newton and many other designers conduct retreats during the summer. In the past, The retreats have involved several designers on a single weekend and the cost was about $1,000. This year they are also going to have one-day retreats with a single designer. Patty Lyons and Melissa Leapman each of each will be leading a retreat in June, and I am very tempted to go, especially if I can get a friend to go with me.

Anna Hrachovec, the Mochimochi lady, was there. I reviewed one of her books a couple of years ago. She has written several books with patterns for tiny, cute figurines that look a lot like egs with faces. This year, she had a whole table of Mochimochi figures and a scavenger hunt on Sunday where the winners won a free Mochimochi book. I was glad to see she’s doing well.

Catching up with other friends

From 7 to 8:30 p.m. on Monday, Jan. 26, I get to catch up with more friends: you.

I’ll be at the Bridgewater Library, and we’re going to have an open knitting and crochet night. Just bring whatever you’re working on and join the fun. Librarian Amy Atzert will be there to help with crochet, and of course, if you need knitting help, I’ll be there. Our last two library sessions have been a delight, and Monday night should be just as good. I will have free totebags for everyone, too.

The Bridgewater Library is at North Bridge Street and Vogt Drive. You do not have to live in Somerset County in order to come. Everyone is welcome. See you there.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1JfflRb