Health The More People Are Told About Obamacare, The More They Like It CREDIT: AP Photo/Jon Elswick, File

One year into the full implementation of the Affordable Care Act, Americans remain confused about what the law actually does — and public opinion toward Obamacare is easily swayed depending on small changes to the amount of information people receive about it.

According to the Kaiser Family Foundation’s most recent monthly tracking poll, overall opinion about the law remains negative, even though large portions of Americans do support the specific provisions that comprise Obamacare. The disconnect reflects a general confusion about how exactly the law functions; pollsters have been tracking this dynamic for years, even as millions of people enroll in plans on Obamacare’s new state marketplaces.

On top of that, people’s opinions about the law shift a lot when they’re given just a little bit of follow-up information that puts the changes to the health care sector in context, the Kaiser researchers found.

For instance, opinion polling has consistently found that the individual mandate — the requirement that every American purchases health insurance that forms the backbone of the law — is deeply unpopular. But providing people with more information about the policy can have a big effect on public opinion.

When people who oppose the individual mandate were told that it doesn’t affect the majority of Americans because most people already have insurance through their job, support rose from 35 percent to 62 percent. When they were told that the mandate doesn’t apply for low-income Americans who would have too much trouble paying the fine, support rose to 59 percent. And explaining that the individual mandate may prevent people from waiting until they’re seriously ill to buy health insurance, which would ultimately drive up costs for everyone else, nudged support up above 50 percent.

CREDIT: Kaiser Family Foundation

Pollsters also asked about participants’ views of Obamacare’s employer mandate — which was delayed for a year to give businesses more time to prepare for it, and is now about to kick in for 2015 — and found that two pieces of additional information could change their attitudes there, too.

When people who support the policy were told that employers might shift workers from full-time to part-time in response to the requirement, support dropped from 60 percent to 27 percent. And when people who oppose the policy were told that most large employers aren’t affected by the impending mandate because they already offer insurance to their workers, support rose to 76 percent.

The complexity of the health reform law, as well as the constant stream of conflicting information available about it in the media, has left some serious education gaps about Obamacare among the American public. Previous Kaiser polling has found that these gaps fall along class lines, as low-income Americans are less likely to have heard about Obamacare from sources they trust. This is a particularly serious problem in red states; patients are less likely to get information about health reform in states where their governor opposes it.