Rep. John Ratcliffe made two stops in Titus County Monday.

He toured the Welsh plant and met with AEP/SWEPCO officials there to talk about President Barack Obama’s Clean Power Plan.

“I related to them that I was one of 19 members to co-sponsor a bill to impeach the EPA administrator that we filed last week,” Ratcliffe said.

Later, he met with Titus Regional Medical Center officials at TRMC to discuss concerns over Medicare and Medicaid, the challenges of operating a rural hospital within the constraints of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act; and how to better serve the health care needs of military veterans.

“For the first time, they (TRMC officials) asked me to help them be approved for the Veterans’ Choice Program,” Ratcliffe said.

At Welsh, Ratcliffe said the discussion centered on the Clean Power Plan’s rules on carbon emissions and the impact those proposed rules would have on coal-fired power - generally and specifically on those facilities. He met with the President and CEO of SWEPCO, Venita McCellon-Allen; the Vice President of External Affairs, Brian Bond; Gary Gibbs, manager – state governmental and environmental affairs; Paul Franklin, SWEPCO vice president – generation assets; and Stan Minter, Welsh plant superintendent.

Regarding the bill to impeach the EPA administrator, Ratcliffe said, “I am generally supportive of trying to reign in regulatory agencies’ reach like EPA, and those proposed rules will have a devastating impact on Texas and a lot of the folks that will rely on rural electric here in East Texas, from cost, that it is going to take.

“I joined in that legislation (to impeach the EPA administrator). We have to hold accountable those people. She perjured herself, based on what I’ve seen of her testimony and related documents. Obviously I expect the president to continue to adhere to a pattern of protecting the bureaucrats to lead the EPA and IRS. It’s important to draw attention to hold those folks accountable and to force a public awareness to what some of the people in these agencies have been doing,” he said.

Regarding the Clean Power Plan, Ratcliffe said that once the final rules are transmitted to Congress he plans to introduce legislation to nullify them.

“I’ll be introducing legislation to nullify them, have announced that to Congress and have a number willing to co-sponsor it.”

He said he expected that to happen by the end of October.

“Some 42 percent of the constituents I represent in the 4th Congressional District get their electricity from rural electric coops that are customers of facilities and operations like Welsh and SWEPCO. What the president has proposed will retire half of the coal supply here in Texas and drive up the cost for rural consumers; and cost jobs,” he said. “It’s a critical issue; something I am eager to be leading on as a member of Congress and certainly ties in well with the reason I ran for Congress and wanted to be there in the first place to reign in the federal government which is making it difficult to create jobs and grow the economy.”

At TRMC, Ratcliffe met with CEO John Allen, CFO Terry Scoggin, Chief Nursing Officer Carol Slider, Shannon Norfleet, business development director; Sharron Bonner, case management director; Keith Luker, special projects manager; Heather Tuck, controller; Molly Hatch, community outreach; and Sharon Alexander, quality director.

“Generally we had a discussion about their concerns regarding Medicare and Medicaid in trying to operate as a rural hospital under the increasing restrictions and costs of patient protection and the Affordable Care Act – Obama Care,” Ratcliffe said.

“We talked about the difficulty of getting reimbursements from the federal government and Veterans Administration. We talked about the challenges of providing care to patients where in Texas there aren’t revenues from adopting the Medicaid expansion. We talked about the Medicaid waiver program set to expire next year, and that it will cause considerable hardship if it is not renewed or extended,” he said.

He said the officials discussed certain legislation, some of which he might cosponsor.

“We had a pretty frank discussion about, in the other parts of the 4th Congressional District, four hospitals have closed and a constructive conversation about the things I can be doing in Washington at the macro-level and about their actions with agencies and the federal government at the micro-level to put them in a better position,” he said.

Ratcliffe said the big component was veteran care and the Veterans’ Choice Program and TRMC’s desire to be approved as a hospital under the Veterans’ Choice Program and how he could help facilitate that.

“They have struggled with their ability to see veterans. They are prohibited by law to do so if those veterans are not property referred. If they (veterans) were referred, they (TRMC) could provide immediate care; and there is a large veteran population in the 4th Congressional District, and 2,000 veterans here in Titus County, and many consider that (TRMC) their care facility,” Ratcliff said.

Though he had been in discussions with TRMC officials previously and talked about how he could be helpful to them, Ratcliffe said, the discussions Monday proved a more direct request for assistance from him.

“They have been actively pursuing it. The discussions we had were how we could be helpful in having them provide to us their information and communication about where that stands. They were sort of briefing us on their desire and their frustration on not getting approved. Up until this point in time we have not been directly asked by them for help,” he said.

Ratcliffe said he also toured the TRMC Wellness Center and was impressed with the facility and the 15,000 membership.

Email: mdavis@tribnow.com