— Pasco County Administrator Michele Baker realized she had made a mistake almost immediately after Erik Bush, her pick to replace Assistant County Administrator Suzanne Salichs, started.

So she fired him after just four days.

In a memo to county commissioners, she wrote: Erik Bush was originally selected and started on May 6, 2014. Unfortunately, it became immediately apparent that Mr. Bush was not a good fit for that position.

He was terminated on May 9.

Baker did not return phone calls for this story. Personnel Director Barbara DeSimone said Baker acted swiftly so he wouldn’t incur any additional moving expenses. “She didn’t want to drag it out, and she thought it would be best before he moved his entire family down here,” she said.

DeSimone said the county owes Bush $1,615.39 (before taxes) for his four workdays.

Bush was the chief financial officer for a school district in Normal, Illinois, for four years. Before that, he held a similar position with Peoria County and had worked as a city manager for the town of Flora, Ill. He has a masters of public administration from Northern Illinois University.

He said he was shocked by Baker’s decision — that he’d never been through something like that before.

“After a few days we got to know each other, and she told me she was letting me go,” he said. “I guess she expected me to hit the ground running a little differently. I was surprised, but I respect her decision.”

Bush said he wishes Catherine Pearson, Baker’s second choice, better success.

“You know, getting a new job is difficult,” Bush said. “There were 2,000 miles between us and different cultures. I would hope the county would make me whole. I still spent $1,500 on gas and hotels, and I made a good faith effort to work there.”

Pearson has worked for Citrus County since 2003, serving as assistant county administrator and community services director. She has supervised many of the same departments — community development, libraries, animal services, public transportation — that are under the public services division.

Commissioners are scheduled to vote Tuesday to confirm Pearson’s appointment and her $110,000 salary.

lkinsler@tampatrib.com

(813) 371-1852

Twitter @LKinslerTBO