Photo by Rick Diamond/Getty Images for WSB Radio

While the smartest move, politically speaking, would be for conservatives to throw Mike Huckabee under the bus after his recent remarks (he implied that believing a woman has contraception needs is the exact same thing as believing she is sexually incontinent), it appears conservative pundits are choosing to try to defend him instead. So it was that Sean Hannity found himself getting aggressive with a woman who called into his show to support the Department of Health and Human Services mandate requiring insurance plans to cover contraception as preventive care.

Hannity griped, "Why are people accused of waging a war on women if they don't want to pay for their birth control, which is inexpensive?" When his caller tried to point out that not everyone has that kind of money, he started to holler, "But why don't women like yourself, then, maybe then have an 'adopt-a-woman' birth control program? In other words, why should the government be doing it?"

Advertisement



You may think I'm going to try to argue Sean Hannity down, but in fact, I think he's onto something here. Perhaps there could be a program where everyone who needs health care, including contraception, pays into a common pool that we can draw out of. You could pay monthly into it—let's call that payment a "premium"—and when you need things like drugs or doctor's visits, you could show a membership card instead of writing a check. Some employers might elect to save money by buying group plans instead of having their employees buy individually. We'd need some anti-discrimination rules to make it fair, so things like contraception should be covered regardless of your personal hang-ups about female sexuality. You can call it an "adopt-a-woman" program, I guess, but I think a simpler term that would both be more comprehensive and male-inclusive would be "health insurance."



Oh wait. That would actually be the very program called "Obamacare" that Hannity hates so much. Maybe he should reconsider this brilliant plan of his.