Colton and Kelsey Sanders are pictured in 2008 with their trophy saddles received as year-end awards. Their sister Karlee Sanders recently won the pole-bending competition in the Tennessee High School Rodeo Association finals and will compete in the national finals. (Photo: Submitted)

Opening thought: “Who shall tell these words whereby thou and all thy house shall be saved.” — Acts 11:14

See you at Mt. Carmel United Methodist Church on Saturday! Their ice cream supper line opens around 4 p.m., with the auction at 6 p.m. This will have to hold you for a few weeks, as this is the last one until Epworth’s summer festival on Aug. 22.

Karlee Sanders recently won the pole-bending competition in the Tennessee High School Rodeo Association finals and is now off to the national finals in Rock Springs, Wyoming. She won a saddle, a buckle and a bit of cash. She has also been re-elected vice president of the Tennessee High School Rodeo Association. Karlee is the daughter of Brad and Leecy Sanders, granddaughter of Joe and Brenda King, Hugh and Carol Sanders and Emily Sanders, and great-granddaughter of Susie Bennett. Cannot wait to hear the results of the competition at the end of this month. Go Karlee!

Happy birthday today to Pam Marlin and Buddy Peden; Monday to Fran Crouch, Paula Frost, Marvin Lillard and Jerry Lindsey; Tuesday to Mary Anne King, Sharon Hunt and Franklin’s Lynn Rhodes; Thursday to Gene Kite, Barbara Owens and James Justice; Friday to Bonnie Overby; and Saturday to Frank Ogilvie. Hugs, kisses and many good wishes are sent to each of you.

On Aug. 1, Bethesda United Methodist Church, in conjunction with United Way and Graceworks, will give away backpacks to Williamson County families in need of school supplies. More on this next week.

The FiftyForward College Grove Center’s Red Hat Society heads to Fairview on Wednesday to tour the Bowie Nature Park. The van leaves at 9:30 a.m. Did you ever watch Bob Ross on PBS? On Wednesday from 1-3 p.m. there will be a Bob Ross painting workshop. It returns to the second Tuesday of the month in August. Please sign up this week for the July 28 trip to the Nissan plant and the July 30 program on strokes. For details on these and other activities available to you, phone 615-368-7278.

Vacation Bible school at Epworth United Methodist Church is today through Thursday from 5:45-7:45 p.m. The theme this year is “G Force (God’s Love in Action).” Interested? The school ends the week on Friday with a picnic at 6 p.m. During the week the school will collect items for the Bethlehem Centers of Nashville. Items needed are glue, scissors, games and first aid supplies, as well as volunteers. Financial considerations are appreciated, too, of course. Phone 615-790-6695 or go to the church website: www.epworth-umc.com.

The 39th Annual Lions Club Super Pull of the South is Friday and Saturday in Chapel Hill, starting at 7 p.m. both days. For additional info, phone 931-364-2236 or go to www.lionssuperpull.com.

Today is National Stick Out Your Tongue Day. Tomorrow is National Ice Cream Day. Thursday is Hot Enough for You Day. First quarter moon is Friday. That’s all the news I was given this week ... have a good ‘un!

Closing thought: “Learn from your children what you forgot along the road to adulthood.” — Jan Blaustone in “The Joy of Parenthood”

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1J8zoEJ