Timothy Jost

November 14, 2013

Earlier today, President Obama announced an “administrative fix” to the problem of health insurance policy terminations that has provoked a major uproar in the media and in Congress in recent days. His announcement was followed up by a letter from Gary Cohen, director of the Center for Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight, to state insurance commissioners implementing the fix. A set of questions and answers on the policy followed later in the day.

The problem, discussed in an earlier post, is that millions of Americans who are insured in the individual and small group markets have been getting notices from their insurers that the policies under which they were covered for 2013 will not be available in 2014. In most instances these notices were accompanied by offers of alternative coverage, but the alternatives offered often cost more, and in some instances included higher cost-sharing obligations. In some instances the coverage that was terminated was problematic — with skimpy benefits and very high cost-sharing. But in other situations, the coverage was adequate — it simply did not meet the full 2014 essential health benefit requirements and cost-sharing standards.

In some cases, the higher premiums required for 2014 policies were attributable to improved coverage. In many situations, however, higher premiums were also attributable to the fact that individuals or groups whose coverage was being terminated had been charged favorable premiums in the past because they were healthy and presented insurers with little risk, but beginning in 2014 would have to pay more because they were going to be part of a risk pool that could no longer be underwritten based on health status. Some of the increased cost was also no doubt simply due to increased claims costs.

Whatever the reason for premium increases, however, individuals and small employers who received notices that coverage would only be available at higher cost were unhappy, and they let Congress and the media know about it.

The debate about cancellations focused on the President’s promise, “If you like your health care plan, you can keep your health plan.” The President was widely accused of having broken this promise, a charge to which the President seemed to plead guilty (and which President Clinton seemed to accept). The promise of the Affordable Care Act, however, was never that if individuals had insurance policies in place in 2013 they could keep those policies forever. Rather the promise was quite specific: “Nothing in this Act . . . shall be construed to require that an individual terminate coverage . . . in which such individual was enrolled on the date of enactment of this Act.”

Although relatively few policies in the individual market have been continuously in effect since March 23, 2010, nothing in the ACA requires insurers to cancel those truly grandfathered policies. Some insurers are apparently terminating grandfathered policies for their own business reasons, but that is not the fault of the ACA, and certainly not a breach of the President’s promise.

In any event, many Americans are very upset that their premiums are going up dramatically for 2014, ACA opponents are in full attack mode, Congressional Democrats up for reelection in 2014 in states that never liked the ACA are running scared, and the White House has decided that decisive action was necessary.

What The Administration Did

The action the administration took was to allow insurers to renew coverage for individuals and small groups that had insurance policies in effect as of October 1, 2013, for an additional year beginning between January 1, 2014 and October 1, 2014, free from most of the 2014 market reforms. Policies can be renewed for one year, lasting into 2015. The ability of insurers to do this will depend on their obtaining approval from state insurance commissioners, and, of course, on their willingness to reissue policies for which cancellation notices have already been sent.

The 2014 reforms from which the renewal policies will be exempted include:

.

The requirement that individual and small group rates vary only based on age (with a maximum 3 to 1 ratio), tobacco use (maximum 1.5 to 1), geographic area, and family size;

The requirement that insurers accept every individual and employer that applies for coverage;

The requirement that insurers guarantee renewal of coverage;

The prohibition against exclusions of preexisting conditions with respect to adults (except with respect to group coverage);

The prohibition of discrimination against individuals and their dependents on the basis of health status (except with respect to group coverage);

The prohibition of discrimination against providers practicing within their scope of practice or against employees for exercising their rights under the ACA;

The requirement of coverage of the essential health benefits and limits on cost-sharing; and

The requirement that plans cover individuals participating in approved clinical trials.

Insurers that offer renewals must send a notice to all individuals or employers who have received or will receive a cancellation notice informing them of 1) changes in options available to them; 2) which specific reforms will not be reflected in their coverage; 3) their potential right to enroll in a qualified health plan through the marketplace, for which financial assistance might be available; 4) how to access marketplace coverage; and 5) their right to purchase coverage outside of the marketplace that conforms with 2014 requirements. HHS has provided model language for insurers to use in this notice.

The administration’s letter recognizes that this change in policy may well result in insurers who issue 2014 compliant policies covering a more expensive population than they anticipated when they set their rates for 2014. It suggests that the risk corridor program will be adjusted to ameliorate these changes. The risk corridor program is one of the three premium stabilization programs established by the ACA, and specifically allows qualified health plan issuers whose allowable costs exceed their premium revenues by certain percentages to receive assistance from the federal government. (QHP issuers whose premium revenues exceed their allowable costs contribute to the program.)

The risk corridor program regulations in place would already partially compensate QHP issuers that end up with a significantly more expensive risk pool than they had bargained for, but the CCIIO letter suggests that this compensation may become more generous. The effect of this, of course, is to shift indirectly the cost of the transition from individuals whose coverage is not being renewed to the federal government.

Questions

Legality. The administration’s administrative fix raises several questions. The first is whether it is legal. The administration’s justification is the same as it asserted when it delayed the employer mandate last summer — HHS has discretion to delay enforcement of legal requirements to ease transitions involving major changes in the law. Although the Administrative Procedures Act permits the courts to compel administrative actions “unreasonably delayed,” controlling legal authority applies a multifactor test to determine reasonableness. A statutory deadline is not necessarily conclusive. There is ample precedent for administrations delaying the effectiveness of statutory requirements. Should the delay continue beyond one year, however, its legality would be highly questionable.

State reactions. A second question is how state insurance commissioners will react to having this hot potato being tossed into their hands. The policy was, of course, released in the form of a letter to the state insurance commissioners, who will have to decide whether insurers in their states will be allowed to renew policies. The reaction of Louisiana Commissioner Jim Donelan, President of the National Association of Insurance Commissioners was swift and negative. Commissioner Donelan noted the adverse effect the renewals would have on insurance risk pools and the problems state insurance commissioners faced in permitting renewals.

At least a dozen states have adopted the federal market reform requirements as state law or regulation and more states have changed their rating requirements. Insurance Departments in these states may well lack the authority to simply ignore these legal requirements. In most states, 2014 insurance rates and forms have already been approved by state regulators, and reapproving 2013 rates and forms for 2014 may not be a simple matter. Indeed, a number of states have already rejected insurer attempts to renew 2013 policies into 2014, which has up until now been legal under federal law. At least one commissioner, Washington’s Mike Kreidler, has announced that his state will not allow the renewal of 2013 policies.

Insurer reactions. Yet another question is whether insurers will in fact take advantage of the enforcement delay. Some may take advantage of the opportunity to pick up a healthier-than-average risk pool for 2014. One can assume that those individuals and groups who renew will be healthier than average, because most of those who are less healthy will probably find a better deal in the exchange. But insurers, which have already sent out cancellation notices, may be reluctant to seek approval of renewals and send out notices to all of their cancelled policyholders all over again.

The extent of the waiver. A fourth question involves the comprehensiveness of the reforms waived by the enforcement delay. Not included on the list of ACA provisions waived, for example, is the section that requires insurers to consider all enrollees in the individual market to be part of a single risk pool and a corresponding requirement governing the small group market. The question is also left open as to whether renewal population would be included in the risk adjustment program, which moves money from insurers in the individual and small group markets with low-cost enrollees to insurers with high-risk enrollees. The risk pool and risk adjustment provisions do not apply to grandfathered plans, but the renewal plans are not grandfathered plans. Another question is whether the annual dollar-limit requirements, delayed as to mini-med plans by waiver in 2010 and 2011, would continue to be waived. The application of each of these provisions could raise the cost of renewed 2013 plans.

The effect on the ACA reforms and the exchanges. The most important question is probably what effect the administration policy will have on the implementation of the 2014 reforms, particularly on coverage through the exchanges. If state insurance commissioners permit renewals, and if insurers offer them, it can, again, be presumed that those who take advantage of the offer will be lower-risk enrollees. This means that the risk pool left to the exchange (and to the rest of the individual market) will be higher risk, and thus more expensive than insurers anticipated when they set their rates.

Established insurers may be able to take a year of losses in the exchange, particularly if their costs are covered by the risk corridor or risk adjustment programs. But new entrants, including the CO-OP plans whose solvency is guaranteed by federal grants, may not. The exchanges, which already offer thin competition in some states, may include even fewer insurers next year. And as actuaries set 2015 exchange rates in a few months, they will certainly take into account 2014 renewals that extend into 2015 and the possibility that noncompliant plans may be renewed again. Rates for 2015 will go up.

Political effects. A final question is how much political cover the administration’s policy actually provides. Democratic candidates worried about cancellations today may have even more to fear from cancellation notices going out in October of 2014.

Perhaps The Best Of A Bad Set Of Choices

In any event, from the perspective of implementation of the ACA, the administration approach is probably the best of a series of bad alternatives. Legislation pending in Congress could have allowed any individuals, whether or not they were renewing coverage, to purchase a noncompliant policy in 2014, blowing a huge hole in the implementation of the reforms and threatening the viability of the exchanges. Alternative proposals would have grandfathered 2013 plans indefinitely. In the end, implementing a change in our health care system of the magnitude of the ACA will never be easy, and is bound to hit major bumps along the way. The administration’s proposal may have been the best of a really ugly set of alternatives, but that does not make it any prettier.