Richard Lee (Photo: Submitted photo)

Central Minnesota Mental Health Center has appointed a new executive director after a vacancy of nearly one year.

Richard Lee, chief executive officer of Woodland Centers in Willmar, will assume his new role at Central Minnesota Mental Health Center on Feb. 1.

"Woodland Centers is a very similar kind of agency," Lee said. "But Central Minnesota Mental Health Center is twice as big."

Lee said his role with Central Minnesota Mental Health Center will give him the chance to develop, maintain and strengthen relationships with stakeholders in the industry, an opportunity he did not have in Willmar.

"In a smaller organization, a fair amount of your time is spent in day-to-day management. In an organization twice as big, there will be less of that and it will allow me to focus on being the face and voice of the agency," Lee said.

Lee said as a leader he prides himself on operational excellence and hopes to implement similar strategies he learned from Willmar at Central Minnesota Mental Health Center.

Also a major focus for Lee is implementing what he considers to be the triple aim of the Affordable Care Act: better care and better patient experience done more efficiently.

"Unless we do a considerably better job of providing for people with mental illness we will not achieve the triple aim," Lee said. "And Central Minnesota Mental Health Center has a very robust commitment to it."

Lee has spent over two decades with Woodland Centers, serving first as a staff psychologist, then clinical director before becoming CEO. He will take over duties at Central Minnesota Mental Health Center from interim Executive Director Cathy LaGow.

Central Minnesota Health Center serves Stearns, Benton, Sherburne and Wright counties with locations in St. Cloud, Monticello, Buffalo and Elk River. The facility employs over 350 people.

Follow Vicki Ikeogu on Twitter @VickiSCTimes or call her at 259-3662.

Read or Share this story: http://www.sctimes.com/story/money/2016/01/06/new-executive-director-named-mental-health-center/78326968/