MONTGOMERY, Alabama --- The waiting list is bigger that a lot of towns in the state: More than 3,100 people.

They are people with intellectual disabilities, once called mental retardation, awaiting services that might help them find new independence and help parents struggling to be caregivers and breadwinners, too.

Alabama doesn't put up enough money to cover everybody who is eligible.

"This waiting list needs to be zero," said Nabella Shunnarah, a widow who lives in Hoover and takes care of her 37-year-old daughter, Lori.

Courtney Tarver, an associate commissioner for the Alabama Department of Mental Health, said a $15 million boost in the budget would significantly shorten the list.

The state dollars match federal dollars, and open the way for more people to qualify for Medicaid.

At present, about 5,800 people with intellectual disabilities receive help from the state through two programs. One offers housing, such as group settings; the other is for those living at home.

Borrow and patch

The waiting list has been around for more than a decade. In fact, funding is a perennial issue for a plethora of state services.

For fiscal 2016, the state General Fund confronts a shortfall estimated at $200 million to $250 million. Where lawmakers might find revenue, or make cuts, is a guessing game. Their 2015 regular session starts in March.

State Sen. Arthur Orr, R-Decatur, who chairs the Senate's General Fund committee, said it's too early to say whether the Legislature would be in position to award more to Mental Health. Deep cuts have bled the agency during the recent national recession, its budget falling from $144 million in 2008 to $104 million in each of the last three years.

One-time revenue streams, like federal stimulus funds, helped close the gap for a while until drying up in 2012.

Good and bad days

Shunnarah's daughter, Lori, was diagnosed with pervasive developmental disorder at age 4. She also has emotional problems.

On her good days, the girl likes to go the Exceptional Foundation center in Homewood, which works with special-needs youths and adults.

Lately, Lori's condition has deteriorated and she sleeps most of the day. She's often confused, and unable to undertake even the simplest tasks.

Shunnarah tutors UAB students in English but can't work full-time because of the demands as Lori's caregiver.

Terry Pezent, executive director of The Arc of Alabama, said she gets calls for help every week from families. Baby boomer-age parents worry about what will happen to their disabled son or daughter after they are gone or get too old to tend to them.

Often, one parent or the other has gone without a regular job for years, devoting the days to care-giving.

"The economic impact is huge, not only for the individual, but for the state as well," said Chris Stewart, president and CEO of ARC of Jefferson County.

Building independence

People with intellectual disabilities need to work, find a measure of independence, and do as much as they can for themselves, advocates say. The state services, they say, fill in the gaps.

Services under the Medicaid waiver, for example, provide job coaching, occupational therapy, physical therapy, behavior therapy, respite care and more. It's those few hours of support, and the hope of progress, advocates say, that rekindle a care-giver's energy.

It was once common for disabled people to languish in large state institutions. Now, the goal is to live with family members, or in apartments or in group homes. The change is like the shift in treatment of mental illness, moving from institutional to community-based care.

James Tucker, a lawyer with the Alabama Disabilities Advocacy Program, said the state has done an adequate job of evolving, providing new mental health resources at the community level.

But thorns, like the waiting list, remain to pierce and prick. "The state says they're eligible, but we can't serve them," Tucker said.

Said state Mental Health Commissioner James Reddoch: "Looking at it globally, it has been a very successful transition."

Still, he agreed, "There are always bumps in the road ... When you've got someone you're trying to take care of at home, they'd like to hear more than, 'We've got them on the waiting list.'"

Contributing to community

Susan Ellis of Vestavia Hills always had high expectations for her son, Matthew Foster, 31, who has Down syndrome.

Foster was involved with his peers in public school and worked since he was a teen. These days, he has a job at Chuck E Cheese, entertaining children as the costumed mouse that gives the restaurant its name. It's a perfect fit, his mother says, because he likes to entertain and likes children.

Foster spent about eight years on the waiting list for intellectual disability services, getting them when he was 28. He receives 20 hours a week in personal care assistance, including help with maintaining his apartment, paying bills and shopping.

Ellis, 64, said it's reassuring to see her son growing on his own and thriving.

"I don't want people to pity my son," said Ellis, state coordinator for People First of Alabama, an advocacy group for disabled people. "He makes our community better."