More than 250,000 New Jerseyans have purchased 2015 health plans under the Affordable Care Act, and as open enrollment closed April 30, the health insurers competing to sell Obamacare coverage have begun reporting on the number of members they’ve signed up around the state.

Five health insurers are offering coverage on HealthCare.gov for individuals and families who use the federal website to obtain federal subsidies to defray the cost of coverage. The insurers are also selling individual and family plans directly to consumers on their own websites, by phone and through health insurance brokers.

Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey told NJBIZ that it nearly doubled its individual health insurance membership in 2015, from approximately 107,000 members to 198,000. Of these, about 122,000 signed up with Horizon via HealthCare.gov.

“We attribute this further strengthening of our No. 1 market share position to a robust marketing and outreach program,” said spokesman Tom Vincz. “Horizon utilized multiple retail channels that allowed us to interact with consumers on a one-on-one basis, providing them with answers and understanding to make informed decisions about their health coverage options.”

Horizon is the state’s largest health plan provider, with 3.7 million members.

AmeriHealth New Jersey spokeswoman Jill Roman told NJBIZ the company does not yet have final numbers for its 2015 ACA enrollment, which closed April 30.

But she said, “We are pleased with our individual membership, which is currently 7.5 times greater than it was pre-ACA and is on target for what we anticipated for in 2015."

She said about 70 percent of AmeriHealth’s individual members purchased 2015 health insurance through the federal marketplace, HealthCare.gov, while about 30 percent enrolled directly with AmeriHealth through the company’s website, telephone or health insurance brokers.

One of the state’s newest health insurers, Health Republic Insurance of New Jersey, said it signed up 55,000 members through April 24; the company said Friday it did not yet have final numbers through April 30.

That’s a big jump from 2014, when the newly-launched HRINJ signed up less than 5,000 members. HRINJ is a nonprofit, co-op insurer created with loans provided by the ACA.

Cynthia Jay, spokeswoman for HRINJ, told NJBIZ, “We surpassed our internal expectations and are very excited about our growth.”

She credited the surge in enrollment this year to a number of factors, including more competitive pricing and more plan choices, including one plan whose members save money by using Monmouth County health care providers, and one that’s built around members using patient-centered medical homes. HRINJ dropped a requirement that members get a referral to see a specialist, is offering access to health care providers outside New Jersey, and provides free access to Teladoc, a telehealth service.

Jay said the company “is a true part of the health insurance landscape in New Jersey as the first and only co-op in the state. We pride ourselves on listening to the health care desires of our members, and expanding the services we offer our members based on member, consumer and broker feedback.”

Oscar Insurance and UnitedHealthcare are selling health plans to New Jerseyans via HealthCare.gov but have not yet announced their 2015 enrollment numbers for New Jersey. Oscar said it has a total of 40,000 members in New York and New Jersey, the two states where it sells health insurance.

New Jersey is one of 23 states where UnitedHealthcare is offering Obamacare health plans. Spokeswoman Mary McElrath-Jones told NJBIZ that the company added 570,000 members through the ACA marketplace across all 23 states during 2015 open enrollment.

Open enrollment on HealthCare.gov officially ended Feb. 15, but the federal government extended the deadline to April 30 for individuals who got hit with a penalty for not having health insurance in 2014—the first year of the ACA’s “individual mandate” which requires most US residents to have health insurance or pay the penalty. Those who signed up by the April 30 deadline can avoid the 2015 penalty but still must pay the 2014 penalty.

The ACA also expanded eligibility for Medicaid, which was a major factor in getting more New Jerseyans covered.

Medicaid is funded 50/50 by the state and federal governments, and New Jersey contracts with health insurers to provide the Medicaid program to the state’s nearly 1.67 million Medicaid members.

The largest Medicaid provider is Horizon. Vincz told NJBIZ that the company’s Medicaid business grew by 205,490 this year, with enrollment going from 576,977 to 782,467.

ALSO ON NJBIZ:

NJBIZ ranks Best Places to Work in N.J. for 2015

Wildstein pleads guilty in Bridgegate case

At real estate conference, Fox touts ties between public transit, redevelopment success