Debbie Wasserman Schultz has never been shy about brandishing her credentials as a liberal Democrat. Supporters cheer her on, while detractors, including some in her own party, criticize her for excessive partisanship.

Regardless, Wasserman Schultz has been an effective member of the U.S. House of Representatives since first being elected in 2004, and the Sun Sentinel recommends that District 23 voters return her to office.

Besides her role as a leader in Florida's delegation, Wasserman Schultz, 48, also was elected chair of the Democratic National Committee three years ago, making her a leading voice in advancing President Obama's agenda and in helping elect Democrats across the country.

She's proven herself to be a powerful communicator, with an impressive recall of details. Though she has sometimes stumbled with harsh rhetoric, that's not surprising in the heat of a campaign. Still, it was difficult to read a Politico story that suggested she's taken personal advantage of her leadership role. But given the fear among Democrats going into this mid-term election, criticism of party leaders is not unexpected.

It's also worth noting that the partisanship Wasserman Schultz displays on Sunday morning news programs doesn't define this wife and mother of three children, who juggles family and work in admirable ways.

To help bridge the partisan divide, she formed a bipartisan softball team of female colleagues that competes against a team of female reporters. And with conservative Republican Daniel Webster of Orlando, with whom she worked in the Florida Legislature, she's been hosting social gatherings for lawmakers of opposing parties to get to know one another. She recognizes that getting things done requires cultivating personal relationship on both sides of the partisan divide.

Wasserman Schultz has a minority party leadership role on the important Appropriations Committee and serves as chief deputy whip, trying to shepherd Democratic legislation through the House. Her positions provide clout that can help win support for issues important to South Florida, including Port Everglades expansion.

While some Democrats up for re-election have distanced themselves from Obama, Wasserman Schultz wholeheartedly supports him. She's a strong advocate of the Affordable Care Act, of raising the minimum wage and equal pay for women.

She also endorses efforts to end so-called corporate "inversions," a maneuver involving a foreign holding company that some American firms have used to avoid U.S. taxes. While she acknowledges the strategy is legal, she says, "Just because you can do something, it doesn't mean you should."

Joe Kaufman, a 44-year-old political activist, writer and lecturer from Weston, is the Republican running against Wasserman Schultz.

It's a rematch, of sorts, as Kaufman has challenged the congresswoman before. Wasserman Schultz won re-election handily then and voters should make sure she does so again.