Health reform encouraged hospitals and doctors to form groups to coordinate care and improve quality for Medicare patients in hopes of saving money.

A new government report shows that about one quarter of 243 groups called accountable care organizations, including one in Buffalo caring for thousands of patients, saved $372 million in 2013 for the giant federal health program aimed at individuals 65 and older.

The accountable care organization here – formed in 2012 by Catholic Medical Partners, a network of 900 doctors, and the Catholic Health hospital system – stood out as one of the most successful in the country.

It saved $27.9 million, the third most in total dollars, although it was not clear from the available information where the group ranked as far as savings per enrolled member.

The results are considered important because accountable care organizations represent a national experiment of new payment methods to simultaneously control health spending and improve quality of care.

Overall, 64 of the Medicare accountable care organizations saved enough money and performed well enough on quality measures to earn bonuses totaling $445 million. The combined savings for Medicare, which spent $492 billion last year on medical services to 49.4 billion beneficiaries, includes the financial incentives to the accountable care organizations that did well.

Officials involved in the Catholic group, which earned an $8.4 million bonus, attributed their success to the hospitals and doctors having a long history of working together and committing themselves to changes in support of the new payment system.

“We had been working on the concept of population health for eight years. We gained experience working with risk contracting. And we reinforced an emphasis on quality outcomes, believing that cost savings would follow,” said Dr. Michael Edbauer, chief medical officer at Catholic Medical Partners and chief clinical officer at Catholic Health.

The Affordable Care Act allows Medicare to reward accountable care organizations with a share of the savings that result from hitting targets for cost reduction and quality measures. The organizations offer an alternative to the fee-for-service payment system that has been criticized for unnecessary care, poor coordination and high costs.

Medicare reported on two types of accountable care groups known as the Medicare Shared Savings and Pioneer programs. These networks can get hit with penalties, too.

The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid report showed that four groups incurred penalties, including Dean Clinic and St. Mary’s Hospital Accountable Care Organization in Wisconsin, which will have to repay Medicare $4 million because it cost Medicare $10 million more than expected.

“We all have a stake in improving the quality of care we receive, while spending our dollars more wisely,” Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia M. Burwell said in a statement.

The Buffalo accountable care organization enrolled 33,000 patients, with about 28,000 of them consistently receiving care.

It saved money primarily through greater efficiency, such as reductions in unnecessary hospital readmissions, emergency room visits and repeat diagnostic tests. In addition, the hospital system and physician group moved toward team-based care in doctors’ offices, including the use of nurse managers, pharmacists and social workers to better coordinate care, officials said.

The doctors and hospitals invested in an electronic medical record and encouraged its use among physicians with technical support and data reports, they said.

Success also came from a recognition that these actions lowered revenue at the hospitals, while increasing costs in some ways, and that, to work, the program required everyone to work cooperatively, said Dennis Horrigan, president and chief executive officer of Catholic Medical Partners.

“We’re closely integrated with Catholic Health. It’s about building a culture of working as a team,” he said.

Across the U.S., the results looked mixed. Some accountable care organizations saved money for Medicare and earned bonuses, but others lost money. The challenge, as officials here found, is that a successful accountable care organization can require new investments but result in reduced revenue for the hospital partners.

“This raises serious questions about the sustainability of the program under the current rules,” Clif Gaus, chief executive officer of the National Association of ACOs, said in a statement.

However, the groups achieved widespread improvements in quality, such as patients’ ratings of their doctor and screening for high blood pressure. It’s not clear if the success here can serve as a model for groups elsewhere.

“Everyone is starting from different points,” said Joseph McDonald, president and chief executive officer of Catholic Health. “It takes courage to step into an unproven strategy. You are constantly making decisions about right-sizing.”

Currently, there are 360 Medicare accountable care organizations serving 5.6 million Americans.

email: hdavis@buffnews.com