The Daily Briefing: It's 'Mini-Super Tuesday' as CT, RI, DE, MD, and PA head for the polls

Image Credit: Vote

Published by: Jared Yamamoto

Herman Cain Daily Briefing for Tuesday, 4-26-2016

Summary

MINI-SUPER TUESDAY Connecticut, Rhode Island, Delaware, Maryland, and Pennsylvania all vote today.

o Trump and Clinton are projecting big wins with leads in most polls.

o Delaware is a GOP ‘winner take all’ and Maryland is a GOP ‘winner take most.’

UPDATED GOP DELEGATE COUNT 1,237 NEEDED TO WIN

· Donald Trump 845

· Ted Cruz 559

· John Kasich 147

UPDATED DEM DELEGATE COUNT (Including Super Delegates)

· Hillary Clinton 1,944

· Bernie Sanders 1,192

THE WORLD IS WORRIED ABOUT AMERICA’S CLIMATE President Obama’s new United Nations climate envoy says he has fielded questions from international allies on the fate of U.S. climate change commitments if a Republican wins this fall’s presidential election.

o The U.S. and other nations met over the weekend to discuss next steps on the climate accord. The deal kicks in when 55 countries representing at least 55 percent of worldwide carbon emissions “join” the deal, and the signatures affixed to the deal Friday were simply the prelude to that step.

o “There is some concern globally about where we’re headed,” said Jonathan Pershing who represents the U.S. Special Envoy for Climate Change. Pershing and others attended meetings at the UN over the weekend to mark the signing of the Paris climate deal.

o Despite the concerns, Pershing said, “I think we were able to really address it with a couple of really telling points that were persuasive for folks.”

o He also said the U.S. will inevitably participate in a global clean energy market regardless of who is president, even if it’s a Republican dismissive of climate change, as leading candidates Donald Trump and Ted Cruz are.

o Administration officials have long warned the GOP not to let Obama’s climate commitments lapse if a Republican take office. Pershing’s predecessor, Todd Stern, said in February there would be “diplomatic consequences” if the next president pulls out of the climate deal, which was signed in New York on Friday.

OBAMACARE BLUNDERS Health insurance companies are laying the groundwork for substantial increases in ObamaCare premiums, opening up a line of attack for Republicans in this heated presidential election year.

o Many insurers have been losing money on the ObamaCare marketplaces, in part because they set their premiums too low when the plans started in 2014. The companies are now expected to seek substantial price increases.

o Insurers are already making the case for premium increases, pointing to a pool of enrollees that is smaller, sicker and costlier than they expected.

o Blue Cross Blue Shield released a widely publicized report last month that said new enrollees under ObamaCare had 22 percent higher medical costs than people who received coverage through their employers.

o Still, even talk of premium increases provides an opening for Republicans who are campaigning against the Affordable Care Act (ACA) as they seek to hold their majorities in Congress and win back the White House.

o The prominence of the premium hike issue in the campaign could depend on whether Donald Trump or Ted Cruz (or someone else) is the Republican nominee.

o The Obama administration has sought to get out in front of the coming ObamaCare premium hikes, in part by downplaying their likely impact.

o ObamaCare premiums rose an average of 8 percent between 2015 and 2016, but once the tax credits were factored in, consumers on average ended up paying just 4 percent more: $106 per month compared to $102 per month.

o Large premium increases were also common before ObamaCare. Back then, people could be denied coverage due to preexisting conditions, meaning some people could not obtain coverage for any price. ObamaCare premiums came in about 15 percent below expectations in the first year of the new coverage, in 2014.

MINIMUM WAGE BACKLASH The University of California at Berkeley’s plan to fire 500 workers a week after the state voted to raise the minimum wage is said to be an ‘unlikely’ coincidence.

o “The school was already in financial trouble it ran a $109 million deficit last year and is projecting a deficit of $150 million this year,” the financial newspaper said in an editorial. “But number crunchers at the school had to have factored in the higher mandated wages when making their layoff decisions.”

o California Gov. Jerry Brown in April signed into law a 50 percent increase in the minimum pay rate to $15 an hour by 2022, saying, “Morally and socially and politically, they (minimum wages) make every sense because it binds the community together and makes sure that parents can take care of their kids in a much more satisfactory way,” according to the Sacramento Bee.

o A week after the wage hike was signed into law, Nicholas Dirks, chancellor of the flagship of liberal academia, sent a memo to UC Berkeley employees announcing that 500 jobs were getting cut over the next two years.

o UC Berkeley’s Center for Labor Research touted a hike in the minimum wage as a boon to low-income household breadwinners in a March 30 report.

o “This is a very big deal for low-wage workers in California, for their families and for their children,” Ken Jacobs, chairman of the UC Berkeley center, told the Los Angeles Times after the report was published.

CHEAP OIL AND THE IMF The International Monetary Fund estimates the Middle East’s oil-dependent economies have missed out on $390 billion in oil revenues last year alone and face up to $150 billion in income losses this year as a result of cheap oil prices.

o The drop in revenues stemming from the export of oil is the direct result of the plunge in crude prices from around $115 a barrel in the middle of 2014 to below $30 at the start of the year and is now above $40.

o The loss in potential revenues has put an enormous strain on the economies of major oil exporters such as Saudi Arabia and Kuwait who have posted massive budget deficits in the past year. The IMF had previously calculated that the declining energy prices would erase around $360 billion in oil receipts.

o To overcome these gaping budget deficits, Persian Gulf countries have introduced a raft of measures ranging from cutting energy subsidies to raising taxes. Some, such as Saudi Arabia, have also burned through their foreign reserves or started to borrow internationally to ease the fiscal pressures.

o Economic growth for the region’s oil exporters is set to rise to 3% in 2016 from 2% last year but that is mainly due to the improved prospects of Iraq, which increased oil production, and Iran, which is looking to benefit from the gradual lifting of sanctions, the IMF said.

o For the oil-rich Persian Gulf countries, economic activity is expected to further slow as governments are cutting spending to rein in widening budget deficits.

NO GROUNDWAR IN SYRIA? President Obama said that sending 250 additional troops to Syria doesn’t constitute a change in the United States’ mission there.

o Obama told CBS News’s Charlie Rose that, “as a general rule,” American troops will not be fighting directly with Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) forces in that country. Instead, they will beef up the train-and-advise mission that is already underway.

o “As a general rule, their role is not to engage directly with the enemy but rather to work with local forces that is consistent with our overall policy throughout,” Obama said.

o The president’s decision has drawn some scrutiny from some critics, who are wary of U.S. mission creep inside of Syria.

o They are worried American forces could get caught in a quagmire; Syria has been wracked by a civil war for five years, leaving a power vacuum that contributed to ISIS’s rise.

o Despite the administration’s insistence the U.S. isn’t fighting the ground war against ISIS, special forces have participated in targeted raids on the ground in Syria.

o Obama this week ruled out sending in U.S. ground forces to overthrow Syrian President Bashar Assad.

o “It would be a mistake for the United States, for Great Britain, for a combination of Western states to send in ground troops and overthrow the Assad regime,” Obama added.

THE BATHROOM BATTLE CONTINUES Four Democratic lawmakers in North Carolina’s House of Representatives have introduced a measure to repeal the state’s controversial House Bill 2, otherwise known as the Public Facilities Privacy & Security Act, which prohibits transgender people from using the bathroom in accordance with their gender identities.

o The bill, known as House Bill 946, would undo HB 2 in its entirety and appropriate $545,407 to the state’s Human Relations Commission, an office within the Department of Administration that enforces equal opportunities in employment, housing, public accommodations, recreation, education, justice, and governmental services.

o It was filed by Reps. Darren Jackson, Graig Meyer, Susi Hamilton and Grier Martin, who said in a press conference Monday morning that “HB2 goes against everything I know about my fellow North Carolinians.”

o Outside the general assembly yesterday hundreds of HB 2 supporters and opponents rallied to mark the return of the state legislature for the first time since it passed the so-called “bathroom law” last month during a special session. A coalition of organizations opposed to HB 2 delivered 185,000 signatures calling for the law to be overturned, according to the Charlotte Observer. Supporters of the measure, meanwhile, gathered for a packed concert and rally on the Halifax Mall in downtown Raleigh.

o Since it was hastily passed and signed into law last month, HB 2 has been the focus of a growing national backlash against the Tar Heel State, with numerous celebrities, businesses and sports organizations calling for the law’s repeal. Proponents insist HB 2 is necessary to protect the privacy and safety of people (usually young girls) from potential predators in the bathroom. Yet critics say the law hurts the LGBT community by nullifying all local nondiscrimination ordinances that offered protections based on sexual orientation and gender identity, while also requiring people to use government building bathrooms in line with the sex listed on their birth certificates.

o For most people, that regulation poses no problem. But for transgender people, whose expressed or experienced gender differs from the sex listed on their birth certificates, it forces them to use the bathroom that conflicts with their identity.

TSA GUNS RECORD Airport screeners established a new record last week when they stopped passengers from boarding planes with 73 firearms in carry-on luggage.

o The Transportation Security Administration officials said the number was reached in the seven days ending on April 21st and the haul surpassed the previous high of 68 set in October 2015.

o After confiscating the 73 firearms, TSA carry-on screeners made a startling discovery: 68 of the weapons were loaded and more than two dozen had a round in the chamber.

o Two loaded guns were seized at Boston Logan Airport on Tuesday and Thursday.

o Other airports where weapons were found included Raleigh-Durham, Dallas-Fort Worth, Phoenix and Detroit.

o Two replica military rounds also were discovered in a checked bag at Tucson, the TSA reported.

o Federal law bars guns in carry-on bags, but they can be transported in checked luggage if they are unloaded and declared to the airline before the flight departs.

CALIFORNIA LAWS California lawmakers are considering fines of as much of $1,500 for jurors who tweet about trials or research a case on Google, after court officials argued that misbehaving citizens have caused mistrials and overturned convictions around the country.

o As jurors and judges have become more technology savvy in recent years, the perils playing around with their smartphones have become a mounting concern, particularly in California. A 2011 state law made improper electronic or wireless communication or research by a juror punishable by contempt.

o Supporters of the latest proposal say a potential fine would give teeth to existing prohibitions against using social media and the internet, and would simplify the process for holding wayward jurors accountable.

o But critics question whether it will have any practical effect on jurors who are constantly on sites such as Facebook and Twitter. They suggest judges vet the social media activity of potential jurors before seating them.

o It is not clear exactly how many times juror social media or internet use has affected trials. But anecdotal evidence suggests it is more than sporadic.

o Eric Robinson, co-director of the Press Law and Democracy Project at Louisiana State University, said he used to track cases of juror social media or internet misconduct using news accounts and other sources, but there were so many “it got to be more trouble than it was worth”.

o “Those are the ones we hear about,” he said. “I’m sure it happens a lot more.”

THE ISLAMIC STATE’S KILL LIST The Islamic State has distributed a "kill list" containing the names of U.S. government personnel at the Pentagon, State Department, and Department of Homeland Security, as well as several other federal agencies.

o The 43 names were distributed by the United Cyber Caliphate over a smartphone messaging application called Telegram, and were accompanied by phone numbers, cities and zip codes.

o Street addresses were not included, and some of the information was affiliated with offices where the targets are employed. The words "wanted to be killed" were included in English, Arabic, French, Spanish and Russian.

o Other targets included personnel at the Departments of Energy, Commerce and Health and Human Services. Targets outside of Washington include staff at the

o Though the cyber division of the Islamic State is often dubbed a "hacking" organization, there is little evidence of any sophisticated technical ability. However, the distribution of kill lists over Telegram has become a standard practice for the group. The names of police officers in Minnesota were released in March, while a list of U.S. officials was released in November.

FELON RIGHTS CONTINUES Attorney General Loretta Lynch said states should make it easier for convicted felons to obtain state-issued identification after they get out of prison setting measures aimed at helping smooth the return to society for the hundreds of thousands of inmates released each year.

o State laws vary on the voting eligibility of people convicted of crimes. Nearly 6 million Americans are unable to vote because of their criminal backgrounds, though more than 20 states have acted in the last two decades to help those with criminal convictions vote.

o The announcement is part of a broader movement to undo criminal justice policies that have meted out exceptionally long sentences for drug offenders, caused prison populations to balloon and, advocates say, created unnecessary barriers for ex-convicts looking to rebuild their lives. It amplifies an ongoing Justice Department push to rethink harsh drug sentences and to ensure alternatives to prison for certain nonviolent defendants, an effort known as "Smart on Crime."

o "The long-term impact of a criminal record prevents many people from obtaining employment, housing, higher education and credit and these barriers affect returning individuals even if they have turned their lives around and are unlikely to reoffend," the department said in a seven-page policy statement titled "Roadmap to Re-entry."

o The issue of felons' rights has attracted growing attention at the state and federal levels in recent years. Last week, Virginia Gov. Terry McAuliffe issued an executive order that would allow more than 200,000 convicted felons to cast ballots in November, calling voting rights the "essence of our democracy."

o The Obama administration, meanwhile, has created a federal re-entry council that looks for ways to reduce hurdles for people leaving prison.

o A letter released by the Justice Department calls on governors of all states to allow federal inmates who are returning to their communities to exchange their prisoner identification cards for state-issued identification, or to simply accept their prison cards as supporting documentation to obtain a state ID.

o Without identity documents, Americans leaving prison face challenges in getting jobs, housing or opening bank accounts, Lynch wrote in a sample letter provided by the Justice Department.

CABLE MERGER The Department of Justice and the chairman of the Federal Communications Commission approved Charter Communications’ $78 billion takeover of Time Warner Cable and its $10.4 billion purchase of Bright House Networks.

o The government agencies attached several conditions to the approval and the deal will affect one in six American households.

o The full FCC still needs to vote to accept Chairman Tom Wheeler's recommendation, but the vote is believed to be a formality in this case.

o Once the deal is complete, Charter will stand next to Comcast, AT&T, and Verizon as a media giant shaping the future of television-watching and web-surfing.

o "We are pleased to reach this critical step in the regulatory review of our merger with Charter," Time Warner Cable CEO Rob Marcus said, "and remain optimistic that the transaction will be finalized soon."

o The purchase was proposed almost a year ago, after Comcast's bid to combine with Time Warner Cable fell apart amid stiff opposition from Washington.

o The same regulators were more supportive of Charter's bid for Time Warner Cable but with important caveats.

o Charter will be prohibited from putting data caps in place or charging customers based on usage.

o Additionally, the company won't be allowed to charge internet content providers fees for connecting them to customers.

o The conditions will apply for seven years to "focus on removing unfair barriers to video competition.”

o Tom Rutledge, Charter's CEO, will run the enlarged company. He initially hoped the deal would be approved by the end of 2015, but the process has taken a long time.

o Now Charter is eyeing a mid- to late-May completion date. Along with the FCC vote, the company still needs approval from the California's Public Utilities Commission. A vote is scheduled for May 12.

GANNETT MERGER . Gannett Co. which owns USA TODAY and more than 100 other media properties across the country has offered to buy Tribune Publishing for about $815 million, its second big expansion move since spinning off from its former parent less than a year ago.

o In a letter to Justin Dearborn, CEO of Tribune, which owns the Los Angeles Times, Chicago Tribune and nine other dailies, Gannett CEO Robert Dickey reiterated a private April 12 offer to pay $12.25 per share, a 63% premium to Tribune’s closing stock price last Friday. Gannett’s deal includes assuming $390 million of Tribune’s debt outstanding as of Dec. 31, 2015.

o The offer price is about 5.6 times Tribune’s estimated 2016 earnings before interest, taxes and other items. Gannett estimates about $50 million a year in “synergies” savings. Gannett owns USA TODAY plus 107 local news organizations including the Detroit Free Press, Cincinnati Enquirer, Des Moines Register, the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel and Arizona Republic.

o “We believe Tribune shares the new Gannett’s unwavering commitment to journalistic excellence and delivering superior content on all platforms,” Dickey said in a statement Monday. “In this respect, the proposed combination of Gannett and Tribune would bring together two highly complementary organizations with a shared goal of providing trusted, premium content for the readers and communities we serve.”

MELISSA CLICK IS AT IT AGAIN Missouri Professor Melissa Click suggested in a newspaper profile that she was fired because she’s white woman.

o Click was fired from her position as an assistant professor of communications in February, and her appeal of the decision was denied in March. She achieved national attention after video footage of her assaulting a student journalist went viral. Later, video emerged of her yelling profanities at a police officer.

o “This is all about racial politics,” Click said in the Chronicle of Higher Education article. “I’m a white lady. I’m an easy target.”

o Her confrontation with a student journalist attempting to cover campus protests in November was caught on the journalist’s camera.

o “I’m not a superhero,” Click told The Chronicle. “I wasn’t in charge. When it got out of control, I was the one held accountable.”

o Her incident with police in October, during a protest at the university’s homecoming parade, was caught on an officer’s body camera.

o “Am I going to be one of those people who stands and watches another brutal moment against black people, or am I going to step in and make sure they’re safe?” Click said she asked herself before stepping between the police officer and a protester.

o “Black people love me,” she’s quoted as telling a reporter.

o Click said the media treated her unfairly, and if she were to write a headline for her story it would have been “Favorite Professor Fights to Support Black Students on Campus in Dangerous Situation.”

SPANKING DOES MORE HARM THAN GOOD The more children are spanked, the more likely they are to defy their parents and to experience increased anti-social behavior, aggression, mental health problems and cognitive difficulties, according to a new meta-analysis of 50 years of research on spanking by experts at the University of Texas at Austin and the University of Michigan.

o The study looks at five decades of research involving over 160,000 children. The researchers say it is the most complete analysis to date of the outcomes associated with spanking, and more specific to the effects of spanking alone than previous papers, which included other types of physical punishment in their analyses.

o "Our analysis focuses on what most Americans would recognize as spanking and not on potentially abusive behaviors," says Elizabeth Gershoff, an associate professor of human development and family sciences at The University of Texas at Austin. "We found that spanking was associated with unintended detrimental outcomes and was not associated with more immediate or long-term compliance, which are parents' intended outcomes when they discipline their children."

o Gershoff and co-author Andrew Grogan-Kaylor, an associate professor at the University of Michigan School of Social Work, found that spanking (defined as an open-handed hit on the behind or extremities) was significantly linked with 13 of the 17 outcomes they examined, all in the direction of detrimental outcomes.

o "The upshot of the study is that spanking increases the likelihood of a wide variety of undesired outcomes for children. Spanking thus does the opposite of what parents usually want it to do," Grogan-Kaylor says.

o Gershoff and Grogan-Kaylor tested for some long-term effects among adults who were spanked as children. The more they were spanked, the more likely they were to exhibit anti-social behavior and to experience mental health problems. They were also more likely to support physical punishment for their own children, which highlights one of the key ways that attitudes toward physical punishment are passed from generation to generation.

o The researchers looked at a wide range of studies and noted that spanking was associated with negative outcomes consistently and across all types of studies, including those using the strongest methodologies such as longitudinal or experimental designs.

o As many as 80 percent of parents around the world spank their children, according to a 2014 UNICEF report. Gershoff notes that this persistence of spanking is in spite of the fact that there is no clear evidence of positive effects from spanking and ample evidence that it poses a risk of harm to children's behavior and development.

U.S. EMBASSY WORKER HACKED TO DEATH A U.S. Embassy worker and editor of Bangladesh's first LGBT magazine was among two men hacked to death yesterday evening in Dhak.

o A statement from the U.S. Embassy identified the man as Xulhaz Mannan, calling him a "dear friend."

o "We abhor this senseless act of violence and urge the Government of Bangladesh in the strongest terms to apprehend the criminals behind these murders," said Marcia Stephens Bloom Bernicat, the U.S. ambassador to Bangladesh.

o Mannan and someone described only as a friend were in a flat in Dhaka when five or six young men posing as couriers arrived at Mannan's building under the guise of delivering a package, said Mohammad Iqbal, officer in charge of the Kalabagan police station.

o They entered the second-floor apartment and hacked Mannan and his friend to death with machetes, Iqbal said. Mannan's mother and a maid were also in the flat at the time, he said. Both are alive.

DEFLATEGATE REINSTATE A U.S. appeals court restored the four-game "Deflategate" suspension of New England Patriots quarterback Tom Brady, handing the National Football League a victory in the latest round in a battle with one of its marquee players.

o The 2nd U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in New York reversed a federal judge's ruling that had overturned NFL Commissioner Roger Goodell's decision to penalize Brady, twice the league's most valuable player, over his alleged involvement in a scheme to deflate footballs used in a 2015 playoff game.

o The Patriots won that game over the Indianapolis Colts, sending them to the Super Bowl, where they defeated the defending champion Seattle Seahawks to give Brady his fourth championship title.

o Writing for the majority, U.S. Circuit Judge Barrington Parker said that under the players' collective bargaining agreement, Goodell had "especially broad" authority as an arbitrator to decide whether to confirm Brady's suspension.

o "Our review of the record yields the firm conclusion that the Commissioner properly exercised his broad discretion to resolve an intramural controversy between the League and a player," Parker wrote.

o Neither the Patriots, nor representatives for Brady were immediately available to comment on the ruling. The National Football League Players Association, the union which pursued the court challenge, said in a statement it was disappointed and would "consider all of our options."

o The ruling came in a 2-1 vote by the three-judge panel, and followed arguments last month where a lawyer for the players' union faced tough questioning that signaled the likely reversal of U.S. District Judge Richard Berman's ruling.

PAUL RYAN’S AGENDA Paul Ryan plans to roll out a policy platform this spring and has already been trying to build a social media and youth movement around the House Republican agenda.

o This week, Mr. Ryan will participate in a town-hall-style event at the Georgetown Institute of Politics and Public Service. In advance of that event, his office has rolled out its latest video holding up Mr. Ryan as a man with a plan, though the details of that plan, obliquely intended to distract from the presidential campaign of Donald J. Trump, are very much a work in progress.

o While Mr. Ryan has repeatedly said that he has no intention of becoming his party’s nominee this year, he has been busy creating a personality and policy alternative to run alongside the presidential effort to provide both a platform for House Republicans to run on and a foundation to rebuild if Republicans fall apart in November.

o Mr. Ryan is not a candidate. But his videos continue to make it seem as if he is running for something.

STARBUCKS OUTRAGE After many Starbucks employees voiced concern, the company has announced a new plan to donate 100 percent of its unsold food to charity within five years.

o Many Starbucks stores were already donating their pastries, which can easily be bagged and dropped off at nearby charities. But creating a program to include perishable items gathered from thousands of stores nationwide was a challenge.

o The federal government believes 30 to 40 percent of the nation's food supply is wasted a year. In 2014, nearly one in seven Americans lived in households that at some point were unsure where the next meal would come from.

o Feeding America is the nation's largest domestic hunger-relief and food-rescue organization. In 2015, its network of warehouses, food banks and food pantries saved over two billion pounds of edible food that might otherwise have gone to waste.

o After a year of research and food safety testing, Starbucks recently rolled out food-donation pilot programs in Arizona and California. In San Diego, Jellison manages one of 30 Starbucks locations now donating all of their perishable foods every day

Political Noise/Right Solutions and P.R.A.Y for Tuesday, 4-26-2016

CLINTON ‘S LACK OF LIKEABILITY Women are increasingly turning their noses up at the 2016 election, including Democratic women despite the likelihood that their party's nominee will be one of them, according to a new Gallup survey.

o Women have never paid as much attention to the current race as men, but Gallup found that the attention gap has expanded in recent months.

o Once just two points apart, in February, the gap is now 13 points and is seen in both Democratic and Republican ranks as men continue to be engaged in the election dominated by news coverage of Republican Donald Trump.

o Gallup said that 44 percent of men, compared to 31 percent of women, are paying close attention to the race.

o "The gender gap persists within both parties. An aggregated analysis of March and April responses shows that Republican men are eight points more likely than Republican women to be following the election very closely, while Democratic men are 11 points more likely than Democratic women," said Gallup.

o "Pure independents — those who do not lean to either party — are following the news less closely than those in either party, regardless of gender, as would be expected. But even with overall lower levels of interest, independent men are significantly more likely than independent women to say they are following the news very closely," added the survey analysis.

o Gallup blamed the lack of female candidates for women paying less attention, though that doesn't explain the low interest among Democrats who are likely to nominate their first woman as the party candidate. What's more, several groups that support women's issues, such as Planned Parenthood and Emily's List have been very public about backing Clinton.

o But, just 30 percent of Democratic women are paying attention to the race, compared to 44 percent of Republican women.

1/38 KASICH Republican presidential front-runner Donald Trump coined a new nickname for rival John Kasich: "1 for 38 Kasich."

o "Lyin' Ted Cruz and 1 for 38 Kasich are unable to beat me on their own so they have to team up (collusion) in a two on one. Shows weakness!" Trump tweeted.

o "Shows how weak and desperate Lyin' Ted is when he has to team up with a guy who openly can't stand him and is only 1 win and 38 losses," he tweeted minutes later.

o His tweets come a day after Cruz and Kasich announced a coordinated strategy to split the upcoming primary states in hopes of denying Trump the nomination. Kasich will clear a path for Cruz in the Indiana primary and Cruz will back down in other states.

o In a statement from Trump following the announcement, Trump criticized the plan as a "horrible act of desperation."

RHODE ISLAND POLLS Donald Trump commands a 13-point lead in Rhode Island the day before the state’s Republican presidential primary, according to a new poll.

o Trump takes 38 percent in the Ocean State in the latest Brown University Taubman Center for American Politics and Policy survey.

o John Kasich ranks second with 25 percent, while Ted Cruz has 14 percent. Pollsters added that 17 percent remain undecided before Tuesday’s contest.

PENNSYLVANIA DEM POLLS Among likely Democratic voters, Clinton has 55 percent support to Sanders's 40 percent.

o She has over 60 percent support among African-Americans, voters over 45, women and voters who identify as Democrats.

o But the Vermont senator continues to dominate among younger voters, with 60 percent of those under 45 supporting him.

MORE POLLS

o Republicans

· California:

· Trump: 49 percent.

· Cruz: 22 percent.

· John Kasich: 20 percent.

· Indiana:

· Trump: 41 percent.

· Cruz: 33 percent.

· Kasich: 16 percent.

o Democrats

· California:

· Clinton: 48 percent.

· Sanders: 46 percent.

· Indiana:

· Clinton: 46 percent.

· Sanders: 42 percent.

NEW CLINTON AD GOES AFTER TRUMP Hillary Clinton unveiled a major new attempt to use Donald Trump’s words against him as both she and rival Bernie Sanders adjusted course near the end of the race for the Democratic presidential nomination.

o While Clinton turned toward an anticipated general election showdown with Trump, Sanders invited Democrats to take a broader view of his role in the race than just as a contender, telling CNN he was out to “revitalize American democracy”.

o “We have got to involve people. And it’s not easy, because so many people have given up on the political process, including a whole lot of low-income people,” he said. “Our job is to bring people into the political process.”

o Sanders vowed to fight on through the last voting in June and predicted a payoff for Democrats in November.

CARLY FIORINA Carly Fiorina is being vetted by Ted Cruz's campaign as a possible vice presidential pick.

o Fiorina, a former Hewlett-Packard CEO and Republican presidential candidate, endorsed Cruz shortly after suspending her own bid for the White House earlier this year.

o Cruz acknowledged to reporters that his campaign is in the process of vetting a short list of potential vice presidential picks but would not confirm if Fiorina was on that list.

o "We have acknowledged some time ago that we have begun a vice presidential search process," Cruz said. "Any responsible candidate just a couple of months out from the convention would begin that process. We’ve begun examining both a long list and now a shorter list that has been called. And that naturally includes a vetting process. At this point, no decisions have been made in terms of who a nominee would be. Or what the timing would be of the announcement."

MARK LEVIN Just one day after conservative radio talk show host Mark Levin eviscerated people involved in the #NeverTrump movement as being "not conservatives" and "buffoons," if they'd vote for Hillary Clinton over Donald Trump, he suddenly changed course and insisted that he is "not voting for Donald Trump. Period."

o Levin, who endorses Ted Cruz for the GOP presidential nomination, said that he changed his mind after former Trump staffer Roger Stone threatened to expose the hotel rooms of convention delegates switching their votes away from Trump.

o Stone also said he plans to organize protests during the Cleveland convention against any attempts being made to "cheat" the New York billionaire out of the nomination through a contested convention.

o "I want to congratulate Roger Stone," Levin said Friday. "And if anybody has a problem with that Donald Trump, you can talk to Roger Stone. These bully dirty tricks Nixonian tactics, they’re only going to backfire. So count me as never Trump.”

o He also complained about the "crap in the National Enquirer against Ted Cruz," after the tabloid printed an article alleging the senator had had extramarital affairs with at least five women.

o Stone, a veteran GOP political consultant who advised Trump early in his campaign, was quoted in the article as saying rumors of affairs have been “swirling around Cruz for some time," leading Cruz to accuse Trump of being behind the article.

o Levin said he made his decision because of the battery charges brought against Trump's campaign manager, Corey Lewandowski, by former Breitbart News Reporter Michelle Fields, who says he grabbed her by the arm and bruised it.

o "I mean, I can go right through the list, too much, too much, too much," Levin said. "At some point, you’ve got to stand up to it."

o Levin also threatened to do his best to get Trump's supporters to back away if they make him mad again.

o “If they piss me off one more time, I’m going to urge millions and millions of you, should he get the nomination, not to vote for him either," Levin said.

A-OKAY FOR TUESDAY 4-26-2016

LEMONADE FOR ADOPTION A third-grader in Missouri has been selling lemonade to help pay for his adoption.

o Nine-year-old Tristan Jacobson sold $1 lemonades in front of the home in Springfield he shares with Donnie and Jimmy Davis, who have been Tristan's kinship guardians since he was 5.

o He has been through so much already in his young life and wants to remain with the only stable family he's ever known.

o The lemonade stand and a weekend yard sale raised $7,100 to assist with the adoption legal fees. A further $11,000 has been donated via YouCaring.com.

o Donnie Davis says "there's not enough words to say 'thank you' to everyone."

o Davis says: "Tristan is already our son, in our hearts. But we want to make it official. He wants to have our last name. Actually he has decided he wants to change his first name. And we are letting him. He has picked out the name of Quill Tristan Davis. He is so excited; he tries to tell his teachers to call him that now. He’s such an awesome kid. "

GOOD ASTRONAUT About 38,000 runners competed in the London Marathon today and one of them ran it in orbit 200 miles above Earth.

o British astronaut Tim Peake completed the 26.2 mile course at the International Space Station with an estimated time of 3:35.21 , the European Space Agency tweeted.

o He was also the official starter of the race in a video message played at the starting line. "I'm really excited to be able to join the runners on earth from right here on board the Space Station. Good luck to everybody running, and I hope to see you all at the finish line," Peake told his fellow competitors.

o He spoke about how inspiring the crowds and the atmosphere were when he ran the London Marathon in 1999. To give a digital sense of the atmosphere down below, Peake made use of the RunSocial app: "so I'll actually be looking at the route that I'm running, and I'll be running alongside everyone else who's running the digital version of the London Marathon."

RED ROBIN SERVER After Columbus SWAT officer Steven Smith’s funeral on Tuesday, a group of police officers went to the Red Robin in Polaris for something to eat.

o But they didn’t have to pay a thing, thanks to a server who gave them all their meals for free.The server, whose name is Jessica Dunbar, left a note on the back.

o “Officers,” she wrote, “Your bill is on me today. I can’t imagine the day you all have had, let alone what you go through every day. I hope your days get better. So much respect. #WeSeeYou #PoliceLivesMatter #RIPOfficerSmith”

o “I just wanted to do something nice,” Dunbar said. “You can’t put a dollar amount on making somebody happy.”

o Lt. Jeff Shelton, with the Wellington Police Department, was one of those at the restaurant.

o “It really touched all of our hearts,” Wellington said. “We weren’t expecting to be treated any different than normal, and just for somebody to come and do that, it really made our day.”

o Dunbar’s father is a retired Blendon Township police officer. She says the death of Officer Smith made her think about her own family.

o “He [Officer Smith] left behind a wife and kids. It could’ve been me. It could’ve been my dad.

o “People look up to them [the police]. To have them shake my hand and say ‘thank you’ to me, that was incredible.”

RETURNING THOR’S WALLET 17-year-old Tristin Budzyn-Baker found a wallet in a Los Angeles restaurant. When he realized that the wallet belonged to none other than the superhero Australian actor Chris Hemsworth, he flipped.

o “I looked up at my mom and was like, ‘ma, do you know who this is?’” he recounted Monday on The Ellen DeGeneres Show. “We found Thor’s wallet.”

o It was full of cash and he tracked down the movie star to return it.

o As a reward for receiving his wallet with nothing missing, Thor gave the honest teen some free tickets, merchandise, and a reward of $10,000 from the publishing service Shutterfly.

o Hemsworth also wrote a recommendation for Tristin to be awarded the Eagle Scout honor.

A VERY SPECIAL NOTE Working in law enforcement is often a thankless job, but one officer with Colorado’s Lakewood Police Department recently got a very special thank-you message from a young boy.

o Agent Ryan O’Hayre was preparing to order dinner at a Chick-fil-A restaurant when he saw seven-year-old Hunter Steffes approach.

o Steffes handed O'Hayre a note that read, "Thank you for your service. You walk the thin blue line. Be safe and go home to your family. Don’t ever worry I have your six."

o The Lakewood Police Department posted the touching note to their Facebook page:

o The phrase - which originated with World War I pilots who referenced the rear of an airplane as the six o'clock position - is a military and law enforcement term meaning "I’ve got your back."

o O'Hayre and Steffes joined Maria Bartiromo today, and the officer revealed that the note had more than heartfelt sentiment. It also included a gift card to Starbucks.

o "I was standing in line and Hunter sort of boldly walked up to me and just handed it to me," O'Hayre said. "He was pretty proud. And his parents should be very proud of him."

RETURNED HIGH SCHOOL RING On Wednesday, in the parking lot of the West Haven city offices, Jensen received a rather belated high-school graduation gift from a total stranger.

o John Monroe, a metal detectorist who lives in West Haven, returned the Layton woman’s high school class ring — 43 years after a thoughtless former boyfriend said he lost it.

o “Oh my heck,” Jensen gushed when John Monroe handed her the piece of jewelry from her past. “I can’t believe it. It’s been 43 years. Forty-three years.”

o Monroe has spent the better part of the past two decades using metal detectors to search for objects in the ground. Over the years, he’s amassed quite a collection. Old pharmacy bottles, marbles, garter belt clips. He’s got a whole mess of Mormon “CTR” rings.

o Or, as his wife Natalie puts it: “We have nine kids … and lots and lots of boxes of junk he’s dug up.”

o Recently, Monroe, 41, had been metal detecting in Ogden’s Liberty Park, where much of the grass has been removed during construction of a new school in the area. On Sunday morning, Monroe was using his detector to sweep an area of the park when he came across a Clearfield High School class ring from 1973. Inside were inscribed the initials “BLM.”

o Monroe immediately set Natalie on the trail of tracking down the owner. She contacted Clearfield High, and was able to page through a 1973 yearbook at Clearfield High. Two females and two males from that class shared the initials BM. Since it was a smaller ring, the Monroes figured they were probably looking for a female. One, they couldn’t find. The other was Jensen. Once the Monroes learned Jensen’s full maiden name was Bonni Lynne Melaney — BLM — they were pretty certain they’d found their owner.

A DIVINE SONOGRAM An Indiana mother-to-be received what some are calling a divine surprise after a prenatal checkup!

o A sonogram of Aley Meyer's baby boy appears to show an image of Jesus on the cross.

o Meyer told WFIE that she didn't even notice until about a week later when someone pointed it out at her baby shower.

o "We took a picture of it and blew it up on my phone to get a closer look, and it is so much detail. You can see the hair and his legs crossed and everything," Meyer said.

o Meyer added that she believes it's a sign that everything's going to be ok with baby Easton, who's due in June.

o Aley revealed that her grandmother even bought the baby a crucifix recently, which she plans to hang in the nursery.