Joining me now, our republican Congressman Matt Salmon and democratic Congressman Bill Pascrell. Congressman Pascrell, it's been a long time. How are you?

REP. BILL PASCRELL (D), NEW JERSEY: Very good. How is your family?

HANNITY: Good. Thank you very much.

All right. Liberals in this country claim they have a monopoly on compassion of fairness for the poor and everybody else. Let me ask you a very specific question. If big business gets a special exemptions, do you think it is fair that individuals did not get the same exemptions and similarly, you in Congress are getting the subsidy exemptions that the rest of us aren't getting with Obamacare. Do you think that's fair?

PASCRELL: Well, first of all the members of Congress do not get a subsidy. It is the employer contribution to health care.

HANNITY: Seventy two percent.

PASCRELL: Like any company or any federal agency. We are not getting anything more than anybody else.

HANNITY: Can I get the 72 percent?

PASCRELL: Wait.

HANNITY: I can't.

PASCRELL: Sean, you ask a good question. Give me a chance to answer it. Because all your guys on your side of the aisle, when this thing blows over, they will be the first ones to make sure that they have coverage. No question about it. You know it and I do. They could give it up tomorrow morning, Sean.

HANNITY: All right. Some of them did actually. Some have given up that benefit, the 72 percent subsidy. But I'm asking you. Big business got an exemption. But the last offer the Republicans was to take that exemption and applied it to everybody, individuals. Why would you be against that?

PASCRELL: Well, this is a plan that demands everybody and that's why.

HANNITY: Except big business.

PASCRELL: .It's important that everybody signs up. Well, there were some glitches. There was a bureaucracy. And we have to get over that bureaucracy. There are a lot of complaints, some of them very legitimate. So the administration thought that this was a way to extend the time, it was very, very necessary. We thought it was important.

HANNITY: All right. And why not individuals, too?

PASCRELL: Well, the individuals are getting as much help as possible.

HANNITY: No, they are not getting exempt at all.

PASCRELL: What's happened over the last three days indicates there is a lot of interest than this. Many people are having problems getting through. I recommend to those folks to continue to try.

IMUS: All right.

PASCRELL: Because it's going to be worthwhile. Regardless of what the folks say, this is going to be successful. And they don't want it to be successful.

IMUS: All right. There is a $10,000 swing Congressman Salmon in terms of the president said we'd save $2500 a year, it's going to cost people $7500 a year on average. And it's going to cost four times the $900 billion the president said and you got an exemptions for big business. What's your reaction to how different it is from what the President promised?

REP. MATT SALMON (R), ARIZONA: Well, nothing as the President promised. He also promised that people could keep their -- if they like their health care policy they could keep it. And that's not the way it's working out. In fact, people are losing their health care policies. So much so that the two prominent unions that lobbied for Obamacare. One was the teamsters, the other one is the United Food workers have written an angry letter to President Obama saying this thing stinks. It's going to create a part-time economy and it's going to take away the health care you promised we could keep.

As far as what Congressman Pascrell just said, I have already said that I won't take the subsidy. As soon as it comes in. I'm not going to take it. And I think that we should live under the same laws every other American does. Now, on that amendment that we offered, several Democrats actually voted with us. Because they realized just like we did this should be about fairness for everybody. Not just for a few.

HANNITY: Congressman Pascrell?

PASCRELL: You know, Sean, it's very, very interesting. You guys are now raising the flag for unions and the working people. I'm glad you are coming over to our side. And secondly, I don't have the federal plan. I have my own plan. So you don't know what you are talking about. The fact of the matter is, we are all different. We have different plans.

HANNITY: Congressman -- you're not telling the truth.

PASCRELL: I don't have the -- subsidy.

HANNITY: You're not telling the truth. You have a 72 percent subsidy that everybody --

PASCRELL: I don't have it.

HANNITY: -- that everybody watching the show does not have. That's what the law says, Congressman. You're getting special perks and special breaks for yourself.

PASCRELL: No, you are absolutely --

HANNITY: So, cut the crap and stop lying to the audience.

PASCRELL: No, you stop the crap.

HANNITY: Stop lying to the audience.

PASCRELL: You don't know what you are talking about. You have been lying.

HANNITY: Congressman Salmon, is there a 72 percent --

(TALKING OVER EACH OTHER)

SALMON: Let's talk about integrity and honesty. Let's be straight with the American people.

HANNITY: One at a time.

SALMON: Be straight with the American people.

HANNITY: Congressman Salmon, is there a 72 percent subsidy or not? Is there a 72 percent subsidy?

SALMON: There is a 72 percent subsidy.

HANNITY: Thank you.

SALMON: And it is a special deal that the President's cut for Congress. He's also cut a special deal for big business --

PASCRELL: There is no special deal the president cut for the Congress.

HANNITY: You got a 72 percent subsidy available to you.

(TALKING OVER EACH OTHER)

You know, what your problem is Congressman? You're an elitist.

PASCRELL: No, my problem is --

HANNITY: You think you are above the American people.

PASCRELL: No, my problem is you don't let me finish.

HANNITY: Go ahead, finish.

PASCRELL: You have a big problem.

HANNITY: My problem is people that lie on this program. You're not telling the truth. You're lying to the American people.

PASCRELL: Don't you dare call me a liar.

HANNITY: You are lying to the American people.

PASCRELL: Don't you dare call me a liar.

HANNITY: You're get ago 72 percent break. You're lying to the American people.

PASCRELL: Hey, Sean.

HANNITY: Tell the people the truth.

PASCRELL: Hey, Sean. Where were you in the last six months --

HANNITY: Tell the people of this country that you have a special subsidy that they don't have. Tell them the truth, Congressman.

PASCRELL: I don't have a special subsidy.

SALMON: That's a fact.

HANNITY: That's fact.

Check mate. We have to go.

PASCRELL: Look --

SALMON: Let me just say this.

PASCRELL: Pass it and put people back to work.

SALMON: Let me just say this to the Congressman, you are entitled to your own set of opinions but not your not entitled for you own set of facts.

HANNITY: Yes, that's exactly right.

PASCRELL: Yes. I remember what you just said, pal.

HANNITY: Hey, Congressman, I will tell you what, I'll bet you $10,000 your charity versus mine that Congress has a special subsidy to the American people don't have.

PASCRELL: Look.

HANNITY: Are you going to take the bet, Congressman? Are you going to take the bet?

PASCRELL: No, I won't take the bet.

HANNITY: Are you going to take that bet?

PASCRELL: No.

HANNITY: Because you're lying. That's why.

PASCRELL: I only talk to people that are straight, Sean.

HANNITY: I'm talking straight. If you take the bet, $10,000 for your favorite charity.

PASCRELL: When you're explaining, you are losing.

HANNITY: Ten thousand dollars.

PASCRELL: You're losing. You're afraid it's going to be successful. That's your problem.

HANNITY: OK. So, you're full of crap.

PASCRELL: Yes. Oh, really?