By Stephen Frank | Watchdog Arena

Sometimes a crisis occurs because of external issues you have no control over. For instance, if you run a business and a new regulation takes effect, you may no longer be able to make a profit. On the other hand, if you try a new marketing device, like banner ads, and they fail to bring in business, this was your choice. You can’t blame someone else.

California, thanks to Obamacare and its exchange, Covered California, has no one to blame but itself. The state is imposing costly rules and regulations on the health care system, causing a death spiral in health care delivery.

A friend of mine is taking care of her sick, elderly father. Until Covered California, she was paying $12 for a prescription for his heart problem. Covered California does not allow this medicine to be covered anymore, so she now pays over $400 every three months to keep her father alive.

Added to the higher costs for deductibles and medicine, you also have a California tax on insurance policies. Since 2008, California has collected a tax of 2.5 percent on all insurance policies. I should note that the tax is never broken out as part of the policy costs.

There are six other states that have a tax like this—four do not have any income taxes, and the other two have much lower income taxes and lower health care taxes. This is one of the reasons California health care costs are among the highest in the nation.

There’s another reason the California health care system could collapse: reimbursements for doctors accepting Medi-Cal patients have been cut by 60 percent as of January 1. There are 12.2 million Californians on Medi-Cal—a doubling of the number in a year.

The formerly Golden State has 38 million people, meaning two-thirds of the people pay for the health care of the other third. How long can this continue?

Gov. Jerry Brown expects several more millions to be added. Worse, if the Obama amnesty is implemented, than over 1 million illegal aliens in California could become eligible for taxpayer-subsidized insurance.

California Health Line noted that the rate cut could lead medical practices to insolvency:

“The federal drop is much more precipitous, but it’s the combination of the two rate decreases that has Francisco Silva concerned. Silva, vice president of legal affairs at the California Medical Association, said primary care providers who see a lot of Medi-Cal patients will have to scale back or stop seeing those beneficiaries. “That’s about 60% less, when you combine both cuts,” Silva said. “We’re very concerned. It’s really concerning for the sustainability of those practices with a large Medi-Cal patient base. When you look at the financial solvency data … there’s a strong correlation between solvency and patient load.”

The system is creating millions of patients, but reducing the number of doctors. We already have too few doctors, imagine how many more will drop out of the system when their already too low reimbursement is cut?

Hospitals are feeling the pinch, forcing several in Northern California to close due to financial distress. Now our rural residents have to go over 100 miles, instead of 20 to 25, to the nearest hospital. As of May 2014, eight California hospitals closed:

To that end, hospitals across California are facing $23 billion in payment cuts between now and 2023. Of that, $17 billion is related to the Affordable Care Act. It’s a tough road ahead for hospitals both large and small.

Less doctors and fewer hospitals, all because of policies made by government, not the mistakes made by health care professionals.

On top of all that, you have the fraud perpetrated by Covered California. Last year, they approved several health care plans through insurance networks. At that time, you could go to the Covered California web site, see the plans, the doctors and the hospitals involved, and make a decision.

It wasn’t until after folks bought the policies, vetted by the government agency, that they found out Covered California used bait and switch tactics on them:

CBS San Francisco reported the following:

Julia Turner was caught in what she described as an ‘insurance bait and switch.’ In her research, she found that her doctor was listed as in-network on the Covered California provider directory. After signing up for the coverage, she found out otherwise. “If I wasn’t going to have access to my doctor, I would have chosen a different insurance,” said Turner.”

Covered California failed to vet the insurance plans and ensure that information was correct. The state now has millions of citizens holding a medical card, but few doctors and hospitals willing to participate. The cost, when you include the taxes and high deductibles, has put quality care out of reach for many families.

To many, the card is worthless—but expensive.

None of this is because of external issues or problems. This is a suicide for the people of California, created by the federal and state governments that seem more interested in providing large numbers of cards than ensuring quality care for their citizens.

This article was written by a contributor of Watchdog Arena, Franklin Center’s network of writers, bloggers, and citizen journalists.