Corporate carve-outs were supposed to be scarce.

But Carlyle Group, which has made billions of dollars plucking unloved units from big companies and building them into standalone companies, seems to be having no problem finding them.

The Washington, D.C., firm has agreed to pay $3.2 billion for Illinois Tool Works’s industrial packaging business. ITW put the unit on the block last year as part of a broad reorganization. In 2012, the packaging business had $2.4 billion in sales.

Carlyle is in the process of investing its $13 billion buyout fund, which it finished raising in November. The Washington, D.C., firm and several of its rivals have recently reloaded with new pools of cash for corporate takeovers, raising the largest funds since the financial crisis. That’s set the stage for stiff competition in auctions of businesses, like the ITW unit, in which firms can invest big chunks of cash.

William Conway, Carlyle’s co-founder and co-chief executive, told investors in December that competition for deals, combined with rising stock prices of publicly traded companies, could make it difficult for the firm to replicate the buying binge it went on between 2010 and 2012. During that time, Carlyle acquired several multibillion-dollar businesses, such as stock photo agency Getty Images, telecom equipment company CommScope, and DuPont’s auto-paint unit, now called Axalta Coating Systems.

In anticipation of a dearth of similar deals, Mr. Conway said Carlyle would look to make non-controlling investments in growing companies. The firm last year agreed to pay $500 million for a minority stake in headphone maker Beats Electronics. Last month, Carlyle struck a similar deal to buy a piece of Vogue International, the maker of hair care products that were until recently sold under the name Organix.

In the span of three weeks, however, Carlyle has struck two deals in the mold of its more typical deals: corporate carve-outs in which it acquires a unit from a large company with the aim of building it into a standalone business. Carlyle in January agreed to pay $4.15 billion for Johnson & Johnson’s blood-testing business.