Co-founder Zach Nichols draws a beer for a customer at Sanitas Brewing Company, which is in the midst of a more than $250,000 brewery expansion. ( Mark Leffingwell / Staff Photographer )

In the 18 months since they opened their brewery, the guys at Boulder's Sanitas Brewing Co. have gotten used to not only finding solutions to tricky situations, but making the most of them.

An initial challenge: Opening a brewery 200 feet from railroad tracks?

Their solution: Offer a discounted "Train Beer" for 15 minutes after a train passes.

Or more recently: Embarking on a more than $250,000 brewery expansion that might bite into the tap room's atmosphere and functionality?

Their response: Bring patrons behind the curtain, give them a quick tour, and explain what's at stake and what's to come.

"We're trying our best to celebrate this with our customers," said Michael Memsic, a co-founder of Sanitas, which is located at 3550 Frontier Ave., off Pearl Parkway and Foothills Highway.

Sanitas is in the throes of a back-room construction project that will result in a quadrupling of annual production capacity, the addition of more barrel-aged beers and the installation of a couple new tap handles for the tasting room. Funding the expansion is a Small Business Administration-backed loan through Flatirons Bank.

But the growth doesn't necessarily come free of pain.

Sanitas' draft lines were tapped out for a week and a half recently and the brewery had to pour pints from cans and jockey boxes as work occurred behind the scenes to get the brewery's latest addition online: a nearly 19,800-cubic-foot cooler.

The hand-me-down from Longmont's Oskar Blues Brewery seemingly dwarfed Sanitas' former 3,200-cubic-foot icebox, the outline of which was marked by an orange pylon and tape.

Advertisement

Nearby, construction workers dug out trenches where four new tanks — three 60-barrel fermenters and one 60-barrel brite — will land in the coming weeks. Those will be followed by two more tanks, effectively quadrupling Sanitas' production capacity, Memsic said.

The brewery produced about 1,000 barrels, or 31,500 gallons, of beer last year, Memsic said.

At its current state, the brewery could bump up that output to 2,000 barrels per year.

But Sanitas officials wanted some breathing room.

Sales have climbed steadily since the brewery's opening in September 2013. During the first two months of 2015, taproom revenue is up 60 percent and outside sales are up 200 percent, Memsic said.

Sanitas also has doubled its on- and off-premise accounts since this past summer.

The jump in production also could allow for Sanitas to line up with a distributor. Right now, two crew members are logging thousands of miles weekly delivering beer from Boulder to more than 160 accounts in places such as Littleton, Stapleton, Northglenn and Longmont.

"We are assuming we wouldn't be able to keep up with our current capacity," Memsic said.

By mid-summer, the Sanitas crew hopes to add another 20 to 30 wine and beer barrels to the cellar and bring its draft selection up to 12 taps, he said.

Sanitas' expansion comes after a banner year for craft beer. The sector composed of independently operated small brewers recorded 18 percent annual volume growth in 2014 and increased its market share of the U.S. beer industry to 11 percent, according to the Boulder-based Brewers Association.

Alicia Wallace: 303-473-1332, wallacea@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/dc_alicia