Topics: black lives matter, Fox News, Media Matters, Politics News

This article originally appeared on Media Matters

Risking severe whiplash injuries, Fox News and the rest of the conservative media have tried to execute a sudden about-face following the Planned Parenthood terror attack in Colorado Springs last week. Scrambling for political cover in the wake of the gun rampage and news that alleged shooter Robert Dear likely targeted Planned Parenthood for political purposes, conservative commentators quickly rewrote their long-held talking points about inciting violence.

Here’s the spin that the conservative press, along with the Republican Party, is now desperately trying to push: When you call people “baby killers” and “murderers” and claim organizations sell “baby parts” for profit, you’re in no way promoting violence. And you’re in no way responsible if a like-minded person takes matters into his own hands, opens fire on a Planned Parenthood facility, shoots eleven people, murders three, and then reportedly makes reference to “no more baby parts” when the carnage is over.

There is no connection between acts of political violence and extremist rhetoric. It’s simply “unfair.” Or so goes the Fox News mantra this week.

Why the whiplash injuries? Because for the last year Fox and its allies have been warning that rhetoric kills. And specifically, rhetoric from Black Lives Matter activists gets police officers killed. (There’s no evidence to support that claim.) And for that, Democrats, including President Obama, are to blame for the so-called “war on cops.”

So in a matter of just a few days (i.e. pre-Colorado Springs vs. post-Colorado Springs), Fox News has thrown away its established playbook and quickly written a new one where everyone should just chill about incendiary political taunts that are seen as being violent and potentially deadly. (Going one step further: “So what” if far-right rhetoric inspires killings?)

Amidst the Fox News flip-flop, which brand of activist rhetoric is actually producing bouts of targeted violence today? As 2015 unfolds against the backdrop of Black Lives Matter protests, note that the number of officers shot and killed in the line of the duty has gone down this year.

By contrast, Planned Parenthood has experienced a spike in attacks on its facilities and employees this year, most likely the result of a coordinated smear campaign against the organization in the form of duplicitous videos, which kicked off last summer and have been heavily promoted by Fox News and other conservative media.

In fact, rather than producing violence as Fox suggests, Black Lives Matter protesters last week in Minneapolis were the target of gun violence. Four men have been charged in the shooting of five black protesters. Three of the arrested were reportedly fascinated “with guns, video games, the Confederacy and right-wing militia groups.”

The truth is Fox News has denounced Black Lives Matter as a “‘murder’ movement” and compared it to the Ku Klux Klan. It has also blamed the group for inciting violence.

In May, after NYPD officer Brian Moore was killed, Fox host Eric Bolling responded by suggesting liberals and their “war on cops” was at fault. According to Bolling, “The ‘anti-cop left’ in America seems to be … fueling some of this hatred and, you know, murderous streak that’s going on against cops.”

As mentioned, there is no “murderous streak” against cops in this country. And as Vox recently noted, “The goals and message of Black Lives Matter have nothing to do with harming police officers in any way. The movement is explicitly concerned with reducing the racial disparities found in the criminal justice system.”