In a continuing effort to clean up their embattled police department, officials in Edison Township are moving to fire two officers over misconduct claims that surfaced late last year.

Patrolmen Anthony Sarni and David Pedana have been suspended with pay over unrelated allegations since October. In recent weeks, both received letters signaling the township’s intention to terminate them, according to two law enforcement officials with knowledge of the cases.

Each officer is entitled to defend himself at a departmental hearing, akin to a trial, where evidence will be presented, according to the law enforcement officials, who spoke on condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to publicly discuss the moves.

Sarni, 39, a 10-year veteran, could not be reached for comment. Pedana, 34, who has been on the force 13 years, did not respond to a telephone message left at his home.

Sarni is accused of returning to the scene of an emergency call after his shift ended to proposition a woman for sex, authorities told The Star-Ledger in October.

The officer was still in uniform when he drove to see the woman at an Extended Stay America hotel in the Raritan Center, the officials said. Sarni met the woman while responding to a disturbance there earlier in the night.

The woman rejected his advances and filed a complaint.

"She felt he was being inappropriate and using his authority as a police officer to coerce her," one of the officials said at the time.

Sarni was charged administratively with lying about the incident and engaging in inappropriate conduct, among other departmental counts.

The case against Pedana grew out of the department’s biggest scandal in recent years: The arson and attempted murder charges against Edison officer Michael Dotro, who allegedly set his captain’s home on fire in May of last year.

Looking to determine if other officers had knowledge of Dotro’s alleged plans, the Middlesex County Prosecutor’s Office seized cell phones belonging to numerous officers, Pedana among them.

While the investigators found he was in no way connected to the fire, Pedana’s phone contained text messages riddled with racial epithets, including some directed at other officers, the law enforcement officials said.

Several of Pedana’s colleagues, none of whom would speak for attribution, called him an exemplary cop who has shown no sign of racist behavior on the job. Nonetheless, the law enforcement officials with knowledge of the case said the text messages were too blatant to address with a lesser punishment.

Mayor Thomas Lankey, who has called reform of the department one of the top priorities of his first year in office, did not respond to a request for comment. Lankey serves as Edison’s public safety director, responsible for all final decisions on hiring and firing.

Police Chief Thomas Bryan and the presidents of the department’s two unions, the Policemen’s Benevolent Association and the Superior Officers Association, declined to comment.

The move to fire Sarni and Pedana continues a tumultuous run for the Edison Police Department, which has seen a drumbeat of misconduct cases in recent years. The charges against Dotro, however, are the most serious.

Authorities have said he was angry at his captain, Mark Anderko, for ordering him to undergo a psychological evaluation after the officer received his 11th excessive force complaint in a decade. Dotro allegedly set fire to Anderko’s house while he and his family slept inside. All escaped unharmed.

In another offshoot of the Dotro case, two more Edison officers were criminally charged in late March with conspiring to help him retaliate against a North Brunswick police officer who had cited one of Dotro’s relatives for drunken driving.

Patrolman Victor Aravena, 42, and acting Lt. William Gesell, 45, were suspended without pay following their arrests. Aravena faces up to 18 months in prison if convicted. Gesell faces up to five years if convicted.

The lengthier sentence reflects the allegation that Gesell illegally accessed the department’s database to collect information about the North Brunswick officer — a third-degree crime.

RELATED COVERAGE

• Edison cop charged with propositioning woman for sex after responding to 911 call

• Lame-duck mayor in Edison draws fire for police promotions, $1M legal settlement

• Prosecutor outlines trove of evidence against cop in firebomb attack on captain's home

• Possible motive emerges in Edison cop's alleged arson attack on captain's home

• Edison cop charged with attempted murder in firebomb attack on supervisor's home

• Betraying the badge: Edison police produce astonishing record of misconduct

• Law and disorder: Edison's police force plagued by infighting, lawsuits