Please enable Javascript to watch this video

KANSAS CITY, Mo. -- A Kansas City car dealer doesn't agree with portions of the Affordable Care Act - so he filed suit. A federal judge granted the injunction, now the Supreme Court will make the final decision.

Randy Reed employs nearly 200 people and has several insurance plans, but under the ACA he would have to provide services that go against his religious beliefs.

"Our whole family, we all felt unanimously, we had to do something to take a stand on this," explained Reed.

The stand is against the part of the insurance plan that would make the 'morning after' pill available to his employees.

"For my wife and I, we're pro-life, we feel strongly that way, I feel it would be wrong for us to pay for somebody to terminate a pregnancy." said Reed.

Reed said he called his insurance company and asked for that portion of the coverage to be removed, but the request was refused.

"It left us no other option but to sue back the government, which is a very intimidating thing to do, to get an injunction so we don't have to abide by something we feel is morally wrong," explained Reed.

Reed said he and his family are proud patriots and the last thing they want to do is rock the boat, but when it comes to their morals, there's no backing down.

"Here we are, we find ourselves where the government is telling us we have to do something that we feel like is wrong and we've never found ourselves in that situation that we had to violate what we feel is God's law to be legal," said Reed.

Reed doesn't feel there will be any backlash from the government over the suit, but he's not sure how past or potential customers will react.

"There could be, but again, I have to do what I think is right and if someone wants to judge me for that, that's their right to do that as well," said Reed.

Religious groups have fought for and been given the exception Reed is hoping for, but so far none has been made for business owners like him. The Supreme Court is expected to hear the case in the Spring and make a ruling next Summer.