Should Rob Portman consider a run for president in 2016? Share your thoughts below.

Rob Portman gets a presidential plug. Ed FitzGerald, Matt Borges and Chris Redfern get the MSNBC treatment. And Frank Jackson goes to Washington. Here is today’s Ohio Politics Roundup.

The best-equipped Republican candidate for president might be right under our noses in the Buckeye State, and he’s not necessarily Gov. John Kasich. Or so argues Larry Sabato, the political scientist and prognosticator, in a new piece for Politico Magazine.

U.S. Sen. Rob Portman – remember him? – was a vice-presidential prospect in 2012.

Then, about a year ago, Portman came out publicly in favor of same-sex marriage, revealing that his son, Will, is gay. The reversal brought increased scrutiny from social conservatives. But, at least in these parts, there was a sense that Portman’s change of heart might be just what a GOP struggling with diversity needed to win 2016.

Sabato apparently agrees. He writes:

But what about another approach—finding a nominee who doesn’t just superficially demonstrate diversity but has taken a substantive, career-threatening position in standing up for diversity? Happy talk, campaign promises and speaking slots at national conventions are wholly inadequate if the goal is the remaking of the electorate. By contrast, a genuine profile in courage who has dramatically broken with GOP orthodoxy and demonstrated a capacity for growth can get the party a hearing, maybe more, with skeptical voters.

Enter Sen. Rob Portman of Ohio. Portman attracted national attention in 2013 when he announced that his son, Will, an undergraduate student at Yale, was gay. Portman declared his support not just for his son but also for same-sex marriage. This happened before the key Supreme Court decision on gay marriage, and showed real family values, not the phony ones invoked by many politicians. Every political adviser on Portman’s team must have warned him of the dangers: You could lose your seat in a primary, you’ll be targeted by social conservatives, your national career will be over and your effectiveness even within the Senate will be circumscribed. It took guts to do what Portman did, with the political consequences unknown and potentially severe.

Bear in mind: Portman didn’t even crack Sabato’s latest Crystal Ball rankings of 2016 hopefuls, whereas Kasich was classified in the second tier and rising.

FitzGerald watch

New limits on early voting continues to be a big political issue in this statewide election year – not just in Ohio, but also on MSNBC, which has long taken an interest in the topic.

Cuyahoga County Executive Ed FitzGerald, the probable Democratic re-election challenger to Kasich this fall, appeared Monday evening on “All In with Chris Hayes.” FitzGerald has called for new policy at the county level that would clash with new state laws and likely invite a legal fight with Republican Secretary of State Jon Husted.

Democrats believe restrictions on early voting, namely the elimination of evening and Sunday hours and new rules for mailing ballot requests, inconveniences working-class voters and minorities. Republicans stress a need for uniformity and cost controls.

Said FitzGerald on MSNBC: “How do you put a price tag on democracy?”

Watch the video:





FitzGerald wasn’t the only Ohioan to tackle the early voting issue Monday on MSNBC. Earlier, on “Ronan Farrow Daily,” Ohio Republican Party Chairman Matt Borges and Ohio Democratic Party Chairman Chris Redfern argued their cases in separate interviews.

Here’s that segment:





Kasich watch

A new ad by the Republican Governors Association is raising eyebrows in Ohio, writes Joe Vardon of the Columbus Dispatch. In South Carolina, the RGA is bashing Vincent Sheheen, the Democratic challenger to GOP incumbent Nikki Haley, for supporting Medicaid expansion under President Barack Obama’s Affordable Care Act.

Yep, that would be the same Medicaid expansion Kasich championed in Ohio.

No matter, for Kasich. Ohio’s gubernatorial race remains in the “Lean Republican” column for Louis Jacobson at Governing Magazine. Jacobson writes: “Kasich is benefiting from an improving economy and has won some crosspartisan plaudits for implementing a Medicaid expansion under Obamacare.”

Convention watch

Cleveland’s business, civic and political leaders made their pitch Monday for the 2016 Republican National Convention. Mayor Frank Jackson led the delegation, reports Tom Beres of WKYC Channel 3.

Meanwhile, movie star and former California Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger is backing Columbus’ bid, writes Jack Torry of the Dispatch.

Jaime Fuller of the Washington Post offers some tidbits on Cleveland, Columbus, Cincinnati and the five non-Ohio cities vying for the GOP convention.

And at his Smart Politics blog, University of Minnesota political scientist Eric Ostermeier explores the question of whether the GOP nominee can expect a boost in the convention’s host state.

Down-ballot: Mike DeWine and Josh Mandel

Torry of the Dispatch reports on an unusual step taken by Ohio Attorney General Mike DeWine, who is arguing that a state elections law violates the First Amendment.

And State Treasurer Josh Mandel is boasting of his office’s third clean audit from State Auditor – and fellow Republican – Dave Yost.

Today in 2006

Lee Fisher, the Democratic candidate for lieutenant governor on Ted Strickland’s ticket, urges tougher penalties and other updates to hate crimes legislation he sponsored as a state senator.

“We need to send a message in our society that when you commit a crime against someone because of the color of their skin or religion or ethnic heritage, you are not just committing a crime against that person," Fisher tells the Associated Press. “You are committing a crime against that entire community and society, and it deserves stiffer punishment.”