Celebration of life, not expression of grief

Nahomi Reza of Longmont at El Dia De Los Muertos celebration at the Longmont Museum on Saturday afternoon. ( Jonathan Castner / Daily Camera )

Throngs of families showed up at the Longmont Museum Saturday to learn about and help celebrate Dia de los Muertos, the Day of the Dead.

Longmont residents Kayla Mathias and Kylie Anderson, two 14-year-old Mead High School students, decorated sugar skulls to honor the memories of grandfathers, who they said had both recently passed away.

"I didn't really get a way to say good-bye to him," Mathias said of her grandfather, John Elsiner.

Long lines of youngsters waited their chance to decorate sugar skulls in one museum room, while another line formed for a paper-flower-making room.

Costumed celebrants included Xochitl Lopez and her daughter, Nahomi Reza, both elegantly dressed as La Catrina, a skeletal figure traditionally associated with the Mexican holiday — now celebrated in other cultures, as well — that remembers friends and family members who have died.

The Longmont Museum began organizing its Day of the Dead celebration 14 years ago, and museum officials have said it's now the largest of its kind in Colorado.

As of about 1:15 p.m., when the event had been under way a little more than two hours and with nearly three hours left to go before it ended, more than 1,300 people had already come through the museum's doors, with more than two hours to go before it was to ended

Saturday's activities featured musical and dance performances, colorfully dyed sawdust "carpets," an altar room to commemorate loved ones' lives, and such activities as making skull masks as well as decorating sugar skulls decorating and making paper flowers.

Saturday's family celebration was the main feature of the museum's annual Day of the Dead exhibits and events, which opened on Sept. 26 and are to run through Nov. 9.

Amy Fontenot, a children's librarian at the Longmont Public Library and a member of the Day of the Dead organizing committee, said she said the occasion is "more of a celebration of life" than an occasion for grief.

Its cultural roots include a fun-making recognition, Fontenot said, that "no matter what class we are, we are the same in death. We're all reduced to bones."

The Longmont Museum's Day of the Dead exhibits and programs are supported by the Longmont Community Foundation, the Community Foundation Serving Boulder County, and the Scientific and Cultural Facilities District, along with individuals and businesses in the community.

John Fryar: 303-684-5211, jfryar@times-call.com or twitter.com/jfryartc