Rep. Vicky Hartzler (R-Mo.). (AP)

(CNSNews.com) – At the State of the Union on Tuesday, Rep. Vicky Hartzler (R-Mo.) said that the empty chair President Barack Obama left in the first lady’s box for victims of gun violence should have been left for “those who’ve had their heads cut off or killed through ISIL, because that was the true cause of the problem in San Bernardino.”

At the U.S. Capitol, CNSNews.com asked Hartzler, “President Obama is leaving an empty seat tonight for victims of gun violence. I wanted to ask, who would you leave an empty seat at the address for?”

Rep. Hartzler said, “Well, I think more fittingly it should be those who’ve had their heads cut off or killed through ISIL, because that was the true cause of the problem in San Bernardino.”

“It wasn’t an issue of a gun, it was an issue of having terrorism come to our shores and we need to address that,” she said. “This is very, very concerning, and so that would symbolize how important it is that we get our foreign policy right.”

Hartzler also provided her response to President Obama’s State of the Union address, as well as her thoughts on the current state of the union.

She told CNSNews.com that the state of the union is “not near as good as it would’ve been if we had some true leadership in this country and had a President who was wiling to help get Washington out of our lives.”

“We have allies who don’t trust us and enemies who don’t fear us, and this President needs to get serious about addressing the rise of ISIL and developing a real strategy in dealing with terror around the world,” Hartzler continued.

She went on to address some of the economic problems Americans are facing.

“We also have less Americans who are working at any time since back in the 1970s,” said Hartzler, adding, “we can get job growth back in this country as we remove Washington’s over-regulations and encourage growth, and we also have too many people that have been losing their health care due to Obamacare.”

Hartzler said that Obama’s legacy is “higher unemployment and it’s decreased status around the world.”

Hartzler pushed for a bill last week that would’ve repealed Obamacare and defunded Planned Parenthood. Despite passing in both the House and the Senate, the legislation was vetoed by President Obama last Friday.

Hartzler also spoke about the GOP’s future plans to accomplish the goal of repealing Obamacare.

“It still is a problem in that many, many Americans have had their healthcare taken away from them due to Obamacare, these are policies that people wanted and could afford but they no longer can, their deductibles have gone up and we can do better,” she said.

“Republicans are going to put forth a bill this year that shows what we think we can do to make healthcare more affordable and more accessible,” she said. “So we’re going to put our positive alternative out there and let America make a choice come November on really who has the best agenda, and we’re going to do that in other policy areas as well.”