Nearly a week after new health insurance coverage was supposed to kick in for many Oregonians, delays in processing applications have left thousands in the dark about whether they've been successfully enrolled.

The delays are mainly centered on people who applied through Oregon's health exchange, Cover Oregon, to obtain new subsidies under the Affordable Care Act. But even some people who enrolled directly with insurers are facing delays, creating stress and potential unnecessary costs. Meanwhile, about 6,000 paper applications to the Medicaid-funded Oregon Health Plan have not been processed, officials say.

"We have hundreds of clients that have applied and they are not hearing anything," said Colleen Quinn, a Portland agent who is president of the firm Northwest Benefit Advantage. "They are panicking, because they are getting to the point where they don't know if they are getting coverage or not. They need coverage, they need medications."

The delays affect those who were hoping for coverage to kick in by Jan 1. People who are seeking to avoid penalties for being uninsured have until March 31 to succesfully enroll.



Not everyone is unhappy. Cover Oregon officials say they've successfully enrolled more than 50,000, including 18,000 in commercial plans. Meanwhile, the state has directly enrolled more than 100,000 people in the Oregon Health Plan. About half of the applicants for Cover Oregon won't be enrolled by Jan. 1 because of incomplete applications, exchange officials say.

But for other people, who aren't getting information on whether they are enrolled, it's causing delays, stress and potential costs.

Jessica Beauchemin, 34, a self-employed Corvallis personal trainer, had to cancel a Jan. 7 doctor's appointment because of health exchange delays. She enrolled more than a month ago at a Cover Oregon application fair. But though she's been told her application was complete, she never did receive an application packet, she said.

One man who needed brain surgery had to extend his costly 2013 plan for an extra month because he hadn't heard back from Moda Health, said broker Lisa Lettenmaier, who owns the health insurance brokerage Health Source NW in Tigard. The result: he likely will pay an extra $7,500 in unnecessary costs under his old plan's high deductible.

Lettenmaier says only a third of about 400 Moda customers her firm has helped have received notice of their enrollment, and about 30 customers who used Cover Oregon to enroll still don't know whether their enrollment was successful. "Moda still hasn't received their information yet," she said.

Moda spokesman Jonathan Nicholas said the delays are caused by an "enormous wave of last-minute applications" but that most people should hear back by Jan. 11. "We are striving to reach out to every single subscriber to confirm enrollment, and then following up as quickly as possible by issuing ID numbers that people use to access health care."

Cover Oregon spokesman Michael Cox said that insurers will soon have information for all enrollees if they don't have it already. He said insurers have until Jan. 15 to notify and bill consumers – which is also the deadline for consumers to pay the first month's premium. "Each carrier has their own individual outreach plan," he said.

In the meantime, consumers and even agents have a hard time getting information. "You call any of the carriers right now and you'll be on hold for 40 minutes to an hour," said Lettenmaier, the Tigard broker. "After a half hour on hold sometimes you'll be dumped into voicemail. We had one instance where we left a message on the 20th and got a call back on the 31st."

Some people who qualified for the Medicaid-funded Oregon Health Plan are also facing delays. Though the vast majority of applications have gone through, about 6,000 paper applications haven't been completed yet, according to the Oregon Health Authority.

Even some people who enrolled in the Oregon Health Plan through the state's exchange have faced delays. Jane E. Williams of St. Helens enrolled on Oct. 1, knowing that otherwise she'd face a $5,000 bill for an MRI imaging to see if a brain tumor had returned. But as her Jan. 6 MRI date approached she faced the prospect of paying it out of pocket.

"I'm just stuck in limbo. I keep calling every day. Yesterday I was on hold for 70 minutes with the Oregon Health Plan and that's typical," Williams, 57, said last week.

On Monday, she had her MRI, and was relieved to know that it would be covered by the state, thanks to a last-minute call from OHP. "I've worked my whole life and I've never asked for handout. But I don't want to die of a brain tumor either," she said.

The good news for Oregon Health Plan applicants is that they may well be enrolled even if they don't know yet. "If you are eligible for the Oregon Health Plan, your coverage begins either the day your application is received if you are eligible under 2013 qualifications, or on Jan 1 if you are eligible under 2014 standards instead," according to Cover Oregon.

Oregon Health Plan enrollees who lack information but have urgent health needs can call 1-800-273-0557 or 711 during normal business hours, or afterhours at 1-800-562-4620.

Agents suggest private insurance consumers keep trying insurers and Cover Oregon ((1-855-268-3767)), and also contact their agents or community partners if they had help in applying.

The delays for applicants through Cover Oregon stem from problems with the exchange website, a focal point of federal health reforms. The state switched to paper applications in November. But applications have not been processed as quickly as hoped, despite the hiring of hundreds of temporary workers for the job.





--Nick Budnick