NOLA.com | The Times-Picayune asked all 11 of the candidates running for the 6th Congressional District to fill out a standard questionnaire outlining their background and positions on some key issues.

The information below is in the candidates' own words. Some of the profiles may have been edited for space, to fit within a standard word count for all candidates. Any candidates not included did not return the questionnaire by press time.

Name: Dr. Charles "Trey" Thomas, III

Party: Republican

Age: 35

Residence (town): Baton Rouge

Education (high school, college/university): Southern University Lab School (1997), bachelor's of science in kinesiology at LSU (2001), master's of science in in kinesiology-education at LSU (2002); master's of business administration in general management and doctor of education in educational leadership at Texas Christian University (2012)

Profession: Education consultant and non-profit management

Family: Wife, Chanell (8 years), daughters: Cydnee (6), Caidee (4), Caia (2), Claire (2)

What makes you the most qualified candidate in the 6th district?

Professional and personal experience in the sectors of education, non-profit, and business that have prepared me to address the issues of education, entrepreneurship, and energy that are critical to families of the 6th District.

What are the top two issues you want to take on as a congressional representative?

1) Fighting to make sure parents and state/local decision makers stay in control of our children's education and not a one-size-fits-all bureaucracy in Washington, D.C.; and 2) Fighting to make sure business can thrive and keep Americans working full-time jobs by addressing burdens such as tax policy and regulatory costs that drive jobs and business capital overseas.

Given the gridlock in Washington, what would you do to actually get things done?

I would stay focused on my primary competency to apply my experience in education to address the ineffectiveness of the Department of Education, while also holding the line to protect and restore the Constitution.

Would you support Medicaid expansion in Louisiana? Why or why not?

The need to expand Medicaid means we have failed to grow our economy to add more jobs, keeps workers working full time, and control the costs of health care to help truly make it more affordable to hard working citizens. So I would not seek to expand Medicaid unless we can demonstrate that successfully accomplishing the three issues above is not enough to increase access to health care.

Would you vote to repeal the Affordable Care Act? Why or why not?

The Supreme Court upheld the Affordable Care Act as defined as a new tax, in order to pay for the increase in health care costs so the government can provide health coverage for people struggling to do so.

So my desire to repeal the ACA is not to reduce access for those who were finally able to get coverage, but to implement true free-market solutions to health care that actually address affordability. Those solutions would increase incomes of patients while lowering costs of services for providers, and not just tax more to spend more. That hurts middle class people such as myself, as my policy increased over $500 due to the ACA.

How do you think the U.S. government should handle its borders, particularly with regard to the unaccompanied children who are now being housed in Louisiana and other states?

The US government and any other sovereign country should stop at nothing to secure their borders from illegal entry and enforce all current immigration laws and policies. Our responsibility to protect the national security interest of our borders does not mean we disregard any humanitarian duty to assist people, especially children in need. However, the ability to help the portion of those in that specific situation does not have to be at the expense of allowing all other dangerous threats to national security to cross our borders.

Click here for links to candidate profiles for those who completed questionnaires.