“But in politics, because it’s a rigged system, because it’s a corrupt enterprise, in politics you’re allowed to collude.”

That’s what Donald Trump told supporters in Rhode Island the day before he whupped the colluders there and in four other primary states.

Whatever we might say about the results Tuesday, they don’t look rigged, at least not yet. No political puppeteer possibly could have pulled so many strings.

Even that curious way that Pennsylvania Republicans do things — with only 17 of the 71 delegates bound to the primary winner, and then only on the first ballot — doesn’t look like enough to stop The Donald. The Post-Gazette’s indispensable political analyst Chris Potter has figured that Mr. Trump appears to also have won at least 31 of the 54 other delegates. If he thus takes 48 of the 71 delegates, that would seem a more than fair haul for taking nearly 57 percent of the vote Tuesday.

That’s an even more remarkable feat considering that voters were asked to vote for Republican delegates on a ballot that DID NOT SAY to which candidate they were allied. Only those voters wise enough or lucky enough to have seen the stories on delegates in mainstream media, or to have been alerted likewise by social media, had any sense which delegate favored which pol.

Mr. Potter found many delegates who don’t like this system, and it’s not clear if we’ll ever know how the individual delegates vote at the Republican Convention in Cleveland beginning July 18. But it’s harder to rig a system once people are wise to the rigging.

On the Democratic side, the presidential ballot was more straightforward, but it still came in two parts: Vote for the candidate, then vote for a slew of delegates identified as being with one candidate or the other. There was no requirement that a voter choose consistently; one could vote for handful of Hillary Clintonites and sprinkle in some Bernie Sanders supporters, too.

After voting, I longed to talk with someone less jaded about this process than I. So I drove across town to meet someone who is not quite old enough to vote, Lainey Newman, the 17-year-old Pittsburgh girl who introduced Ms. Clinton at a Monday rally of some 800 people at Westmoreland County Community College.

I’d read that morning of Lainey’s introduction and immediately recognized the name. She’s the Barack Obama Academy of International Studies junior who was just elected governor of the 2017 YMCA Youth & Government Model Legislative Session.

She took some time off from about six hours of knocking on the doors of potential Clinton supporters in Squirrel Hill to sit down and talk at a Forbes Avenue coffee shop.

I asked what drew her to politics.

“It’s the fulcrum of how our society functions,” she said. “It’s how the people execute and manifest their ideals. I think government can be beautiful.”

Then this Clinton supporter quoted a Republican congressman she’d met. U.S. Rep. Mike Fitzpatrick of Bucks County had told her, “The government is the democracy which is the people,” and Lainey liked the simplicity and directness of that explanation.

She sees herself as a pragmatist, not an idealist. Her parents, both psychologists, told her that Obamacare allowed their patients to get care they otherwise couldn’t afford. That’s essentially HillaryCare, too, Lainey said, and sees her candidate’s experience in government as unparalleled.

She began volunteering at the Clinton campaign office, down the street from her school in East Liberty, the day it opened last month. She’d originally been scheduled only to pitch social media to the crowd in Westmoreland County on Monday, but she got a call the midnight before the event saying she’d be introducing Ms. Clinton.

Yes, she woke her parents up to tell them.

The next morning, Ms. Clinton — “such a calming presence” — told her, “Take a deep breath. You’re going to be great,” and they walked out together.

Her schoolmates found out — via social media, not the newspaper, alas — so it had been quite an Election Day morning already. I left her to more door-knocking.

That couldn’t have hurt. Ms. Clinton took almost 56 percent of the Pennsylvania vote. The next afternoon, when I reached Lainey, she said she was “thrilled to be part of the success and the action over the past month and a half or so.”

Others weren’t so happy but that’s politics. It was encouraging to talk with a young woman willing to invest some old-fashioned shoe leather in a candidate. Now I’m hoping her generation can come up with a delegate system as straightforward as her ideals.





Brian O’Neill: boneill@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1947.