ENGLEWOOD, Colo.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Centura Health, the region’s leading health care network, and Walgreens (NYSE: WAG) (Nasdaq: WAG) today announced a clinical collaboration agreement that will provide coordinated and expanded health care services, while improving access to high-quality, convenient and affordable care for patients throughout Colorado’s Front Range.

Centura Health will work with Healthcare Clinic at select Walgreens to handle serious conditions outside of the Healthcare Clinics’ scope of services, and will help collaboratively manage the treatment of patients with chronic diseases. The collaboration will include direct communication between Centura Health providers, including Colorado Health Neighborhoods, Centura Health’s clinically integrated network, and Healthcare Clinic nurse practitioners to facilitate care coordination and sharing of patient information, and enhanced awareness of Healthcare Clinic at select Walgreens and the Centura Health network.

Healthcare Clinic providers are able to help monitor, manage and support Centura Health patients with diabetes, asthma, hyperlipidemia and hypertension. While Walgreens and Healthcare Clinic strongly encourage all patients to have a designated medical home for ongoing needs, the collaboration will provide the patients of Centura Health access to quality, non-emergent care seven days a week, with or without an appointment.

“This clinical collaboration further supports our strategic efforts to expand our Total Health Solution to consumers. Centura Health and the Healthcare Clinic at select Walgreens will promote quality care through evidence-based medicine and best practices, and increase convenience through multiple access points, within a service-friendly environment, at an affordable cost,” said Gary Campbell, Centura Health’s president and CEO. “Working hand-in-hand, this coordinated care model enables us to carry out our combined vision to deliver optimal health care value and support population health management. The result is more people get the right care, at the right time, in the right place, for the right price.”

With the Affordable Care Act bringing millions of newly insured patients into the health care system, the relationship aims to help address some of the needs and challenges facing both patients and providers.

“Healthcare Clinics are playing an important role in enhancing patient access to quality, convenient and affordable care, and serve as a cost-effective alternative to emergency rooms for non-emergent care,” said Alan E. London, chief medical officer, Consumer Solutions Group, Walgreens. “The health care system today is facing myriad challenges, and this collaboration enables our nurse practitioners and physician assistants to further coordinate patient care in these communities, working closely with primary care physicians and others to help more people get, stay and live well.”

Healthcare Clinic at select Walgreens locations partnering with Centura Health include:

5190 W. 120th Ave., Broomfield

6820 Centennial Blvd., Colorado Springs

5755 Constitution Ave., Colorado Springs

8705 Lexington Dr., Colorado Springs

6200 E Colfax Ave., Denver

2975 Federal Blvd., Denver

1505 S. Federal Blvd., Denver

1601 W. 84th Ave., Federal Heights

6650 Timberline Road, Highlands Ranch

309 N. Hwy. 287, Lafayette

10808 W. Jewell Ave., Lakewood

5870 S Kipling Parkway, Littleton

1041 Main St., Longmont

205 E. Eisenhower Road, Loveland

19028 Lincoln Ave., Parker

4401 Wadsworth Blvd., Wheat Ridge

About Centura Health

Centura Health connects individuals, families and neighborhoods across Colorado and western Kansas with more than 6,000 physicians and 17,100 of the best hearts and minds in health care. Through our 15 hospitals, six senior living communities, health neighborhoods, physician practices and clinics, home care and hospice services, and Flight For Life® Colorado, we are making the region’s best health care accessible and affordable in every community we serve. We believe you can inspire the people you care about to live healthier lives by encouraging them to do the little things that can make a big difference. We’re Centura Health, and we’re here for your health. For information on Centura Health or any of the facilities in our network, please visit www.centura.org.

About Walgreens

As the nation's largest drugstore chain with fiscal 2013 sales of $72 billion, Walgreens (www.walgreens.com) vision is to be the first choice in health and daily living for everyone in America, and beyond. Each day, Walgreens provides more than 6 million customers the most convenient, multichannel access to consumer goods and services and trusted, cost-effective pharmacy, health and wellness services and advice in communities across America. Walgreens scope of pharmacy services includes retail, specialty, infusion, medical facility and mail service, along with respiratory services. These services improve health outcomes and lower costs for payers including employers, managed care organizations, health systems, pharmacy benefit managers and the public sector. The company operates 8,200 drugstores in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. Take Care Health Systems is a Walgreens subsidiary that is the largest and most comprehensive manager of worksite health and wellness centers, provider practices, and in-store convenient care clinics, with more than 750 locations throughout the country.