Michigan partners with Illinois for new Medicaid software

Wednesday is the anniversary of Healthy Michigan, the state’s popular Medicaid expansion program that has led to 600,000 low-income adults making below 133 percent of the poverty line to be enrolled in government health insurance under the federal health care law. (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

LANSING – The digital backbone of Michigan and Illinois’ Medicaid system is now on the cloud, allowing the two states to share the costs of future upgrades and making those upgrades easier, faster and cheaper to implement.

In 2013, Michigan and Illinois were the first states to announce a joint effort to build a new Medicaid software system for enrolling and screening health care providers. Illinois essentially piggybacked on Michigan’s existing system, and the new, two-state software went live late this year.

The system was moved to the cloud — essentially Internet-based as opposed to hardware-based software — so the two states could share the technology’s infrastructure. That means that, while the two states’ data remains segregated, maintenance and future upgrades can be made to one program as opposed to two.

Officials with the Rockville, Md.-based tech firm that built the software, Client Network Services Inc., or CNSI, said the system could support additional states in the future.

Adding Illinois and moving to the cloud cost about $9.5 million, of which Illinois paid Michigan more than $8 million, said Jennifer Eisner, spokeswoman for the Michigan Department of Health & Human Services. The majority of that expense was covered by the states’ share of federal Medicaid dollars.

Michigan approved a $51.5 million contract with CNSI to build its Medicaid software — called Community Health Administrative Management Payment System, or CHAMPS — in 2006. Various upgrades and add-ons over the years have grown the total value of that contract to more than $381 million.

But comparing the new system to the old “is night and day,” said Sashi Ravipati, CNSI’s vice president of the Midwest region.

For one, it used to take a month or more to screen health care providers who signed up to receive Medicaid payments.

“Now, less than two seconds, a provider gets screened,” said Sharif Hussein, CNSI’s senior Midwest vice president. “Not only that, it gets screened against all the databases in the entire U.S., not just the databases in Michigan.”

The new system also includes an application that shows real-time data on Medicaid providers and beneficiaries, including the types of services they’re using.

That data not only helps policymakers monitor activity in government’s most expensive operation, but also is used to help beneficiaries manage their own care. The software supports smartphone applications and online programs that help patients do things like search for doctors and view medical records, and they can receive text and email reminders about things like immunizations.

“Traditionally, it was always, try to pay the providers; once you paid the providers, (governments) were happy, happy campers,” Ravipati said. But “when (patients) take care of their health in a meaningful way, then obviously it will bring down cost.”

CNSI officials also said the technology helps prevent fraud, because patients can more quickly see all claims filed in their name and can flag payments for services they didn’t receive.

And, while the botched rollout of insurance exchanges through the Affordable Care Act made “glitch” synonymous with “health care software” in the minds of many, CNSI officials said the system is built with security and performance features that protect against failure.

The system continuously monitors the number of patients and providers online at any given moment, for example, “so we can see if there’s a spike,” said Adnan Ahmed, CNSI president. “It has self-corrective mechanisms … this is monitored 24/7, 365.”

Ravipati said the system processes about $13 billion in payments to tens of thousands of providers a year in Michigan, and the system has not failed. Illinois has about twice that volume, he said.

The arrangement was controversial: Illinois officials were accused in 2013 of hiring CNSI through a no-bid contract, since Illinois is getting the software through an agreement with Gov. Rick Snyder’s administration instead of a direct deal with the tech firm. Government watchdog groups in Illinois raised particular concern two years ago because CNSI had troubled pasts in Arkansas, Louisiana, Utah and Maine, the Chicago Tribune reported at the time.

But, the Tribune reported, Illinois was assured by federal regulators and Michigan had received satisfactory service from the contractor for nearly a decade. And the multi-state partnership offered a chance to get more for less.

The “sharing of government services is the right approach for taxpayers,” David Behen, director of the Michigan Department of Technology, Management & Budget, said in a statement announcing the new software.

Contact Justin A. Hinkley at (517) 377-1195 or jhinkley@lsj.com. Follow him on Twitter@JustinHinkley. Sign up for his email newsletter, SoM Weekly, at on.lsj.com/somsignup.

Read or Share this story: http://on.lsj.com/1YykCL3