Walk past the Madou tower in downtown Brussels and you are sure to notice the graffiti pleading for “No TTIP” (Trans-Atlantic Trade and Investment Partnership). But while everyone in Washington and Brussels focuses on chlorine chicken, something else is about to pass rather unnoticed by U.S. lobbying: TiSA, the Trade in Services Agreement. It stands for something of considerable magnitude. The epitome of a services-based economy, the European Union plans to sign an agreement liberalizing trade in services with like-minded nations. Together, they will account for three-quarters of the planet’s services economy.

The EU, U.S., Australia, Canada, Chile, Chinese Taipei, Colombia, Costa Rica, Hong Kong China, Iceland, Israel, Japan, Korea, Liechtenstein, Mexico, New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Switzerland and Turkey are currently negotiating this Trade in Services Agreement. It aims at opening up markets and improving rules in areas such as licensing, financial services, telecoms, e-commerce, maritime transport, and professionals moving abroad temporarily to provide services.

ADVERTISEMENT

However, any new transatlantic trade talks are currently bound to make Europeans fret about the weakening of privacy and data protection rules. While these are viewed by a number of TiSA stakeholders as mere “non-tariff trade barriers,” European civil society thinks differently. Adding insult to injury, the proposed liberalization of cross-border data transfers would benefit American financial, IT and telecom interests, still under suspicion after a series of political events in recent history.

At the same time, EU concerns have been raised about the further weakening of the state’s control over a number of services of public interest, and their placement under the sway of the market economy. What is certain for public international law buffs is that TiSA will offer further insight into the EU’s way of promoting its trade interests, both with the “Really Good Friends of Services” (the awkward nom de guerre assumed by the group of countries negotiating the agreement) and with others.

Among these others, China is less skeptical about the snake oil, having signaled intent to join TiSA — as opposed to the rest of the BRICs (Brazil, Russia and India). For now, it has been left peeking over the fence. China and the EU are meanwhile negotiating an investment agreement with a view to entering a free trade agreement (FTA), presumably before the People’s Republic celebrates its 75th anniversary. By that time, the machine called the EU will have a number of other trade agreements under its belt, and use this added experience in the negotiations with China. American industry must also look beyond the moment when a treaty is initialed. The famed TTIP got a head start, but TiSA will follow and the Trans-Atlantic FTA is also waiting patiently in line. When the time comes, the EU will send a team of trade experts, armed with the blueprints of their predecessors.

After being famously late to the party and not engaging in FTAs for a good part of its existence, the EU has changed its course. Bureaucrats and politicians come and go, but they all chip in to a modus operandi that also reveals itself in trade treaties. For internal policies, the EU has a 28-room laboratory at its disposal. Something works well in two, three member states? Slap a “best practice” label on it and eventually have it imposed across the board. For external trade, there are the treaty negotiations. And the EU’s trade partners should pay more attention to the emerging patterns.

The EU will likely use TTIP as the basis for future agreements. This means it is in the U.S. interest to have a closer look at the contents and negotiation process behind TTIP. Meanwhile, America would do well to negotiate the TTIP with a strategic view to influencing future EU bilateral agreements. TiSA is not negotiated in a vacuum, and its effects will be felt around the globe — whether the agreement is ultimately integrated in the World Trade Organization or not. TiSA should be viewed as an opportunity for early engagement by U.S. government and corporations alike.

Geiger is managing partner of Alber & Geiger, a political lobbying and European government relations law firm based in Brussels.