The end of the federal fiscal year is coming. The appropriations bills won't be completed on time. The government is going to run out of money unless Congress and the president act to provide either a short-term funding plan or a long-term continuing resolution that will allow them to punt for the upcoming year and try again in 2016.

Punting wouldn't be bad. Thanks to at least one of these deals arrived at during the Obama presidency, the federal government has to live under mandatory spending caps that have actually brought down the rate of increase in spending.

In the infinite scheme of things, the Budget Control Act might not seem like much of a victory, but it has brought spending down from a peak of 24.4 percent of gross domestic product during the Obama stimulus to a much more reasonable 20.3 percent. These are real savings – as opposed to the kind that are usually promised but never delivered after a grand bargain that on paper produces some permanent tax increases in exchange for some temporary spending cuts.



[SEE: Democrat Cartoons]

It's an achievement that spending foes have not just failed to embrace but insist on continually putting in jeopardy. Call it the Shutdown Waltz. It's a dance congressional conservatives (especially a group of House members) proudly insist on having every year by threatening to shut the government down if their demands are not met.

One year it was over Obamacare. This year they want to zero-out federal funding for Planned Parenthood in the wake of the scandal involving the post-mortem sale of baby body parts to medical researchers. Somehow they always seem to find a cause to really behind and, in the process of drawing their metaphorical line in the stand, take themselves out of the spending debate entirely because every demand is non-negotiable.

It's a foolish tactic, one that forces congressional leaders to negotiate to their left rather than their right in formulating a spending plan for the upcoming fiscal year. Moreover, it's something Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev., has gleefully announced he wants to see happen. You just have to ask why the House spending hawks are behaving in a way that will give Reid, who never met a tax dollar he didn't want to spend, exactly what he wants: the opportunity to bust the caps and undo the Budget Control Act. It's as though some Republicans don't know which side of the fight they are really on.



[SEE: Political Cartoons on Obamacare]

More to the point, no one has been able to point out just what the spending hawks would gain if they managed to leave the operations of the government unfunded for a period of time. In the event of a federal shutdown it is likely the Obama administration will handle things with a little more finesse than it did last time, and resist the temptation to close the World War II Memorial to honor flights, block Mt. Rushmore from public view, and shut down the parking lots at George Washington's Mt. Vernon. (Because it is privately owned and operated, the administration couldn't close the mansion and its grounds.) Instead, expect the administration to make a stand in favor of women's access to essential health services – which is exactly what it argues, falsely as it turns out, will happen if Planned Parenthood loses its annual contribution from the federal government.

Here's a news flash: Smart politicians shouldn't ever want to be explaining why the allegation they voted to shut the government down in order to stop women from having access to pre-natal care, birth control and mammograms is untrue. It is not a debate that's going to help you "grow your vote" in the next election.

It may be uncomfortable for those congressmen and senators who think that Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell and House Speaker John Boehner are, when it comes to federal spending, kissing cousins to drunken sailors on liberty to admit they have to change their strategy. But if they want to win that's exactly what they have to do.



[SEE: Republican Party Cartoons]

Instead of promising to take a walk on any measure that funds Planned Parenthood, decide how much they can still get as part of an overall spending package that you can vote for and still look at yourself in the mirror. Think about what other programs you might like to see cut in places where you can score political points and make a difference. Take a whack at the EPA budget to block it from implementing the job-killing, electricity-rate hiking Clean Power Plan. Make the EPA pay for the cleanup of the river in Idaho it just poisoned by reducing salaries for senior executives, cutting the size of the agency's motor pool, and zeroing out the travel budget. Add language that prevents the Pentagon from paying for gender reassignment surgery for U.S. military personnel and their dependents.