CSUMB logo (Photo: Provided)

CSUMB tapped for freshmen study

What will the college freshmen year of the future look like?

Cal State Monterey Bay is one of 44 institutions nationwide drawing the scenario. CSUMB has joined a pilot program, Re-imagining the First Year of College in hopes of improving the student success rate for freshmen.

The three-year project is coordinated by the Association of American State Colleges and Universities. It is funded by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and USA Funds.

According to a news release, the first year of college is the point at which schools experience the greatest loss of students. The goal of the project is to help the participating colleges enhance the first-year experience, increase retention and improve graduation rates, particularly among historically underserved populations – low-income, first-generation and students of color.

The goal for each campus is to have a better strategy for student success by the end of the project, with measurable results on retention and credits earned, plus a broader support network.

“The Re-imagining the First Year of College project will allow CSUMB to continue to work on student success on campus and it will align nicely with Monterey County's cradle-to-career partnership, Bright Futures.

El Sausal enters national science contest

Once again, El Sausal Middle School in Salinas is in the running to represent California at the National Science Bowl this spring. The 26th annual event is sponsored by the U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science. Carmel Valley Middle School is the other school competing from Monterey County.

A regional contest is set Feb. 20 at Arroyo Grande High School. The winner of the regional competition will receive an all-expenses-paid trip to Washington, D.C. to compete in the National Science Bowl from April 28 to May 2; the national winner will receive prizes for the team members and their schools.

More than 14,000 middle- and high school students will compete this year. The goal of the National Science Bowl is to encourage students to enter careers in the sciences and technology.

Online:http://science.energy.gov/wdts/nsb/.

Buy Photo Hartnell logo (Photo: File)

Hundreds at Hartnell make honor roll

Hartnell College named 687 students to its Dean’s List and 682 students to the President’s Honor Roll for the fall 2015 semester.

To make the President’s Honor Roll, a student must have earned a grade point average between 3.5 and 4.0. To make the Dean’s List, student GPAs must range from 3.0 to 3.49. All 1,369 honor students were enrolled in at least 12 units for the semester.

The students’ names will appear in an ad in The Californian on Saturday.

“The vision of Hartnell College is about growing leaders through opportunity, engagement, and achievement,” Superintendent/President Willard Lewallen said in a press release.

“Students who are on the Dean's List and the President's List have taken advantage of opportunities, they have engaged in learning, and they have ultimately achieved academic success,” he said. “Congratulations to all these students for demonstrating dedication, commitment, and grit in the pursuit of their education goals.”

Former congresswoman to speak at CSUMB

Dr. Donna Christensen, the first female physician to serve in Congress, will speak at Cal State Monterey Bay on Feb. 24 as part of the university’s festivities celebrating Black History Month.

Christensen was a non-voting delegate from the Virgin Islands to the U.S. House of Representatives from 1996 to 2014.

Christensen will talk on “The Affordable Care Act: Health, Civil Rights and Job Creation” from 3 to 5 p.m. in the World Theater. A reception will follow.

Dr. Donna Christensen (Photo: Provided)

She was a member of the Congressional Black Caucus’ Health Braintrust, which oversees and advocates for minority health issues, and was instrumental in the development of the Affordable Care Act.

The American Medical Association honored her with its Dr. Nathan Davis Award for Outstanding Government Service.

The lecture is free, but visitors must buy a parking permit from a machine on the lot.

It is sponsored by Salinas Valley Memorial Hospital, Natividad Medical Center, Doctors on Duty and the Visiting Nurses Association.

Information: Call Kaylee Rivera at 831-582-3736

Soledad High School unveils its new salad bar in the cafeteria Thursday. (Photo: Provided)

Soledad High turns new leaf with salad bar

The Soledad Unified School District launched its new salad bar at Soledad High School Thursday at lunchtime. The district announced its partnership with the Grower-Shipper Association Foundation which has provided salad bars for several schools.

The Foundation is a non-profit that provides scholarships and leadership programs as well as educational and philanthropic activities on behalf of the agriculture industry.

Online: http://growershipperfoundation.org

Compiled and edited by Roberto M. Robledo. The Education Digest appears online and in print on Friday. Email your news for the Education Digest to rrobledo@thecalifornian.com or phone call 831-754-4269.

Read or Share this story: http://bit.ly/1TgjDRI