Legislative leaders have no one but themselves to blame for the blood pressure-spiking brinkmanship at the Capitol this week.

It’s not as if they suddenly became aware in the session’s final hours that they either had to raise revenue to patch a $1.3 billion budget hole or impose further draconian cuts in state services.

Like students who wait to start a major project until the night before it’s due, budget writers fiddled behind closed doors for three months – finally dribbling out revenue-generating proposals just three weeks before the May 27 deadline.

They either were unable to agree on how to proceed or concluded they had a better shot of ramming through a budget if they waited until the last minute.

That strategy may have backfired, leaving House Speaker Jeff Hickman with nothing to do but rail against legislative Democrats for not supporting a proposed $1.50-per-pack cigarette tax increase.

Irony Alert I: Read-my-lips, no-new-taxes Republicans complaining that Democrats won’t support a tax hike?

Irony Alert II: Republicans have absolute control over the Legislature, owning 71 of 101 House and 39 of 48 Senate seats. They have the votes to do whatever they want – and their party’s governor, Mary Fallin, to sign it into law.

House Democrats wisely exercised their limited power to influence the budget by voting as a bloc – refusing to support the cigarette tax unless Republicans agreed to a Medicaid expansion that would pump $900 million in federal money into the state.

These are tax dollars that Oklahoma taxpayers sent to Washington. The Legislature’s refusal to accept the federal expansion means Sooner tax dollars are underwriting health care for the working poor in other states while 175,000 of Oklahoma’s most vulnerable remain without health coverage and the state’s hospitals buckle under the mounting costs of uncompensated care.

How could this happen? It’s all because of who resides in the White House. Rather than work with Obamacare – oh, the humanity! – the state’s Republican leadership would rather risk the physical health of thousands of Oklahomans and the fiscal health of Oklahoma’s medical facilities. Talk about playing politics with people’s lives.

Let’s cut to the chase: The Legislature’s primary responsibility each session is to produce a state budget. A balanced state budget.

Instead, for much of this session, lawmakers majored on the minors, focusing, for example, on goofy matters like whether to allow open carry of guns without a permit or training.

Now, with the session’s end only a week away and the budget unresolved, legislators still can’t resist dabbling in the peripheral.

Just this week, a slim House majority decided it is time Oklahomans be required to buy new vehicle license plates. The GOP sponsor, speaker-designate Charles McCall, portrayed it as a “public safety measure,” asserting that as reflective material on current metal tags fades it becomes increasingly difficult for law enforcement to read the numbers.

Of course, it just so happens the replacement tags would cost Oklahomans $5 each … generating about $18.5 million for the cash-strapped state government. Yep, that should put a real dent in a $1.3 billion budget gap.

More preposterous, Republican lawmakers are wasting precious time and energy crafting a legislative response to the Obama administration’s directive that schoolchildren be permitted to use the restroom of the gender with which they identify.

Not only would a legislative thumb in Washington’s eye risk millions in federal aid for cash-strapped schools, it also would invite another lawsuit that could unnecessarily cost taxpayers even more. Yet another legislative solution in search of a problem.

The 2016 session may be the best argument yet for budget-only sessions every other year.

Arnold Hamilton is editor of The Oklahoma Observer; okobserver.net.