Buy Photo Sen Mike Delph, R-Carmel, listened to action on the Senate floor on opening day of the 2015 General Assembly at the Statehouse in Indianapolis. (Photo: Charlie Nye/The Star)Buy Photo

Indiana Sen. Mike Delph, R-Carmel, did the right thing.

On Tuesday, the same day that the frontrunner for the Republican presidential nomination, Donald Trump, reiterated in a debate his call for a ban on Muslims entering the United States and refused to call Muslims serving in the U.S. military “patriots,” Delph went a different direction.

The conservative Indiana lawmaker created a forum at the Indiana Statehouse for Hoosier Muslims to speak some basic truths.

Those Muslim Hoosiers said the things that all thinking people already know.

They said they love America.

They detest the murderous violence that brought grief and tragedy, most recently, in Paris and San Bernardino.

They said that people who murder others in the name of Allah don’t embody the Islamic faith; they betray it.

And they said that they view Trump’s call for a ban on allowing all Muslims to enter the United States as “a personal insult.”

Amen to all of that.

Delph and I have had our differences. I poked fun at a Twitter rampage he went on a couple of years ago after the demise of Indiana’s proposed constitutional amendment banning same-sex marriage, which he supported. I’ve also made sport of his tendency to deliver hyperbolic sound bites and his sometimes expansive sense of his place in the universe.

He took umbrage, which is his right.

In this instance, though, Delph is on the side of the angels.

What’s more, he understands a fundamental truth that many other conservatives – and many other social conservatives, including Gov. Mike Pence – don’t seem to.

In the last session of the General Assembly, those conservatives turned Indiana into a national and international joke and nearly ripped the state in two by ramming through the legislative process an ill-advised Religious Freedom Restoration Act. The fall-out from the controversy was so great that legislative leaders hurried back to the table before the session’s end to craft a “fix” that pleased almost no one – and, in fact, now is being challenged in court.

The refrain from social conservatives through the entire RFRA debacle was that the “rights” of people of faith had to be protected from a government that seemed determined to disparage or deny those rights.

Social conservatives adhered to that argument despite the fact that Indiana state government is led by a governor, attorney general, House speaker and Senate president pro tempore who are conservative themselves and don’t exactly separate their religious beliefs from the performance of their public duties. Social conservatives also clung to their case despite rejoinders from some of us that the Bill of Rights established religious liberty and does a pretty darn good job of protecting it.

It doesn’t matter. The notion that they’re being persecuted if they can’t discriminate against others is a bedrock belief among social conservatives and they are entitled to their beliefs.

But here’s the rub: They can’t logically say that their fight is about preserving religious liberty – the expression of religious belief – if they also are willing to deny that liberty to other people of faith.

Muslims, for instance.

That’s the thing about rights. Either everyone has them or no one does. If they can be waived, revoked or denied – particularly through the arbitrary exercise of government power – then they really aren’t rights.

They’re privileges.

Free people don’t have privileges.

Free people have rights.

Delph seems to get what so many other self-proclaimed social conservatives do not. The fight for respect by Muslim Hoosiers and Americans is – or should be – conservatives’ fight, too.

Faith is faith.

And freedom is freedom.

Those who would deny people the full protection of the law on the basis of their faith or their national origin can’t plausibly claim to be defenders of freedom, religious or otherwise.

Delph seems to grasp that.

And that is why, in this case, Mike Delph is right.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1YsS7i2