The Lincoln County Republican Central Committee and Lincoln County Republican Club held its annual Lincoln Day Dinner at the Lincoln County Fairgrounds in Troy, Saturday, April 23.

The event was kicked off with veterans leading the pledge of allegiance.

Social hour gave attendees and candidates a wonderful opportunity to discuss issues one on one. A pork tenderloin and chicken dinner was prepared by Monty‘s Catering,

The emcee and keynote speaker for the event was Missouri State Senator Dr. Bob Onder.

Onder, who is a physician and attorney, is strongly opposed to “Obamacare.” He actively advocates for life, the Second Amendment, and family values. Senator Onder, who sponsored the “Religious Liberty” bill in the Missouri Senate, expressed need to stop government from restricting religious freedoms.

Several Missouri counties scheduled their “Lincoln Day” on the same date and were all vying for the state GOP candidates to come to their venue. A number of state candidates had committed their attendance elsewhere. Lincoln County was fortunate to have attracted so many of the state GOP candidates here.

A large slate of Republican candidates were on hand to speak to the packed audience. Among the speakers were Missouri Senator Jeanie Riddle speaking on behalf of U.S. Senator Roy Blunt. U.S. Congressman Blaine Luetkemeyer who is running for re-election and his GOP opponent, former State Representative Cynthia Davis.

Missouri has four GOP candidates in the race for governor. Gubernatorial candidate John Brunner was present and laid out his concerns and hopes for the Missouri economy.

Hopeful candidates for Lt. Governor Missouri Senator Mike Parson and Bev Randles both brought to the audience their interesting personal histories and how those experiences have helped prepare them for the office.

Candidates for Missouri Secretary of State were heard as well, and they included Missouri Senator Will Kraus, and Mrs. Jay Ashcroft, who spoke for her husband.

Addressing the audience were Missouri Senator Kurt Schaefer, and speaking for her husband, Mrs. Joshua Hawley. Both are seeking the position of state attorney general.

Mr. Hawley is a Constitutional Law attorney and noted as being one of the litigators of the Hobby Lobby case before the U.S. Supreme Court.

Missouri Senator Eric Schmitt is opposed in his GOP primary run for State Treasurer. Schmitt has been instrumental in eliminating the corporate franchise tax, resulting in a boost to Missouri businesses and job creation.

Kelly Hardcastle who is running opposed in the primary for Lincoln County associate commissioner District 2, outlined his vision for the future of the county.

Lincoln County has been divided up into three state representative districts. Representatives Randy Pietzman (District 41) and Robert Cornejo (District 64) were in attendance and recognized. Also recognized were Circuit Judge Chris Kunza Mennemeyer, Associate Circuit Judge Greg Allsberry and County Assessor Kevin Bishop. Mike Mueller, who is running for Lincoln County associate commissioner District 1, was recognized as were the campaign representatives of state candidates who were unable to attend.