Topics: A Hard Day's Night, backstreet boys, Editor's Picks, George Harrison, John Lennon, Justin Bieber, Monkees, Music, New Kids on the Block, One Direction, Paul McCartney, ringo starr, The Beatles, Entertainment News

In June 1965, the British playwright Noël Coward attended a Beatles concert in Rome. He left disappointed, not necessarily in the music, which he couldn’t hear amid the thunderous crowd noise, but in his fellow audience members. In a diary entry written a week later, he was still confounded by the behavior he’d witnessed among the masses:

“I was truly horrified and shocked by the audience. It was like a mass masturbation orgy….To realise that the majority of the modern adolescent world goes ritualistically mad over those four innocuous, rather silly-looking young men is a silly thought….Personally I should have liked to take some of those squealing young maniacs and cracked their heads together. I am all for audiences going mad with enthusiasm after a performance, but not incessantly during the performance so that there ceases to be a performance.”

What Coward harrumphed at was the phenomenon known as Beatlemania — that potent alchemy of adoration, hormones and fandom that whipped adolescents into a shrieking frenzy each time one of the Fab Four came within eyesight. Teenagers had swooned over Frank Sinatra’s velvety vocals and Elvis Presley’s swiveling hips, but the hysteria that hounded the Beatles was different — more fervent, almost atavistic, and even dangerous at times.

Beatlemania arguably reached its crescendo during the band’s blockbuster first appearance on “The Ed Sullivan Show” in February 1964, when roughly 73 million Americans tuned in for their five-song repertoire. But to truly appreciate the scope and ardor of Beatlemania you have to turn to their first motion picture, “A Hard Day’s Night,” which celebrates its 50th anniversary this month. Shot in seven weeks following the Beatles’ triumphant tour of the United States, “A Hard Day’s Night” is not so much about the Beatles, who play caricaturized versions of themselves (John Lennon remarked that the film is a “comic-strip version of what was going on” with the band), but about Beatlemania itself: the ways it shaped, constricted and occasionally imperiled their day-to-day existence. And it’s this filmic representation of unbridled fandom that continues to exert enormous influence on how emerging pop stars measure and depict their success.

“A Hard Day’s Night” was not intended to be a great film. Shortly after the term “Beatlemania” was coined by the Daily Mirror in late 1963, United Artists approached the Beatles about making an inexpensive feature film to showcase their new songs. By that time, so-called jukebox musicals already had gained a deservedly poor reputation, exemplified by Elvis Presley’s cringe-worthy acting forays. The Beatles were wary of the hackneyed plotlines that these musicals trafficked in. Richard Lester and Alun Owen, the director and screenwriter of “A Hard Day’s Night,” came up with a fitting solution: They disregarded plot almost entirely in favor of a pseudo-documentary style that drew out the Beatles’ distinct personalities and witty interactions.

During his first meeting with the group, Richard Lester asked John Lennon if he liked Sweden, where the Beatles had just played a string of concerts. “Yes, very much,” Lennon replied. “It was a room and a car and a car and a room and a concert and we had cheese sandwiches sent up to our hotel room.” This answer greatly informed Lester’s representation of the Beatles. The subtext of “A Hard Day’s Night” is that the Beatles have become entrapped by their success, confined to a series of interchangeable interior spaces broken up only by live performances, mad dashes into chauffeured vehicles, and inane interviews with the befuddled press corps. It’s a glimpse of Beatlemania from the inside — more tedious than exhilarating. The film exposed a central irony of the Beatles: They were always on the move, but their movements were increasingly restricted. They traveled from one exotic locale to another, but each new place looked just like the last.

Lester didn’t need to worry about re-creating Beatlemania on the big screen. The crowds came to him. The film opens with Lennon, George Harrison and Ringo Starr fleeing from actual hordes of fans at a train station. Later, Lester covertly filmed the Beatles gawking from the backseat of a car at the shrieking fans who encircled them. Overall, the movie feels like it takes place in the unstable eye of a perpetually powerful storm. If the Beatles ventured too far from their sheltered spaces, they risked being engulfed by the very forces they helped create.

Lester’s hand-held camera style reinforced the overall sense of claustrophobia. In the opening scenes in the train and hotel room, Lester often holds the camera tight to the Beatles’ faces. In contrast, in the film’s most iconic scene, the Beatles burst out the backdoor of the television studio where they’re rehearsing and discover that the crowds are nowhere to be seen. “We’re out!” Ringo yells in relief. As they rush onto an empty field, Lester switches to a panoramic helicopter shot, underscoring their sudden freedom. The Beatles frolic through the field with childlike joy, almost as if they haven’t been outdoors like this in months. They seem to be burning off all the energy pent up from their programmatic, fishbowl-like existence.