By of the

Madison — Gov. Scott Walker's administration is notifying 92,000 people this month that their health insurance through BadgerCare Plus will end this year, requiring them to buy potentially more costly commercial health coverage under the Affordable Care Act.

The notification letters are reigniting the debate over Walker's decision to reject additional federal money under what's commonly known as Obamacare to expand BadgerCare Plus. That decision is costing the state $119 million in its two-year budget.

However, Walker has expressed doubts about whether that additional federal money can be counted on in the future, and the program presented too big a risk to embrace. The administration also believes people will be better off in commercial health plans rather than government programs.

BadgerCare Plus has covered adults with children under 19 in households with incomes up to 200% of the federal poverty threshold, or $47,100 for a family of four. The state picked up about 40% of the cost; the federal government picked up the balance.

Under the plan put in place by Walker and the Legislature, that coverage would stop at 100% of the threshold — $23,550 for a family of four.

Those above that threshold will get subsidies to buy private health insurance through the marketplace, or exchange, being set up by the federal government. That coverage — even with the subsidies — will likely be more costly to a recipient than BadgerCare Plus has been.

The way Obamacare was envisioned, BadgerCare Plus would have covered those with incomes up to 138% of the poverty threshold, and then the subsidized marketplace plans would have kicked in.

What that means is about 50,000 people — those above the 138% threshold — presumably would have been moved from BadgerCare Plus to commercial health plans even if Wisconsin had endorsed the Affordable Care Act.

The difference is that under the Walker plan, an additional 38,000 adults — those with incomes between 100% and 138% of the poverty threshold — will have to buy insurance on the exchange, the state Department of Health Services estimates.

About 6,200 people in a limited program for adults without children under 19 also will be moved to private health plans next year.

The changes will not affect children, pregnant women or adults who are disabled or elderly.

In the Milwaukee area, four companies plan to sell health plans for individuals and families on the federal exchange.

Calls to follow letter

The letter from the state goes out a week ahead of the scheduled launch of the federal exchanges on Oct. 1.

The Department of Health Services also plans to call the households receiving letters, said Claire Smith, a spokeswoman for the department. And it will send a second letter in November warning people that their health insurance will end Dec. 31.

The state plans to add the equivalent of 70 full-time employees in the Milwaukee area to help people sign up for coverage through Medicaid or that federal exchange.

How many adults now covered by BadgerCare Plus will buy private health plans on the federal marketplace is unknown. Many will have never bought health insurance before and some will not have bank accounts or credit cards, complicating the process of making monthly payments for their share of the premium.

"There are going to be a lot of very confused people for a while," said Jenni Sevenich, executive director and chief executive officer of Progressive Community Health Centers in Milwaukee.

The Department of Health Services has acknowledged the challenge.

"We are in uncharted waters here," Kitty Rhoades, secretary of the Department of Health Services, said earlier this month.

'Vital safety net'

Under Walker's plan, the state also will cover uninsured adults who do not have children under 19 and have incomes below 100% of the poverty threshold — $11,490 this year. The state will pay 40% of the cost, with the federal government paying the rest.

An estimated 82,000 adults will get coverage under this plan, Smith said.

If Walker had accepted the money available through the Affordable Care Act, the federal government would have paid all of the cost through 2016, with the amount eventually dropping to 90% by 2021. In addition, the federal money would have applied to those with incomes up to 138% of the poverty threshold.

A spokesman for the governor said the additional federal money available through the health law can't be counted on in the future and that Walker is focused on providing coverage for the neediest people in the state.

"The governor's plan preserves Medicaid as a vital safety net for our state's neediest," spokesman Tom Evenson said.

On Monday, U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin (D-Wis.), a strong supporter of the federal law, wrote a letter to Walker saying his approach could lead to confusion or loss of coverage among some BadgerCare recipients.

"Instead of playing political games with people's health care and calling for repealing, defunding or delaying the (Affordable Care Act), it is my sincere hope that you will lead on the law's implementation because you have a shared responsibility to make sure it works for Wisconsin," Baldwin wrote.