Any hope of making serious headway on resolving contract differences between the faculty union and administration at the 14 state-owned universities during Friday's talks diminished quickly.

The sides met for what one side estimates to be about 15 minutes before the talks broke down.

The faculty's current four-year contract expires June 30. This was the fifth time the sides have met at the bargaining table.

The Association of Pennsylvania State College and University Faculties' statement about the talks indicates the session broke down over issues of how faculty layoffs, or retrenchment, are handled and fiscal transparency.

The State System's statement about the talks with the union that represents about 6,000 professors, was more descriptive.

It said, "After rejecting the State System's counterproposal on retrenchment and indicating that APSCUF was not prepared to discuss issues related to the Affordable Care Act, the union's chief negotiator read a statement that included a series of personal attacks against system officials and claims included in a pending lawsuit, resulting in the session ending early without any progress."

The pending lawsuit being referred to is a whistleblower suit filed by a former West Chester University chief budget officer who accuses the university of falsely reporting deficits to receive state funding to use if it succeeded in spinning off from the State System.

Faculty union President Ken Mash said that pending lawsuit "contains very specific allegations about the system's failure to negotiate in good faith. The entire lawsuit is troubling both to our members but should also be troubling to all parent of students, students, and every citizen of the commonwealth. The system has a lot to do to rebuild its credibility."

System spokesman Kenn Marshall said the union negotiators treated allegations raised in the pending lawsuit as fact during Friday's talks. "They are just claims made in a potential lawsuit," Marshall said.

"It was clear they didn't' come prepared to negotiate today and it's hoped that next week when get back to the table they will be," he said.

The two sides will meet again on June 19.

The faculty affected by these contract negotiations teach the more than 100,000 students attending Bloomsburg, California, Cheyney, Clarion, East Stroudsburg, Edinboro, Indiana, Kutztown, Lock Haven, Mansfield, Millersville, Shippensburg, Slippery Rock and West Chester universities.