REUTERS Soapbox When Presidents Lie For the first time, most Americans don't trust Obama. Can he recover?

For Richard M. Nixon, it was “I am not a crook,” for George H. W. Bush it was “Read my lips: no new taxes” and for Bill Clinton it was “I did not have sexual relations with that woman.”

Big presidential lies take many forms. What they all share is the potential to sever the bond of trust between a president and the people he was elected to serve—and therefore to destroy a presidency.

Story Continued Below

And while it may lack the intrigue of Watergate or the Monica Lewinsky imbroglio, “If you like your plan, you can keep it” may very well have a similar effect on Obama: effectively ending his presidency more than three years before it officially concludes.

In August 1964, Congress passed the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, which authorized President Lyndon B. Johnson to use “ all necessary measures” to protect U.S. service members abroad without having to secure a formal declaration of war by the Senate. The resolution was prompted by the Gulf of Tonkin incident, which Johnson described to Congress and the American people as two unprovoked attacks by North Vietnamese warships against U.S. vessels in the Gulf.

Only it was untrue. Johnson used the incident first to promise the American people that “We still seek no wider war,” which helped him defeat the hawkish GOP Sen. Barry Goldwater in the 1964 election, then, later, to escalate the war in Vietnam.

It is often said that Vietnam was LBJ’s undoing. But it was his lies about Vietnam that really did him in. A 1967 Harris poll found that Americans’ most serious criticism of Johnson was that “he was not honest about sending troops to Vietnam.” Johnson’s approval ratings never recovered, and he was forced to scale back his ambitious domestic agenda. Ultimately, he reluctantly withdrew from the 1968 presidential race.

At the 1988 Republican National Convention, George H.W. Bush accepted the Republican nomination for president by emphatically stating, “Read my lips: no new taxes.” The pledge was seen by the Bush campaign as a way to unite the GOP around the moderate candidate. Once in office, Bush ultimately raised taxes at the behest of a Democratic Congress dead set on balancing the budget through tax increases. The backlash was strong. A New York Post headline read: “Read my lips: I lied.”

Bush’s popularity plummeted, and Pat Buchanan, who challenged Bush in the 1992 Republican primaries, constantly reminded voters of Bush’s lie, insisting it was proof of Bush’s lack of honesty. Clinton also seized on Bush’s broken promise, producing ads late in the campaign that attacked Bush’s character. Bush’s repeated apologies only made him look weak, and they became fodder for late-night comedy shows. When Bush lost, many political pundits said they believed he would have won had he not raised taxes.