John Bartkowski, CEO of Sixteenth Street Community Health Centers, and Rachel Roller, senior vice president of community and government relations for Aurora Health Care, are shown Monday at the health center in Milwaukee. Credit: Mark Hoffman

By of the

Aurora Health Care will give a building with an estimated value of $1 million to Sixteenth Street Community Health Centers to open a new clinic at 4570 S. 27th St., continuing the recent expansion of community health centers that provide care to roughly one in seven people in Milwaukee.

The gift is in addition to a $1 million grant last year to Sixteenth Street to expand access to primary and behavioral health care. That grant now will be used for renovations to the building and to offset the clinic's operating losses in its first years.

"They stepped up to the plate, and I have to give them a lot of credit for that," said John Bartkowski, president and chief executive officer of Sixteenth Street.

Sixteenth Street, which provided care to 39,400 people last year, also plans to open a clinic south or west of Miller Park, an area that has been identified as having limited access to primary care and other health care services.

That clinic will be financed by a $12 million grant from Froedtert Health announced in August. The Medical College of Wisconsin also has committed to supporting it.

Aurora pledged $1.7 million to Progressive Community Health Centers last year to open an urgent care clinic and a medical clinic on the Aurora Sinai Medical Center campus in downtown Milwaukee. The two clinics, scheduled to open this month, could reduce the number of people seeking primary care at the hospital's emergency department.

The grants by Aurora and Froedtert Health to Sixteenth Street and Progressive are the most recent examples of the increased collaboration between health systems and the four community health centers in the Milwaukee area.

Community health centers, located in low-income urban and rural areas, provide primary, dental and behavioral health care and other services, primarily to patients who are covered by Medicaid programs, such as BadgerCare Plus, or who are uninsured.

Community health centers receive higher payments for seeing patients covered by Medicaid programs than the health systems do. As a result, community health centers can make money on patients covered by the programs, while the health systems typically lose money on those patients.

"It only makes sense that the systems want us to help," Bartkowski said.

The building that Aurora is giving to Sixteenth Street is part of Aurora's plans to give $5 million to community groups throughout eastern Wisconsin this year through its Better Together Fund.

The health system gave $10 million in grants through the fund last year to expand access to primary and behavioral health care as well as for sexual assault and domestic violence prevention and treatment programs.

"We view this fund as part of our role as a leader in the community, and it's based on collaboration, which is really the best way to solve problems," said Michael Brophy, chief of staff and chief communications officer for Aurora.

The grants from Aurora and Froedtert Health come when health systems are posting stronger profits partly because of the expansion of coverage through the Affordable Care Act and the drop in charity care and bad debt expense. Aurora reported operating income of $462.4million last year and $503 million in 2014 compared with $156.8 million in 2013. Froedtert Health reported operating income of $149 million for its fiscal year ended June 30 compared with $83.4 million in its 2014 fiscal year.

Sixteenth Street's new clinic — about 10,000 square feet — will be smaller than its clinics at 1032 S. Chavez Drive and 2906 S. 20th St. and the clinic planned for south or west of Miller Park.

The new clinic, which will provide primary and behavioral health care, could have a mix of five or six physicians, nurse practitioners, physician assistants or therapists. Sixteenth Street hopes to be in the new clinic in January.

In addition to the grants totaling roughly $2 million, Aurora also agreed for its specialists to accept referrals from Sixteenth Street. "The partnership with Aurora is almost as important as the million-dollar building," Bartkowski said.

Sixteenth Street, which has worked closely with Columbia St. Mary's, will have a similar arrangement with Froedtert Health and the Medical College of Wisconsin when it opens its clinic to the west.