Only one post office in New Jersey will keep its doors open late for those last-minute filers on Wednesday's IRS holiday.

After a decade of decline in paper returns and the ride of electronic filing, only 112 locations across the country will offer extended hours on Tax Day, according to the United State Post Office.

Bellmawr will be the lone location in the Garden State to get your taxes in under the wire.

Obamacare tax issue: Last minute tips for the dreaded Form 8962



Since 2005, the United State Postal Service has seen a drop of almost 30 percent or 30 million pieces of first-class mail on April 15.

"There was a time, not too long ago, when events were staged outside of post offices (not by us but by third parties) because tax day was an event," said Sue Brennan, the senior public relations representative for the United State Postal Service. "With the continued decline in mail volume, that doesn't happen anymore."

The Bellmawr Post Office, on Benigno Boulevard, just a few miles below Camden, has extended hours Wednesday from 8:30 a.m. to 10 p.m., according to USPS.

In North Jersey, residents are out of luck if they're running behind with all post offices operating at regular hours. Locations in Newark, Woodbridge, Linden and Bayonne are open until 7 p.m. with their last collection at 5.

Five tax myths that skew the national debate | Moran

Although the USPS cannot differentiate between someone mailing their taxes or just a birthday card on Tax Day, Brennan said the number of people who file through the mail is declining.

According to the IRS, the tax agency expects 23 million returns to be filed through the mail, down 7 percent from last year. As of March 28, 82 million people have filed electronically, while only 8.3 million were done on paper.

If desperate, residents can head into New York City and send out their taxes at The James A. Farley Post Office near Penn Station until midnight.

The Wilmington Post Office in Delaware will also be open until 10 p.m.

The USPS has offered the following tips for those mailing in their taxes:

If you're dropping your taxes in a blue collection box, double-check the last scheduled pick-up time.

Tax forms are no longer available at Post Offices. Federal forms are available here and state forms here.

Make sure the postage is correct. The IRS will not pay postage due and your filings will be returned if there is insufficient postage.

Don't forget a return address.

Craig McCarthy may be reached at CMcCarthy@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @createcraig. Find NJ.com on Facebook.