Barbara Marra with her daughter, Anna, 11-months. Marra hired a health care advocate to help coordinate health care for her elderly in-laws. ( Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer )

Nanna Bo Christensen, breast health navigator, in the consultation area of the Boulder Community Health Integrated Care Center. (Paul Aiken / Staff Photographer)

U.S. growth in health advocate industry 2011 - 266 advocates 2012 - 318 2013 - 384 2014 - 493 2015 - 579 Source: The Alliance of Professional Health Advocates

New emergency rooms, urgent care centers and hospitals are springing up across Boulder County and the country, but that doesn't equate to an improvement in health care, at least not yet.

As a result, a new field of professionals - private health care advocates - is emerging to help families cope with a health care system that some say is growing in complexity.

Judy Lawten of Sagemont Healthcare Advocates at her Erie home on Tuesday. (Paul Aiken / Staff Photographer)

Charging fees of $50 to $70 an hour, their mission is to help unravel glitches in care, billing and payment. During the past five years, the number of health care advocates has more than doubled, reaching 579 this year, up from 266 in 2011, according to the Alliance of Professional Health Advocates, a trade group based in Baldwinsville, NY.

"Health care has become fragmented," said Judy Lawten said, a Boulder-based health care advocate. "When a patient goes to see a specialist, for example for diabetes, cardiac disease, arthritis or cancer, often no one is overseeing the total care of the patient. Therefore, the primary care doctors may not be aware of all the medical issues when their patients see specialists."

Advertisement

"Patients today have doctors who don't talk to one another. You would think electronic medical records would make people communicate more effectively but they are not. And so mistakes are happening."

Lawten and her partner run Sagemont Healthcare Advocates.

Lawten believes that with rising work loads, doctors and nurses aren't able to spend as much time with patients, at times leaving them confused with their treatment plan and options.

Communication misfires

"People are confused," said Cindy Rigot, co-founder of Re:assured Advocacy in Denver, another advocate organization.

"I've seen so many problems in communications."

Rigot said that in today's medical world, doctors spend less time with patients, and medicine is more complex than ever.

The confusion and poor communications got the better of Barbara Marra, who cares for her elderly in-laws. She moved them from California to Boulder a few years ago, and suddenly found herself immersed in the world of medical specialists.

"It's too complex. I don't know how anyone navigates the medical world," Marra said.

"None of the specialists talk to each other, even when they are in the same office. It's unbelievable."

Marra turned to Judy Lawten, who has more than 40 years experience in health care, to become an advocate for her in-laws.

"It has been amazing," Marra said.

"The primary care doctors often rely on their patients to know changes in their health status or visits to other specialists, which is not always comprehensive," Lawten said. "Seniors are particularly vulnerable since they often have multiple chronic diseases and multiple specialists. The lack of care coordination can lead to errors in treatment, including medication errors."

"Advocates play a strong role in this care coordination and can ensure that all doctors are on the same page and develop a cohesive care plan for the patient," Lawton said

With the advent of electronic charting and medical records, Lawton said, Doctors must split their time with the patient to make sure the electronic records are completed while the patient is in front of them, often leaving patients feeling that their questions haven't been asked and leaving doctors feeling that they wish they had more time for the patient."

Primary care physicians

The days of the old family doctor or primary care physician managing an individual's health care from A to Z seems to have faded away. It's been replaced with specialists.

"It appears to me that the role of the primary care provider or family physician has been greatly diminished. Specialists called 'hospitalists' have largely taken over the role of the PCP, once the PCP's patient has been admitted to the hospital," said Dr. Sid Vinall of Lafayette.

"So again, the PCP's role in managing the health care of patients is being compromised and not in the best interest of patient care."

"In this larger health care delivery system, I feel there has been some loss of the basic doctor-patient relationship, as the old family doctors position in the hierarchy has diminished," Dr. Vinall added. "Patients now are being cared for more and more by the specialists and sub-specialists and are often lost in the system."

That's not to say hospitals are being negligent. Dan Weaver, spokesman for UCHealth, which operates the Longmont Clinic and the University of Colorado Hospital, pointed to several initiatives that should improve communications between doctors and patients.

At the top of his list are medical record apps.

"This is certainly a big advancement that we're just at the beginning of. Patients now have their test results and medical histories not just in their doctor's office, but in their smart phones," Weaver said. "The app allows a patient to securely email their doctor and keep track of their medical tests - to determine whether their cholesterol is increasing or decreasing for example."

Weaver said improved connectivity will go a long way in keeping doctors and patients on the same page and in synch.

"For example if a Longmont Clinic patient got in a car accident in Colorado Springs and was rushed, unconscious, to Memorial Hospital, doctors there would still be able to pull up that patient's medical record and see his or her medical history, current prescriptions, allergies," Weaver explained. "This saves lives, and being able to see medical images and tests at different locations reduces the need for repeat tests/imaging, which is both safer for the patient and a reduction in cost."

The patient experience is also high on the list of priorities at Boulder Community Health.

For cancer patients, BCH has what it calls nurse navigators to help guide individuals through the process of care.

"The nurse navigators help patients if they get confused, helps them find resources, and helps then understand everything that is going on," said Jacqueline Attlesey-Pries, chief nursing officer and vice president of patient care services at BCH.

"We also offer a transitional care program, which supports the patient and keeps them informed."

Billing

When health care advocates aren't explaining medical conditions or confirming treatments, they are usually helping clients with the financial aspects of their treatment. That's why Tess DeLaney of Boulder reached out to Sagemont Healthcare Advocates.

"I spent weeks and weeks on the phone trying to work out the billing and negotiating between doctors, facilities and insurance but I couldn't get anywhere. It was a complete nightmare," DeLaney said.

"I can't say I lost faith in the health care system but I felt like it was an utter nightmare."

That nightmare began in August of 2014, when DeLaney's partner, an elite rock climber, fell 60 feet in Eldorado Canyon and suffered a severe traumatic head injury.

After months of treatment the bills began to roll in, and with that confusion over deductibles, what was covered, and what was out of pocket. Delaney's frustration prompted a phone call to Judy Lawten.

"She took over calling the doctors offices and hospitals and insurance people. She organized the claims and figured out who had charged for what and figured out who had overcharged or double charged, who should be owed what," DeLaney said. "She organized all the bills. She spent hours on the phone with offices and collection agencies sorting through the mess. The bills I received were so convoluted I couldn't even tell what we were being billed for!"

The organization's founder and director Trisha Torrey is quick to praise the efforts of doctors and nurses across the nation's health care system, but doesn't see the need for advocates going away anytime soon.

"Our time with our doctors will continue to decrease as insurers put even more of a squeeze on doctors' time. That means that medical errors will continue to increase - misdiagnosis, drug prescription errors, unnecessary tests and procedures," Torrey said.

"Thus the rise of the private patient advocate, and that's who I work with. Private, independent, professional patient advocates are shepherding patients through the system because no one teaches us how to be smart patients. Patients are beginning to recognize that they don't know what they don't know - so - just like legal problems suggest we need to connect with a lawyer, health care system-related problems mean we need to connect with a patient advocate who knows how to help us get the best from the system."

Vince Winkel: 303-684-5291, winkelv@times-call.com or twitter.com/vincewinkel