The past year was marked by both controversy and considerable change in Highland Park and Deerfield.

Whether it was protesting the departure of a popular high school principal or opposing the closure of the town's only boat ramp, Highland Park residents came out in numbers to public meetings and made their voices heard.

Meanwhile, District 112 laid the groundwork for a $150 million bond referendum vote in April to finance the plan to consolidate and upgrade the district's schools.

And in Deerfield, a U.S. Congressman lost his seat after one term in office.

Here's a look back at some of the big stories from the past year.

Change in the schools

Perhaps no regional story was larger in 2014 than the planned consolidation of North Shore School District 112.

School officials have said the goal is to improve the district's long-term financial stability while upgrading the schools to be more conducive with "21st Century learning."

Through a series of community meetings, and by contracting architectural consultants, the district has crafted a plan to go from 12 buildings to seven, creating a middle school campus where Red Oak and Sherwood elementary schools currently sit, officials say.

Voters could see a $150 million referendum request on the ballot in April.

In Township District 113, which covers Highland Park and Deerfield high schools, turmoil overshadowed facility upgrades.

Beginning last spring, the superintendent and school board faced community outrage following the controversial departure of former Highland Park High School Principal Brad Swanson and proposed staffing cuts.

Emotional parents and students packed various meetings decrying Swanson's departure, blaming Superintendent George Fornero and school board members.

Fornero subsequently announced he would retire at the end of this school year, two years before his contract was up. District 113 is conducting a search for a new superintendent, among other leadership positions within the district.

Swanson, now an assistant superintendent for Glenbrook High School District 225, was arrested in connection with a DUI early Thanksgiving morning.

Dold gets second chance

U.S. Rep. Brad Schneider, the Deerfield Democrat representing the 10th Congressional District, was ousted after only one term in office, losing to a familiar foe in Bob Dold in the mid-term elections.

Dold, a Kenilworth Republican who was first elected to the office in 2010, was edged out by Schneider in 2012.

During the tightly-contested campaign, Schneider assailed Dold's voting record, particularly on the Affordable Care Act, depicting him as a reliable Republican vote.

Dold stuck to his campaign message that he was a moderate, though, and ultimately celebrated the Election Night win surrounded by supporters at Austin's Saloon and Eatery in Libertyville.

Infrastructure improvements (or not)

In Deerfield, the long-awaited reconstruction of Deerfield Road was pushed back to 2016.

Now slated to begin in 2016, the Deerfield Road reconstruction project involves replacement of existing water mains, storm and sanitary sewers, and traffic signals, between Rosemary Terrace in Deerfield and Ridge Road in Highland Park, according to village board documents.

The project also includes the pavement patching, grinding and resurfacing of the road between the Metra underpass and Rosemary Terrace.

The estimated cost for the Deerfield Road project is $15 million with engineering included, officials have said, but Deerfield will only pay about $1.5 million for construction and an additional $200,000 or so for engineering.

In Highland Park, planned security improvements at the water treatment facility sparked community uproar.

In the fall, city officials announced the recommended closing of Park Avenue boating facility in order to tighten up security at the plant, which provides water for 129,000 residents in Highland Park and other communities, officials have said.

The problem?

That's the only boat launch in town. Many dozens of boaters objected to its closure and the city subsequently eased off its recommendation. Now a park district task force is studying a possible compromise between access and security.

Tragedies new and old

In September, Highland Park woman Carly Rousso was sentenced to five years in prison for abusing inhalants while driving, before running over and killing a 5-year-old girl in Highland Park.

The sentencing brought closure to the lengthy legal process following the Labor Day 2012 crash. Rousso had swerved from the road after huffing chemicals, striking Jaclyn Santos-Sacramento, 5, and her family as they walked on the sidewalk.

Rousso was found guilty of reckless homicide and aggravated drunken driving.

After the sentencing, the Jaclyn's parents said they were disappointed by what they perceived to be a light punishment for Rousso.

"Seeing my daughter killed in front of me is something I cannot put into words," said Modesta Sacramento Jimenez in a statement.

Another family was reeling from loss after the Nov. 3 shooting of Christopher Anderson, a Waukegan man killed by Highland Park police.

Anderson, 27, drew a gun on police at NorthShore Highland Park Hospital, officials have said. Police fired nine shots after he refused to drop the weapon. Anderson's 9-year-old daughter was receiving medical treatment at the hospital, but was not present when the shooting took place.

After an investigation into the incident, the Lake County State's Attorney's Office determined the shooting to be justified.

On a lighter note

A pony-tailed figure skater from Highland Park emerged onto the international stage during the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi.

Jason Brown captured the hearts of his hometown fans with his humble and enthusiastic demeanor, and inspired new fans globally with his exuberant "Riverdance" routine.

Brown helped the U.S. team to a bronze medal in the team figure skating event and came within striking distance of a bronze in the individual competition before finishing ninth overall.

"People ask me about the sacrifices I've made, but I never really look at any part of my journey as a sacrifice," Brown told Highland Park High School students at a rally upon return home. "If you love what you're doing, then it really isn't a sacrifice."