We've learned a few things about Hillary Clinton since the official start of her presidential campaign. Above all, she hasn't changed much from the cautious, closed-door candidate of the past.

Her opponents are picking apart her credibility, day by day, on a variety of issues, and the media are turning against her for keeping them at arm's length and failing to answer their questions as she focuses on meeting with voters in controlled settings. So, if Clinton was trying to reshape her image and make herself into a more likable leader, as some of her allies urged her to do, her rollout has failed.

[READ: Democrats Caught in Hillary Clinton's Personal Game of 'Survivor']

She remains the favorite for the Democratic nomination, far ahead in the polls and presumably in fund-raising, but her favorability ratings with the public have declined. A new Pew Research Center poll finds that only 49 percent of Americans have a favorable view of her and 47 percent view her unfavorably, a nine-point drop in her popularity from 58 percent last August. It's clear that her path toward the White House won't be an easy one.

Some of the most revealing assessments of Clinton came in a Washington Post article by Karen Tumulty published May 23. "She's not a paranoid person, I don't think, but she wants some paranoid people around her," a former aide told the Post. Another former Clinton adviser said she values "a combination of loyalty, blind devotion, willingness to stand up and fight for her – somebody who doesn't back down from a fight on her behalf and who doesn't flinch."

These are not exactly at the top of the list of traits most people want in their president, at least to the extent that they crowd out other attributes such as being open to new ideas, seeking to conciliate and putting everyday people first. The word "Nixonian" comes to mind, derived from former President Richard Nixon's dividing of the world into friends and enemies. This added to the toxic atmosphere in Nixon's West Wing. Hillary Clinton would be wise to avoid this Manichaean viewpoint.

But Clinton made a habit of playing hardball when she was first lady in President Bill Clinton's administration. She did it again during her unsuccessful 2008 campaign for the Democratic presidential nomination, which she lost to Barack Obama. And she demonstrated similar toughness throughout her four years as secretary of state under President Obama. I have covered her since she arrived in the White House with her husband in 1993. She can be charming one-on-one. But her belief in a "vast right-wing conspiracy" aimed at ending the careers of her and her husband has been a defining feature of her many years in the public spotlight. This belief has surrounded her with a carapace of suspicion about those outside her inner circle, especially conservatives and the news media.

Clinton has a tendency to rely on core supporters when she gets into trouble rather than reach out to others who aren't in her orbit. This trait was evident in emails released by the government from her tenure as America's chief diplomat. For example, she apparently turned to longtime friend Sidney Blumenthal for counsel on the Middle East even though his expertise was questionable.

She is in the mainstream on most issues, ranging from support for gay marriage, maintaining the parts of Obama's health-care law that work, raising the minimum wage and spending federal funds to improve the nation's infrastructure. She sometimes gets fuzzy when the issue is particularly divisive, such as Obama's free-trade agreement with Asia-Pacific nations. But in the end she is a centrist.

[ALSO: Hillary Clinton's Play: People Over the Press]

However, she is being urged to move further left in order to enhance her position with the liberals who have a big impact on the Democratic presidential nomination. And pressure from the left is rising. Referring to the large speaking fees and personal wealth accumulated by Hillary and Bill Clinton, Sen. Bernie Sanders, a political independent and self-described socialist from Vermont who is also seeking the Democratic presidential nomination, told CNBC, "When you hustle money like that, you don't sit in [modest] restaurants like this [where he was interviewed], you sit in restaurants where you spend – I don't know what they spend – hundreds of dollars for dinner and so forth. That is the world you are accustomed to and that is the world view that you adopt. You're not worrying about a kid three blocks away from here whose mom can't afford to feed him. So, yes, I think that can isolate you – that type of wealth has the potential to isolate you from the reality of the world." In her defense, Clinton says she has consistently fought for the middle class and poor people throughout her political career.

Some of the criticism she is drawing, especially from Republicans, is aimed at prodding her to lose her temper and adding to the perception that she is unlikable. And the attacks won't go away, including GOP criticism of private emails that she used in violation of Obama administration policy as apparently another example of how she holds herself above the rules that apply to others. She is also under severe criticism for how she handled the terrorist attacks in Benghazi, in which four Americans died, when she was secretary of state.