Denver Post sports writer Mike Klis posts his Broncos Mailbag on Wednesdays during the regular season.

Pose a Broncos- or NFL-related question for the Broncos Mailbag.

Hey, Mike! Where did C.J. Anderson come from and why in the world would we need to spend second- and third-rounders on Montee Ball and Ronnie Hillman when we have that beast? Thanks.

— Ariel Belkin, Los Angeles

Ariel – C.J. Anderson came from the University of California-Berkeley, where as a junior and senior he was a backup to Isi Sofele. He came from Laney community college in Oakland, Calif. He came from the rough streets of Vallejo, Calif., which is near Oakland.

And he came from way back on the Broncos’ depth chart.

In Game 4 this season against the Arizona Cardinals, Anderson didn’t even dress. The Broncos started Montee Ball. Ronnie Hillman was No. 2. And because rookie Juwan Thompson can contribute on special teams, he was No. 3.

Anderson would flash running ability when he got his sporadic chances the past two years, but it wasn’t until Ball and Hillman went down with significant lower-body injuries that Anderson got his first real opportunity to shine.

Ball was a second-round draft pick. Hillman was a third-rounder. Anderson was undrafted. It’s happening more and more. Arian Foster, Chris Ivory, Jonas Gray, Joique Bell and Isaiah Crowell are among the undrafted running backs of note. Priest Holmes was undrafted.

It goes to show that the draft, or acquisition of rookies, doesn’t end with the seventh round. Give the Broncos’ scouting department, particularly Matt Russell, credit for finding this rushing gem.

Mike – I am so frustrated with our defense. What in the world is going on? John Elway goes out and gets top defenders, and I don’t see the improvement. At least not lately. I guess I’m more disappointed than anything. Is it the play-calling? Can you enlighten me? I’m really beginning to think that this team is not a Super Bowl team.

— Betsy Meier, Colorado Springs

Betsy – The biggest concern with the defense is at linebacker, where they have lost two starters to significant injury. Danny Trevathan was arguably their best defensive player last year and he’s only essentially played in one game this year. Trevathan is back practicing from his knee fracture this week, but he won’t be eligible to play until Game 14 at San Diego.

Middle linebacker Nate Irving, however, isn’t coming back. He’s finished with a torn MCL. Brandon Marshall has been outstanding replacing Trevathan, but Trevathan has been missed. Steven Johnson and rookie Lamin Barrow are replacing Irving, but their inexperience showed in the last two games against St. Louis and Miami.

Trevathan and Irving are the Broncos’ best run-tackling linebackers, and their absence is catching up to the defense, which has suddenly allowed 114.0 yards rushing on average the past two games, after allowing just 67.0 rushing yards through their first nine games.

But the Broncos are also struggling lately to find the right defensive tackle rotation outside of Terrance Knighton. Marvin Austin was benched last week, Sylvester Williams was caught playing high on several long Dolphin runs and Malik Jackson is a far better pass rusher from the inside than he is a run-stopper.

Malik Jackson. Worth the stupid penalties? How many personal fouls does this guy have total for the season? At some point a player’s production and worth have to be balanced against the negatives he brings to the team. In your view, how does Jackson tip the scales?

— David “Bronco” Brown, Lenexa, Kan.

David – Jackson is worth it. He does play with a crazed state on Sundays, and there are times when his emotion crosses the line between aggression and making a critical mental mistake.

But you have to be careful about overly taming wild stallions. Jackson is a terrific inside pass rusher. Any coach would tell you it’s better to hold back a player than try to push more out of him.

Just wondering if the Broncos have a beef about playing two teams in a row (Dolphins and Chiefs) that are coming off Thursday night games? Having 10 days off and extra time to prepare. With the early bye and the Thursday game after a Sunday night game, it seems the schedulers were unkind to the Broncos. Thank you.

— Shay, Brigham City, Utah

Shay – I’m sure they noticed. But the Broncos played on Thursday night before traveling to New England. If the Pats were miffed before the game, they got over it.

And the Broncos just beat the well-rested Dolphins. The Chiefs coming off a stinging loss to the horrific Raiders negates any advantage they had with added preparation. And the shocking revelation of safety Eric Berry’s medical condition will take more than a few days to get over.

The Chiefs may still beat the Broncos on Sunday night, but if they do, I’m not sure the extra rest/preparation will get much credit.

The biggest gripe I’ve heard about the Broncos’ schedule was in regards to their early bye in Week 4. They have since played eight games in eight weeks with five games in the next five weeks to go.

That’s 13 games in 13 weeks without a break. It won’t be easy keeping those bodies in peak physical condition for the stretch run. That first-round playoff bye is always a carrot but it’s dangling like a … like a … like a ‘roid-injected carrot this year!

Should we be concerned about too much wear and tear on Peyton Manning’s throwing arm? As I recall, Tony Dungy had him on a pitch count in Indy at one point. Thanks in advance. Always appreciate your insight.

— George G., Groveland, Calif.

George – Manning is no Double-A pitching prospect. He’s thrown for 525 touchdowns (more than anyone in history) and 68,522 yards (second-most of all time and just 3,316 behind Brett Favre).

I think he’s got his throwing program figured out by now.

He did have to reconfigure things after four neck surgeries that cost him the 2011 season left him with nerve damage in his right biceps.

Manning doesn’t come out early for an early throwing session before games — a practice he stopped after his three-interception game at Atlanta early in the 2012 season. It wasn’t the picks so much as everyone coming up to him to say hello.

We all know Manning well enough to know that when he’s in his preparation mode, stay out of his way. I think Manning has the rest of this season and then two more years left in his throwing arm.

Hey, Mike. I may be way out of line here, no pun intended, but why not put Ben Garland in at guard, move Orlando Franklin back to right tackle, and move Manny Ramirez and Louis Vasquez over one space to the left? I know Ben doesn’t have much experience, but he’s a player who will put it all on the line for his team. I’m probably way out in left field here, but what could it possibly hurt? Plus, Ben knows the offense.

— Mike Fields, Thornton

Mike – Not way out of line. My only answer to this is if the Broncos’ coaches thought their line would be better with Garland at left guard, Ramirez back at center, Vasquez back at right guard and Franklin at right tackle, they’d do it.

The Broncos are committed to not putting Franklin back at right tackle. Start there. And they don’t believe Garland would be an upgrade over Franklin at left guard. Keep in mind, Franklin is a four-year offensive line starter, and Garland was shifted to the offensive line just last year.

Franklin is a free agent after this year. Garland will compete for the starting left guard position next year.

I wholeheartedly reject the Broncos’ excuses for not pursuing RBs LeGarrette Blount or Ben Tate. Somebody will sign them, and the Broncos will probably regret that later in the playoffs. Bill Belichick would do it. Denver has still not learned that you have to be able to run and control the clock to win in the playoffs. Just look at the way K.C. and the Patriots are surging now.

— Dan Pradere, Seattle

Dan – You obviously mailed off your letter before Tate was claimed off waivers by the Minnesota Vikings, so the Broncos couldn’t have got him if they wanted him, and before Belichick indeed signed Blount.

Good call on your part. Belichick being Belichick, Blount replaced last week’s Patriot hero, Jonas Gray, and played well, rushing for 78 yards and two touchdowns on 12 carries just days after he was released by Pittsburgh for insubordination.

But here’s why Blount made sense for the Patriots and not the Broncos: He played for the Pats last year. He knows their offense. He does not know the Broncos’ offense. It would have taken him the rest of this season to pick it up. See Trent Richardson with the Indianapolis Colts last year.

I do agree that even with C.J. Anderson’s breakout performance the past three weeks, the Broncos are dangerously thin at running back because there is no guarantee Hillman (groin) or Ball (foot) will fully recover from their injuries.

But in C.J. the Broncos trust.

Hi, Mike. Just finished reading your latest mailbag, and I had a thought (not totally serious): If the Broncos were the No. 1 rushing team in the NFL with Tim Tebow, what about signing him and giving him a package of plays? Everyone would know we were running the ball, but that didn’t really stop him before.

— Jonathan Cain, Lakewood

Jonathan – As you saw Sunday, the Broncos don’t need Tebow to run the ball. All they need is to try. The Broncos committed to running the ball Sunday, even when they were behind, 14-3. They stayed with the run even when they were down 28-17 in the second half.

Manning was effective with less passes and more runs. When you can run, you can beat tough defenses on the road, in cold weather, in January. When you can’t run, you can’t get through all those challenges of cold weather, tough defense, road game, playoffs.

Manning and the pass must remain No. 1 in the Broncos’ offense. But it can no longer be Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 4.

Mike – I notice a lot of people complimenting you on your work lately, saying things like “Love your work” or “I look forward to reading your work each week.” Is that the key to getting a question on the Broncos Mailbag each week? BTW, Love your work.

— Deborah, Ventura, Calif.

Deborah – One time at a frat party, my college roommate Tom Fehn showered a heavyset, young lady with compliments about her beauty.

When I questioned Tom about the sincerity of his flattery, he said: “Everybody deserves a compliment.” That has always stuck with me. (Obviously.)

Happy Thanksgiving to you and all the people out there who enjoy the Broncos ‘bag.

Pose a Broncos- or NFL-related question for the Broncos Mailbag. Listen to Mike Klis on “Klis’ Korner” on Monday-Friday at 102.3 FM ESPN.