In what has to be the absolute best conspiracy theory in history–sorry Lizard People–apparently, some conservatives are freaking out over the “first victim of the death panels.” That victim? Dorothy Zbornak. Well, actually, “Dorothy Zborknak.”

This January, the “satire” site The Daily Currant ran an article claiming that a woman named “Dorothy Zborknak” had become the first victim of these imaginary “death panels.” The story was then picked up in September by conservative site American News as actual fact:

According to recent reports, a group of death panels organized under Obamacare ordered their first execution. Following a hearing by the president’s Patient Resource Efficiency Board (PREB), 86-year-old Dorothy Zborknak has been ordered to death. The reason? According to the administration, she is no longer useful. Zborknak worked at Fleur de Lis Florist in Chicago for nearly forty years, before she made the decision to retire in 1998. Since that time, she has struggled with a host of health problems, including diabetes, high blood pressure, and kidney failure. “Unfortunately, the cost of her care just became too expensive,” claims Peter Johnston, a member of the Chicago PREB. “Under the Affordable Care Act, we have the power to make choices about end of life care and I stand by our ruling. I know it will be hard for the family to accept what’s going to happen…But from a financial standpoint, this was a very easy decision.” What do you think? Is this just wrong?

It is wrong! Bea Arthur may have died of cancer in 2009, but Dorothy Zbornak is alive and well, living on in our hearts forever.

Although the article dates back to September, the news of Ms. Zbornak’s demise, they have been in heavy circulation on social media and through the chain emails (Of course chain emails. Of course.)–possibly as a result of the recent elections and the fury over remarks made by Jonathan Gruber regarding Obamacare.

The rumor has reignited an interest in the idea of “death panels,” which may have inspired a recent Breitbart.com article hilariously titled “The Death Panels Are Coming.” Which no, for the record, they are not. Because that is absurd. Almost as absurd as said death panels murdering Dorothy Zbornak. Or Dorothy Zborknak.

[RightWingWatch]