Buy Photo Maggie, left, sits calmly as her soon to be husband Sparky checks out her bouquet before they exchange vows during their wedding ceremony at Parnassus Books Saturday, Aug. 2, 2014 in Nashville, TN. (Photo: Sanford Myers / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

The first wedding at Parnassus Books boasted more than just an usual location.

It also featured a couple with eight legs.

Dozens witnessed the union of two neighbors and longtime friends — Sparky, a shelter dog adopted by author and bookstore owner Ann Patchett and her husband Karl VanDevender, and Maggie, adopted by Tory Abel and Pamela Carter.

The bride wore a pink carnation bouquet and a matching harness. The groom went casual in his Hawaiian shirt.

More: Parnassus Books among world's coolest, CNN says

Both pooches walked down a hastily-made aisle in the middle of the store, eager children lining it hoping to pet them.

Once lifted onto a card table, the two dogs exchanged vows, promising to love and cherish and play nicely with each other for the rest of their days. Instead of rings, they were both given personalized bone-shaped dog tags saying that "Sparky (hearts) Maggie" and "Maggie (hearts) Sparky."

They met when Abel and Carter were house-hunting in Nashville with Maggie in tow when they walked by Patchett, who was walking Sparky.

"It was love at first sight," said Carter, who also officiated the ceremony.

Dogs Maggie and Sparky exchanged wedding vows during a ceremony at Parnassus Book store to help raise funds for the Nashville Humane Association. Sanford Myers / The Tennessean

Maggie and Sparky quickly became neighbors, and the two dogs started playing with each other every day.

In lieu of a wedding registry, Sparky, Maggie and their families chose to have a "Woof-istry" of items to be donated to the Nashville Humane Association. Parnassus Books also donated a percentage of its proceeds from Saturday to the Humane Association.

A handful of dogs from local non-profit rescue group Proverbs 12:10 were also on hand, ready to be adopted into a permanent home.

"It's when you have a dog and you have that companion, you just want other people to have the same thing," Patchett said.

After the wedding, Patchett said Maggie and Sparky and their families planned to have a nice boat ride down the Cumberland River as their honeymoon on Saturday night.

"I'm already thinking of anniversary parties," Patchett said.

Reach Brian Wilson at 615-726-5970 or on Twitter @brianwilson17.

Read or Share this story: http://www.tennessean.com/story/news/local/2014/08/02/author-ann-patchetts-dog-weds-nashville-bookstore/13521221/