State and local officials are continuing to check for signs that the emerald ash borer has infested trees outside Boulder's city limits, and to try to prevent the devastation that could occur if it does.

Information: Emerald ash borer Longmont ash borer website: http://longmontcolorado.gov/departments/departments-e-m/forestry/emerald-ash-borer Boulder ash borer website: https://bouldercolorado.gov/parks-rec/emerald-ash-borer Boulder County ash borer website: http://www.bouldercounty.org/property/forest/pages/eab.aspx Colorado Department of Agriculture ash borer website: eabcolorado.com, or https://www.colorado.gov/agplants/emerald-ash-borer Colorado State University Extension Service: http://www.ext.colostate.edu/;type "emerald ash borer" into the search window

Thus far in Colorado, ash borer beetles and beetle-damaged trees have only been confirmed inside several areas in Boulder, where the invasive pest was first identified in September 2013.

Elsewhere in Boulder County, though, arborists remain on the lookout for the invasive insect and have been working on their own management plans to replace ash trees whose otherwise-poor health might make them more vulnerable to the wood boring beetles if they do spread.

Longmont forestry supervisor Ken Wicklund said a recently updated inventory of trees on city street rights of way, in city parks and on other city-owned properties counted 2,684 ash trees — about 13 percent of the total trees on city land.

Brett Stadsvold, an emerald ash borer coordinator on Boulder County's staff, said an inventory of trees on county road rights-of-way, on county-managed parks and open space holdings, and on the grounds of county properties, identified about 1,500 ash trees.

Last year, Boulder city officials reported that of about 38,000 total park and right-of-way trees under the jurisdiction of the Parks and Recreation Urban, about 4,800 were ash trees, about 12.6 percent of the city's public tree population.

Nor are the trees that become vulnerable to the spread of the pests confined to public property. Longmont officials, for example, have estimated that the city may have as many as 45,000 total ash trees within its boundaries, including those on private property.

There and elsewhere in the county, residents are being advised to determine whether there are any ash trees on their private properties — and if there are, to start deciding whether those trees are healthy enough to make them worth saving attempt such as with chemical treatment applications.

Boulder city forester Kathleen Alexander said that since the initial discovery of the ash borer in Boulder in 2013, a number of trees have been removed, although she said she did not have an immediate count on Friday of how many trees were cut down.

This spring, Alexander said, Boulder is "doing a lot of tree planting" to replace the ash trees removed last year, while continuing to remove more trees and to monitor the tree population throughout the city for ash trees with symptoms of ash borers' presence.

"We're not preemptively removing all ash trees," Alexander said.

Alexander said Boulder is trying to focus on trees that appear to be unhealthy or in poor condition for a variety of reasons, which could include trees having been attacked by pests other than the emerald ash borer. Decisions are being made about which trees are worthy of treatment and preservation attempts, something she suggested that private property owners can also do by consulting a city-licensed and certified arborist.

Stadsvold said Boulder County has taken samples from more than 100 trees on county-owned or county-managed properties but hasn't found any emerald ash borer evidence in any of those samples. But he said it's hard to know whether the infestation has spread beyond Boulder's city limits because it can sometimes take several years for the problem to be readily visible.

Nor has Boulder County begun removing or replacing any ash trees yet, but both the county and Longmont are developing emerald ash borer management plans to be prepared for what might turn out to be that eventuality, though, Stadsvold and Wicklund said. They said those plans they said are being coordinated with the county's other communities, including Boulder.

Wicklund said a contractor for Longmont is being paid $60,000 to preemptively remove 71 ash trees that were ascertained to be in poor enough health, quality or condition to make them vulnerable if the ash borer does show up there.

Longmont intends to treat at least some of the trees on city-owned property when they're considered worth trying to save, Wicklund said, but until the ash borer is found to have begun nearing this corner of the county, "we don't want to treat too prematurely."

The potential price tag of removing all the ash trees on Longmont public property, grinding out the stumps and replacing them with other varieties of trees could total about $2.7 million, Wicklund said.

In November 2013, the Colorado Department of Agriculture established a quarantine zone to prohibit conveying ash trees, ash logs, branches and chips, ash nursery stock, green lumber, and all hardwood firewood to any destinations outside of Boulder County, the town of Erie, the two landfills around Erie and the Republican Landfill in northern Jefferson County.

John Fryar: 303-684-5211, jfryar@times-call.com or twitter.com/jfryartc