Obama is among the least influential people of 2014, or so says GQ magazine in its annual hit piece."Why are you still on Martha's Vineyard?! Missouri is BURNING. Putin is conquering Europe. The CDC is playing nude Twister with Ebola patients," the publication wrote. This year, it ranked Obama the second least influential person of the year, after singer Bono and the rest of U2."Are you even president anymore? When Obama got blasted for golfing shortly after ISIS beheaded journalist James Foley, he said, 'I should've anticipated the optics.' How do you win the presidency without knowing that golfing makes you look rich and indifferent?"Like rats from a sinking ship, even the most devout liberals are turning on Barry these days. Yes, even GQ is bravely criticizing the president now that his approval rating has collapsed to less than 40 percent.That doesn't mean, however, that it doesn't have a couple choice words for a few (dozen) conservatives too. All the classic boogeymen of the right get honorable mentions. "The Cops," for instance – apparently all of them – rank in at #30.Texas Gov. Rick Perry ranks in at number 13 "with his new 'smart feller' glasses," and John McCain — who insists we "keep bombing everyone" — takes the 22nd spot on the list. Eric "OOPS!" Cantor, who lost his seat in a primary, takes home the medal for tenth least influential person of 2014.Sarah Palin and Dinesh D'Souza take the 26th and 27th slots, respectively. Palin gets dinged for "letting her Wasilbilly family rumble while she's probably Googling herself without a care in the world," and GQ dubs D'Souza's "Obola" tweet the worst pun of 2014.New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie originally ranked 20th, however the author of the list did acknowledge that "in his capacity as chairman of the Republican Governors Association, [he] helped decisively turn the midterm elections in the Republicans' favor . . . So when your state governments do absolutely nothing for you for the next four years, be sure to thank him!"After Obamacare, the VA, Operation Fast and Furious, and Lois Lerner, we should all be so lucky as to have government do nothing.