WASHINGTON -- Republican Lt. Gov. Jay Dardenne and State Rep. John Bel Edwards, D-Amite, plan to make an issue of what they call U.S. Sen. David Vitter's "ineffective" congressional record as they compete in the race for governor.

Luke Bolar, the spokesman for the Republican senator, said such criticism is way off base, given that Vitter has strong record of working across the aisle to move important legislation.

But Dardenne and Bel Edwards, in separate interviews, insist that Louisiana voters don't like the "dysfunction," in Washington and that Vitter has been a major contributor to the partisan divisions that often paralyze Congress.

"You have to wonder how effective he is going to be as governor when he couldn't get much done when he served in the State Legislature, in the House of Representatives and in the United States Senate," Dardenne said. "We don't want to bring Washington politics to Louisiana."

Democrat Bel Edwards, while repeating the "ineffective" label pinned on him by Dardenne, said Vitter's also been a "conservative ideologue" that fights legislation that could help the state and its residents, like "raising the minimum wage."

Edwards said Vitter shares the same conservative orthodoxy of outgoing Gov. Bobby Jindal that he says led to the state's current budget problems. "Vitter is Jindal on steroids," Bel Edwards said.

The other major challenger in the governor's raise, Louisiana Public Service Commission member Scott Angelle, said he's running "on my record and my ideas," and won't run a negative campaign.

Bolar, Vitter's spokesman, said his boss is anything but ineffective, working with Democrats and fellow Republicans to move legislation important to the nation and the state of Louisiana. He points to the Water Resources and Development Act (WRRDA) that he and liberal Sen. Barbara Boxer, D-Calif., drafted and passed with key hurricane protection, flood control and navigation provisions for Louisiana. Another example, he said, is the chemical safety bill he drafted with Democratic Sen. Tom Udall of New Mexico, which recently cleared the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee.

He also helped draft and win Senate passage, again with Boxer, of a long-term highway funding bill; won congressional budget passage of measures to bar the federal government from coercing or incentivizing states to adopt Common Core, or provide subsidizes for House and Senate members' health insurance, though the budget's provisions don't have the effect of law.

His well-publicized efforts to pass bills to block automatic cost of living congressional pay increases, while never adopted, may have contributed to Congressional votes over each of the last six years to forego the pay hikes. His persistent bills to set term limits for members of Congress never went anywhere, unlike when he won a term limit constitutional amendment, but angered some colleagues, just as they did in the Louisiana Legislature.

Bolar, Vitter's spokesman, said he has an impressive record.

"David Vitter has always fought for Louisiana values and gotten things done," Bolar said. "Passing major bipartisan bills like WRRDA, the flood insurance fix, and the Steve Gleason Act; holding agencies like the Corps and FEMA accountable; cutting through red tape to help constituents with their federal problems; staying in touch through 588 in person and telephone town halls -- that's the Vitter record, and nobody can match it."

Still, there's no doubt he can be divisive. During the last two years, the major cause of bad feelings between some of Vitter's colleagues and the senator are over the Louisiana Republican's unrelenting effort to bar taxpayer subsidies for members of Congress and their staffs to purchase health insurance through the Affordable Care Act.

His efforts have proved popular on conservative talk shows, but angered colleagues, both Republicans and Democrats, who argue he is unfairly seeking to take away subsidized health insurance not so much for themselves ("many of us can afford insurance without the subsidy, said one colleague) but for congressional staffers who would be hard pressed without them. The insurance subsidies, his congressional critics said, are provided all other full-time federal workers and most workers for large private employers.

Vitter tried to get the Small Business Committee, which he chairs, to subpoena material from the D.C. Small Business marketplace to find out who authorized an application for Affordable Care Act coverage for congressional members and their staffs by describing the Senate and House as small businesses with fewer than 45 employees. That Vitter points out is patently false. He needed the votes of each of the committee's 10 Republicans to prevail, but, in a rare rebuke to a committee chairman, lost support from five of them.

Vitter has used the power of a single senator to block legislation or confirmation of nominees by President Barack Obama to demand votes for legislation or federal action on projects, sometimes leading to angry floor fights with Senate Democratic Leader Harry Reid. His insistence in 2013 that the Senate vote on his bill to bar subsidies for members, staffers, and even the president and other White House officials, before he'd allow a vote on a Senate energy efficiency bill, killed the legislation.

It prompted the Republican sponsor, Sen. Rob Portman, R-Ohio, to say he wished Vitter had found another bill to wage his fight, given the years of hard negotiations needed to put on the verge of passage.

Said Sen. Jeanne Shaheen, D-N.H., the Democratic sponsor: "The fact is he chooses to be here to hold up this bipartisan piece of legislation at a time when we can get some real agreement on energy legislation coming out of the Senate -- the first time since 2007."

The bill still hasn't moved.

Dardenne, the lieutenant governor challenging Vitter, said the senator seems to assert himself on issues that can help him politically more than on issues that can help his state.

But Vitter's Louisiana Republican congressional colleagues are backing his run for governor. "Having served with David Vitter in the Louisiana legislature and in Congress, I've witnessed firsthand his commitment to the state of Louisiana and his ability to solve critical problems," said House Majority Whip Steve Scalise, R-Jefferson.