WEST CHESTER, Pa.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--PrimePay, the nation’s largest independent payroll processor, welcomes Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) attorney Mitchell “Mitch” Geiger to the company as Director, Regulatory Compliance, Benefits. In this role, Mitch will draw on his expertise in ERISA law and involvement in the development of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) to provide support for the entire PrimePay team, advising on complex issues surrounding ACA compliance and administration of employee benefit plans, as well as developing ACA- and ERISA-compliant benefit plan documentation.

PrimePay is an employee management solutions provider that offers a full range of integrated payroll and human resources support services. Mitch will extend PrimePay’s expertise with his two decades of experience as an ERISA and employee benefits attorney. He has counseled clients on a broad range of benefit matters, from general compliance to the administration of qualified retirement plans under ERISA and the Internal Revenue Code, and he has a particular focus on keeping employers compliant with ACA regulations.

Mitch brings extensive experience designing, drafting, ensuring compliance with, and providing training support for all types of tax-qualified retirement, health and welfare, and fringe benefit plans. He also advises organizations on welfare plan issues involving cafeteria plans, health plans, flexible spending accounts, group insurance products, COBRA, and HIPAA.

Mitch began his career as an investigator for the United States Department of Labor’s Employee Benefits Security Administration (EBSA). He then served several years on the legal compliance team for Northern Trust Retirement Consulting, a national third-party administrator. He later worked as in-house counsel for Wachovia Insurance Services, one of the largest insurance brokerage firms in the country. Before joining PrimePay, Mitch returned to the Department of Labor in the Office of Policy and Research, where he provided legislative and regulatory analysis and assisted in the implementation of the ACA.

“As the regulations surrounding employee benefits administration grow increasingly complex, our clients demand more from PrimePay in the areas of health and welfare benefit compliance,” said William J. Pellicano, Founder and CEO of PrimePay. “Mitch Geiger comes to us with a robust and diverse background in benefits management and will be integral in our ability to provide direct answers and solutions to our clients’ complex benefit plan questions, designs, and requirements. Furthermore, Mitch’s direct involvement in the development of the ACA makes us the best-equipped third-party benefits administrator to ensure complete ACA compliance for small businesses.”

About PrimePay

PrimePay is an employee management solutions provider offering a full range of integrated payroll and HR support services. As the nation’s largest independent, privately owned payroll processor, PrimePay serves all 50 states from more than 30 office locations, delivering highly personalized and comprehensive payroll processing services, Worker’s Compensation insurance, benefits administration, workforce solutions, HR support services, and software as a service (SaaS) solutions. With 500 employees nationwide, PrimePay, headquartered in West Chester, PA, holds a fanatical devotion to serving its clients and franchises. For more on PrimePay, visit http://www.primepay.com.