Huskies sophomore leads team; Green, Weaver place well

Taylor Holand during the Pueblo Centennial Invitational on Saturday at Dutch Clark Stadium in Pueblo. Holand won the event. ( Brandon Hopper / Daily Record )

Cole Alford during the Pueblo Centennial Invitational on Saturday at Dutch Clark Stadium in Pueblo. (Brandon Hopper / Daily Record)

Pueblo — Taylor Holand isn't at her best this early in the season. But where she was at on Saturday was good enough to win.

Florence's sophomore standout jumped 4 feet, 11 inches for the high jump championship at the Pueblo Centennial Invitational at Dutch Clark Stadium.

Last year at the state meet, Holand cleared 5 feet to finish second in Class 3A. Her personal best is 5 feet, 1 inch. On Saturday, her 4-foot-11-inch mark was good enough to beat Class 4A Pueblo East's Kaitlyn Simony.

Holand wasn't at her peek. Instead she found herself battling nagging shin splints and her body's unwillingness to do what her training has taught her.

"I was just trying to ignore the pain," she said minutes after winning the jumpoff against Simony. "It was really hard."

She said she was tipping her head back and not looking at her feet while in the air, and she also was frustrated that she repeatedly slowed down on her approach instead of speeding up.

"She's got to get her steps down. She didn't have a great week of practice — she's nursing a little bit of shin splints. All in all she did pretty well," Florence coach Tom Torres said, adding that the field provided her with great competition.

Makenna Green finished fourth in the shot put, 13th in the discus and 18th in the 100-meter hurdles. Her shot put distance of 35 feet, 1/2 inch was a personal best, Torres said.

On Deck Wednesday: Florence @ St. Mary's Invite, 3:30 p.m. April 5: Florence @ Pueblo County meet, 9 a.m. April 9: Florence @ St. Mary's Invite, 3:30 p.m.

Morgan Weaver finished seventh in the long jump and 10th in the 100-meter dash.

The girls finished 13th as a team, while the boys failed to place any competitors and didn't score points, although they did have some solid performances.

Matthew Miller took 12th in the 110-meter hurdles and 12th in the high jump. Brent Leggitt finished 23rd in the 100-meter.

"This weather has really been damaging," Torres said. "We're so young, it's just really hard for them to compete (in it)."

The Huskies will be in action Wednesday at St. Mary's in Colorado Springs.