Four panelists and 2 moderators discussed the issues surrounding cancer and healthcare in the lead-up to the 2016 presidential election during the National Comprehensive Cancer Network 21st Annual Conference.

Published By: Surabhi Dangi-Garimella, PhD

Four panelists and 2 moderators from both sides of the aisle discussed the issues surrounding cancer and healthcare in the lead-up to the 2016 presidential election to open the second day of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network 21st Annual Conference. Will cancer find a spot on the health agenda in the election year? How will current healthcare policies and care models influence cancer care?Moderated by Kavita Patel, MD, MSHS, nonresident senior fellow, Brookings Institution; and Marc Samuels, JD, MPH, founder & CEO, ADVI. Participants on the panel included Cybele Bjorklund, MHS, distinguished visitor and senior fellow, Georgetown University; Lanhee J. Chen, PhD, David and Diane Steffy research fellow, Hoover Institution; Elizabeth J. Fowler, PhD, JD, vice president, Global Health Policy, Johnson & Johnson; and Scott Gottlieb, MD, resident fellow, American Enterprise Institute.Patel asked each panelist to discuss what they recognize as stumbling blocks within the healthcare system in the United States, and what changes they would like to see.“It is an exciting time overall for healthcare, with changes brought in by the Affordable Care Act (ACA) that have influenced Medicare and private market exchanges,” Bjorklund said. While efforts to better align the 3 “Ps”—patients, payers, and providers—are exciting, she thinks payment changes that drive the integration, are immersed in promise and unknown challenges. Bjorklund feels that integrating care delivery is a particularly difficult task because healthcare in the United States has historically been a fractured system.Chen feels that the population in the country is not very enthusiastic about discussing healthcare. He believes that while politicians and policymakers want to have a rhetorical discussion, the actual substance of what will happen has its limits and boundaries. Cost of care is another significant problem facing the nation, Chen said, and politicians like to talk about it to gain mileage, the fact of the matter is that patients are struggling.“I do think policymakers realize there is life in healthcare beyond ACA. While change will happen within boundaries, whether the current structure of bureaucratic organizations will be able to support the changes is crucial,” Chen added.Fowler, who’s played a considerable role in the formulation of the ACA summarized what ACA has accomplished: 20 million previously uninsured individuals now have health coverage. “We have had the slowest growth of healthcare spending in the last 50 years. ACA payment changes are allowing innovation and collaboration in care delivery. Personally, I am worried about cost sharing. While insurers are trying to make deductibles affordable, cost sharing is heavy-handed on patients,” according to Fowler.Gottlieb said that he’s not a big supporter of the capitation and bundled payment models. “Bundles make it difficult for providers to introduce new technology. The other thing that worries me is consolidation of private practices with health systems—it’s a process that will be very hard to unwind. These are sticky relationships that increase local monopolies. There is also evidence that productivity declines with these mergers,” he said.He also highlighted some of the growing challenges faced by healthcare consumers: narrow provider networks and narrow formularies. “These will quickly become market standards,” Gottlieb believes.His optimism hovers around the tsunami of innovation in medicine: not just drugs but also the platforms being used to deliver them. Gottlieb is also fascinated by the pace at which the technological advances are translated into practice.There is need for increased awareness on insurance coverage, especially in oncology Gottlieb asserted. “The government usually tries to regulate technology to control physician access, rather than directly controlling physicians in other direct ways.” Gottlieb thinks that there will be increasing control on access to, and use of, technology, which is politically and bureaucratically possible.