Throughout the Obama presidency, particularly since the implementation of the Affordable Care Act, Republicans have been shrilly claiming that Democratic policies would spell absolute disaster for the American economy and the complete destruction of all things American. It's been so ridiculous that if Obama indicated any support for a Republican idea, the Republicans were suddenly and unanimously opposed to it.

"We'll end up like (collective shiver) Greece!" they cried or, worse, we'll somehow be turned into a socialistic state run by the sinister anti-American monarch, Obama.

Record high for the Dow, gas prices down, record number of consecutive months for job growth, TARP money recovered with a profit... maybe, the sky isn't falling after all.

AL.com Opinion About the writer

Clete Wetli is a liberal, political activist and works as the Executive Director for First Stop, Inc. His opinions are solely his own and not representative of First Stop, Inc. or the Madison County Democratic Party. He can be reached at decaturclete@gmail.com.

Clete Wetli is a liberal, political activist and works as the Executive Director for First Stop, Inc. His opinions are solely his own and not representative of First Stop, Inc. or the Madison County Democratic Party. He can be reached at decaturclete@gmail.com. Read more

See more by Clete Wetli

Maybe it's time for Republicans to admit the unthinkable.... they were wrong.

Like they were wrong about bailing out the auto industry. Like they were wrong about drug-testing food stamp recipients and cutting funding to mental health.

Here in Alabama, the Republicans have been wrong about taxes, the state budget, closing Veteran's Assistance offices, Medicaid expansion, and the effectiveness of corporate welfare because all they talked about during the election was who hated Obama more than their opponent.

They were wrong about trying to put the Ten Commandments in the courthouse and wrong about trying to make Christianity the state religion. Yeah, that pesky separation of church and state thing... again.

Also, they were wrong about Obama coming for your guns. Go look under your bed or in your waistband... still there.

They've been wrong about which President has taken the most vacation days. And, yes, for the umpteenth time, they were wrong about Benghazi. Oh, by the way, there is no U.S. Ebola crisis, either.

Not to beat a dead horse, but the whole "trickle-down" thing and Reagan's anti-union tirade didn't really work out too well, either.

But, just like they talk about in twelve-step meetings, the first step to real recovery is to admit you have a problem. Sometimes, that includes admitting that you were wrong.

Republicans, this could be a very liberating experience and, perhaps, an opportunity to focus your energies on more productive things. Things that all Americans want; like improving our aging infrastructure or regaining our rank as the world's leader in education.

Of course, that would mean swallowing one last bitter pill and admitting one more ideological wrong. Government is not intrinsically bad.

See, government policies, when intelligently and deliberately applied, can do amazing things. It's how we got our interstate system, our postal system, and a myriad of other public services that we take for granted. In fact, FDR's public works projects helped us out of the Great Depression.

The idea that every government program is rife with fraud and abuse is simply a myth. This may come as news to some conservatives, but our military is actually a "big gub'mint" Federal program. Yeah, it's pretty shocking, but totally true.

All this is really important because we have real problems in America that need to be solved, but they won't be solved if we don't learn from our mistakes and admit when we are wrong.

Ever since Republicans began mythologizing and idolizing Pres. Ronald Reagan, they have become increasingly intolerant to any fact or opinion that does not mesh with their increasingly extremist political rhetoric. But now, the cognitive dissonance it takes to listen to Republican-mouthpiece Fox News or to hear Alabama Gov. Bentley explain his flip-flopping on Medicaid expansion is enough to make one's head explode.

Republicans, just admit you're wrong. You'll feel better. As they say, the truth will set you free.