By VALERIE DIMOND

Correspondent

When she was in her 30s, Longboat Key resident Diane Wight, 69, was diagnosed with fibromyalgia — a condition that causes fatigue and widespread musculoskeletal pain, mood and sleep disorders, headaches and digestive problems.

Things got worse after her hepatic lobectomy — removal of part of the liver — to excise a nonmalignant tumor several years ago. The surgery was traumatic, leaving only 60 percent of her liver behind. She had painful, incapacitating scar tissue that prevented her from bending.

“I was so debilitated; I couldn’t even take milk out of the refrigerator,” says Wight, who used a pair of tongs to pick things up around the house.

As the agony persisted, affecting all aspects of her life, Wight found herself on a medical treadmill. She had joined the ranks of people who suffer from chronic pain.

“You are pigeonholed as a particular kind of patient,” she says. “Doctors think they know how to treat you because it’s in your records. Sometimes it seems nothing works, and then finally you find THE doctor. A doctor that has a good referral system is extremely important.”

Chronic pain — pain that lingers six or more months beyond the time it typically takes for an injury or illness to heal — affects an estimated 100 million Americans, according to the Institute of Medicine.

Comorbidities are common too. Fifty percent are clinically depressed. Many have anxiety, insomnia, fatigue, sexual dysfunction, isolation and other problems that peck away at joy and well-being.

THE PILL PROBLEM

Opioid medication — oxycodone, hydrocodone, and others — is the most common and frequently-prescribed treatment for moderate to severe chronic pain, according to a 2013 report by the American Chronic Pain Association. That’s because for most people it works.

But health care providers, mental health professionals and patients know how relying on pills alone, or taking them for long periods of time, can be a slippery slope.

“Opioids carry a lot of baggage,” says Dr. Rafael Miguel, medical director of the Pain Medicine Program at Sarasota Memorial Hospital’s Institute for Advanced Medicine.

Miguel says painkillers usually come with a lot of unpleasant side effects — ranging from bothersome, to intolerable and potentially dangerous. Strict laws and increased monitoring of the way opioids are prescribed and dijstributed in Florida have also forced doctors and patients to rethink treatment options.

And patients’ dependency on painkillers and fear of withdrawal can keep them tethered to a medication they’d rather not take anymore.

"There are many things we can do so you don’t have to be attached to a pill. I’m not going to really help you if I just give you the pills and don’t address everything else anyway." — Dr. Myrdalis Diaz-Ramirez, medical director at the Comprehensive Pain Center of Sarasota

“My experience is that patients don’t want to take a pill — they want their lives back,” says Dr. Myrdalis Diaz-Ramirez, medical director at the Comprehensive Pain Center of Sarasota. “There are many things we can do so you don’t have to be attached to a pill. I’m not going to really help you if I just give you the pills and don’t address everything else anyway.”

Wight says that because her liver is too vulnerable to metabolize strong painkillers, she has had to find other ways to cope with chronic pain — including a combination of tools and non-opioid treatments.

Wight now enjoys a full, active lifestyle. She also facilitates a monthly chronic pain support group at the Waldemere Medical Plaza, where she and others share experiences and learn to face up to and move beyond the limitations of chronic pain.

“I can do things now — approaching my 70th birthday — that I couldn’t do in my 40s,” says Wight.

BEYOND THE MEDS

Miguel and Diaz-Ramirez say many patients, including Wight, are managing chronic pain with less or no opioid medication — by using analgesic injections, neurostimulation implants, antidepressants, acupuncture, cognitive and behavioral therapy, biofeedback, meditation, hypnosis, exercise, physical therapy, massage, herbs, patches, analgesic creams, supplements and better nutrition.

“We need to take the whole gamut of what’s available for treating pain,” Miguel says. “There’s a wide variety of things that can be done.”

For example, to address arthritic back pain — a condition Diaz-Ramirez sees all the time — analgesic injections are providing significant relief for up to 24 months in many of her patients.

“We can work from the neck all the way down,” Diaz-Rimirez says. “Patients are so happy. Many don’t take any medication with this.”

Diaz-Ramirez also favors spinal cord stimulation, a device that’s surgically placed under the skin (after a trial period to test its efficacy) that sends electrical currents to the spine to mask the sensation of pain.

“This is very good for nerve pain,” Diaz-Ramirez says. “It is a fun, fun therapy — and if it works, many patients don’t have to take medication.”

Wight uses a less invasive but similar treatment to ease her own back pain. It’s called a transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulator — TENS — and it enables her to function with less medication. A TENS is a portable device that sends therapeutic, low-voltage electrical currents to the affected area via electrodes placed on the skin.

“TENS works very well. It’s a very useful adjunctive,” Miguel says. “It’s drug-free; you can use it all day.”

INTERESTED?

The Chronic Pain Support Group meets the second Wednesday of every month — including tomorrow — at 5:30 p.m. in the Cypress Room at Waldemere Medical Plaza, 1921 Waldemere St.

For more information, call group facilitator Diane Wight at (941) 383-1811 or email cpsg@yahoo.com.

Also critical, pain specialists say, is achieving a healthful balance in life through stress management and a nutritious, anti-inflammatory diet. Dr. Ernesto Fernandez, a Sarasota doctor of oriental medicine, acupuncture physician and mental health counselor, emphasizes this body-mind connection — the idea that old traumas, painful thoughts and emotions are stored in the body and manifest as physical illness.

“There’s lots of stuff to treat the symptoms,” he says. “But if you only focus on the symptoms, then you are perpetually chasing something — they never really go away.”

Lakewood Ranch resident Joan Mahon, 70, says changing her diet and taking supplements have enabled her to reduce the amount of hydrocodone she normally takes for a painful spinal cord injury.

“I’ve been in intractable pain for years,” says Mahon, who experienced serious memory lapses from her pain medication.

On the advice of her doctor, switching to an anti-inflammatory diet — cutting out sugar, gluten, dairy and other foods — and adding supplements, including alpha lipoic acid and B-12 shots every other day, improved her situation measurably.

“Just doing that, I was able to cut my dose in half at night and sleep all the way through,” Mahon says. “And now when I get up, I don’t feel pain anymore.”

Miguel says taking tricyclic antidepressants can also help to improve nighttime sleep and lessen the burning sensation caused by nerve damage. Over-the-counter and prescription-grade analgesic creams are also useful.

“They’re incredibly well-tolerated — almost no toxicity or side effects,” says Miguel. “People might dismiss them, but there are some very good creams that can be compounded. Prescription creams are extremely effective.”

Moving the body is also essential, say Miguel and Diaz-Ramirez — even when you don’t want to or think that you can.

“Exercise — you have to do it — it’s good for chronic pain,” said Diaz-Ramirez. “If you can only do two repetitions, that’s good. At some point you’re going to do that third repetition.”

Wight says physical therapy, yoga and other physical activity have been fundamental to her recovery. So were psychotherapy, acupuncture, biofeedback and joining support groups. Even listening to audio books distracts her from the pain.

Miguel and Ramirez-Diaz say that’s how it should be done, that a comprehensive, multi-treatment approach to managing chronic pain provides the best outcomes.

“I throw anything I’ve got at it,” says Wight. “It’s either gonna manage you, or you’re gonna manage it.”