Never has more change come more rapidly to the health care industry.

In North Texas, not-for-profit providers are collaborating with retailers on walk-in clinics at neighborhood drugstores and aligning with elite national providers.

This week, Dallas-based Methodist Health System said it was becoming part of the Mayo Clinic’s nationwide Care Network. Similarly, Baylor Scott & White Health is working on an agreement to become part of the Cleveland Clinic’s national cardiology network.

Meanwhile, Dallas-based Tenet Healthcare Corp., one of the nation’s largest for-profit hospital companies, is busy collaborating across the country.

In El Paso, it is partnering with Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center to build a new hospital. In Connecticut, it has formed a partnership with the Yale New Haven Health System. And in Arizona, it is talking with two not-for-profit Catholic health systems about a joint venture.

“Today, things are happening that we’ve never seen,” Tenet CEO Trevor Fetter said.

Industry leaders foresee continuing consolidation through mergers and acquisitions as well as other types of alliances. Last year, Tenet acquired Nashville-based Vanguard Health Systems Inc., and Baylor Health Care System merged with Temple-based Scott & White Healthcare.

Scale — the right scale — is more important than ever, industry experts say. Providers want to maximize benefits from investments in technology and expertise and offset emerging risks as they take responsibility, in some cases, for the health of entire workforces of companies.

“The future is collaboration and partnerships,” Baylor CEO Joel Allison said.

Much of the change accompanies full implementation of the Affordable Care Act, which, among other provisions, penalizes hospitals that have excess patient readmissions. As providers become more accountable for the care they offer, they are focusing on keeping patients healthy, not just treating those who are sick.

In the industry, that’s sometimes called a population health approach.

It requires a system that offers care from the simplest procedures to the most complex, all performed in the most appropriate, cost-effective settings. There also should be appropriate follow-ups and monitoring, especially for patients with chronic conditions.

Allison called it a continuum of care. “You may not own it all,” he said. “But you make sure you and your partners agree on quality.”

More and more, Fetter said, especially in population health, hospital systems have to be able to handle just about everything.

“Where you get killed is where you get some very expensive cases that go out of your network,” Fetter said.

Nate Kaufman is a San Diego-based industry consultant who has worked with Baylor and others. “It’s all pretty chaotic,” he said of the state of the industry.

He said smaller hospitals are limping along. Some won’t make it. Larger players are looking at how to connect, and not necessarily through mergers.

“The challenge is not just to be big but to be effective,” he said.

Technology is accelerating change. Kaufman said it’s possible to do a real-time $49 doctor “visit” through a smartphone or tablet. The average waiting time at American Well, a Boston company, is two minutes, Kaufman said.

“There’s a lot of experimentation going on,” he said. “It’s not all going to work, but we do need to experiment.”

Cooperative agreements come in many forms.

Earlier this summer, Arlington-based Texas Health Resources said it was teaming with CVS on clinics at selected sites here. At the same time, Baylor said it was near similar deals with Walgreens and Wal-Mart.

Two years ago, THR and Methodist partnered with Louisiana-based LHC Group, a for-profit company, on a venture offering a full range of home health services for North Texas patients.

Methodist CEO Stephen Mansfield described his organization’s new alliance with Mayo, based in Minnesota, as a “clinical collaboration” that will help Methodist and its physicians continuously improve their quality of care.

In an interview, he said that much of the consolidation and collaboration occurring in the industry is driven by efforts to deliver better patient experiences — and quality — at lower prices.

“Scale is a key part of the equation,” Mansfield said. “You need sufficient size.”

Tenet, with revenue now running at the rate of more than $15 billion a year and with more than 105,000 employees, has 80 hospitals and nearly 200 outpatient centers. As such, the company sees all types of competition.

Fetter, the CEO, called California-based Kaiser Permanente the “ultimate example” of a population health organization. Kaiser has a large physician group, a comprehensive hospital system and an insurance organization, which helps it bid for employers’ business.

To better compete with Kaiser in Modesto, Fetter said, Tenet’s lone hospital there partnered with a physician group and Blue Shield of California, trying to mimic the Kaiser model.

The Tenet accountable care plan in Modesto began in 2012 and has been profitable each year, Fetter said. Member enrollment has grown 20 to 25 percent.

“We’re experimenting with all this stuff all over the country,” Fetter said.