Correcting ninth paragraph that “Titanic” is the second-highest grossing movie of all time after “Avatar.”

Getty Images Actors Oscar Isaac, Daisy Ridley and John Boyega at the Star Wars Celebration 2015 in Anaheim, Calif. in April

The Walt Disney Co. will report its third-quarter earnings after the market closes on Tuesday, and investors will be looking for any mention of “Star Wars: The Force Awakens.” But the release of that film is far, far away.

Here’s what investors can expect when the House of Mouse reports on Tuesday.

Earnings: Analysts tracked by FactSet on average expect Disney DIS, +0.37% to report per-share earnings of $1.41. That would be a 10% increase over a year earlier. There’s also a streak to keep alive: Disney has beaten EPS expectations in each of the last 10 quarters.

Sales: Disney is expected to post revenues of $13.17 billion, up 6% from $12.46 billion a year ago. The company has topped FactSet consensus on revenue in nine of the last 10 quarters. Analysts expect $4.25 billion of Disney’s revenue to come from its parks and resorts, followed by its cable networks at $4.07 billion.

Read: Why Disneyland deserves 60th birthday wishes

Share Price: Trading close to $120, shares of Disney are up 28% so far this year, handily beating the Dow Jones Industrial Average, which is down 1%. Analysts covering the stock on FactSet have an average price target of $121.92 and an overweight rating. The most bullish analyst has a price target of $150, while the most bearish is at $98.

Other Issues: Disney has had lots of success at the box office so far this year. The company’s film distributor, Buena Vista, has the second-largest market share among film studios, after Comcast Corp.’s CMCSA, +0.96% Universal’s $1.9 billion. Movies like “Avengers: Age of Ultron” and “Inside Out” have helped Disney rake in $1.3 billion in box-office receipts.

One thing to look for on Tuesday will be any news of another likely Disney hit: “Star Wars: The Force Awakens” is set to debut Dec. 18.

“As expectations begin to ramp from ‘Star Wars’ we look at how to benchmark the film compared to ‘Avatar’ and some of the other recent global blockbusters,” Stifel Nicolaus analyst Benjamin Mogil wrote in a recent note. “In aggregate, we believe that the film can gross around $2.2 billion globally.”

That could top “Titanic,” now the second-highest grossing movie globally of all time, without accounting for inflation, at $2.18 billion. “Avatar” is the highest-grossing with $2.8 billion.

One of the biggest unknowns is when the movie will be released in China, an increasingly important market for film studios, Mogil said. China has increased its screen count 400% since 2009, he said.

One headwind for Disney is the foreign-exchange rate in many markets when revenue is converted back into dollars, Mogil said. The stronger U.S. currency means it will take more of the local currency to buy the same amount of dollars.

Another issue to watch for is Disney’s plans for ESPN. Disney Chief Executive Bob Iger told CNBC last week that the sports channels eventually will move toward becoming a stand-alone streaming service.

“I think eventually ESPN becomes a business that is sold directly to the consumers,” Iger said.

According to Nielsen data, ESPN has lost 3.2 million subscribers in just over a year. A move to offer direct-to-consumer content would certainly push forward the cord-cutting movement. In a lot of eyes, sports content, including live events, is one of the last tethers holding consumers to pay-TV bundles.