More than a quarter-million New Jersey residents now have health insurance policies they purchased through the federal website set up by the Affordable Care Act.

The final tally for the second open enrollment period of Obamacare shows 254,316 people in New Jersey got insurance through healthcare.gov, according to figures released today by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

In New Jersey, those customers were split almost equally between newcomers (48 percent) and those who re-enrolled (52 percent.)

Nationwide, 11.7 million Americans have now enrolled for health insurance. It remains to be seen how many of those enrollees will follow through and pay their first month's premium, however.

Although open enrollment is closed, federal officials recently announced a "last chance" exception, beginning March 15, for people who claim they didn't realize they would be fined for having no insurance. Those fines are assessed via the individual income tax filings.

Federal officials said they were surprised - and encouraged - by the number of people who'd enrolled the first year yet came back to the website this year to switch plans. In New Jersey, roughly a third of those returning consumers switched their plans. More than half of those who switched picked a plan that gave them a monthly premium of under $100.

More than four out of five (83 percent) of those consumers had household incomes low enough to qualify for federal tax credits. In New Jersey, those credits averaged $306 a month. Those subsidies are paid directly to insurance companies.

That's lower than the national average of $263 a month.

Because New Jersey relies on the federal website for its citizens to access subsidized plans, it is one of the 34 states that could be drastically affected if the U.S. Supreme Court rules this summer that those subsidies are unlawful. A lawsuit by opponents of the Affordable Health Care was argued before the court last week.

Nationwide, consumers in general are picking plans that are slightly more expensive than the lowest-price plans, according to data released today. That might be due to consumers' preference for a plan their doctors accept, or for a plan with a lower deductible or lower co-pay fees, officials said.

High-deductible plans have proved to be a barrier to care, health care experts say, as consumers who have that kind of insurance still feel they can't afford to use it.

Only 22 percent of people selected the cheapest plan, the bronze level, which typically covers only 60 percent of health-care costs, said Meena Seshamani, Office of Health Reform Director for Health and Human Services.

Kathleen O'Brien may be reached at kobrien@njadvancemedia.com, or at (732) 902-4557. Follow her on Twitter @OBrienLedger. Find NJ.com on Facebook.