In the age where children are playing with tablets and video games controlled by voice and body movements, one traditional toy still dominates Christmas lists in Longmont.

Among more than 100 letters to Santa collected by the Longmont Times-Call this year, more than half included requests for LEGO sets.

The popular building blocks span gender and age, topping wish lists of local children.

During a visit with children at the Longmont Public Library Wednesday, Santa Claus said LEGO sets are among the most requested toy.

"They love LEGOs," Claus said. "Boys and girls all over want to see them under the tree on Christmas."

In his letter to Santa, Longmont resident Isaias asked for "LEGOs, a dog for uncle, books, gloves and a couch for my room."

Children sent letters to Santa via the Longmont Times-Call's "Direct to North Pole" mailbox, beginning around Thanksgiving.

Junior asked for a LEGO car and speed racer and brother Isack wished for a LEGO Ferrari in letters that promised they were good this year.

Amelia asked for "LAGO" parts and included a hand-drawn sketch of Santa in her letter.

An anonymous letter to santa listed eight gifts, including a LEGO castle set, LEGO Chima lions and figures and "random LEGOs."

The sets come in popular themes like "Star Wars" or sets catered to girls. They can be large or small, simple or complex. Some even include mechanical parts that can turn the blocks into moving objects.

The possibilities are endless, hence the appeal, said Longmont LEGO artist Imagine Rigney.

Rigney, 19, is, not surprisingly, asking for LEGO sets for Christmas this year.

The blocks have topped Rigney's Christmas list since he was a little boy and have provided some of the enthusiast's most vivid holiday memories.

"I remember when I was maybe 4 or 5, my grandmother gave me an old LEGO computer game that wasn't sold anymore and I fell in love with the game and one of the old sets in the game," Rigney said. "I asked Santa for the old set, it was called the Chrome Crusher. I had been dreaming about it and it was so amazing to see it on Christmas day."

"The LEGO Movie," released earlier this year, has increased interest in the toy this year, Rigney said. But the appeal and variety of LEGO sets will remain after the hype of the movie fades, he said.

"LEGOs make it possible to do anything you want," Rigney said. "All of the dreams I had as a kid are coming true now, now that I have the means and capabilities to do it through LEGOs."

Whitney Bryen: 303-684-5274, wbryen@times-call.com or twitter.com/soonerreporter