Sioux Falls, SD

In 2014 Huset's had only two 360 Sprint Cars run full-time on their track due to the cost of the cars. Beginning in the 2015 season Huset's and I-90 speedway will no longer run their 360 Sprints Classes. They will replace it with the I.M.C.A. RaceSaver Class.

"I would have ruined a historic racecar track if I had not found this racing class," Eagle Raceway Owner Roger Hadan said.

Local track owners went to check out the RaceSaver cars in Eagle, Nebraska. They found that it was a much more affordable car to run, which meant more cars on the track.

"It puts everyone on a level playing field and keeps a little bit more money in our pockets for our families at home," Driver Casey Abbas said.

"It is a class of cars that a lot of people can afford to race. They are going to be competitive and fun to watch. When you get more people involved the crowds get bigger and it's more fun," Huset's Owner Steve Rubin said.

In 2013 Eagle Raceway began with 17 RaceSaver drivers. At the end of 2014 they had 54 full-time cars. Both Rubin and Howie III have seen steady declines in both their driver and attendance numbers over the years and hope this new car will jump start their tracks.

"I think we can bring back affordable racing to the local racer and that is really what racing needs," I-90 Speedway Owner Lyle Howie III said.

"It was time to make a move. We want to be on the front of something rather on the back end, because sometimes you can't bring it back. I think we are on the front end of a trend that is going to get us into the next five to ten years," Rubin said.

Although the car may be more affordable, they still need to find local drivers that are willing to start over now. Until then, Huset's and I-90 will try to reach a respectable number of racers from other states to ensure a good show.

"It would be great if we could come out with 12 to 15 cars. Then the fans would get a great opportunity to see how well these cars can race. I believe these cars will put on a good show, because they will be fairly equal, with a lot of talent, and that should make for a lot of side-by-side racing," Howie III said.



While neither track plans on running the 360 Sprints full-time, they will feature them on select nights as a special class.



For more information on the RaceSaver Class, visit racesaver.com