istock

A group of medical societies and pharmaceutical industry trade groups is pushing the government to flesh out data that will be published next month showing how much drug makers pay doctors.

They sent a letter today to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to ask the agency to explain what context will be provided to help the public understand the justification for payments, such as speaking fees and grants used to bankroll clinical research.

The letter is signed by more than 20 medical societies and organizations including the American Urological Association, as well as heavyweight industry trade groups Biotechnology Industry Organization and the Pharmaceutical Research & Manufacturers of America.

The missive was sent as CMS plans to post the payment data in an online, searchable database as required in the Sunshine Act provision of the Affordable Care Act. The provision was passed in response to concerns that medical practice may be unduly influenced by industry.

The law requires most drug and device makers to report to CMS detailed information about payments and gifts provided to U.S. doctors and teaching hospitals. The disclosures are being made in stages, but September marks the debut when payments will appear publicly.

Supporters of the Sunshine Act say the transparency will provide useful information to patients about the relationships their doctors may have with drug or device makers, and serve as a deterrent to the more extreme examples of industry money unduly influencing medical care.

But some doctors and companies fear payment data will be misinterpreted by the public, or painted with a broad brush. They say there are legitimate interactions that serve to advance medicine, and that doctors should be compensated for services such as consulting for a company about the development of a new product.

Some medical societies teamed up with industry groups to form Partners for Healthy Dialogues, to defend such interactions between industry and doctors, and some of its members signed the letter sent to CMS.

The medical societies and industry trade group lament what they write in the letter is a dearth of context that accompanied CMS’s milestone release of Medicare Part B payments to physicians earlier this year.

Some medical groups say the data did not include context to show which doctors may be abusing the system and which were receiving big payments because of high overhead costs.

“We do not believe this is an effective way to share data with the public and, in fact, can lead to confusion and misinterpretation,” the groups wrote, adding that “we have heard nothing” about how CMS will present the data. And they want CMS to preview with doctors the proposed contextual information that will accompany the data.

Drug and device makers are required to report to CMS the payments made to individual physicians broken down by different categories including fees for speaking and consulting, food, research and gifts. But the letter says CMS has not explained how data will be publicly presented in order to distinguish between payments.

For instance, Robert Harbaugh, president of the American Association of Neurological Surgeons, one of the groups that signed the letter, notes that he is the recipient of a grant from a foundation affiliated with Integra Life Sciences, a device maker.

The company is funding a resident-physician exchange program between his institution, the Pennsylvania State University Milton S. Hersey Medical Center, and another in China. He fears the CMS data release will make it appear that he personally received the entire grant amount, which he estimated at about $250,000 for a five-year period.

“It would be nice to be able to put some context around the dollar figures,” he says, although he acknowledges that he has not viewed his own data.

We asked CMS for comment and will update you accordingly.

The medical and trade groups also asked CMS to promote awareness among physicians that the payment data will be released soon, saying many doctors remain unaware.

CMS recently began letting doctors register online so they can view their payment data before it is made public, and dispute any amounts in hopes of resolving discrepancies with drug and device makers.

The groups complain the process, which runs through August 27, is cumbersome and creates the risk that doctors will not complete their registrations. After the deadline, physicians will lose the ability to easily challenge payment data, according to John Murphy, an assistant general counsel at the PhRMA trade group.

[UPDATE: A CMS spokesman wrote us late in the day to say the agency does plan to make available the nature of payment for each payment or transfer of value made to a physician or teaching hospital and will also include context on the website. CMS, he adds, also has an "extensive ongoing outreach campaign" underway to educate and inform physicians. As an example, the agency had mobile applications designed to help physicians track payments on a free download].