Scott Brennan (Photo: Special to the Register)

The process of choosing a new chairman of the Iowa Democratic Party will carry over into 2015, state party officials say.

State party Chairman Scott Brennan sent out an e-mail over the weekend, saying he will call the election for the new chair at the state central committee's Jan. 17 meeting. Brennan is not seeking re-election. The state central committee meeting on Dec. 13 will likely be used to meet with people interested in running for chairman.

So far, at least three people are actively exploring running for chair and a few others may be interested. It's relatively rare to have a multi-candidate contest for party chair, so Brennan and other party officials have said they intend to take their time with the process.

Among those actively considering a run is Jim Mowrer of Boone, the Democrats' 2014 nominee for the 4th Congressional District. Mowrer lost his race against Republican Steve King, but raised nearly $2.2 million — more than any congressional campaign in Iowa, he says.

"I have a record of strong fundraising, and a lot of it comes from non-traditional and small dollar donors and digital fundraising ... and that's something that I would work on in the party" as well as working with traditional donors, he said.

Mowrer said he's interested in expanding party organization in all 99 counties. While the party's focus on turning out urban votes won't change, he said, "how do we fight for votes in rural areas where, right now, we're really not competing at all."

He said he observed during his congressional campaign that because of all the outside money coming into races, the candidates themselves "can only do so much." What the party can do, he said, is build "longer-term infrastructure."

"It was frustrating to me as a candidate because there were rural areas where we didn't have infrastructure in place," he said. "One single campaign can't change that."

Kurt Meyer of St. Ansgar, another former congressional and Statehouse candidate who is exploring a run for chairman, made similar comments in an interview last week.

Mowrer said the bottom line on the Democratic message is, "we have to win on the issues." He said polls show most Iowans agree with Democrats on most issues. "Many times, people don't know that they agree with us," he said. "A lot of it is in the messaging."

A third person said to be taking steps toward a run for party chair is Dr. Andrea "Andy" McGuire, a physician and president of Meridian Health Plan of Iowa. McGuire has long been active in Democratic politics and was the running mate of gubernatorial candidate Mike Blouin in 2006.

Congressman Dave Loebsack suggests he'll expand his focus — and travels — beyond his district. The retirement of Sen. Tom Harkin and Rep. Bruce Braley's defeat in the Senate race leave Loebsack as the lone Democrat in Iowa's congressional delegation.

"I grew up in Sioux City. I went to Iowa State. I've been around the state of Iowa a lot over the course of my going on 62 years now and I've always enjoyed getting around the state. I'm looking forward to doing that," he said.

He added, "So long as I can find a hotel that has an elliptical, I'll be fine," he joked.

He said he's prepared to inherit many of the requests for federal action from Iowans and interest groups. But, he noted, "The longer you're in office, the fewer promises you make."

Congratulations to Grant Woodard and Andrea Jansa, on their wedding Saturday in Cedar Rapids. Jansa is a research analyst on the Iowa House Democratic caucus staff. Woodard is former chief of staff to former U.S. Rep. Leonard Boswell and he recently managed the campaign of gubernatorial candidate Jack Hatch.

The reception, held at the Veterans Memorial Building for over 500 people, looked like a Jefferson-Jackson Day dinner. There was even an enormous American flag behind the stage. Instead of wedding cake, Jansa's grandmother and the ladies at St. Wenceslas Catholic Church baked hundreds of kolaches, a fruit-filled Czech pastry.

Boswell and Hatch were in attendance, as were many Democratic legislators and activists. Come to think of it, they probably could have elected a new Democratic Party chair with the people in the room.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1vKXeAA