Dede Kennedy told the audience a vignette from life with her 83-year-old mother, who her family moved in with to care for. She was one of 12 women and one man who took the stage at Charleston Music Hall in a “Listen to Your Mother” show last Sunday.

Motherhood is messy. Motherhood is hard. And our relationships with our mothers are typically more complex than what’s inside a Mother’s Day card.

Perhaps that’s why “Listen to Your Mother” has resonated with so many audiences across the country. Started in Madison, Wis., in 2010, “Listen to Your Mother” features live readings of true stories “about mothering, being mothered and how that shapes us,” as producer Angie Mizzel put it. This year, Charleston was one of 39 cities to host the show in the two weeks leading up to Mother’s Day.

Eleven women and one man — all locals — read their stories out loud Sunday before a packed house of more than 300 people at the Charleston Music Hall for the city’s second annual production of the show.

The stories they shared were less “Chicken Soup for the Soul” and more David Foster Wallace meets Joan Didion. They’re edgier, more thought-provoking and occasionally irreverent. “I think that comes from the readers’ vulnerability and honesty,” Mizzell said, “And maybe sharing aspects of motherhood that aren’t always portrayed.”

Like addiction. Sickness. Suicide. The everyday, un-Hallmark struggles of being a mother. When the cast read their essays on stage, the audience laughed, cried and nodded along.

“This way of telling stories reminds us that we’re more alike than we’re different,” Mizzell said. “Stories bring people together, even in the way they didn’t expect.”

Here are excerpts from six of them:

‘The Cock-A-Roach’

By Dede Kennedy

She started yelling my name frantically. Frantically is how we operate, my mother and I. Like my Uncle John Vitagliano says, “Whether you wreck the car or can’t find a pencil, the reaction is the same.” Frantic.

She sounded like she was buying letters from Vanna White on “Wheel of Fortune.” My body tensed and my anger grew as I tried not to scream at her to stop screaming. Because your screaming is going to wake up the kids and they’ll start screaming and we’ll all be screaming!

You see, my mama’s mind is changing, becoming fuzzy and confused. Her emotions are erratic these days. One minute she’s peaceful and singing, the next she’s furious with me because she can’t find her lipstick. Her body is giving out and she is in constant pain because of “old people issues” that I am way more familiar with than I should be. Her emotions and health are not my fault, but somehow I feel responsible. And since she and I are the last surviving members of our immediate family, I’m the easiest one for her to blame. And she’s the easiest one for me to blame too.

I think it’s just a case of the reality of life caring for an elderly parent. And not simply a parent but a mother! A mother and a daughter. With issues. Codependency Issues. Enmeshment issues. Mama adopted me when I was five months old. She loved me like I was born from her flesh, raised me. Never deserted me, even in the darkest depths of my alcoholism. She never let me go, even when I claimed she didn’t love me and she wasn’t my real mother. She never left me. I will never leave her.

l l l‘Unconventional Mother’

By Kris Harper and her daughter Betsy Harper

Kris: I have three children, boy-girl-boy. They are all great kids, but they are so different. You know, as a parent, you try to treat your children equally. But sometimes it just doesn’t work out that way. They have different needs, and you want to be there for them whenever and however they need you. Sometimes one is just more needy than the others and you do what you have to do.

Betsy: She forgot about me on the first day of kindergarten.

Kris: I didn’t forget — I just didn’t know what time to pick her up. There is a huge difference!

Betsy: It’s the first day of kindergarten. If there’s a time to get the logistics right for your kids, this would be one of them. I started the first day of my formal education in a.m. kindergarten, p.m. kindergarten, my brother’s third grade classroom and the principal’s office.

Kris: I’m sure I made a wonderful first impression on her teacher. But I didn’t forget her. We had just moved to the area and I didn’t know what time to pick her up.

Betsy: She also forgot about me once in high school.

Kris: Yup, that time I did forget her.

‘Perspective’ By Kate Berrio

I would like to know why I had to explain the words “surgery” and “cancer” to my kids. I would like to know why my husband still thinks I am being overly dramatic. I would like to know why the biopsy said “negative” but the pathology came back with the word “carcinoma” and I can’t stop replaying that moment in my mind.

While we’re on the “whys” ...

Why are there women who lose babies before they have the chance to be born? And others who give birth, but then can’t stay healthy enough themselves to keep the baby?

Why does my son experience the world as too bright and too loud? Such that we sent headphones to school for music time (he’s that kid, crap) and I have to mix a bright blue pill into a dollop of ice cream each morning. Who would know to buy the right shirts that aren’t too close to his neck for him if I died? Why am I, lately, thinking so much about the possibility of dying and what would happen to all of them? Would they be fine? Would he re-marry? Would she be a better mommy than me?

How is it that one in four children in South Carolina face hunger as a regular, daily struggle? Does that mean that five of the children I chaperoned on the kindergarten class trip are always hungry or scared to go home fearing an empty tummy?

Should I start sending extra lunch boxes to school? What happens on the days we have delayed opening and there’s no breakfast for them?

Is it OK to sometimes prefer to sleep snuggled next to my babies rather than my husband? To feel like the sweet little boy breathing is the salve that my soul needs to wake up and be ready to do it all again tomorrow?

When will I finally feel like I know what I’m doing? That I’m not fooling them all? That I am not some great imposter of a parent, friend, employee, woman, runner, writer?

Are you still there, God? I know. It’s a lot.

But it’s a lot because being a Mom sometimes feels like skydiving with a parachute on your back that you’re only pretty sure will open but you have to smile and say “It’s okay! Of course it will open!” to everyone who asks you.

It’s a great balancing act and these past several months have slammed me in the face with waves of perspective. Brought me to the brink and back. But, always back.

‘My Mother’s Hands’ By Amy Maciariello

We had been here on more than one occasion, and I knew how this night was going to go. So I did all that I knew how to do in that moment: I began to rub her back — back and forth — there in the quiet of the night.

In that moment, I saw it — the age! When did this happen?

I mean, the stark contrast between the size of my seemingly gigantic hand and her petite and delicate frame. The fine wrinkles of my once youthful skin that were exaggerated by the shadows in the room. The thin skin as it moved about my hand seeming less and less attached these days. The various scars placed precariously about, showing the years of wear and tear. The battered fingernails long since forgotten by their owner. The trials. The years. The history. The kindness being transferred. The love pouring out.

And in that moment, I really saw it — my mother’s hands. I saw the many times she had done this for me and my brother and sister, the many times she comforted us through broken hearts, through upset stomachs, even through death.

I saw them wrapped tight around my shoulders as I sat in the middle of an empty house falling apart over the end of my marriage.

I saw them white knuckled in my sister’s hand as the nurses worked desperately to bring life to our newest addition.

I saw them as I imagined my mom, touching my brother’s pale face for the very last time.

And then I felt it. I felt the power of my mother and her mother and hers, coming through these hands, and felt the healing touch that only a mother can feel. I saw the joy, the love, the sorrow, the guilt, the hurt — I saw it all. And I saw beauty. And I saw strength.

And I saw my hands. My own mothering hands.

‘Letters To My Love’ By Philicia Baugh

Dear Mr. South Carolina Driver’s License Holder,

Keep your eyes on the road. Never text and drive and always offer your mother a ride to church. As I gaze at you from this passenger seat, I say, “Job well done.” Not to you boy, to me! I taught you to stand up and pee, to tie your shoes and to divide by the number three. I taught you about the birds and the stingers on the bees in the parking lot of Baskin-Robbins over a game of brain freeze. We conquered those IEPs screaming, “Dyslexia ain’t got nothing on me.” Don’t repeat that. The grammar is terrible. We got married, added two siblings, then divorced. I finished my master’s degree, started my Ph.D. and found the women that couldn’t exist at 15. We made life work because we worked hard at being a family — you and me. I had you before I had a driver’s license. I had you before I had any dreams. I had you before I had me. While I raised you, you raised me. I am so thankful for you “Ziggy.”

Dear Isaiah,

I tell you I love you every day because so often we see tomorrow is not guaranteed. Recently, my mother told me I was the mother she always wanted to be. After I cried a little, my heart shifted to you. You help me make this single parenting thing look easy then secretly wipe my tears when we knew no one is looking. You’ve always blossomed no matter where I planted you. I am the best me because I was blessed with the “perfect you.” As your 18th birthday draws near, I stand here to say: May you never go hungry. May you never be cold. I will always love you. I put that on my soul.

l l l‘Your Love Was Enough’By Reggie Davis

When I was 22 and had not heard you say you loved me for many years, they told me you where found dead, probably from some of the bad choices you had made in your life.

I felt a little uncomfortable at your funeral because I did not recognize you lying there, so I did not feel the need to cry, until I saw my uncle crying.

Yes, it took seeing your brother, the successful gangster of the family, who always reminded me how much you loved and cared for everyone in the family, to once again remember how much you told me you loved me, so I cried for you too.

What I really want to say to you, Mom, is I have never doubted your love for me because I understand now.

See, some mothers are not intentionally bad moms. They are just too sick to be good moms.

Mom, I hope you are proud of me. Like you, I love helping people and I have worked as a paramedic for over 30 years, helping people during very difficult times in their own lives.

I have been in recovery for 30 years, married to my best friend for 34 years. You would have loved her because she is the best mom in the world, at least in my opinion.

We have two beautiful adult children, who grow up in a drama-free home and never experienced my alcoholism because I found recovery before they were born.

I have had the opportunity to help thousands of people break or suppress their own family curses by working through some of their own hurts, habits and hang-ups.

Yes, Mom, I’m OK with the good and bad I inherited from you because I know you really did love me and I love you.

So for some of us, a mother love is all she’s able to give, and love is enough.

Reach Deanna Pan at 937-5764.