75 Flares Filament.io 75 Flares ×

Greg Abbott is a chief advocate for Texas' current Voter ID law. It has been called discriminatory by Justice Department because of the communities it primarily impacts, minorities, elderly and young people. It's no coincidence that these tend to be Democratic constituencies and the politics of preservation play a role in its intent. “Without voter fraud, Obamacare would not exist,” Abbott said at the Texas Tribune Festival this year.

Earlier this week Abbott tweeted, “Another conviction for Voter Fraud in Texas,” referring to a case in South Texas of mail in fraud. There was no reference to mail in fraud in the tweet, but it in all cases of fraud since 2002 there have only been a total of about 28 convictions according to an article by Politifact. In question, was Abbotts statement claiming, “since 2002 … election fraud investigations by the Texas Attorney General's Office have resulted in 50 convictions,” which they rated as “Half-True.” Even more important, only 2 convictions were for “voter impersonation” which was supposedly why the Voter ID law is so important.

According to the Dallas Morning News Abbott, “has pursued 66 people on charges of voting irregularities since 2004. Only four cases involved someone illegally casting a ballot at a polling place where a picture ID would have prevented it,” adding, “Abbott acknowledged that voter ID wouldn't have made a difference in most of the cases he has prosecuted.” When pressed Abbott said told DMN, “It's hard to put a number on it…If you don't have any photo ID requirements, how do you know the person coming up to vote is the person they say they are?” A that question would certainly remain for mail in ballots. “If you really wanted to go after all the voter irregularities, you'd be looking at mail ballots,” Rep. Trey Martinez Fischer told the DMN.

Check below the jump to see whose claim is backed by the Elections Committee's interim report…



The Texas House Committee on Elections Interim Report seems to agree with Martinez Fischer, “Overall, most allegations of election fraud that appear in the news result in indictments relate to early voting by mail ballots.” They also mention Abbott's reference to voter fraud as an “epidemic.”

“We've had far more instances of voter fraud than instances of people not being able to vote because of the voter ID law,” Abbott said. The facts don't seem to support this statement. Linda Krefting, President of The League of Women Voters of Texas, which is opposed to the law, told the New York Times, “We have always felt there was anywhere from 500,000 to 800,000 voters who would not be able to present the proper identification.”

Abbott may contend, to much disagreement, that the Voter ID law does not target historically disadvantaged groups but for sincerity sake lets consider the ID that are acceptable. A concealed handgun license, yes, a valid student ID from a state university, no. Oh, you are an international traveler? Just present your passport at the voting booth. Yes you can get your free ID but you must go to the DMV and wait there first, at least a full 30 before the election, long before many busy middle-class and low income (potential) voters start paying attention to what is on the ballot. Need more evidence? Only 121 state photo IDs had been issued by Election Day, and the amount of provisional ballots cast in 2013 more than tripled from 2011 before the law passed.

You can follow me on Twitter at @joethepleb.