The Woodland School District 50 Board of Education and teachers union have agreed on a new contract that will keep its current salary schedule for certified teachers in place for five more years while eliminating a high-cost health plan, district officials said.

"The board negotiating team and the union negotiated over the last 11 months to reach a long-term contract which aligns with the district's long-range financial projections and supports the Board of Education's goal of attracting and retaining excellent teachers and support staff," school board President Chris Schrantz said.

The school board voted to approve the new contract Tuesday night after about a half-dozen sessions with federal mediators. Members of the Woodland Council, which represents 823 teachers and support staff in the Gurnee-based district, ratified the contract Dec. 3, according to a statement from the district.

"We're not just employees of the district, but parents and taxpayers too, so negotiating changes that support our students ultimately moves our entire school community forward," Sharon Anday, Woodland Council president and middle school science teacher, said in a statement.

The agreement, covering the 2015-20 school years, keeps the district's current salary schedule, according to a statement from the district. Half the district's teachers will receive an average annual salary increase of 4.1 percent, said district spokeswoman Jennifer Tempest Bova. Teachers who have worked for Woodland for more than 16 years and are no longer on the salary schedule will receive 3 percent raises in the 2015-16 and 2016-17 school years, with 2.5 percent salary increases in the three remaining years of the contract, she said.

Non-certified staff will receive 4.15 percent raises for each year of the agreement, district officials said.

An earlier school board contract offer sought smaller salary increases that were tied to inflation. Schrantz said the district expects to see some cost savings as more than 60 teachers are expected to retire over the next five years.

District officials also said a change in the health insurance plan offerings will help offset the cost of salary increases. The new contract eliminates an insurance plan option district officials said would have led to about $1.5 million in penalties under the Affordable Care Act.

Tempest Bova said the contract is expected to cost about $5.6 million over the five years.

Under the new contract, the district will also offer an additional evening of parent-teacher conferences and create an online grading system that will let parents keep an eye on students' grades in real time, district officials said.

The contract also promises additional funding for professional development and says teachers will be notified about assignments for the upcoming school year a month earlier, giving them more planning time, according to Anday's statement.

It also states that teachers will be responsible for developing curriculum but will collaborate with administrators, something that hadn't been addressed in previous contracts, said Kenzo Shibata, spokesman for the Illinois Federation of Teachers.

lzumbach@tribpub.com

Twitter @laurenzumbach