While 9 in 10 NKY adults have easy access to healthy foods, only 31 percent eat the recommended amounts of fruits and vegetables per day, the Kentucky Health Issues Poll says

See the end of this article for a list of vegetable trimmings to keep. (Photo: Provided) Story Highlights The majority of Northern Kentucky adults favored a smoke-free law, and favored tobacco-free and school nutrition policies in schools.

Northern Kentucky adults were also more likely to report that their neighborhood was very safe to exercise.

Northern Kentucky adults are more likely than most Kentucky adults to report ease of purchasing healthy foods and safe neighborhoods for exercising, according to the 2013 Kentucky Health Issues Poll.

But Northern Kentucky, like the state as a whole, does not eat enough fruit and vegetables, the survey indicated.

Nine in 10 Northern Kentucky adults reported that they had easy access to healthy foods in their neighborhoods, slightly more than adults statewide, the survey showed.

Thirty-one percent reported eating the recommended amounts of fruits and vegetables per day in Northern Kentucky. Statewide the number was less, at 23 percent.

"Nutrition is an area that we need to work on," said Dr. Lynne Saddler, district director of health for the Northern Kentucky Health Department, who was asked by the Recorder to react to the survey.

"The poll data show that Northern Kentuckians have access to healthy foods, including fresh fruits and vegetables, yet they also report that they don't regularly eat the recommended daily servings. This shows that we need to work with local families on ways to incorporate fruits and vegetables in their daily diet," Saddler said.

The poll was conducted by Interact for Health, formerly The Health Foundation of Greater Cincinnati, in cooperation with the Institute for Policy Research at the University of Cincinnati.

In the 2013 Kentucky Health Issues Poll, 54 percent of Northern Kentuckians are somewhat physically active. (Photo: File photo)

Northern Kentucky adults were also more likely to report that their neighborhood was very safe to exercise.

"In some respects, it looks like Northern Kentucky is moving in the right direction, particularly in that we have a population who shows an interest in creating healthy environments," Saddler said.

"We need to continue to work to make those interests translate into activity, with people not only having healthy choices, but making the healthy choice," Saddler said.

If you have a fitness club membership but don't use it, evidently you're not alone.

"Similarly, Northern Kentuckians report they have access to places to be physically active and that they feel safe doing so in their neighborhoods, yet only 54 percent of us are somewhat physically active," Saddler said.

"Again, we need to figure out how we can motivate residents to be active and use the resources available."

“The poll data show that Northern Kentuckians have access to healthy foods, including fresh fruits and vegetables, yet they also report that they don't regularly eat the recommended daily servings. This shows that we need to work with local families on ways to incorporate fruits and vegetables in their daily diet.” Dr. Lynne Saddler

Northern Kentucky adults' views were comparable to the state as a whole on many topics, Interact for Health reported in its findings. The majority of Northern Kentucky adults favored a smoke-free law, favored tobacco-free and school nutrition policies in schools, and reported visiting a dentist in the past year.

According to Saddler, "The rapid increase in local support for a statewide smoke-free law, from 40 percent in 2010 to 66 percent in 2013, shows that Northern Kentuckians recognize that everyone should have the right to breathe clean air."

In the survey, Northern Kentucky was defined as Boone County, Campbell County, Carroll County, Gallatin County, Grant County, Kenton County, Owen County and Pendleton County. For more about Interact for Health's survey, visit: http://bit.ly/NKYhealthpoll.

How NKY compares to state

Similarities

In general, responses from Northern Kentucky residents were comparable to the state as a whole. Like the statewide results, in Northern Kentucky:

• The majority of adults favored new school nutrition standards (76%)

• The majority of adults favored requiring schools to provide 30 minutes a day of physical activity to students (92%)

• The majority held a generally unfavorable opinion about the Affordable Care Act (53%)

• The majority favored the decision to expand Medicaid in Kentucky (74%)

Differences

• N. Ky. adults are more likely to rate the conditions of their neighborhood sidewalks and shoulders as "excellent" or "very good"

• N. Ky adults are more likely to report that their neighborhood was very safe to walk, jog, or bike

• Adults in Northern Kentucky were less likely to have heard about Kentucky's new health insurance marketplace called kynect

Source: 2013 Kentucky Health Issues Poll

Read or Share this story: http://cin.ci/1rJJfsI