The gap between how white and black students are doing in Wisconsin when it comes to reading and math is now widely recognized and the cause of deep concern.

But what about Hispanic kids? How are they doing? Their achievement picture gets less attention, but is also an important concern. The big picture answer is that there are serious gaps also, but they are somewhat smaller than those between black and white kids, and there is reason to feel some encouragement. But the need to push for better outcomes for Hispanic kids is also an urgent statewide matter.

I suspect a lot of people who live away from areas such as the south side of Milwaukee underestimate how much the Hispanic population of the state has grown, which is one of the big reasons to pay more attention to how kids are doing.

In the mid- to late 1970s, when court-ordered school desegregation was implemented in Milwaukee, little to no attention was paid to Hispanic students, simply because the percentage was in the low single digits. It was all about white kids and black kids.

But almost a quarter of the students in MPS now are Hispanic — 24.1%, in this fall's official count. The Hispanic percentage passed the white percentage (13.6% this fall) years ago. Including kids in private voucher schools and charter schools doesn't change the overall picture.

Statewide, 10.5% of students are listed by the Department of Public Instruction as Hispanic, more than the 9.7% who are African-American.

The reasons for optimism when it comes to Hispanic students can be seen in results such as those released last week by the National Assessment for Educational Progress, or NAEP, for 21 urban districts across the United States. Overall, there was a slight bit of good news in the results for Milwaukee Public Schools — scores in fourth- and eighth-grade reading and math showed a little improvement from the last time these tests were done in 2011.

The results for Hispanic kids were one of the reasons. For example, in eighth-grade reading, scores for Hispanic students in Milwaukee jumped 10 points between 2011 and 2013, which was the second biggest increase in the report and, in terms of these tests, a lot. The average Hispanic eighth-grader in MPS was reading above the "basic" level, which is actually not so bad — the grading curve on these tests is strict.

In NAEP results released in November for each state, the Wisconsin results showed serious gaps between white kids and Hispanic kids, but gaps that were smaller than those between whites and blacks. And there were small (too small, you could say) indications of improvement.

Milwaukee bright spots

The test results back up what observations suggest. There are good things happening in schools serving large numbers of Hispanic kids. And they're occurring in all three streams of Milwaukee schools.

Within MPS: Reagan High School, with its International Baccalaureate program, is about the best thing that's happened in MPS in the last dozen years and is more than 50% Hispanic. A roster of kindergarten through eighth-grade schools, such as Longfellow, 1021 S. 21st St., are high-energy operations with strong alliances with community organizations. ALBA, in the old Walker Middle School at 1712 S. 32nd St., is a teacher-led school where three teachers were listed recently by People magazine among the nation's teachers of the year.

Among charter schools: Seeds of Health elementary schools at two locations and Carmen High School, which shares the old Walker Middle School, have built records of genuine quality. The Bruce-Guadalupe schools, part of the United Community Center on S. 9th St., have great records, going back more than a decade. And I toured the high-profile Rocketship Southside Community Prep school last week and was impressed with how well they had their act together in their first year.

Among voucher schools: The St. Anthony kindergarten-through-12th-grade operation, in several buildings, had 1,833 students this fall, making it one of the largest Catholic schools in the country. The school appears focused on aiming for the overall success it hasn't attained so far. Smaller school such as St. Martini Lutheran, 1520 S. Cesar Chavez Drive, are taking impressive steps to improve outcomes.

Serious hurdles remain

I'm putting some of the positive spots in the spotlight (hey, it's a season of good cheer). All of these schools — and many others — have a lot more to accomplish. There are serious needs, serious challenges and serious gaps to close.

And beyond the school buildings, the south side faces widespread poverty, unemployment and underemployment, and crime issues, along with challenges specific to an immigrant community — many kids who are English language learners and many who face complex situations because they are undocumented.

But I remember asking a school leader several years ago what percentage of his school's parents were actively involved in supporting their children's education. He said it was well over 80%. I perceive a feeling among many Hispanic parents that good education for their children means a better future — and that belief is, in itself, a plus for long-term improvement.

I want to tread carefully on sensitive turf. There also are reasons for encouragement on the north side and among predominantly African-American schools. But I am confident a lot of people tuned into education in the city would agree the fabric of the whole undertaking is doing better on the south side than the north, for many reasons.

I hope the good things taking root, regardless of which side of town, bloom into bouquets of good results. Statewide, I hope the slight indications of change for the better are heralds of times when we won't be focused on these gaps because all kids will have good opportunities, good outcomes and a fair shot at bright futures.

As an all-black elementary class sang to me during a school visit last week, feliz navidad.

Alan J. Borsuk is senior fellow in law and public policy at Marquette University Law School. He can be reached at alan.borsuk@marquette.edu.