Readers sound off on Insure Tennessee.

Buy Photo Letters to the editor may be emailed to letters@tennessean.com, faxed to 615-259-8093 or mailed to Letters to the Editor, The Tennessean, 1100 Broadway, Nashville, TN 37203. (Photo: File / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

End Obamacare hatred, help Tennessee

What is the difference between federal Republicans (Alexander and Corker) and state Republicans (Tracy and Gardenhire)?

Insure Tennessee, which could have provided 300,000 Tennesseans, “the working poor,” with insurance. Obviously, the state Republicans a) have insider information that the federal government’s promise to fund 100 percent of a Medicaid expansion is no good, b) know that in 2016, when the federal government pays 90 percent and The Tennessee Hospital Association pays 10 percent, that those promissory notes are not good, and finally, c) believe that health care jobs created in community hospitals are not a part of the economic engine in our state.

State Republicans against Insure Tennessee have to simply hate any affiliation to “Obamacare.”

Could we simply pretend that the program was once called “Romneycare” and see if the light bulb in their brains would go off in favor of Insure Tennessee?

Greg Cantrell

Brentwood 37027

Kill two birds with one stone

I see that state legislators have killed Insure Tennessee and also have also OK’d the guns-in-parks measure.

Perhaps the two measures could be combined; herd all the uninsured people into parks, where they could be shot by gun owners.

It wouldn’t have to be deliberate — an accidental stray bullet would be just as fatal. Dead is dead. This would help to “decrease the surplus population.” (If any legislators are not literate enough to catch the quoted reference, perhaps someone who knows how to read could explain it.)

This state has called itself the Volunteer State. It needs a new slogan; I suggest “the Backward State.”

Coleman Coates

Antioch 37013

Why won’t they be moved?

Tennessean photographer George Walker IV deserves an award for his stunning image under April 1’s front-page headline, “HOPE IS LOST AGAIN.”

Many of us are moved by visual images that grab the heartstrings and greatly help in telling the story.

We are moved when we see people who are unfairly denied medical help, who work and are underpaid, or who can’t work and are unable to afford health coverage.

At this special time of year, we are moved when we see portrayals of Christ’s crucifixion. Humbly, let’s borrow the words of Jesus from the cross and say, “Father, forgive them, for they (the state legislators) know not what they do.”

Why do we keep electing these uncaring, excuse-making leaders? Let’s unseat all those with “R” after their name who blocked Insure Tennessee legislation.

Mark Dorais

Nashville 37217

Who says “you can’t fix stupid”?

Our state legislators have failed yet one more time to do the right thing.

There are 280,000 Tennesseans who work hard to pay their rent/mortgage, feed and clothe their families, and pay for basic necessities, but they don’t have enough money left over to buy health insurance. Insure Tennessee would have provided health insurance for this group at no cost to the taxpayers for three years, with an option to “opt out” at any time.

This is what sensible people call a “no-brainer.”

Here is how you “fix stupid”: You vote them out of office!

Here are the six senators who voted to “kill” Insure Tennessee: Jack Johnson, Jim Tracy, Todd Gardenhire, Delores Gresham, Steve Southerland and Bo Watson (“For Insure Tennessee backers, hope is lost again,” April 1). Please remember these names the next time you vote.

N.D. Hasty, MD

Nashville 37215

Endlessly inane legislative session

Let me get this right.

Insure Tennessee voted down in committee, fake guns are worth a bill, we need to designate the Bible as our “state” book, guns are allowed in parks, but we can’t afford to change the signage to warn park visitors that they are in danger.

How long, oh how long, is this legislative session going to last?

Ellen Finney

Kingsport 37664

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1yjOFzl