Ruiz represents Clarendon well at Miss SC

Last Updated: July 4, 2015 at 12:23 am

Miss Clarendon 2015 Ariana Ruiz didn’t make the finals for Miss South Carolina, but she did win the media award from the state pageant.

It was the third straight year the Miss Clarendon Scholarship Pageant won the award, which calculates points based on “media appearances” that are published in papers like The Manning Times and on newspaper websites.

“We were extremely proud of winning that award for the third time,” said Miss Clarendon co-local executive director Ericka Sexton Floyd. “We have the girls make a lot of appearances for their community service, and that translates into media for them, Miss Clarendon and Miss South Carolina.”

Ruiz said the state pageant was “one of the most stressful things I’ve ever done.”

“But I would do it all over again three times!” she said. “My most memorable experience would definitely be the dressing room with the other candidates. All of us created somewhat of a sisterhood; we even have our own group text.”

Miss Greenville Daja Dial, who was competing for her fifth straight year, was ultimately crowned Miss South Carolina 2015.

“I would have probably chosen everyone,” Ruiz said of her personal winner. “All of the girls were so talented.”

She said the most nerve-wracking part of the pageant process last week was “talent practice.”

“The idea of performing in front of all of the other girls scared me more than actually performing in front of the entire state of South Carolina,” Ruiz said.

Before the state pageant started, Ruiz said she was most nervous about the interview portion of the competition. With the Supreme Court announcing several decisions last week in relation to the Affordable Care Act and same-sex marriage, and Gov Nikki Haley calling on state lawmakers to remove the Confederate flag from the State House grounds, Ruiz said she was hoping to get some of those controversial questions.

“Part of the reason I enter these pageants is so that my voice can be heard,” she said. “I already had my opinion formed about those controversial topics. I wish I could remember what they asked. It’s so hurried and you’re nervous. I do remember them asking me about my platform, which is urban sprawl.”

Ruiz said she doesn’t know if she will compete in another preliminary pageant for the Miss South Carolina system this year.

“But you will definitely be seeing more of my face!” she said. “My plan for the rest of the summer is just to take a small break to just get my mind right for freshman year of college (Central Carolina).”

She said she is grateful to Clarendon County for its support.

“No one knows how much it truly means to know that so many people are on your side,” she said.