Senate President Mary Lazich, R-New Berlin, talks in support of her bill that bans abortions after 20 weeks on June 2, 2015, in Madison, Wis. (Photo: AP Photo/Scott Bauer) Story Highlights Proposed Wisconsin law could force physicians to choose between saving a woman's life and going to prison.

As a practicing obstetrician/gynecologist for 36 years and current faculty member of the Medical College of Wisconsin and former of the UW Medical School, I have dedicated my life to making women and families healthier and safer.

This commitment to my practice and patients make it all the more disheartening and disturbing to see lawmakers like Gov. Scott Walker and Sen. Mary Lazich so dedicated to passing a bill to ban abortion that will put women's health and safety at risk.

Lazich believes her bill to ban abortions, without exception, in Wisconsin "is all about pain." This is something that we should talk about, and the medical and scientific communities need to be involved in that conversation. Professional medical organizations in Wisconsin like American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, the Wisconsin Section of the American Academy of Pediatrics, the Wisconsin Family Practice Physicians all strongly disagree with Lazich's abortion ban at 20 weeks based on fetal pain perception and are adamantly opposed to a one-size-fits-all approach to abortion regulation.

RELATED STORY: 20-week abortion ban bill endorsed

Physicians can and regularly do have discussions about the likelihood of pain perception and fetal brain development during pregnancy. Researchers have produced a comprehensive scientific review of the evidence in the U.S. and abroad and found that that fetal pain perception may be neurologically possible at 26-28 weeks, but not at 20 weeks gestational age.

These discussions within the medical community are important, but they are not actually reflective of the pain that is truly at issue with this bill.

In Wisconsin, pregnancy terminations after 20 weeks are rare. Most of these terminations are due to devastating complications that arise during a desired pregnancy. In fact, there are no elective abortions after 20 weeks in Wisconsin — all are medically implicated and take place in hospitals where elective abortions are prohibited. Families in these situations experience profound grief as they come to terms with the reality that their much-wanted baby is going to die. They learn about lethal birth defects they could never have imagined, such as babies without vital organs or missing pieces of their brain.

These families that are going a through devastating loss deserve to have treatment plans that are individualized — not one size fits all, like this law would mandate. These families deserve the best advisement and counseling from their physician and not interference from state senators.

Physicians providing care and counsel to women and families grappling with a complicated diagnosis actually might agree with Lazich that this bill is "all about pain" — the pain that is caused needlessly by politicians. When you step in to the privacy of the physician's office and meet with a woman or family in these horrible situations, there is one pain that no one can dispute — the pain and suffering that befalls them as they are told at the time of their 20-week ultrasound that there are fetal abnormalities not compatible with life. The bottom line is that these families are able to make the decision that is best for them in an unimaginably painful situation. These families deserve and need better than what Republicans in the legislature are proposing.

This bill also creates an unimaginable situation for a physician who might be forced to choose between possibly saving the life of a pregnant woman and going to prison. The bill, which makes ending a pregnancy after 20 weeks a felony, does not take into account the reality of a woman and her physician facing a medically complex scenario. In some cases, a physician only has minutes to decide the best course of action to protect his patient's health and life. The limited medical emergency exception does not provide any clarity to a physician in the midst of a time sensitive decision and the threat of prison hanging over him could lead to treatment decisions that are not based on what is best for the woman.

Physicians who take care of pregnant women overwhelmingly oppose abortion bans. The practice of medicine by legislators who have no medical background and who will never understand the real world impact of their ideological agenda is damaging to families and damaging to the profession of medicine.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1Mlq9Q5