Caring for the aging comes naturally for Fairfield Nursing and Rehabilitation Administrator, Jonathan Moore, as he grew up with his grandmother, Gladys Noble Seago, living with his family.

“It gave me a deep sense of commitment to family and a love for those who have difficulty caring for themselves,” Mr. Moore revealed.

Mr. Moore also proudly stated that his grandmother had been a member of the Daughters of the Republic of Texas, and it was her family’s property on which the first Methodist Church in Texas was built.

“It is a wonderful blessing to have this [facility] as a resource here in a rural community,” Mr. Moore said speaking of Fairfield Nursing and Rehabilitation.

He indicated that rural areas make better nursing homes because of the continuity of the staff and lifelong relationships that are formed in a small town.

Mr. Moore has been with the Fairfield Nursing a little over a year. During that time, he has grown to love Fairfield and strives to make the Home an intricate part of the Community.

He wants to be available to the Community 24/7 and proved it by providing his cell number 254-855-4487 for publication in the article.

The facility provides long-term patient care, as well as short-term care. In addition, they are experts in such things as the Affordable Care Act, estate concerns, Medicare, and Medicaid.

The facility also has an outpatient rehab area.

Currently, they are planning a trip to Athens to see the Christmas light tour.

Residents often take trips to Wal-Mart to shop and Sam’s Restaurant to eat.

Next year, Mr. Moore plans for patients to be able to attend Eagle’s home games.

“We welcome any members of the community to come and fellowship with us,” he invited stating that several church groups and schools have come by to present Christmas programs this season.

Mr. Moore has worked 13 years in Nursing Home Administration. He was the Nation’s first Long-term Administrator in the Federal System.

He joined the Marines right after finishing high school, which helped to pay for his college at Tarleton State University where he obtained his bachelors and completed some work toward a master’s degree.

McLennan Community College is where Mr. Moore took his Administration training to become licensed with the State. He completed the require 1,000 hours of internship at Quality Care in Waco.

Furthermore, Mr. Moore knows about caring for the needs of patients as he, himself, is a cancer survivor.

Jonathan Moore and, wife, Sabrina have been married for 8 years. They have four children. Anna Elizabeth is 14, Julia Lauren is 7, Jonathan, Jr. is 5, and Timothy Luke is 3. DISCUSSING THE DAY’S SCHEDULE of visitors are Fairfield Nursing & Rehabilitation Director, Jonathan Moore (right) with receptionist, Billie Brim.