Topics: Dem primary, Donald Trump, economic justice, Economics, Elections 2016, GOP primary, Poverty, Racism, the economy, News, Politics News

We know whom the voters cast ballots for on Super Tuesday, and thanks to exits polls have some sense of what their rationale was for their choices. But as we extrapolate these results to see what they portend for the general election, what do we really know about the lives of the people who voted? Sad to say, in the midst of our horse race obsessions, really very little.

All totaled, the dozen Super Tuesday states are a pretty big sample group, with a total population of 85 million, almost a quarter of the U.S. population.

Five of the states are more diverse than the country. Five of the states have a higher percentage of college graduates than the nation as a whole, which has 29.3 percent of adults with at least a bachelor’s degree. Four have college graduation rates that are significantly lower than the U.S as a whole.

Across America 13.1 percent of those living here are foreign born but in Texas and Massachusetts that percentage is 16.5 percent and 15.3 percent, respectively. But in five states the portion of immigrants now calling the U.S. home is less that half the national percentage of foreign born.

Pundits this year are describing primary voters in general as being cranky, but when pressed for an explanation, the TV experts usually get quite vague about just what has voters upset — which, in a way, kind of trivializes popular sentiments. “How about those wacky, ‘fired up’ voters!”

If you’re lucky, what you’ll get from these high-paid groupthink prognosticators will be something about how the people who are turning out to vote think the “fix is in” in our politics, with the super-wealthy and multinationals corrupting the process by way of billions in dark money and campaign cash.

Another commonly expressed rationale for voter discontent is disappointment over what has been the weakest and most anemic recovery since World War II. But that sugarcoats what the data shows, which is that tens of millions of Americans are idle and that several million desperately need full-time work but are being kept permanently in part-time status.

In every one of the dozen states that voted Tuesday, the ranks of those not working has grown since the start of the Obama tenure.

And while this decline in labor force participation has deep historical roots that go back to the 1970s, this mega-trend accounts for the increasing irrelevance of the top-line unemployment number that is the gold standard of central bankers and the clueless business press.