Regis offensive lineman enjoyed unofficial trip to Boulder

Great visit at CU! pic.twitter.com/6DxUGPi14f — Timmy Lynott (@TL56TIM) February 23, 2014

It wasn't all doom and gloom in Boulder on Saturday night.

Regis Jesuit High School (Aurora) offensive lineman Tim Lynott told BuffZone he enjoyed his unofficial visit with the Colorado football program as CU continued its junior day festivities.

"It was fun actually, it was really fun," Lynott said of the CU men's basketball team's 88-61 loss to No. 4 Arizona.

It was a busy day for the 6-foot-4, 295-pound lineman, who is surely at the top of the Buffs' list of targets for the 2015 recruiting cycle.

"We just got to get a tour around the school, the facilities and everything, the rec center. Got to see everything, what the school's about," he said.

"I got to meet all the coaches. I was mostly with coach [Gary] Bernardi the O-line coach, coach [Mike] MacIntyre and coach [Troy] Walters, the wide receivers coach."

Lynott said his visit improved his view of CU as his recruitment rolls through the junior days chapter. The Buffs were the first to offer the Regis product a scholarship in January and were later followed by Colorado State and Oregon.

Advertisement

"Yeah, a lot," Lynott said when asked if CU wants the lineman to be a Buff. "It's pretty awesome, actually, to know that they want me that bad and want me to play for that team."

"I liked it a lot more. I got to see what they're about. I got to see the campus and everything so that helped me a lot, with my decision more. I'm kind of leaning toward them. It helped me to get to see everything."

Regis Jesuit High School offensive lineman Tim Lynott, left, and Colorado head football coach Mike MacIntyre pose for a photo on Saturday during the Buffs' junior day. (Photo courtesy of Gerri Lynott )

Lynott didn't know many of the other junior day visitors and said the majority of them were from out of state. He did get a chance to meet California tight end Tyler Petite and in-state recruit Salofi Gaoa, a 6-foot-7, 260-pound offensive lineman from Fort Collins' Rocky Mountain High School.

Lynott said he plans to keep in touch with the Buffs, but he'll have to call them, universities are not allowed to contact juniors on the phone.

"I'm just going to keep in contact with them," he said. "I think I'm maybe going to their spring game. I'm not sure yet, but I think I'm going to Oregon too for junior day."

Lynott attended Colorado State's junior day earlier this month and had favorable things to say about both programs.

"It was a lot longer, I can tell you that," Lynott said of CU's junior day. "I love all the coaches at both schools, but they're different, because they're different schools. I like both schools a lot."

Lynott's not ready to name a favorite, nor is he ready to commit to a school, just yet.

"I want to see other schools, make sure I have the right school before I commit anywhere," he said.

Colorado is one of many Pac-12 schools hoping to land a signature from the future collegiate guard. The Buffs are taking their best shot at keeping the lineman in Colorado.

"I've been talking to ASU, Nebraska, UCLA, Washington, Northwestern, Penn State and Oregon," Lynott said, later adding Oregon State is also in the mix.

"I'm just checking them out, but I like CU a lot. I like everything about it."