Nucleus Clinic will host its annual fall wine, salad and chocolate open house benefit Thursday, Oct. 24, 5-8 p.m., at its Coon Rapids location, 1323 Coon Rapids Blvd. Tresa Undem

According to Executive Director Becky Fink, it will be a casual evening with great food, wine, chocolate, conversations, door prizes, silent auction, complementary chair massage and Reiki care.

As the only independent, nonprofit reproductive health clinic serving the northern suburbs from St. Cloud to St. Paul, Fink said contributions to benefit patient care by mail or at the open house will be gratefully received.

The open house will include a program at 6:15 p.m., with speaker Tresa Undem, a partner and founder of PerryUndem, Washington, D.C.

A Minnesota native and one-time VISTA volunteers for Anoka County, Undem is now a nationally recognized policy researcher whose clients include Enroll America, AARP, American Cancer Society, Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and Kaiser Family Foundation, Fink said.

“As a recent guest on MPR and in briefing White House and cabinet staff and her research cited in the New York Times, Tresa is considered one of the most informed and nationally cited researchers on health care enrollment issues for the Affordable Care Act,” she said.

In her talk, Undem will present ideas and insights based on her widely recognized policy research on engagement and enrollment in the Affordable Care Act and MNsure and the role and future of community clinics, including Nucleus, Fink said.

The next morning, Friday, Oct. 25, Undem will be the speaker at a breakfast hosted by the Nucleus Clinic Board of Directors, 8:30-10:45 a.m., at Unity Hospital Education Building, 620 Osborne Road, Fridley.

According to Fink, MNsure navigators, brokers and advocates and those interested in health care reform have been invited to the breakfast.

The focus of the meeting will be on relevant, leading national research on the Affordable Care Act, Fink said.

“This is an outstanding information opportunity for the health care provider community, those preparing to be MNsure navigators, MNsure brokers and the social services community,” she said.

For more information, email [email protected]

Peter Bodley is at

[email protected]