The Florida Department of Law Enforcement, along with the U.S. Marshall's Service arrested escaped inmates Charles Walker and Joseph Jenkins, both 34.

This undated combo of photos provided by the Florida Department. of Corrections shows Joseph Jenkins, left and Charles Walker. Walker and Joseph Jenkins were mistakenly released from prison in Franklin County, Fla., in late September and early October. According to authorities, the the two convicted murderers were released with forged documents. A manhunt is under way for the two men. (AP Photo/Florida Department. of Corrections)

The Bay County Sheriff's Office had been working closely with the United States Marshals Florida Regional Fugitive Task Force, FDLE, the Florida Department of Corrections, and the Panama City Police Department to figure out where these two men could be.

The Sheriff's Office says at approximately 5:20 p.m., authorities narrowed down their search to the Coconut Grove Motor Inn at 9725 Front Beach Road, Panama City Beach.

They say about 20 members of the task force surrounded the room of the two escaped inmates and used a PA system from one of the patrol cars to instruct Jenkins and Walker to come out.

Both men walked out of the room calmly and put their hands in the air. Soon after that they were taken into custody without incident.

"They were able to actually pinpoint it down to the very room and it was the right room and we're very fortunate that the two men had not split up," said Ruth Corley, the Bay County Sheriff's Office spokesperson. "It would have made it a little more difficult but they were both together and didn't fight. They came out with their hands up."

Inmate Charles Walker, 34, was serving life without the possibility of parole on a 2nd degree murder conviction from Orange County.

He escaped from Franklin Correctional Institution on October 8, 2013 after the Department of Corrections received fraudulent release documents from the Clerk of Court.

Inmate Joseph Jenkins, 34, was serving a life without the possibility of parole on a 1st degree murder conviction from Orange County.

He escaped from Franklin Correctional Institution on September 27, 2013 after the Department of Corrections received fraudulent release documents from the Clerk of Court.

Saturday morning, the families of Joseph Jenkins and Charles Walker had asked them to turn themselves in to law enforcement.

"Is there anything too hard for God? God knows who you are," said Lillie Danzy, Charles Walker's Mother. "I know who you are. Your family knows who you are. We want you to return home safely."

Jenkins and Walker's first appearance in court will be Sunday at the the Bay County Courthouse.