Congress is well on its way to passing both a continuing resolution and a budget deal that will, despite the best efforts of some conservatives to achieve an alternative outcome, keep the federal government open well into the next year.

The complaints coming from the right are loud and growing louder. The one that probably stings the most is "If we wanted a Boehner deal, we would have kept Boehner in the speaker's chair."

Some of the complaints, like the one about giving the Democrats cover on the repeal of the ban on crude oil exports, are nonsensical. Others, like the lack of fundamental regulatory relief, are more on point. It's important to note that some people are never satisfied. Some of the things the leadership is being called out on today are things the immovable wall of conservatives championed yesterday. Some people, it seems, are never satisfied.

[SEE: Congress Cartoons]

Other people can go into detail about the details, which is where – some are quick to remind – the devil lives. The politics of it all are just as interesting. To understand what's going on you really have to appreciate that some of the most conservative members in Congress – a euphemism for those who complain the loudest – still don't know President Barack Obama at all.

In Congress, the horse trading was fierce. Under the rubric that whatever the deal was had to be something the president could sign, Democrats and Republicans made lots of trades. Nancy Pelosi's team, for example, gave up a lot, and permanently, in order to continue to delay the imposition of the so-called Cadillac tax on health plans that will destroy the unions – and with it her party's political base.

Conservatives didn't get everything they wanted. Some key initiatives, like the one blocking the EPA's Clean Power Plan, were left on the table and they were forced to swallow a continuation of the wind and solar energy production tax credits on a temporary basis, phased down over time, but they were not routed. They held their own and turned out a product that, while not all good, is not all bad either.

[GALLERY: Barack Obama Cartoons]

Off the hill it's a different matter. The real changes, like the complete disassembly of Obamacare from the roots up, will not come until there is a president who will agree to them. Congressional conservatives do not have the leverage to force Obama to act, even if it means a government shutdown, because this president doesn't want anything from Congress, doesn't need anything from Congress, and has decided for the most part to ignore Congress except when absolutely necessary.

To put it another way, there's just no negotiating with him – which makes it impossible to lead from Capitol Hill like Newt Gingrich did with Bill Clinton after the 1994 election. The last deals, the one that in exchange for a tax increase on the highest-income earners made all the other Bush tax cuts permanent and the one that forced a sequester that has led to real reductions in federal spending, did not leave the liberals happy. The president bluffed, Boehner called it and Obama lost.

These were significantly bigger policy victories than many conservative leaders were willing to acknowledge at the time and they appeared to learn nothing from the experience. Obama, on the other hand, learned a lot: Stand back, ask for nothing in order to give up nothing, and let Nevada's Harry Reid take the heat for it in the Senate.

[SEE: Democrat Cartoons]

What is truly ironic is how these complaining conservatives fail to see that Obama's strategy is exactly the same one they employ when dealing with the House and Senate leadership. They present a list of requests (that they come across as demands is a communications issue they really need to resolve) and promise to walk away from the finished product unless each and every one of them is acceded to. It's a foolish approach in that it gives the leadership nowhere to go but to the Democrats in order to find the votes they need to pass things the president will sign; presumably all these bush league constitutionalists do remember his signature is necessary on most everything before legislation can become law.