The other day, WGAL News aired one of its regular segments about our new governor, called the “Wolf Watch,” intended, I suppose, to place the governor under the same level of scrutiny as the eagles nesting at Codorus State Park. (The Wolf Cam, though, was our idea, but it didn’t fly.)

This one was about the governor’s proposal to reform property taxes, and the criticism of his plan seemed to be that he would replace property taxes with something else, raising other taxes. In that way, the criticism seemed to be that the governor didn’t have some kind of magic wand that he could wave and make property taxes disappear, replenishing the state’s coffers with money from the revenue fairy or something.

It was kind of dull. These things are. But at one point in the report, state Rep. Seth Grove, R-York County, appeared on screen to say that the governor’s proposal was “the largest socialist redistribution plan I’ve seen in Harrisburg.”

Really?

It seemed like an odd thing coming from Grove. He doesn’t have a lengthy history of saying dumb things for the sake of rousing the rabble and arousing the tea party people who seem to believe that the very existence of government is a socialist plot to contaminate our precious bodily fluids. (That role, of course, is the domain of state Sen. Scott Wagner, R-York County, who can’t seem to go a week without saying something dumb.)

Advertisement

Throwing the word “socialist” out there is like throwing a Christian into a lions’ den. It’s red meat for the base.

It gets thrown around a lot, mostly in reference to President Obama, because it would be considered bad form to constantly point out that the president is a black man. It’s not like the president has done anything that could be considered socialist. He hasn’t partially nationalized the big banks to protect them from failing; that was the last president, who wasn’t called a socialist.

Conservatives always point to the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, as an example of socialism, when, in fact, it is based on ideas that conservatives came up with themselves to reform health care using the existing insurance industry. (The mandate was a conservative idea, too, in case you were wondering.)

So, in a way, “socialist” is the new black.

(See what I did there?)

Back to Wolf.

Grove was saying that the governor is pushing “socialist redistribution,” which makes absolutely no sense. Yes, the governor wants to make sure that urban school districts are funded at fair levels. Urban school districts, like York city’s, are broke and have little chance of recovering unless they get some money. Sure, the Legislature talks about other reforms and the brilliant idea of handing the job of educating kids over to invisible hand of the free market and the variety of hucksters and grifters who push that notion. But the bottom line is the bottom line. They need money.

It’s not “socialism.” It’s called “governing,” which seems to be a foreign concept among the Mayberry Machiavellis that populate Harrisburg. Still, I was struck by this notion that Tom Wolf is a socialist.

You could look at his life and career objectively and come away with the opposite conclusion.

He took over his family business and nurtured it into a huge enterprise, leaving to serve in the Rendell administration as revenue secretary. In 2009, when the collapse of the housing market threatened the existence of his family business, he returned to the business and saved it. His business provides good jobs. It is dedicated to American manufacturers, creating jobs in this country and not Indonesia or China.

His business makes money. Lots of money.

If anything, he’s capitalist.

By contrast, take a look at Seth Grove’s professional career. His official bio only lists government work, and he was serving as chief of staff for Rep. Keith Gillespie, R-York County, when he ran for the Legislature in 2008. There was no mention of private sector employment.

So there’s that.

But still, Grove may be on to something.

Socialism is bad. We all know that. I mean, look at some of the terrible things that could be considered socialism, right here, in the land of the free. Social Security. It even has “social” in its title. Medicare. Unlike Obamacare, Medicare is a government-run health insurance system. The Interstate Highway System. Socialism on a huge scale.

And Wolf may be a socialist? The horror.

Let’s take a closer look.

Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov could have been considered a socialist. Actually, he was a Marxist, which is different in that it mandates nationalization of all private industry and property, but still, to a lot of people, it’s the same thing.

Ulyanov was best known as Lenin, one of the founders of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic, which later evolved into the Soviet Union. He championed universal health care, free public education and civil rights for women. But — there’s always a “but” — he was also responsible for the oppression and executions of political opponents and creating a nation that crushed the governed, until it collapsed under its own weight. So there’s that. (The Russian people are now happily governed by an oligarchy, a gaggle of kleptocrats whose over-arching philosophy of government is based on theft. Russians just can’t seem to catch a break.)

Anyway, Lenin and Tom Wolf.

Lenin was bald.

Tom Wolf is bald.

Lenin had a beard.

Tom Wolf has a beard.

And think about this: You never see Wolf and Lenin at the same place at the same time.

Sure, Lenin’s been dead for nearly 90 years. But still...

Really makes you think.

Or not.

That solves it.

Seth Grove was right.

Mike Argento is a columnist for The York Daily Record, a sister newspaper of The Mercury. Reach him at mike@ydr.com or 771-2046. Read more Argento columns at www.ydr.com/mike. Or follow him on Twitter at @FnMikeArgento