WASHINGTON -- Next year will bring a number of changes to one of Medicare's pay-for-performance programs, the physician value-based payment modifier (VPM) -- changes that will show up in physicians' paychecks a few years hence.

In 2014, the VPM will be expanded to practices with 10 or more eligible professionals -- covering some 60% of physicians. The program, which was mandated by the Affordable Care Act, assesses a provider's quality of care and costs, and increases Medicare payments for good performers and decreases them for bad ones.

As finalized in the 2014 Medicare physician fee schedule released last week, physicians' 2014 performance will be reflected in adjustments to 2016 payments. As much as 2% of Medicare payments will be at risk in 2016 based on physician performance in 2014. It was only 1% for 2015, which was based on doctors' 2013 performance.

This year, groups of 100 or more were measured for payment adjustments in 2015. In 2014, the program will begin affecting groups of 10 or more, and, in 2015, the VPM program will kick in for all Medicare practices -- regardless of size -- with the adjustments from that year's performance starting in 2017.

However, only groups of 100 or more professionals could potentially receive downward adjustments over the next few years. Practices with between 10 and 99 professionals will only see their payments go up if they perform well -- at least for 2016.

Also starting in 2014, physician practices will have additional ways to report quality measures, and patient experience measures -- as reflected in patient satisfaction surveys -- will be added for groups of 25 or more professionals.

For example, if a practice doesn't report quality measures as a group, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) will calculate a group's quality score if at least 50% of the eligible professionals in the group report quality measures individually under the Physician Quality Reporting System (PQRS), Michael Wroblewski, director of CMS' value-based payment division, said in a call with practices Tuesday.

Cost measures in 2014 -- as in 2013 -- will be based on total per-capita costs, risk-adjusted costs for Medicare Parts A and B, and total per-capita costs for beneficiaries with four chronic conditions (diabetes, heart failure, coronary artery disease, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease).

"All cost measures are payment-standardized," Wroblewski said. "We take out all the geographic adjustments that Medicare makes. For example, they pay higher rates in New York City than they do in Omaha."

However, Medicare will add an additional measure of per-beneficiary spending 3 days before and 30 days after an inpatient hospitalization. Additionally, each group's cost measures will be adjusted to account for specialty mix in the group.

"So you'll really be compared with folks that are in groups just like yours," Wroblewski said.

CMS plans to provide Quality and Resource Use Reports (QRURs) to all groups of eligible professionals and solo practitioners late next summer. The agency provided such feedback to groups of 25 or more nationwide in September. Those data were based on 2012 information.