Regardless, this is a corker of a story from Fars. They claim the Russian FSB (successor to the KGB) has found some remarkable information in the Snowden documents. It appears that the US government is being controlled by space aliens who have been here quite a while. In fact, one group of aliens - "the tall whites" - actually helped Hitler seize power.

It's all very logical - if you're a nutcase:

In Snowden's own words, this report continues, he outlined to Greenwald the reason for his highly secretive group obtaining and releasing these documents by warning that that there "were actually two governments in the US, the one that was elected, and the other, secret regime, governing in the dark."

As to who is running this "secret regime" Snowden and his cohorts were warning about, FSB experts in this report say, was confirmed this past weekend by former Canadian defense minister Paul Hellyer who was given access to all of Snowden's documents by Russian intelligence services and stated they were, indeed, "accurate."

Even though Defense Minister Hellyer's exact statements to the FSB in regards to Snowden's documents remain classified, shortly after his "extensive electronic interview" by the FSB he was allowed to appear on Russia Today's program SophieCo this past fortnight where he shockingly admitted that aliens have "been visiting our planet for thousands of years" and described several types of these extraterrestrials, including "Tall Whites" who are working with the US Air Force in Nevada.

Of the many explosive revelations in this FSB report, the one most concerning to Russian authorities are the Snowden's documents "confirming" that the "Tall Whites" (further revealed by Defense Minister Hellyer as noted above) are the same extraterrestrial alien race behind the stunning rise of Nazi Germany during the 1930's.

In just one example of the many outlined in this FSB report, it shows that with this "alien assistance," at the end of the 1930's, when Nazi Germany possessed just 57 submarines, over the four years of World War II it built 1,163 modern technologically advanced submarines at its dockyards and even put them into operation.

Snowden's documents further confirm, this report says, the "Tall Whites" (Nordic) meetings in 1954 with US President Dwight D. Eisenhower where the "secret regime" currently ruling over America was established.

Most disturbingly, this FSB report warns, is that the "Tall White" agenda being implemented by the "secret regime" ruling the United States calls for the creation of a global electronic surveillance system meant to hide all true information about their presence here on earth as they enter into what one of Snowden's documents calls the "final phase" of their end plan for total assimilation and world rule.