Anoka County’s footprint in downtown Anoka with the government center, courthouse and jail is on the verge of growing larger.

The Anoka County Board Aug. 25 authorized a work group comprising two county commissioners and five staff members to negotiate a purchase agreement for the county to buy five parcels owned by Jackson Street Properties, a city block east of the Anoka County Jail bounded by Fourth and Fifth avenues, Jackson and Golf streets.

Once developed, the purchase agreement will be signed by County Board Chairperson Rhonda Sivarajah, County Commissioner Matt Look, who chairs the Finance and Capital Improvements Committee, and County Administrator Jerry Soma.

The proposed purchase price is about $2.25 million, for which the county would use the asset preservation fund (reserves) or other identified funding sources, according to Soma in a report to the board.

In an interview following the meeting, Commissioner Scott Schulte, county board representative on the work group along with Commissioner Jim Kordiak, said that a loan or note, but not bonding, are being looked at as possible sources of funding, but indications are there is sufficient money in the asset preservation fund to pay for the properties.

On the parcels are three buildings – the three-story Jackson Professional Building, a two-story office at the corner of Jackson and Fifth Avenue that is currently rented to state public defenders who work at the Anoka County Courthouse, and a single-family home converted into an office that is currently vacant – and a large parking area.

The third floor of the Jackson Professional Building is completely rented to several attorney groups and part of the first floor is occupied by Goldberg Bond Company, but the rest of the first floor and all of the second floor are not rented at this time, according to Soma.

Three or four years ago, the county was approached by the owners of Jackson Street Properties about purchasing the property for some $3.5 million, but the county was not interested at that time, Soma wrote.

Recently, one of the Jackson Street Properties investors contacted Soma to tell him the group planned some $1 million in further improvements to the professional building and other areas and discussions on the county’s interest in the property resumed, he said.

In his report to the board, Soma wrote that buying the property now “as is” before the improvements are made could bring significant savings over the future years.

The county’s current facilities in Anoka are landlocked and offer very limited opportunities for expansion and it is expected that the county will need more office space and expansion of the jail at some point in the future, he wrote.

“When the county has a need to expand any of its facilities on the footprint currently owned by the county, it would have to go through an extensive tearing down and rebuilding of parking lots and facilities,” Soma wrote.

Purchasing these parcels to provide more space adjacent to the government center would be a more viable, long-term option for the county, he wrote.

According to Soma, for taxes payable in 2016, the city of Anoka has valued the five parcels at $1,986,100 with a property tax of $71,190,33.

The county, through Soma, Kordiak and Schulte, has been working with Ron Touchette of the Rock Solid Companies, Maple Grove, who represents the investment groups that owns the parcels.

According to Schulte, as discussions progressed Finance Director Cory Kampf and Facilities Management and Construction Director Andrew Dykstra as well as Christine Carney and Steve Nash from the Anoka County Attorney’s Office were brought into the work group.

The county initially offered $2 million to which the investment group responded that it would want $3.5 million if all the proposed improvements were made and $2.5 million with the buildings and property “as is” except for finishing the remodeling of the third floor of the professional building, Soma wrote.

The county’s $2.25 million offer for the property “as is,” with the exception of the third-floor remodeling already under way, was the recommendation of the work group first to the Facilities and Capital Improvements Committee and then to the county board.

According to Soma, there is some urgency for board action because the investors have borrowed the money to upgrade the building to entice more tenants and planned to start the project this fall.

If the purchase agreement goes through, the county would receive rental payments from the existing tenants of the building and would have the option of renting out vacant space in the professional building or using it for its own use, Soma wrote.

The County Board was unanimous in voting to move forward with the proposed purchase. According to Look, the county is looking to the future 10, 15, 20 years in terms of facility needs and will receive cash flow from renting out the buildings until they are needed by the county.

“Some of our buildings in the county are pretty old and for our future building needs we need to look at locating centrally to minimize the travel,” Look said.

The landlocked location of the government center, courthouse and jail make expansion to meet the county’s needs very difficult and the close proximity of these buildings “offer opportunities to expand as needed,” he said.

“This is a great opportunity at a reasonable rate to open up the door to our needs, which require attention,” Kordiak said.

While the county board has tried to keep government growth under control, outside forces such as federal and state mandates in such areas as the Affordable Care Act, MnCHOICES and child protection legislation has meant increases in county staff and “we need make sure we have a plan for the future,” Sivarajah said.

Commissioner Mike Gamache said population growth is occurring in some parts of the county and the county needs to be prepared. “A centralized location is more efficient,” he said.

The county board action is the “first step to getting us started,” Schulte said.

According to Schulte, while the county is not in that big of a hurry to conclude the purchase agreement, the Jackson Street Properties investors are and the county wants to accommodate them.

The goal is to finalize the purchase agreement by Labor Day, Schulte said in the interview.