ENLARGE Elmer Bäck in Peter Greenaway's new film ‘Eisenstein in Guanajuato’ Photo: Strand Releasing

NewFest

Bow Tie Chelsea Cinemas

260 W. 23rd St.

NewFest.org/2015

Thursday–Tuesday

An impressive array of low-budget indie features, documentaries and foreign-language dramas make this festival of films with LGBT themes especially buzzy in its 27th year. There is new work from major directors such as Peter Greenaway (“Eisenstein in Guanajuato”) and Mika Kaurismäki (“The Girl King”), and discoveries to be made, such as the coming-of-age ensemble pieces “Henry Gamble’s Birthday Party” and “Take Me to the River.” Documentaries include “Gazelle: The Love Issue,” about the struggles of an HIV positive New York scenester, and “When Bette Met Mae,” which captures an encounter between Hollywood icons.

Margaret Mead Film FestivalAmerican Museum of Natural History

Central Park West at West 79th Street; (212) 769-5100

Thursday–Sunday

Founded in honor of anthropologist Margaret Mead, the annual festival surveys the best in recent ethnographic documentaries and beyond. Among this year’s subjects are Hungarian punks under communism (“East Punk Memories”), the folk traditions of a Lithuanian village (“Land of Songs”) and the plight of state workers caught up in changing times in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (“Elephant’s Dream”). Closer to home, “Killing Time” considers the spiritual limbo of a Marine Corps base in Southern California.

ENLARGE A scene from Spike Lee’s ‘Bamboozled’ (2000) Photo: New Line Cinema/Photofest

Behind the Mask: ‘Bamboozled’ in Focus

BAMcinematek

30 Lafayette Ave., Brooklyn; (718) 636-4100

Oct. 28–Nov. 3

Spike Lee’s satire of media, race and latter-day minstrelsy hit screens 15 years ago with a resounding thud. “It was unfairly dismissed,” argues critic Ashley Clark, who explains why in his new book “Facing Blackness.” “It’s a very feel-bad movie, a film that ends with the murder of the lead character and a five-minute montage of Hollywood’s racial history. That’s not an invitation to go out on the town.” Mr. Clark explores the movie’s discomfiting but prescient truths with Mr. Lee in a post-screening Q&A that opens this series, which also includes key inspirations (“A Face in the Crowd,” “Network”), as well as Marlon Riggs’s documentary “Ethnic Notions,” a history of African-American stereotypes on screen.

‘Les Vampires’ & Musidora

Anthology Film Archives

32 Second Ave. (212) 505-5181

Thursday–Sunday

A tribute to the artist and French silent-cinema icon Musidora includes a centennial revival of “Les Vampires,” the classic Louis Feuillade serial that made the performer famous as Irma Vep. It was the start of a movie career that led to the actress directing and producing her own films, most of them now lost. Programs include the Olivier Assayas homage “Irma Vep” and series curator Michelle Handelman’s study “Irma Vep, the Last Breath.”

ENLARGE The Marinelli Glacier as seen in Patricio Guzmán’s new documentary The Pearl Button Photo: Kino Lorber

‘The Pearl Button’

IFC Center

323 Sixth Ave.; (212) 924-7771

Friday–Oct. 29

The Chilean coastline runs more than 2,500 miles along the Pacific Ocean, as evident a geographical fact as its mountainous terrain. Filmmaker Patricio Guzmán explores the land’s relationship with water in his new, essay-like documentary, which poetically uses natural science to explore Chile’s history of genocide. The saga of indigenous Fuegian tribes wiped out by 19th-century European settlers dovetails with the mass torture and killings executed by the Pinochet regime. Mr. Guzmán’s captivating way with images and elegant narrative illuminate the darkest corners of his country’s history, much as in this film’s companion piece, “Nostalgia for the Light.”