Photo

A winter storm churning through the Southeast dumped sleet, snow and freezing rain from the Mississippi River Valley to the mid-Atlantic Seaboard into the night on Monday. Flights were canceled, schools closed, Mardi Gras parades were rescheduled, and at least two state legislatures, in Kentucky and Tennessee, announced they would not meet on Tuesday as the storm continued into North Carolina.

The National Weather Service forecast was for up to a foot of snow for some areas, with more in eastern Kentucky, followed by days of temperatures that would be 20 to 30 degrees below the norm. The cold was expected to complicate recovery efforts and render some preparations, like salting roadways, less effective.

“It’s bad, and it’s only going to get worse before it gets better,” said Buddy Rogers, a spokesman for the Department of Emergency Management in Kentucky. Plows there could barely keep up with the quickly falling snow, which began well before dawn in the western part of the state.

The storm fell on the Presidents’ Day holiday, giving rise to a chief-hailing nickname, #Snowbama, that was quickly adopted on Twitter. (Example: “Coffee was already cold by the time I got to it. Thanks, #Snowbama.”) A suggested replacement, #TeddySnowzavelt, fell flat.

The storm was following a track from eastern Kansas through Tennessee and West Virginia to the mid-Atlantic Coast. While most of the affected areas can expect a snowstorm about once a year, said Jim Hayes, a meteorologist at the weather service’s Weather Prediction Center in Maryland, states like Kentucky were seeing snowfall well above average.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“This is going to be a big event for them,” he said. “They don’t get that much snowfall very often.”

Washington braced for the heaviest snowfall of the season, while the Capital Weather Gang blog at The Washington Post pointed out that if the storm jogged slightly to the south, it would be a bust. At Dulles International Airport, the temperature fell on Monday to a record low of 6 degrees.

The southern band of the system, from eastern Oklahoma through Little Rock, Ark., to Georgia, got more freezing rain than snow. Nashville was hardest hit by ice and freezing rain, the National Weather Service said on Monday evening. In Georgia, wary after an ice storm last year left thousands of people stranded for hours, the governor declared a state of emergency for 15 northern counties where rain, sleet and snow began falling Monday morning.

New Orleans pushed up the start time for two major parades on Monday afternoon, and braced for cold and blustery winds on Tuesday, Mardi Gras, just one year after a rainy Mardi Gras.

“It’ll be cold and windy, but at least it won’t be raining,” said Errol Laborde, the editor of New Orleans Magazine and a Mardi Gras historian.

Emergency officials worried over the bitter cold that was forecast to follow the storm, saying it would keep schools closed longer and could lead to brownouts because of increased demand for power. “They’re predicting lows from 10 to 13 degrees below zero Wednesday night,” Mr. Rogers said in Kentucky. “The high Wednesday they’re saying is going to be around 5 degrees. That’s just going to complicate the snow removal on the secondary roads.”

Wet, icy snow began falling in North Carolina between Durham and Chapel Hill shortly before 5 p.m. Monday. Gov. Pat McCrory declared a state of emergency ahead of the storm. Trucks from the State Department of Transportation raced to dump anti-freezing brine as evening fell.

Joey Cass and Hunter Harrington had just made it up from Sanford, N.C., about 40 miles south, in a landscaping truck equipped with a snowplow to clear the parking lot of a shopping center on Martin Luther King Jr. Parkway.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“We started getting the trucks ready about 6:30 this morning,” said Mr. Harrington, 21. The parking lot was packed and lines long at the Harris Teeter market where Mr. Cass and Mr. Harrington were set to work.

But at Compare Foods, three miles down the road, shoppers were preparing for what they hoped would be the briefest of interruptions. Gladis Castro, 47, a hotel worker, loaded her cart at with extra coffee, sugar and pork, just in case she had to play host for her family for two or three days. “Only God knows what’s going to come,” she said in Spanish. “I’ve been here for 16 years, so I know it’s not usually bad. But better to stay at home.”

Felicia Parker, 37, said she was not buying extra groceries. “We’re not used to seeing a whole lot, so we’re not expecting a whole lot,” she said. If anything, she was happy to be able to start shopping early because the gas station where she works as a cook had closed early to allow employees to get home. In last year’s snow, she said, “people got stuck, it happened so fast.” Still, she expected to be back at work on Tuesday.