New York, NY

Six billion people are expected to get engaged this weekend; but for 100 couples, they're celebrating Valentine's Day on the top of the world. They got married on top of the Empire State Building in New York City.

Mike Kleean and Heather Colwell got quite a view as they said their wedding vows on the 86th floor of the Empire State Building.

The couple bonded over adversity, meeting for the first time when Heather left her car lights on and her battery died.

Mike jump started her car and her interest.



A year and a half later, the couple from Petersburg, Ohio married high above New York City.



"I get to spend the rest of my life with the woman I love," Kleean said.



Brad and Catherine Stansberry of New York renewed their vows in front of their four children.



Their 8-year-old daughter said, "They really love each other."



100 couples won a lottery to be there this Valentines Day.



"The Empire State Building is Brad's favorite building and I've never been up it, so this was the perfect way to celebrate," Catherine Stansberry said.



All of the lucky couples get a gift bag and in five of them, the newlyweds will find a cupid, which means they win an extra special wedding present.



The Drouets found cupid, winning them a free six day honeymoon to Aruba.



"Oh my God it's amazing. I think that's the only thing that kept me warm taking the pictures," Ayaris Drouet said.



Or maybe it was all the warm hearts around her.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 Associated Press. All Rights Reserved. Material may not be redistributed.