According to police reports, an undercover informant bought drugs from 65-year-old Omega Robinson at his home on several occasions in August and September. Robinson is the Union president for the largest transit system in the state.

A metro union president was arrested and charged with four counts of cocaine and marijuana possession.

He represents Oklahoma City's Transit Union workers, and is out on bond, and apparently back at work.

According to police reports, an undercover informant bought drugs from 65-year-old Omega Robinson at his home on several occasions in August and September. Robinson is the Union president for the largest transit system in the state, and Robinson has served in that position under the international organization for more than 25 years.

“He's been a good neighbor to us, so,” said a neighbor.

But now the union head is facing serious drug charges.

OKC's union is a member of the Amalgamated Transit Union, the largest labor union representing transit and allied workers in the country. On the organizations website, Robinson is still listed as the president of the OKC union. In fact, News 9 is told he was at work Monday, despite his drug charges and arrest.

According to a confidential informant, Robinson sold "large quantities of cocaine base." A search warrant reveals Robinson was seen by the informant "selling crack cocaine." The informant also told investigators he's seen "cocaine base in a pill bottle" inside Robinson's home.

On several occasions beginning in late August, that same informant was sent to Robinson's home to purchase cocaine. Police arrested Robinson Sept. 23. In addition to the drugs and paraphernalia found, police also confiscated multiple guns.

In a statement from EMBARK, the Oklahoma City Transit Authority, News 9 is told "Mr. Robinson never served as a bus operator. The situation with Mr. Robinson is a personnel matter and is currently under investigation."

We stopped by Robinson's home. A woman briefly looked outside the window, but never opened the door. Robinson spent one day in jail and remains free on bond.