The BMO Harris Bradley Center and the UW-Milwaukee Panther Arena (bottom left) are shown in this photo taken earlier this year from the roof of the Hyatt Regency Milwaukee. Credit: Mark Hoffman

Those planning and debating a possible new arena for downtown Milwaukee need to pay attention to what the children of Jane Bradley Pettit are saying. It was Pettit's generous donation of $90 million that led to the construction of what is now called the BMO Harris Bradley Center, and her children have both an interest and some expertise on the topic.

First, Pettit's son, architect David Uihlein, suggested that the Bradley Center, the UW-Milwaukee Panther Arena and the Milwaukee Theatre should go to make room for a new sports and entertainment complex that would provide a broader venue than just as a home for the Milwaukee Bucks. The National Basketball Association has said that the Bradley Center is outdated and that the Bucks need a new home soon or the Bucks will be leaving Milwaukee.

Keeping the Bucks here is important, but creating something larger that can be integrated into a revitalized downtown makes all the sense in the world. Some with vested interests in the center, the arena and the theater oppose Uihlein's suggestion, and maybe all of those buildings don't have to go. But the community and its leaders have to answer a vital question: Just how many venues and of what size does downtown need?

Last week, Pettit's daughter, Lynde B. Uihlein, said she agreed with her brother that a new arena and surrounding economic development should not be done in a piecemeal fashion.

Although she may not be keen on razing the Bradley Center, Lynde Uihlein did say in an email to the Journal Sentinel that "Whatever the outcome for the Bradley Center, Milwaukee must look to the future and not approach this opportunity piecemeal. That means not only considering the impact on economic development of a new complex but also its life span: how accessible, affordable and sustainable will it be for the people of Milwaukee?"

Sister and brother have it right. A new arena should be part of a larger plan that will bring new life and economic development to downtown west of the Milwaukee River. If that can include a new vision for the Shops of Grand Avenue and ancillary development in the Park East corridor, even better.

As the debate over a new arena continues — where to put it and how much public money will be needed — let's all keep in mind the bigger issues that Lynde and David Uihlein have raised.

•••

We, too, are disappointed that the Milwaukee Catholic Archdiocese could not reach a settlement with victims of sexual abuse by priests in the archdiocese's bankruptcy case. Nor do we know who carries the larger share of blame for this failure, although we suspect both sides bear some responsibility.

What we do know is that the victims still deserve a measure of justice that they have not yet received from the church and that the people in the pews who had nothing to do with abuse should not bear an undue burden of the cost. How to reconcile those two will be, sadly, litigated rather than settled in the coming months.

U.S. Bankruptcy Judge Susan V. Kelley on Friday voiced her disappointment that the parties could not reach a settlement during two rounds of talks last month, the Journal Sentinel reported. She also issued a plan that will dictate how the case proceeds and said she wants the bankruptcy "on a fast track."

"If this case is not going to be settled amicably...it's time to litigate the remaining issues," Kelley told attorneys at a status hearing on Friday. "I want this case over."

Whether Catholic parishes that harbored sex abuser priests should be given blanket immunity from future lawsuits is among the issues that will be litigated in the coming months as the archdiocese attempts to emerge from its nearly 4-year-old bankruptcy.

Last week's hearing came as the archdiocese filed a new round of objections to claims filed by individuals who allege they were abused by non-diocesan priests, parish staff and others for whom the archdiocese maintains it is not liable.

Sadly, Kelley is right. If the two sides can't agree on a settlement, move forward with the court case and resolve these issues.

•••

As Jim Stingl noted in his column last week, White House officials have backed off from the absurd restrictions imposed on reporters during Michelle Obama's appearance in Milwaukee last week. Reporters, including the Journal Sentinel's Meg Kissinger, were told they shouldn't be interviewing people in the crowd at the campaign event for gubernatorial candidate Mary Burke.

"It is not our policy. This was an open press event. If anyone either from the Burke campaign or from our team obstructed a reporter from speaking with folks who were there, that was an error," Stingl was told Thursday by Maria Cristina "MC" Gonzalez Noguera. "This is a case of an overzealous staff person," she said.

We're glad to hear that it's not the administration's policy. But this is hardly the first time the Obama administration has run into open government issues, including a complaint last year that journalists were being routinely denied the right to photograph or videotape the president while he was performing his official duties.

Obama promised an open and transparent government, a promise that has fallen short, except, perhaps, in the case of White House intruders. The administration really has to do better at practicing what it preaches on this.