Eagles finish runner-up; Mountain View sixth

Thompson Valley's Lindsey Kroboth finishes the anchor leg of the 4A girls 400-meter relay Saturday at Jeffco Stadium. Kroboth earned three top-five finishes to help the Eagles place second overall. ( David R. Jennings / Broomfield Enterprise )

LAKEWOOD — The Thompson Valley girls track and field team comes to the state championships every year with roughly the same goal in mind: to win a state title.

Some years it happens. Some years it doesn't. Injuries will do that.

But what seems like a given is the Eagles will fight and claw for every point in every event they're in. Saturday's third and final day of the state meet was no different, with the TVHS girls finding their way onto the podium six times.

The day culminated and was highlighted by a second-place finish in the 1,600-meter relay, vaulting the Eagles to second in the final 4A team standings with 57.5 points, 2.5 ahead of third-place Broomfield.

Behind another record-setting meet by Elise Cranny, Niwot repeated as state champions with 66 points.

The runner-up by Thompson Valley marked the sixth time in the past eight years coach Matt Norton's team has placed in the top three in the final team tally at Jeffco Stadium.

"We've got an unbelievable staff of guys that work really, really hard all year long," Norton said. "Then we've got kids that care about each other. That's a good combination."

The Eagles trailed Northern Conference rival Broomfield by 5.5 points entering the meet finale, the 1,600 relay, needing a fourth-place finish or better to clinch second. Emily Leidig, Helena Ernst, Tina Maas and Kendra Larson erased any doubt by crossing in 3:56.36 to grab the silver medal.

Advertisement

That TVHS still finished as 4A's overall runner-up was a credit to the team's depth and resolve, as the Eagles were without a pair of key sprinters because of injury in Carly Feuerstein and Maren Janda. Junior standout Megan Irvine was also hampered all meet with a pulled hamstring, which caused her to struggle to a seventh-place finish in the 400.

Thompson Valley's Emily Leidig, left, rounds the corner during the 4A girls 1,600-meter run Saturday at Jeffco Stadium. The TVHS freshman finished 10th in 5:13.23. (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

"Injuries don't break apart our team. We're still a team," said Leidig, a freshman who was also 10th in the 1,600 Saturday after placing fifth in the 800 on Friday. "The people who are injured just root everyone on. We all are together; it's like they're still running with us."

The second in the mile relay by the Eagles followed a pair of top-five showings Saturday by senior Lindsey Kroboth, who placed fourth in the 300 hurdles and tied for fifth in the 100 dash with Berthoud's Tacey Divittorio at 12.51.

Kroboth, who as it turned out claimed the team's only title in the long jump Thursday, also was part the 400 relay that placed sixth — a foursome that included Kara McKee, Kelsi Schuetz and McKenzie Craig.

"I think we have such a strong program because of our coaches. They step up every single year and get people to deliver," Kroboth said. "Thompson Valley runs because of heart. It's not because some coach is dragging them here every year, unlike other teams."

Following not too far behind in the 4A girls team standings was Mountain View, which finished in sixth with 45 points. The Mountain Lions racked up nine points Saturday in the mile with Riley Cooney finishing fourth and Lauren Offerman sixth.

The Lions then capped the meet off with a fourth-place run in the 1,600 relay in 3:57.49, breaking the school record. Cooney finished with four top-four finishes over the weekend, which started with her anchoring the 3,200 relay state title team Thursday.

"My individual races weren't exactly where I wanted them to be, but our relays really came through," the junior said. "To win a state championship with those girls was so much fun. I just love all these girls and I'm really sad the season is over."

Contact Reporter-Herald Sports Writer Sean Star at 970-669-5050 or sstar@reporter-herald.com and twitter.com/RHpreps