Closing this loophole would save more than $8 billion over 10 years.

“Heat and eat” ties home heating assistance to food stamps. (Photo: Eileen Blass, USA TODAY) Story Highlights 16 states use the gimmick to extract billions of dollars in extra food stamps.

Senate should close this loophole in the farm bill.

Farm bill would cut food stamps for just 4% of beneficiaries and make everyone play by the same rules.

Like attorneys who comb through the tax code looking for loopholes to exploit for wealthy clients, clever state officials browsing through food-stamp rules have figured out a way to game the program for their poorest citizens.

The trick — called "heat and eat" — is to give someone with no actual heating bill a token amount of home heating assistance — as little as $1 a year in some states, or a single dime a year in California. Sixteen states and Washington, D.C., use the gimmick to extract billions of dollars in extra federal food-stamp benefits that their citizens aren't really entitled to under the rules.

OPPOSING VIEW: Feeding the needy isn't a loophole:

It's a little complicated, but here's a simplified explanation. People eligible for food stamps can get more of them if they can show that they also get assistance paying their heating bills, typically from a separate anti-poverty program: the Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program — LIHEAP in Washington jargon. But that requires a utility bill, which renters often don't get. So by giving those people token assistance, the states qualify their residents by other means. Pretty clever.

Many people would rather look the other way on this because in effect, it's like giving additional groceries to some hard-pressed beneficiaries for whom food stamps — more formally known as the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, or SNAP — can be a vital lifeline. But rent is already built into the food-stamp formula, so it amounts to double-dipping.

It is a scam that bends the rules in ways lawmakers never intended. It gives some people extra benefits while others in the same situation get less. And it's serious money: Closing this loophole would save more than $8 billion over the next 10 years. Monday, as the Senate begins voting on the farm bill, it has a chance to shut down this game.

Much of the shouting over the nearly $1 trillion farm bill has come over provisions that dole out billions of dollars a year to farmers and agribusinesses. They're obnoxious and ought to be reined in. But they're not a good excuse for ignoring flaws in the food-stamp and nutrition program, which eats up almost 80% of the bill's cost.

Food-stamp aid has ballooned in recent years due to the terrible economy and aggressive efforts to expand the program. Congress has fought bitterly over whether and how to cut it back.

The Republican-led House wanted almost $40 billion in cuts, while the Democrat-led Senate offered $4 billion. The compromise tightened rules to bar abuse that rarely happens (lottery winners won't be able to get food stamps, for example), but virtually all the $8 billion in savings comes from ending heat-and-eat. The House approved it in a bipartisan vote on the overall farm bill last week.

Anti-hunger activists say the deal savages the poor, but it would reduce food stamps for just 4% of beneficiaries and make everyone play by the same rules.

Defenders of the poor should realize that one of the greatest threats to the food-stamp program is the perception that people are using it to cheat the government. Closing the heat-and-eat loophole makes that argument much harder to make.

USA TODAY's editorial opinions are decided by its Editorial Board, separate from the news staff. Most editorials are coupled with an opposing view — a unique USA TODAY feature.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1eKNTLx