Three points separated Auburn University from being No. 1 in college football.

Imagine an 80-point gap between the top two contenders.

That's about the percentage market share that separates the No. 1 health care insurance provider in Alabama, Blue Cross and Blue Shield, from the No. 2 health insurer, UnitedHealthCare.

We caught up today with UnitedHealthCare's Gulf States Region CEO Glen Golemi to find out how he plans on staying in the game with such outsized competition.

"Compared to other states, we've had this Alabama health-care landscape that is extremely uncompetitive due to the large market share of one carrier," Golemi said.

Golemi said to chip away at Blue Cross' big lead, his company needs to offer value and service and be able to ride the wave of change in the market.

[Read Behind Big Blue: A special report]



By most measures Blue Cross has well over 80 percent of the health care insurance market and more than 90 percent in some segments of that, such as individual health plans, Golemi said. Blue Cross has 3 million members in Alabama. UnitedHealthCare (which owns Golden Rule Insurance) has 250,000 covered lives -- less than 5 percent of the market.

Golemi pointed out that if you add up surrounding Southern states Mississippi, Louisiana, Georgia and Florida, his company has 5.5 million people covered.

"So the share is more dispersed in other markets (outside Alabama)," he said. "And the markets are more competitive."

The premium increases some people are experiencing because of mandates in the Affordable Care Act could be an opportunity to gain some visibility, he said.

"The rising costs of health care will create a bigger appetite for change, and it's incumbent on us that while they are looking for change, we have the products, service and the pricing to make them comfortable for change," Golemi said.

He said the sticker shock in Alabama is exacerbated "by the fact that people don't know there is viable competition."



Golemi said the company plans to keep plugging away at service, value and visibility.



"More competition is good for the consumer," he said.

[ What's been your insurance experience? Good, bad or nonexistent? Share your story ]