An eye-catching photo of a traveling Obamacare ad plus an explanation by Drudge Report's creator Matt Drudge on his Twitter page was interesting enough that Drudge received a nod for "Tweet of the Day," on Monday. Drudge explained, "Govt looking van offering free Obamacare hit Miami streets today." Drudge also quipped, "Can you throw in pair of season tickets for Heat?"

The rear doors of the white van, striped in red and blue, were wrapped in yellow with black text in Spanish which translated in English to:

You can still subscribe to Obamacare

Apply today!

800 - 419-6318

Qualify and receive calls

Totally free

A busy signal was the only response to attempts to call the number advertised repeatedly for over an hour this morning. However, Drudge also posted a photo of some of the targets for the mobile Obamacare ads seated in a large room with Obamacare signs.

Drudge struck a compassionate tone as he included a cryptic reference to the presidential elections of 2016 in his post. Drudge wrote, "Watched as they lined up for Obamacare this morning in Miami. Warehouse setting, sad faces. No English. Hillary'16. pic.twitter.com/DeG6ycsAdE."

Over on his Drudge Report page, amid a constant storyboard of articles focusing on President Obama's signature legislation, the Affordable Healthcare Act (ACA), an article written by one of his two additional editors, Joseph Curl, was included yesterday. Curl's conclusion was, that "Obamacare is already finished before it started," because although Democrats and the president sold the concept of the need for insurance reform based on "46 million uninsured," less than five million have now signed up for Obamacare as the deadline for open enrollment looms, ending March 31. (Refer to: Drudge editor urges American revolt: 'Take to the street' for 'real change')

Numerous reports have been made about the effort by the Obama administration to encourage Latinos to sign up for Obamacare. According to Politico, of the large numbers of uninsured Latinos residing in California, Florida and Texas, nearly one in three Latinos is uninsured, a higher proportion than the national rate. The Obama administration has estimated approximately 10 million Latinos, who must be citizens or legal residents to get benefits, are eligible for coverage in those exchanges. It is also accepted fact that most will be eligible to receive premium subsidies as well.

It was December before the Spanish language site, CuidadoDeSalud.gov, was even launched. Then attacks were quickly made claiming the site was riddled with translation errors and applicants still couldn't browse plan options in Spanish.

Attempts to reach the Latino population have not been limited to the mobile ad which Drudge referenced. Outreach has included navigators and volunteers working in-person plus media outreach and community town halls. Still, tapping this population has proved difficult and across the board, "advocates of the law don’t expect enrollment among Spanish speakers to be high in the first year."

Matt Drudge, himself, has vowed that he was not signing up for Obamacare. Drudge referred to the tax penalty as "Monopoly money," a comment which quickly drew angry responses. Among those who questioned his meaning, Ezra Klein wanted to know, "Are you going to be uninsured?"

Related Articles: