Kiz: We were warned, Broncos Country. Quarterback Peyton Manning and coach Gary Kubiak told us the Denver offense would be a work in progress. Nobody, however, expected this mess: At 3.73 yards per offensive play, the Broncos ranked last in the NFL through two games. Yes, it’s early. But is the marriage of offensive styles between Manning and Kubiak in trouble? And how can it be fixed? Is nothing more than patience required? Or are there reasons to panic?

Renck: The solution to marrying the concepts is a shotgun wedding. The Broncos need to operate almost exclusively out of the shotgun. It’s not ideal for the zone-blocking scheme, but Denver will still be able to run effectively. It leaves Manning more comfortable — he can see the defense — and the running backs showed last season they can gain yards in this formation.

Kiz: The NFL is a league ruled by quarterbacks. And that’s where the problem with the Denver offense begins. Manning is playing more like Alex Smith than an NFL legend. At 5.07 yards per attempt, Manning ranks 32nd in the league, a stark illustration of his inability to throw the ball down the field. But here’s a bigger cause for concern: Manning is known for his precision, and his 58.8 percent completion rate is the lowest since his rookie season.

Renck: Manning set breathtaking standards that color every view of him. He has not played well, but there are reasons to believe he can play well enough for the Broncos to win 12 or 13 games and be dangerous in the playoffs. It starts with running the ball. If Denver forces opponents to respect its ground attack, play action will leave receivers wide open and the tight ends will surface as a weapon. Manning will be more precise because he won’t have to be perfect.

Kiz: When Manning attempts to roll out, his legs look as heavy and slow as if he were carrying one of his kids through 2-foot-deep water in the shallow end of the pool. But the rollout pass and play action with the QB under center are both central to Kubiak’s offensive philosophy. This offense will either get well in a hurry, hurry against Detroit, or a power struggle between Manning and Kubiak will escalate. Remember: QBs rule this league. If push comes to shove, Kubiak will take the blame and Manning will get his way.

Renck: Kubiak wants to win, not prove a point. He will continue to tilt toward Manning’s strengths if that is the adjustment necessary. But the Broncos aren’t going to abandon the running game. Until the running game works, there’s no reason to have Manning roll out. And if he does, roll him out to the right — where he’s not throwing against his body. Manning wants to win another Super Bowl and knows he can’t do it by throwing the ball 45 times per game. So run out of the shotgun and open up the play action. It can work.