Ohio Gov. John Kasich's entry into the GOP presidential contest just weeks before the first debate in Cleveland brings to a reported 16 the number of major Republican candidates who've announced. With Donald Trump's serial headline-grabbing pronouncements, many of them against fellow candidates, the volume of the rhetoric on the Republican side also seems to have gone up markedly. Meantime, all-but-annointed Hillary Clinton faces a rumbling of opposition for the Democratic nomination from a number of others, most prominently liberal Vermont independent Sen. Bernie Sanders, but also Vietnam veteran Jim Webb, a former secretary of the Navy and former U.S. senator from Virginia whose son served in Iraq.

The question for our roundtable this week is what is missing in the campaign? What are the critical issues the candidates are ducking or not addressing in a substantive way? What are the issues the next president will likely have to tackle that require a fuller airing on the campaign trail?

When 10 of the Republican candidates assemble in Cleveland on Aug. 6 for the first debate -- unless the GOP and Fox News take our editorial board's excellent suggestion and open the floor to all candidates in a two-part debate -- what do we want to hear them discuss instead of Trump's attention-getting remarks?

A number of our editorial writers offer their preliminary suggestions, along with some video clips that illustrate the best -- or worst -- of the campaign so far. As we did last week, a we also videotaped some of our thoughts on this topic.

What are your thoughts? Please share them in the comments below.

Peter Krouse, editorial writer, Northeast Ohio Media Group:

Every Republican presidential candidate claims to oppose Obamacare, including John Kasich, one of the few Republican governors to accept Medicaid expansion offered by the Affordable Care Act. He also believes pre-existing conditions should not be a barrier to health care coverage, another element of Obamacare. Years ago, conservatives embraced the essential elements of Obamacare. A smart Republican (Kasich?) should go back to the future.

Listen to Kasich talk off-and-on about Obamacare and Medicaid expansion on this video, starting at the 3:30 mark: http://www.cnn.com/2015/05/27/politics/john-kasich-medicaid-obamacare-reagan/

Kevin O'Brien, deputy editorial page editor, The Plain Dealer:

I want to hear candidates of each party explain what they would do to put the executive branch back within its constitutional restraints, thereby pressuring Congress to come out of hiding and do its own job.

Thomas Suddes, editorial writer:

I want the candidates to talk about net neutrality -- the Internet is a hugely important factor in American life. This is an issue that Bernie Sanders has addressed: http://www.c-span.org/video/?c4538334/sen-bernie-sanders-net-neutrality

Sharon Broussard, editorial writer, Northeast Ohio Media Group:

Donald Trump is eager to rant and rave offensively about immigration, as illustrated on this video clip, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jaz1J0s-cL4

but not so eager to raise his voice against pervasive child poverty in American cities and rural towns. Now that Trump has taken center stage, he should tell us how he will reduce child poverty in the United States and make this a country of opportunity for the youngest Americans.

Christopher Evans, editorial writer, Northeast Ohio Media Group:

Ted Cruz is waging as repugnant a presidential campaign as Donald Trump. Instead of Mexican immigrants and American war heroes, Cruz rants against same-sex marriage. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x8BWRfOGB2M

Substance, not hate speech, wins the White House. That's why neither candidate has a chance.

Ted Diadiun, editorial writer:

If the Republicans don't get their collaborative act together, former Democrat Sen. Jim Webb could be the only thing standing between us and President Hillary Clinton. Webb is heroic, honest, honorable and principled ... all things that Clinton is not. But he's had a late start on the primary stage and needs to begin emphasizing the many ways he differs from her in character and policy, both foreign and domestic. Here's a sampling of what Webb has to offer, starting at the 3:43 mark on this video clip: http://abcnews.go.com/ThisWeek/video/jim-webb-2016-campaign-32552567

Elizabeth Sullivan, opinion director, Northeast Ohio Media Group:

Politifact gave Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker's claim that Ronald Reagan's firing of air traffic controllers influenced the Soviet Union to declare defeat in the Cold War its "pants on fire" rating for untruthfulness since there are no documents supporting this view, although Reagan's actions apparently did catch the attention of Soviet leaders. The ridiculous meter on foreign policy pronouncements is in full motion, as are the Reagan analogies – but given the stakes, voters must insist on credible, well-thought-out positions, not ideological rants masquerading as expertise. You'll find Walker's remarks starting at about the 4:30 mark on this clip: http://www.msnbc.com/morning-joe/watch/walker--obama-must-grow-economy-everywhere-387056195701#