Campaign Buttons 021116 GN Carleton Legg, director of the Attleboro Industrial Museum, displays some of the many campaign buttons and ribbons in the museums collection. Many of the buttons were made in Attleboro. Below, a button from Harry Turner’s campaign for state auditor. Turner, a Republican, served as auditor from 1901 to 1911, and a button from the 1983 campaign of former Attleboro Mayor Brenda Reed.

Campaign Buttons 021116 GN These are some campaign buttons an ribbons in the collection of the Attleboro Industrial Museum. Not every button was made in Attleboro. A campaign button touting Henry Turner for Auditor is held by Leanne Pisani the museum’s director’s assistant.

Campaign Buttons 021116 GN These are some campaign buttons an ribbons in the collection of the Attleboro Industrial Museum. Not every button was made in Attleboro. NOTE: These buttons were made in Attleboro by R&W Robinson, not connection to the Robbins Co. of latter years.

Campaign Buttons 021116 GN These are some campaign buttons an ribbons in the collection of the Attleboro Industrial Museum. Not every button was made in Attleboro. This is a campaign badge for the Republican Club of Mass.

Campaign Buttons 021116 GN These are some campaign buttons an ribbons in the collection of the Attleboro Industrial Museum. Not every button was made in Attleboro. This button for Samuel E. Winslow didn’t use a pin, but was fitted to a man’s button hole.

Campaign Buttons 021116 GN These are some campaign buttons an ribbons in the collection of the Attleboro Industrial Museum. Not every button was made in Attleboro. This button for Samuel E. Winslow didn’t use a pin, but was fitted to a man’s button hole.

Campaign Buttons 021116 GN These are some campaign buttons an ribbons in the collection of the Attleboro Industrial Museum. Not every button was made in Attleboro.

Campaign Buttons 021116 GN The Attleboro Industrial Museum’s campaign button collection includes one commemorating H.E. Sweet, the city’s first mayor. The button is held with gloved-care by Leanne Pisani, the museums directors assistant. At bottom left is a campaign button, made in Attleboro, for the presidential run of William Henry Harrison and at below, a button from Samuel Winslow’s campaign for Massachusetts lieutenant governor.