Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

Another goal for Riyad Mahrez. Another victory for Leicester in its bid to become the English Premier League’s most unlikely champion.

Hours after seeing fellow title rivals Tottenham and Arsenal draw 2-2 in the north London derby, Leicester beat Watford 1-0 away to extend its lead to five points with just nine games remaining.

Mahrez grabbed the winner with his 15th goal of the season, controlling the ball at the edge of the area, feinting to give himself extra room, and curling an exquisite shot into the top corner in the 56th minute. It was the 11th away goal scored by the Algeria winger, who could yet complete a breakthrough season at soccer’s highest level by winning England’s Player of the Year award.

A team that was almost relegated last season is showing no sign of slowing up in its charge to the title. The same cannot be said of the other contenders.

“It is one game at a time — that’s got us where we are today,” Leicester goalkeeper Kasper Schmeichel said. “If we get too far ahead of ourselves, we risk blowing it.”

Alexis Sanchez scored a 76th-minute equalizer to earn 10-man Arsenal a point against Spurs, meaning both sides dropped two points on Leicester. Leicester has 60 points, Tottenham has 55 and Arsenal has 52.

Fourth-place Manchester City is the other team with a realistic chance of hauling in Leicester and a 4-0 win over Aston Villa ended a run of three straight losses. Sergio Aguero scored two of the four second-half goals and struck the post with a penalty to miss out on a hat trick.

West Ham scored three goals in the final 12 minutes to rally to a 3-2 win at Everton and keep in touch with the top four, which could now be out of reach for Chelsea after the soon-to-be-deposed champions drew 1-1 at home to Stoke.

Newcastle and Norwich both lost to stay in the relegation zone, with Newcastle manager Steve McClaren’s position likely under severe pressure following the team’s 3-1 home defeat to Bournemouth.

“No, no way,” said McClaren, when asked if he was going to quit. “That’s for other people to decide. I don’t do that.”