Walmart's decision to close nine Kansas stores has several small town's scrambling. The loss of the Walmart express store in Clearwater will leave the town without a pharmacy.

"We get our prescriptions filled down here, my dad gets his prescriptions filled down here and it's very, very convenient," said Amy Duncan of Clearwater.

Duncan says she was heartbroken when she found out the one-stop shop will be closing in just 11 days.

"You call it in here and they always have it filled and I only have to drive a mile and a half to pick my prescriptions up," said Duncan.

Clearwater's mayor Burt Ussery wasn't available for an interview when KAKE News contracted him on Sunday, but tells reporter Ben Jordan that Walmart's closure leaves the whole town concerned.

When Walmart moved to Clearwater over a year ago, it bought out the only local pharmacy so there would be no competition. Now residents will have to make a 15 to 20 minute drive to Haysville, Goddard or Wichita to get their medicine.

"It's not very pleasing," said Clearwater resident Donald Love.

Once Clearwater's Walmart closes for good on January 28, the town of 2,500 will also be down to only one grocery store and gas station. Ever since the town got their two week notice from Walmart, city administrators have been reaching out to other grocery and pharmacy stores, but so far Ussery says there hasn't been much interest.

Residents say they're worried Walmart's '1-year experiment' will leave them in a much worse spot than before.

"I don't know, there's no pharmacy, no groceries, no gas and their stuff is always reasonably priced grocery wise, everything. Whether it's shampoo, conditioner, all that stuff," said Duncan.

Ussery says the closing of their Walmart Neighborhood Market will also have an economic impact.

He tells KAKE News that the store employs around 30 people, and brought in around $20,000 a year to the city in tax revenue.

Walmart made the announcement last week to close more than 150 locations across the county including all express stores. The announcement comes months after the company said it would review its store fleet amid increased competition.