Tegan Molloy says the success of roommate Caroline Buchanan pushed her to win the world downhill crown. Photo: Matt Bedford

Rooming with multiple world champion Caroline Buchanan proved to be the catalyst for Jindabyne downhill mountain biker Tegan Molloy to claim her own world crown.

The 18-year-old has her first race back in Australia since winning the junior world championships in Norway last month when she competes in the third and final round of the NSW-ACT Downhill State Series at Mount Stromlo on Sunday.

Molloy spent most of the year competing overseas where she won the World Cup series and the world title in a dominant 2014.

Tegan Molloy will compete in the final round of the NSW-ACT Downhill State Series at Mount Stromlo on Sunday. Photo: Matt Bedford

She's been back in the country for just three weeks and was only looking to have some fun in her local event, where she'll be competing in the elite women's event as she prepares to step up from the junior level next year.

Advertisement

Molloy had the perfect roommate at last year's worlds in Buchanan who claimed her second world crown for 2013 at the downhill worlds in South Africa. She'd earlier won the BMX world title.

"I spent a bit of time with Caroline overseas last year at the world champs in South Africa. She was actually my roommate; that was pretty cool," Molloy said.

"I definitely look up to her. I came third last year and this year I was more determined and really wanted that win."

Skiing down the nearby mountains in winter and then mountain biking down them in summer, Jindabyne is the perfect home for Molloy.

When the snow melts, there's a world-class track just a short trip away at Thredbo.

It all started through sports classes at school, where downhill was part of the course.

From there her love for the fast and furious sport grew.

"We do mountain biking as a school sport at Jindabyne Central School and I did it with school for a couple of years and asked dad if I could give downhill a go at Thredbo," Molloy said.

"Ever since then I've stuck with it.

"Thredbo's got pretty much a world-class downhill track that I'm lucky to have in my backyard, so I ride that a lot."

While Molloy is just having some fun, Canberra's Tim Eaton is leading the NSW-ACT men's series and will be looking for a win on his home track.

While Stromlo will host the downhill speed demons on Sunday, last weekend it hosted the Scott 24-Hour Mountain Bike Championships, in which the Dynamic Motivation/Werks Bikes junior team - comprising Canberra and Queanbeyan riders - created history as the first junior team to win overall honours in a 24-hour event.