WASHINGTON – For the first time since Republicans took over the majority nearly seven months ago, the Senate Sunday (July 26) voted on legislation to repeal the Affordable Care Act. But critics of the national health care law fell well short of the 60 votes needed to advance their proposal.

They had tried to tack an amendment repealing the law to a pending highway and transportation bill. The party line vote in the rare Sunday session to end debate and advance that amendment was 49 in favor and 43 against. Sens. David Vitter and Bill Cassidy, both Louisiana Republicans, supported repeal of a law that has become known as Obamacare.

Republicans had hoped that a Supreme Court challenge to the Affordable Care Act would advance their efforts to repeal the law, and replace it with a GOP alternative. But the high court affirmed the law last month, in a 6-3 vote, rejecting the argument that the law shouldn't permit subsidies for health plans bought on federally run marketplaces used in Louisiana and 33 other states.

Still, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., argued that the 2010 law pushed by President Barack Obama isn't working and needs to go.

"This is a law filled with higher costs, fewer choices, and broken promises," McConnell said. "This is a law that's failed repeatedly, and that continues to hammer hardworking middle-class families. The vote we'll take this afternoon presents a stark choice to every senator: Protect a president who likes a law with his name on it, or stand with the middle class by finally opening the way to truly affordable care."

Sen. Chis Murphy, D-Ct., said that the law is working, providing coverage for 10 million Americans. He said GOP leaders appear to be scheduling "show votes" to advance the campaign of Republican presidential candidates.

"It is pretty clear that the Republicans are still addicted to litigating a law that is working across the country," Murphy said.

The Senate also voted to limit debate on an amendment to re-establish the Export-Import Bank. That vote was 67-26. Vitter and Cassidy each voted no. Both senators have said that they can't support re-authorizing the bank without substantial reforms to its operations. The bank lost its ability to issue new loans and loan guarantees June 30.

The vote touched off an angry speech last week by Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Tex., a GOP presidential candidate, who accused McConnell of a "flat-out lie," for bringing the Export-Import measure to a vote. Cruz said he had been assured by McConnell that there was no deal with supporters of the bank to bring reauthorization to the Senate floor.

The bill faces stiff opposition in the House, despite strong support from business communities, including in Louisiana. The bank helps finance foreign projects by U.S. businesses with direct loans and loan guarantees.

In the House, Kevin Roig, spokesman for Rep. Garret Graves, R-Baton Rouge, said the freshman congressman opposes a long-time reauthorization of the bank, though it has financed projects in his 5th Congressional District.

"Garret does not support the Ex-Im Bank as it operates today and would oppose any effort to reauthorize the program in its current form," Roig said. This type of taxpayer-liable financing system has no place in a true free trade and free market world. The bank has transparency, accountability and financial liability issues that require immediate attention."

"What complicates issues is the fact that as many as 85 other similar export credit agencies operate in foreign countries. If the United States unilaterally withdraws or eliminates the Ex-Im bank, these 85 agencies could put foreign manufacturers at a competitive advantage over our American manufacturers. At this point, a temporary extension with fundamental reforms and a requirement of concurrent multi-lateral discussions to begin eliminating these programs worldwide may be the most prudent solution."