"Handcuffed" is how Mark Strumwasser says he feels as owner of Sunshine Rentals, a supplier to the temporary-housing industry.

Holding him back are, on the one hand, lenders that won't fund expansion into new markets without secured interests and, on the other, the Affordable Care Act, whose small-business provisions kick in at 50 employees.

"Getting credit to fund trucks or laundry equipment? Not a problem," says Strumwasser, president of the $3.4 million Vista, Calif., company. "To fund working capital? Problem." As for Obamacare, "I stopped hiring at 49. We did the math. That would be a very expensive 50th employee."

Even so, he says, "we have had a lot of growth. Growth is still there."

For business owners like Strumwasser, America's slog back to economic health is neither the worst of times nor the best of times. Call it the mehst of times. Entrepreneurs are more confident in the national economy than they were during the recession, but few are excited about the pace of recovery. And if many talk blue skies about their own company's prospects, they fume about obstacles — a surfeit of taxes and regulations, a paucity of skilled workers — that prevent them from growing faster.

For our annual report on the State of Small Business, we surveyed nearly 300 leaders of America's fastest-growing private companies (as ranked by the Inc. 5000) and interviewed 24 respondents. The percentage calling themselves "very confident" in the economy declined to 22 percent from 26 percent a year ago, with 17 percent saying they were "neither confident nor unconfident," versus 14 percent last year. Purportedly positive forces, such as low oil prices and new sources of funding, barely registered.

"Things are just a bit soft," says Bruce Ballengee, CEO of Pariveda Solutions, a $65 million technology services business in Dallas. Lately, Pariveda's public-company customers have been slower than usual to pay invoices. And consultancies whose customers serve the struggling oil industry are spending less or requiring higher returns on investment. "People are queasy and don't put themselves at risk for growth," says Ballengee.

The views of outside experts are rosier. Although small-business hiring peaked in April 2014, growth has been consistent and sustainable, says Martin Mucci, CEO of Paychex, which provides payroll and other services to small businesses. Even more auspicious, the rate of new business formation has seen the biggest year-to-year increase in two decades, according to the Kauffman Foundation, an entrepreneurship research organization based in Kansas City, Mo. And Kauffman says 80 percent of new entrepreneurs are starting businesses because they spot opportunities, not because they couldn't find work.

Growth companies, in particular, have reasons to be cheerful. In addition to ample money for funding, says Herb Engert, head of strategic growth markets for the Americas at Ernst & Young, "labor markets are improving and M&A is still very attractive."

Yet as our survey reveals, a unified theory of small business does not exist. Entrepreneurs are like those proverbial six blind men describing an elephant by touch. Depending on their industries and profitability, different people experience a very different animal.

"Banks are happy to increase credit lines. At least for us."

Nowhere is the disparity greater than in financing. Banks remain by far the most common source of capital for entrepreneurs, with 45 percent of respondents seeking loans or lines of credit from them this year. Many walk away unhappy. "Banks have started to come back, but it's not a very big comeback," says Rohit Arora, CEO of Biz2Credit, an online marketplace for small-business funding.

Still, respondents had a relatively sunny perception of banks' lending practices, with 63 percent saying banks are more willing--or slightly more willing — to lend. Stephen Fernands, founder of Customized Energy Solutions, a $26 million Philadelphia consultancy and energy services provider, says, "Banks approach us to increase our credit limit, which is a strange experience."

Owners of tech companies may be happier still. "There is plenty of investment capital and all-time high valuations," says Justin Bellante, CEO of BioIQ, a $15 million health care technology company in Santa Barbara, Calif. This year, BioIQ raised institutional, venture, and angel money; next year, it may do the same.

But shoulders remain cold for business owners in industries like construction. "We have literally been told by banks, 'We don't want anything to do with a landscape company,'" says Eric K. Weishaar, president of $4 million Brecken­ridge Landscape in New Berlin, Wis. "Trying to get a bank on board with that is like pulling teeth."

"Just tell us what the rules are and stop helping."

Company owners find the eternal money hunt frustrating, because it distracts them from working on their businesses. But at least fundraising is about growth. Compliance issues may curtail growth; at minimum they bury entrepreneurs with paperwork. This year, 54 percent of respondents cited regulations as a major drag on the economy.

Entrepreneurs fret over new federal rules that extend eligibility for overtime. Regulations meant to prevent misclassification of employees as contractors also raise hackles. States come in for separate attacks, especially California, which in the past year passed or implemented a volley of rules related to such issues as paid sick leave and equal pay. California's Labor Board "is always going to side with the employee," says Sabina Keil, COO of Xcaliber Solutions, a $3 million e-commerce consulting business in Silverado, Calif.

Despite their frustration, 55 percent of entrepreneurs support a minimum wage hike of $1 or more. And a few respondents saw an upside to regulations that they believe strengthen the middle class. "Having a healthy, balanced work force is in our best long-term interests even if it costs us some short-term labor dislocation," says Aaron Ribner, CEO of Romanoff Renovations, a $101 million construction services company in Smyrna, Georgia.

But to entrepreneurs, most regulations are gnats compared with the blood-swollen mosquito that is the Affordable Care Act. Though few respondents say the ACA has forced them to drop their coverage, lay off workers, or raise their pay to cover premiums, 73 percent are seeing costs go up, and 43 percent report cutting back in other areas to pay premiums. Twenty-nine percent say the impact of ACA on their company has been "worse" or "much worse" than expected, while fewer than 10 percent describe the effect as "somewhat better" or "much better."