Tennessee's actions in response to the Affordable Care Act are at the heart of a lawsuit that accuses state officials of creating barriers to people trying to enroll for Medicaid.

Gov. Bill Haslam's December 2012 decision to not have a state-run health insurance exchange was the first in a series of decisions that led to Tennessee giving up state control of enrollment duties. While Tennessee was not alone in agreeing to let the federal Health Insurance Marketplace make eligibility determinations, TennCare relied more heavily on the federal government than other state Medicaid programs.

That was not according to plan.

Tennessee intended to have a new computer system for processing applications. It announced in November 2012 that Northrop Grumman would get a $35.7 million contract to have a TennCare Eligibilty Determination System ready to roll on Oct. 1, 2013 — the date of the first open enrollment when people could start shopping for health coverage and also learn if they qualified for Medicaid.

TennCare needed to replace a more than 20-year-old computer system that could not be modified to process Medicaid applications according to new income guidelines set by the federal health law. The old system also processed food stamp requests to the Tennessee Department of Human Services, which handled Medicaid applications for TennCare.

More:Twin babies' $200K hospital bill illustrates TennCare flaws

More:Governor defends TennCare director

State officials feared that programming the new income modifications into that antiquated computer would cause it to crash. So the state had to rebuild its computer for determining Medicaid eligibility "from soup to nuts," said TennCare Director Darin Gordon.

After Northrop Grumman kept missing deadlines, TennCare realized the computer wouldn't be ready even by an extension date.

"When it became apparent that the state's new computer system would not be up and running by January 1, the state developed a mitigation plan to assure that Tennessee citizens could still apply for and be determined eligible for Medicaid," said John Goetz, a spokesman for TennCare. "That mitigation plan was approved by (Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services) and relied on the fact that the Affordable Care Act created a second pathway to Medicaid eligibility through the federal, rather than state, government."

Simultaneously, the state stopped staffing county DHS offices with personnel who had helped people apply directly to TennCare. People, except for Tennesseans in certain eligibility categories, had no other choice than to apply through healthcare.gov.

Lost, backlogged applications

The federal website notified some applicants they qualified for TennCare, but they never received followup action from the state agency. When they called to ask about the status of their applications, they could not get answers. Applications got lost because Tennessee didn't have a computer that could effectively interact with the federally facilitated marketplace, and it had no backup means of processing applications.

No firm figure has emerged as to how many applications got lost. In a letter to a federal official, Gordon described the number as "a small percentage of applicants." Well over 100,000 people applied for coverage. A total of 126,300 people had been newly enrolled in TennCare between January and May, Gordon said, but that number does not reflect all who applied.

More: TennCare applicants in limbo face more delays, confusion

More: TennCare timeline

While TennCare focused on the computer issues, it delayed implementing other requirements of the Affordable Care Act, such as expanded hospital presumptive eligibility. The new rule allows hospitals to temporarily enroll people in Medicaid who likely qualify until a final determination can be made.

Meanwhile, TennCare was also running into criticism over CHOICES — its program for elderly and disabled people in need of at-home assistance and nursing home-level care. Families complained about difficulties getting approved or delays with their applications.

The state had set up a call center called the Tennessee Health Connection where people were supposed to get answers about Medicaid applications. But when they called the number, the workers couldn't access the information because of the Northrop Grumman computer issues. TennCare had contracted with Cognosante LLC to set up and operate the call center. The four-year contract is valued at $31 million.

Pressing the state

Lawyers with the Tennessee Justice Center, a nonprofit legal firm that advocates for access to health care, began trying to help people with lost applications. The lawyers realized they were dealing with more than just a few cases and began pushing for the state to correct the problem.

On June 27, Cindy Mann, the federal director of Medicaid programs, sent a letter to Tennessee and five other states concerning delays with new mandates for Medicaid eligibility and enrollment. Tennessee received the most criticism.

In that letter, Mann noted that other states had implemented manual processing of applications because of delays with computer systems and hired additional staff to do that work. She said enhanced federal matching money may be available to help cover the cost.

Gordon responded with a defiant letter on July 14 in which he wrote he was "obliged to correct several mistaken assertions." He said "almost all" the problems with applications "have been the result of flaws in the federal government's healthcare.gov website." He rejected doing applications manually, saying it "would likely increase the time required for an eligibility determination."

Nine days later, lawyers with the Tennessee Justice Center along with the Southern Poverty Law Center and the National Health Law Program filed a federal lawsuit on behalf of people whose applications got backlogged.

They won significant victories on Sept. 2 when U.S. District Judge Todd Campbell gave the case class action status and issued an injunction ordering TennCare to start holding hearings for people who could prove they had applied for Medicaid.

The state is challenging the judge's injunction order to the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals in Cincinnati. Lawyers for the state contend the plaintiffs should be suing the federal government.

Reach Tom Wilemon at 615-726-5961 and on Twitter @TomWilemon.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1xeOBM0