Last month, during the U.S. Conference of Mayors in Dallas, County Judge Clay Jenkins hosted four White House officials at the County Administration Building.

He gave them a tour of The Sixth Floor Museum. Then he chatted with them in his office about the border crisis. He told them he wanted to know how Dallas County could help the tens of thousands of Central American children stranded in the U.S. without their parents.

The request seemed unusual to the White House officials, Jenkins said. And it surprised Dallas County residents when he announced his plans at the Texas Democratic Convention a week later.

But for Jenkins, the events were nothing new. More than most Texas Democrats, he has been an enthusiastic partner of the Obama administration for years.

In a state where a politician can make a name for himself by picking a fight with President Barack Obama, Jenkins has chosen another path. He has backed or replicated some of Obama’s most prominent initiatives, on issues such as health care, the minimum wage and the Texas voter ID law.

It’s a risky strategy for a Texan, even a Democrat, and even in Dallas County, with its strong Democratic majority. The efforts have raised Jenkins’ political profile, but they’ve angered Republicans and could test how truly blue the county has become.

Jenkins said he’s aware of the risks, but that he’s doing what’s best for Dallas County.

“What I am trying to do is get things done,” he said.

The relationship between Jenkins and Obama dates to before either was in his current office. In June 2007, Jenkins donated $1,000 to Obama’s first presidential campaign, according to federal election records. Back then, Jenkins was a practicing lawyer. Obama was a freshman U.S. senator and an underdog candidate for the Democratic presidential nomination.

A mutual friend, former Dallas Mayor Ron Kirk, asked Jenkins to do some pro bono legal work for the Obama campaign, and Jenkins agreed.

“To be honest, I didn’t think he could win ... but I thought it would be fun,” Jenkins said.

Three years later, Jenkins was in his first term as the top elected official in Dallas County and decided that he needed the White House’s help. He reached out to the administration after receiving word that the U.S. Postal Service planned to close a mail processing center in Dallas. When the decision was reversed, Jenkins got to make the public announcement.

In September 2013, the county joined a lawsuit brought by Obama’s Justice Department challenging the Texas voter identification law. Democrats have said the law is likely to discourage voting among several groups that tend to vote Democratic.

Jenkins also became one of the leading local advocates for the Affordable Care Act. He and other county employees spread the word about health insurance exchanges and helped residents fill out applications. Meanwhile, he pushed for state legislators to accept funds to expand Medicaid.

His efforts earned him praise from the president. In a November 2013 speech in Dallas, Obama called Jenkins an “outstanding county judge ... who’s doing a great job on affordable care.” The quote is prominently displayed on Jenkins’ campaign website.

Jenkins has joined Obama’s call for a “living wage.” In January, the Dallas County Commissioners Court eliminated its two lowest pay grades, ensuring that no one on staff would make less than $10 per hour. In March, Jenkins proposed requiring that county contractors also pay workers more than $10 per hour. That was about a month after Obama signed an executive order that essentially did the same at the federal level.

Jenkins faced criticism for each of those moves, but none generated as harsh a response as his plan to bring 2,000 child immigrants from the border and house them in shelters in Dallas County. Jenkins has been inundated with angry phone calls, many from out of state.

Jenkins said the White House officials with whom he met in his office predicted an outraged reaction. They warned him that the plan could hurt his chances for re-election in the fall.

His response: “We can’t afford to wait until the first Wednesday in November.”

That night, the group joined mayors from across the country at a reception at AT&T Stadium. Jenkins found Dallas Mayor Mike Rawlings, who pledged his support. Then he found one of the White House workers and told him, “We are ready to go.”

Last week, Obama included Jenkins among the elected officials and religious leaders with whom he met in Dallas to discuss border issues. In photographs of the meeting, Jenkins was seated in a prime position — at the middle of the table, right across from Obama.

Texas is among the reddest of red states, but things are different in Dallas County. Obama won 57 percent of the Dallas County vote in 2008 and 2012. And Democrats have dominated countywide races for almost a decade.

In 2010, Jenkins, running against a Republican and a Libertarian, was elected with 49.6 percent of the vote. He’s the favorite in November, seeking re-election against Republican Ron Natinsky, a former Dallas City Council member.

Still, some think it’s an unnecessary political risk to position himself as an Obama ally. Republicans have been quick to point out the alliance.

“He is totally focused on the federal Obama agenda,” said Mike Cantrell, the lone Republican on the Commissioners Court. “It is a very radical leftist progressive agenda, and he is propagating it right here in Dallas County at taxpayer expense.”

Jenkins’ decisions, Cantrell suggested, might not be driven by consideration of what’s best for Dallas County.

“I think it has more to do with political advancement for the judge than anything,” he said.

There’s been speculation that Jenkins has his eye on a higher office or a federal appointment. But there’s no obvious path for advancement for a Democrat who lives in Highland Park. Texas remains solidly Republican, and Obama’s time in office is nearing its end.

Jenkins deflects questions about his political plans, saying he’s focused on doing his job well and pursuing what is right. Sometimes that aligns with Obama; sometimes it doesn’t, he said.

“My theory is that if you try to do the best at everything, then the body of work will speak for itself,” he said.

Follow Matthew Watkins on Twitter at @mwatkinsDMN.