It’s a new inversion

With help from Brian Faler and Katy O’Donnell

YES, IT’S AN INVERSION: It had been, what, two months since the Pfizer-Allergan merger? Tyco, which focuses on fire safety products, and Johnson Controls, the Milwaukee-based maker of heating and air conditioning systems, announced a $14 billion merger on Monday, in the latest of the offshore tax deals that have riled up our political system.

Story Continued Below

Our Toby Eckert has more of the details: Johnson shareholders will control 56 percent of the shares of the combined company, which will be based in Cork, Ireland — where Tyco is already based. Johnson and Tyco expect to save about $150 million a year on taxes with the inversion. http://politico.pro/1nuX0w7

WHAT THE COMPANIES ARE THINKING: The “strategic rationale” of the deal will override any public fallout, a source familiar with the company’s thinking said. “This is a business decision.”

Alex Molinaroli, Johnson’s chief executive, made a similar point on a conference call, per the WSJ, insisting the merger creates a better company “that will transform our ability to capture opportunities in a fast-moving market place.”

The Journal also has more on the tax benefits, for the latest of about a dozen inversions over the past 16 months: “As a result of Johnson Controls’ inversion, the company’s effective tax rate will be 18 percent or 19 percent, said people familiar with tax structure. Tyco paid 12 percent of its profit in taxes over the past three years, versus an average 29 percent by Johnson Controls, according to S&P Capital IQ.” The 56-44 split also hits the “holy grail of inversion planning,” the WSJ said. http://on.wsj.com/1OJp47m

MAKE NO MISTAKE: This deal might be less than a tenth of the size of the Pfizer-Allergan merger, and the company’s executives can swear up and down that this was just a business decision. But Democrats will try to force some public fallout.

Both leading Democratic contenders for president released statements on the Johnson-Tyco deal on Monday, with Hillary Clinton calling it “outrageous” and Bernie Sanders labeling it “a disaster for American taxpayers.” Clinton has proposed an exit tax on companies that invert, and both candidates want to rein in the earnings stripping tactic that can make inversions even more attractive.

Still, it remains to be seen whether these rather complex merger deals can be the potent political issue that Democrats want them to be. During the 2014 midterm cycle, President Barack Obama used the bully pulpit to call inverted companies “corporate deserters,” but the issue had basically petered out by the time voters went to the booths that November.

WELL, IT’S TUESDAY. And we’re guessing that at least some of you will have to head back to the office, and thus give up your Netflix and Amazon Prime, cold turkey. We’re looking for tips, if you’re getting back into the swing of things. Email: bbecker@politico.com, teckert@politico.com, bfaler@politico.com, kodonnell@politico.com. Twitter: @berniebecker3, @tobyeckert, @brian_faler, @katyodonnell_ , @POLITICOPro and @Morning_Tax.

WHERE’S THE GOP? House Ways and Means Chairman Kevin Brady offered a pretty succinct response to the Johnson-Tyco merger that underscored that the various Democratic proposals to combat inversions aren’t going anywhere on the Hill: “This news is yet another reminder that America's tax code is an outdated relic that is keeping America at a disadvantage.” (We’re also still awaiting that Treasury response on earnings stripping.)

TWISTING THE KNIFE: Democrats get annoyed at every inversion, but there’s certainly reason to think that Tyco’s involvement might be especially galling. The WSJ, for instance, took a look at Tyco’s two decades’ worth of globetrotting to various tax advantaged spots — a 1997 move from the U.S. to Bermuda, then a 2008 move to Switzerland before 2013 took them to Ireland. “At least four pieces of the onetime industrial conglomerate — which was broken up after an accounting scandal that sent its former CEO, Dennis Kozlowski, to prison — have become major players in the recent surge in cross-border, tax-flavored M&A.” http://on.wsj.com/1Nwxefi

And your Morning Tax author, back at his last gig, noted that Tyco was among the inverted companies that were receiving millions of dollars in federal contracts from both the Treasury Department and federal government at-large: http://bit.ly/1nLCSpj. That’s a sign that the current rules seeking to stop inverted companies from getting federal contracts, which Democrats want to strengthen, already have some holes.

CBO SAYS: Congress’ official budget scorekeeper projected Monday that inversions like the Tyco-Johnson merger will play no small role in chipping away at the corporate tax base over the next decade, according to our Brian Faler.

More from Brian: CBO “expects corporate tax receipts to be about 5 percent lower in 2026 than they are today, thanks to businesses maneuvering to avoid paying the 35 percent corporate tax rate. About half of that projected decline is attributable to inversions, transfer pricing, intercompany loans and other techniques multinationals use to shift income overseas, out of the reach of the tax man.”

The 5 percent drop is equal to about 0.1 percentage point of GDP, CBO added. http://politico.pro/1KATgOc

WHAT ELSE IS IN THERE?: Brian broke down a few of the more interesting tax tidbits from CBO’s 226-page report on the budget and economic outlook until 2026.

Among them: The concentration of wealth at the top will force a trade of sorts — more individual tax revenue, but less from the payroll tax that funds Social Security. The payroll tax cap is currently $118,500, and receipts will eventually decline from 6 percent of GDP to 5.8 percent. But income gains for the wealthy will also lead to a 0.3 point increase in income tax receipts. http://politico.pro/23pkToW

And if you were looking for a silver lining to the stress that all those baby boomers would put on the entitlement system, Brian also notes that the influx of older Americans will lead to more withdrawals from tax-favored retirement accounts — raising enough revenue to increase receipts as a share of the economy by 0.2 percentage points over 10 years. http://politico.pro/1K7r2zF

Also of note: It would cost $256 billion between 2018 and 2026 if Congress fully repealed the Obamacare taxes — the “Cadillac tax” on high-end insurance plans, the medical device tax and the health insurance tax — that got delayed or temporarily suspended at the end of the year.

TAX FOUNDATION KNOCKS HILLARY: The free-market friendly Tax Foundation found that Hillary Clinton's raft of tax increases would collect around a half trillion dollars over a decade when scored statically — but only $191 billion after taking reduced economic growth into account. http://bit.ly/1OVwTVt

The group's work has been pretty heavily cited in the Republican presidential race, with more than a few mentions in GOP debates, even as there have been some suggestions that the Tax Foundation's dynamic analyses overstate how much tax cuts can stimulate the economy.

** A message from Intuit Tax and Financial Center: Last year, 109 million federal filers received refunds totaling more than $125 billion. However, criminals will attempt to steal tax refunds. As the makers of TurboTax, we at Intuit believe each of us has a special responsibility to help combat tax fraud: http://bit.ly/1QjRXYk **

BERNIE MAKES IT CLEAR: Sanders made no bones about how he would pay for his “Medicare for all” tax plan in a CNN forum on Monday. “We will raise your taxes. Yes, we will,” the Vermont senator said, before adding that it was “demagogic” to not point out the savings that middle-class families would get under a single-payer health system.

"There's a little bit of disingenuity out there. We may raise taxes but we are also going to eliminate private health insurance premiums for individuals and for businesses," he said. Cameron Joseph of Mashable noticed that Clinton’s campaign seems all too excited to make hay out of those comments. Clinton has said she’ll only hike taxes on the rich, an approach that worked for Obama before her, and has sharply criticized Sanders for being willing to raise taxes on the middle class. http://on.mash.to/1Qxwptc

ICYMI: President Barack Obama suggested, in an interview with POLITICO's Glenn Thrush, that the more mainstream press would increase its scrutiny of Sanders’ domestic policy proposals if the Vermont senator does well in Iowa and New Hampshire. (And let’s be honest: Those two states are well-suited demographically for Sanders.)

“I think that if Bernie won Iowa or won New Hampshire, then you guys are going to do your jobs and, you know, you're going to dig into his proposals and how much they cost and what does it mean, and, you know, how does his tax policy work and he's subjected, then, to a rigor that hasn't happened yet, but that Hillary is very well familiar with,” Obama said. http://politi.co/1Vm3lnT

(To be fair, there has been a fair amount of policy reporting — much of it noted here — on the roughly $14 trillion in taxes needed to pay for Sanders’ single-payer plan, along with further questions about how his health plan would actually work.)

OBAMA ON RETIREMENT: The president’s plan to expand access to retirement accounts, first pitched in his last State of the Union and to be included in his budget, will include offering tax breaks to employers who offer retirement plans. Employers with less than 100 workers that automatically enroll their employees could get a credit for up to $3,000, according to a White House fact sheet. The AP has more: http://bit.ly/1nkyPzL

STATE UPDATE —

THE TAMPON TAX BACKLASH: Washington Post columnist Catherine Rampell, concerned that she might be “a traitor to my sex,” says there are plenty of good reasons for states not to exempt tampons and other feminine products from sales taxes.

Quick recap: Most states exempt necessities from the sales tax, but only a handful include tampons in that definition. But Rampell says states would be better off just giving cash transfers to the poor instead of blowing hole after hole into their sales tax bases: “Maybe it seems unfair that in so many states Twizzlers don’t get taxed while tampons do. But the solution isn’t to dole out yet more tax breaks but to end the ones we have and direct more public funds to people who actually need assistance.” http://wapo.st/1RJWpTw

ALABAMA GOVERNOR DROPS THE TAXES: Republican Gov. Robert Bentley wanted a half-billion dollars’ worth of taxes last year. This year: nothing, according to WHNT. "The governor understood where the Legislature was," said state Sen. Arthur Orr. "The people of Alabama, by and large, didn't want to see a bunch of new taxes." http://bit.ly/1nkoMux

QUICK LINKS

— The Justice Department nabs another bank in its Swiss program. http://1.usa.gov/1PwynLo

— More backlash for Google’s tax deal with the U.K. http://bit.ly/1JxTT03

— Want to limit the amount of taxes you pay on airfare? http://tandl.me/20pOqMJ

DID YOU KNOW? In honor of Metro’s slow-but-steady recovery from the storm: Adm. David Farragut, who now has a downtown Washington square and two Metro stations named after him, unleashed his famous “Damn the torpedoes, full speed ahead!” declaration at the Battle of Mobile Bay in Alabama in August 1864.

** A message from Intuit Tax and Financial Center: Our challenge today is to protect and secure our nation's information and systems — and taxpayers as well — against international criminals, fraudsters and other wrongdoers. Last spring, the IRS brought together state tax officials and the nation’s leading tax return preparers and software developers, including Intuit, to create and agree on new anti-fraud measures to protect taxpayers. Together we are working to authenticate legitimate returns without unnecessarily delaying the timely refunds of deserving taxpayers, protect the nation's tax information technology infrastructure, and better inform taxpayers about how to protect their sensitive personal, tax and financial data. From government and industry, to every business and individual in the country, each of us plays a role in combating tax fraud. With everyone doing their part, we believe this is a fight that can and will be won: http://bit.ly/1QjRXYk **