Twenty years after the release of his bestseller, “We’re Right, They’re Wrong,” James Carville is planning an update — and he says Democrats are “still right."

ITK has exclusively learned that the famed liberal political strategist is working on a new version of the book, expected to be released ahead of the parties' conventions.

ADVERTISEMENT

“In 1996, I did a book after the Democrats lost the House, and it was kind of a rallying cry… We said, look, our policies are better than their policies,” Carville says. “And I pick up the thing, and the last 20 years, you know, I think have been a validation of that.”

The new book, which currently has a working title of “We’re Still Right, They’re Still Wrong,” will include research Carville and his team have done comparing economic performance under Democratic and Republican administrations, as well as analyze past forecasts about the country’s political future. “We had 16 years of, in my views, consistently wrong predictions about everything from weapons of mass destruction, to Terri Schiavo, to raising inflation, to base currencies, to no one would sign up [and] ObamaCare would wreck the economy, you know, the deficit is going to kill us all,” the 71-year-old Louisiana native says in his signature drawl.

“I just think that there’s a massive amount of evidence that we’ve acquired over the last 20 years that generally validates one point of view and completely discredits another point of view.”

“It’s not going to be heavy reading or anything like that,” Carville says of the upcoming book, which should hit shelves sometime this summer, “but I think it’ll give some people insight, put some things into perspective.”

The Tulane University professor, who says with a laugh that he’s lost track of how many written works he’s penned over the years, was preparing to deliver a lecture to his students when ITK caught up with him.

“I’ve always taught that the Republican nominating process in the United States is utterly predictable and utterly stable, and it seems like that’s not the case now,” the adviser for Hillary Clinton Hillary Rodham ClintonWhy superdelegates shouldn't support Sanders Young Turks host offers million for Trump, Sanders debate An all-female ticket? Not in 2016 MORE’s 2008 White House bid says.

Calling the current election “topsy-turvy, particularly on the Republican side,” Carville says it’s “very seldom” that he’s unable to explain the political landscape. But, he chuckles, while he’s generally completely confident in his opinions, “In this instance, in explaining this, not only am I not certain, I’m generally flummoxed.”