<p>Greg Johnson</p>

Remember not so many years ago all those “compassionate” types who were appalled — Appalled! — Tennessee refused to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, aka Obamacare? Remember how they were aghast — Aghast! — Tennessee turned down “free” federal funding to provide “free” health insurance to the uninsured?

Remember the Democratic derision when Tennessee’s “stupid” Republicans decided not to establish an Obamacare exchange? Remember Obamacare was going to “bend the cost curve,” causing insurance premiums to fall? Well.

The Wall Street Journal reported last week BlueCross and BlueShield of Tennessee, the largest provider of Obamacare insurance plans in the state, has requested a 36 percent premium increase for 2016. Which means, I guess, the cost curve is bending. Up. Straight up. Sickeningly so.

“Our filing is planned to allow us to operate on at least a break-even basis for these plans, meaning that the rate would cover only medical services and expenses — with no profit margin for 2016,” BCBS spokeswoman Mary Danielson told the Journal. BCBS said it lost $141 million last year on Obamacare exchange-sold plans, primarily because of a few really sick people.

There’s no guarantee BCBS will get all its request. Tennessee Insurance Commissioner Julie Mix McPeak told the Journal she would be “surprised if we settled” for such a sharp rise. However, McPeak said her staff had seen data that confirmed BCBS paid some huge claims for a relatively few policyholders. The older, sicker Tennesseans who bought their insurance on the federal exchange cost insurers much, much more than the “compassionate” crowd could comprehend.

And about those exchanges. Oregon and Nevada have already closed their state-run exchanges. Hawaii could be next. Other states are learning the low, too-good-to-be-true cost estimates of running exchanges were, in fact, too good to be true. Colorado recently learned the cost of its call center would be more than 60 percent higher than estimated — $21 million vs. $13 million.

The feds have pumped more than $5 billion into state-run exchanges to get them up and running. State exchanges are up, but many are barely crawling. Vermont, with 626,000 residents — one-tenth the population of Tennessee — could see its exchange cost more than $200 million to run this year. Those bribes — er, federal subsidies —to state exchanges are set to expire this year, so more exchanges could fall into failing fiscal health soon.

And finally, remember how Obamacare would cap administrative costs, meaning more money for actual care? The Hill reported this week, citing an analysis of data from the Congressional Budget Office and the government’s National Health Expenditure Projections, administrative costs will increase more than $270 billion over the next decade above what would have happened without Obamacare. In other words, Tennessee dodged a budget buster by “cold-heartedly” opting out.

The “compassionate” crowd felt morally superior to “stupid” Republicans when Obamacare was but a fraudulently sold concept. But now that reality bites and the actual bills for it are coming due, we learn again stupid is as stupid does.

Greg Johnson’s columns appear on Wednesdays, Fridays and the second Sunday of each month. Follow him on Twitter @jgregjohnson. Email him at jgregjohnson@hotmail.com.