“We might have a pot luck, we might have bring your own chili,” former “The View” co-host jokes about the notion gay people would cater their weddings with pizza

Rosie O’Donnell chimed in on the controversial Indiana law Thursday, calling it bigotry and persecution during a Sirius XM Town Hall event.

The former “View” co-host also touched on the pizza shop, Memories Pizza, that landed at the center of the firestorm after owner Crystal O’Connor told a local ABC affiliate her “proud Christian establishment” in Walkerton, Indiana, “would have to say no” to a gay couple asking for the restaurant to cater their wedding.

“Not even lesbians would do that,” O’Donnell joked about the notion gay people would cater their weddings with pizza. “No, we might have pot luck, we might have bring your own chilli but that’s only if financial situations are tough.”

Also Read: Rosie O’Donnell Exiting ‘The View’

O’Donnell spoke with gay rights activist Michelangelo Signorile, who suggested conservatives are trying to discriminate and then turn themselves into the victims: “We have to fight against that,” he said.

O’Donnell has been fairly quiet since abruptly bolting “The View” for the second time in February. Insiders at the show say they are months away from replacing her.

Also Read: Insider: Rosie O’Donnell’s ‘View’ Replacement Might Not Be Named for Months

This week, an insider told TheWrap the show would love to have Monica Lewinsky as a guest co-host.

Watch O’Donnell above.

Indiana Pizzeria Scandal: 11 Other Fast-Food Controversies to Chew On (Photos) Indiana-based pizzeria Memories Pizza found itself at the center of controversy this week, when it was announced that the company would not cater same-sex weddings following the passage of Indiana's Religious Freedom Restoration Act. The company can at least take comfort in the knowledge that it's not alone. Here are 11 other food-related scandals that left some people choking on outrage.

DiGiorno Pizza Serves a Slice of Outrage A case of social media marketing gone wrong. DiGiorno was forced to issue an apology when it tweeted the hashtag #WhyIStayed, coupled with the message "You had pizza." A seemingly innocent tweet, until they company found out that the hashtag was actually launched in response to domestic violence, after video surfaced of football player Ray Rice punching out then-fiance Janay Palmer.

Starbucks' 'Race Together' Program The ubiquitous coffee chain's effort to spark a dialogue about race relations in America was met with widespread criticism, probably because most of the company's customers are just trying to get their caffeine fix and go without a lecture from their baristas.

SpaghettiOs' Pearl Harbor Flap Uh-oh, SpaghettiOs, indeed. In 2013, Campbell Soup, the company behind the circular pasta treat, issued a mea culpa after the SpaghettiOs Twitter account tweeted an image of a cartoon SpaghettiO holding an American flag with the message, "Take a moment to remember #PearlHarbor with us" on Dec. 7. Not surprisingly, the crass marketing ploy bombed with the public.

Chick-fil-A's Anti-Gay Boss How about a side order of homophobia with your chicken sandwich? Chick-fil-A stepped into a big pile of controversy when its president Dan Cathy piped up on the subject of gay marriage, stating that "we’re inviting God’s judgment on our nation when we shake our fist at him and say we know better than you as to what constitutes a marriage." Some people boycotted; others, unable to avoid the restaurant chain's tasty fare, swallowed their pride along with the chicken.

Papa John's Obamacare Scare Enjoy your pizza hot, tasty and cheap? Papa John's CEO John Schnatter had some bad news for you in 2012, when he declared that the the passage of Obamacare would raise the cost of a Papa John's pizza by 11 to 14 cents. Sure, and if you find yourself shorted on your breadstick order, go ahead and blame Obama for that too.

Entenmann's Casey Anthony Twitter Goof Sweets-maker Entenmann's hit a sour note when it tweeted the message, "Who's #notguilty about eating all the tasty treats they want?!" Unfortunately, the company was found guilty of using a hashtag associated with the controversial not-guilty verdict of Casey Anthony, who had been accused of murdering her two-year-old daughter. Oops.

Domino's Delivers ... Anti-Choice Support? Domino's Pizza founder Thomas Monaghan's donations to pro-life groups such as the controversial Operation Rescue have left a bad taste in some consumers' mouths.

The Pizza Underground A pizza-themed Velvet Underground tribute band? That includes former child star Macaulay Culkin? Seriously -- that's cheesy.

Krispy Kreme's Klan Kontroversy A British franchisee of the donut company raised eyebrows in February when it launched a "KKK Wednesday" promotion, apparently unaware that "KKK" is a widely known abbreviation for white supremacy group the Ku Klux Klan.

Kentucky Fried Controversy Not everybody needs a little KFC -- least of all PETA, which has targeted the fried-chicken chain for allegedly abusing chickens before serving them up to customers.

Starbucks' 9/11 Gaffe Americans were a tad on edge following the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. Unfortunately, some of that national unease landed on Starbucks, whose poster for its "Collapse Into Cool" campaign evoked traumatic memories for some. Previous ; Next 1 of 12 When questionably nutritious eats meet questionably tasteful corporate action Indiana-based pizzeria Memories Pizza found itself at the center of controversy this week, when it was announced that the company would not cater same-sex weddings following the passage of Indiana's Religious Freedom Restoration Act. The company can at least take comfort in the knowledge that it's not alone. Here are 11 other food-related scandals that left some people choking on outrage.