I'm so excited to have the opportunity to develop public health professionals." -- Former U.S. Surgeon General Regina Benjamin

It was billed as a news conference to announce the latest milestone in Dr. Regina Benjamin's stellar career, but the Friday morning session at Xavier University quickly turned into a 50-minute group hug as speaker after speaker welcomed the former surgeon general back to her alma mater to occupy an endowed chair in public health science.

University, city and health officials piled on the praise. Sister Grace Mary Flickinger, who had been Benjamin's biology teacher, even invoked the university's founder.

"I am sure that Katharine Drexel is smiling down on the young woman who is standing here today," she said. "The real purpose of Xavier is that our graduates will become leaders who will go out to help create a more just and humane society.

"Regina, you've done it, you'll continue to do it, and on behalf of every Sister of the Blessed Sacrament -- those up in heaven smiling at you and this one talking to you and those who are nearby -- thank you very much."

"We have been waiting a long time for this day," Xavier President Norman Francis said.

Benjamin, 56, stepped down as surgeon general on July 16 and now occupies the NOLA.com | The Times-Picayune Chair in Public Health Sciences. NOLA.com | The Times-Picayune Publisher Ricky Mathews, who is also president of NOLA Media Group, described Benjamin as "another in the long list of wonderful contributions that this university has made to this state."

She "will bring wonderful international attention to us and make a great difference," Mathews said.

Benjamin, who started work at Xavier on Sept. 6, has a full agenda. In addition to being a teacher and mentor, she plans to work with local, state and national health officials; organize conferences; and continue to stress the importance of prevention, which was one of her principal themes as the nation's top doctor.

Prevention is an issue that hits close to home for her. Benjamin's mother, a longtime smoker, died of lung cancer. Her father died of complications of a stroke and high blood pressure. And her brother died of HIV infection.

"All (were) preventable diseases," she said Friday. "I don't want other people to suffer that loss."

Benjamin also plans to keep volunteering regularly at the clinic she founded in Bayou LaBatre, Ala. Her work there, including rebuilding the clinic after Hurricane Katrina and a fire, brought her national attention and probably helped ensure that she received a $500,000, no-strings-attached MacArthur Foundation fellowship, one of the so-called genius grants.

Despite the commute, "I can't leave my patients," said Benjamin, an Alabama native who has said she wants to give most of her MacArthur money to the clinic.

Benjamin will have plenty to do in New Orleans to ensure delivery of health care to people who need it and haven't been able to get it, said city Health Commissioner Karen DeSalvo, a longtime friend. "This is a community that cares but a community that has challenges," she said. "We have much work to do."

As surgeon general, Benjamin led the U.S. Public Health Service, whose members were pressed into service after such calamities as Hurricanes Katrina, Rita, Isaac and Sandy.

"We need more of these professionals," she said. "That's why I'm so excited to have the opportunity to develop public health professionals."

Benjamin was surgeon general for President Barack Obama's first term, during which the Affordable Health Care Act was passed by Congress, signed by the president and upheld by the U.S. Supreme Court.

Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal has refused to participate in components of that act, including provisions that would provide more home health care for Medicaid recipients, expand Medicaid coverage for low-income people and establish an online marketplace where people can buy insurance and qualify for subsidies.

State officials have said these programs would cost too much.

When New Orleans City Councilwoman LaToya Cantrell asked Benjamin what she would do about this situation, Benjamin did not criticize Jindal. Instead, she stressed the importance of grass-roots action.

"We may not . . . wait for government to do things for us," she said. "We have to do things for ourselves. We have to roll up our sleeves and get moving. When we see people falling through the cracks, we have to be there.

"I'm always going to look out for people who need our help."