9:00 PM UPDATE: CHANGES TO TOMORROW’s FORECAST

We may have to make a few amendments to the forecast tomorrow; a few hours of snow is possible in southeastern Connecticut tomorrow evening, amounting to nor more than a coating.

As we mentioned below, there will be a coastal storm offshore later in the day. Before, the models were consistently keeping the moisture field offshore while just suggesting cloudy skies. With the latest runs of some models, however, the forecast trend has been for a few hours of snow in areas southeast of Hartford. If this were to develop, it would happen around dinner time Sunday, lasting only two to four hours. Accumulation would be minimal: perhaps a coating.

Several models still keep enough low-level dry air in place to keep the coastal storm snow away tomorrow evening. So, it’s a situation we are watching closely for you.

QUIET AND MAINLY DRY TONIGHT

It was a soggy morning, with southeastern Connecticut getting the brunt of the rain (radar estimates were between a half inch and almost three inches in parts of New London and southern Middlesex Counties!) and the northern hills getting a little coating of snow earlier today. Since then, drier air has been setting into the state from the west. There is still enough moisture and “lift” that a few showers may still pass. A few have cropped up over New York and Pennsylvania and are meandering into Fairfield County now. But, all in all, the weather will turn drier and the sky will become partly cloudy during the rest of the evening and overnight. With this sky and wind from the west – northwest, lows will be able to dip into the 20s. Most of the moisture from earlier rain and snow should be dried off roads, alleviating us from huge icing concerns.

QUIET & CLOUDY SUNDAY…MAYBE

Tomorrow will be dry, cloudy and colder. If you have things to do outside, you will stay dry while doing them, but you will need a heavier coat than you did on Saturday. High pressure will be anchored over the eastern Great Lakes, helping to maintain a drier lower atmosphere. A breeze from the west and northwest will then more northeasterly in the afternoon as a storm system off-shore the Carolinas comes closer. As it stands now, this storm will remain far enough offshore to spare Connecticut from most of its precipitation beyond an isolated flurry, but close enough to spread clouds over the state. If the storm tracks as little as 50 miles closer to the state, we might have to introduce a short period of snow into the forecast for much of the state.

This series of events will render a changeable sky, but dry and cold weather. We can expect a mix of clouds and sunshine in the morning as readings begin in the 20s. During the afternoon, clouds will take over the sky, making the afternoon gray. Highs will range between 35 and 40 degrees, so when comparing to today’s 40s, the day will be colder enough that you’ll likely want a little more layering if you are going to be outside re-enacting today’s play-off game with the kids. There will be a brisk northwesterly breeze, too, but it won’t be too much of a bother.

WINTER COLD NEXT WEEK

Most of next week will bring the type of cold for which January is known. You will likely want the full-on winter gear available for use! An arctic cold front will pass through Connecticut late Sunday night and early Monday morning and, upon the front’s passage, a blast of cold air will soon follow. Temperatures will drop into the 20s by Monday morning will remain locked in the 20s to near 30 degrees all day. Plus, a northwesterly wind will gust as high as 30 or 40 mph, which will keep wind chill readings in the single digits and teens most of the day.

There may also be a little snow, as well. With the onslaught of cold air, the lake-effect snow showers will churn strong and some of them will meander all the way into southern New England. In addition, the weakest of “disturbances” will pass through the state, which will add just enough extra “lift” to squeak out a few snow showers of our own. These disturbances sometimes also enhance the strength of lake-effect snow showers, as well – all of these factors are part of why we may see a few snow showers and snow squalls Monday. In some areas, enough snow may fall to make roadways slippery with snow and black ice.

Tuesday will be partly sunny blustery and cold. Morning temperatures will be in the upper single digits and teens. Afternoon highs will only be in the mid to upper 20s. Wind chill readings will be in the single digits and teens most of the day. High pressure will be over the Great Lakes and low pressure will be over the Maritimes; in between, a strong pressure gradient will exist, which will be the cause of strong wind again.

Wednesday may have a changeable sky. A weak area of low pressure in the “middle altitudes” will be moving through the state. This system may bring a period of cloudiness and – perhaps – a flurry. Otherwise, count on partly sunny skies for most of the day with early morning lows in the teens and afternoon highs in the low and middle 30s.

Thanks to high pressure, Thursday and Friday look good too. We should enjoy partly to mostly sunny skies Thursday and more cloudiness Friday as the wind turns more easterly. It’ll be breezy at times and seasonably cold with highs in the low and middle 30s. Overnight lows will be in the teens and lower 20s.

WINTER STORM POSSIBLE SATURDAY

We may have snow with a wintry mix along the Shoreline Saturday or we might have dry weather. How is that for a specific forecast? (HAHAHA!) All of the latest medium range model runs are showing that a storm will be forming to the east of the Carolinas late Friday. Some trusted models bring the storm up the coast Saturday and bring it close to the “40-70 Benchmark” with enough of a cold air supply for mainly snow inland, but with mixing in southeastern Connecticut. It would bring a snowfall large enough we would need shovels and snow blowers on-hand to clear the driveway and sidewalk. Other model runs keep this storm several hundred miles south but and high pressure positioned in such a way an easterly wind would bring low clouds but no snow.

I wish the signals were clearer; however, they are not. I have officially included snow and ice in the 7-day forecast, simply to highlight the fact we are watching this storm. Our confidence in the forecast on this storm is low.

JANUARY AVERAGES AND EXTREMES

January is here and it is typically the coldest month of the year. However, that wasn’t the case last year when February was the all-time coldest month on record. On January 1st, the normal (or average) high is 35 degrees and the normal low is 19 degrees. The normal high dips to 34 degrees by the 7th and the normal low dips to 17 degrees by the 9th. By the 31st, the normal high is back up to 35 degrees and the normal low rises to 18 degrees. Normal snowfall in January is 12.3”.

January can be a month of big weather extremes. The mercury reached as high as 72 degrees on January 6th in 2007, and it plunged to 26 degrees below zero on January 22nd in 1961. That is the all-time coldest temperature on record for the Greater Hartford Area. I am sure many of you remember January 2011. That’s when we had a record 54.3” of snow at Windsor Locks. It was the all-time snowiest month on record!

THE WARMEST DECEMBER ON RECORD

By leaps and bounds, Connecticut experienced the warmest December in 110 years of record keeping. The average temperature at Windsor Locks for December 2015 was 43.3 degrees, an amazing 11.7 degrees warmer than normal and – more amazingly -- 4.7 degrees warmer than the previous record of 38.6 degrees in December of 1923!

December was wetter than normal, but snowfall was well below normal. Total precipitation for this month was 4.25”, which is 0.81” above normal. Total accumulation of snow and sleet was 1.0”, which is 6.4” below normal.

2015 WAS A YEAR OF RECORDS

2015 ended with a record warm month, but it didn’t start out that way. In fact, the first quarter (January, February, and March) of 2015 was the all-time coldest on record. February was brutally cold with an average temperature of 16.1 degrees, making it the all-time coldest month on record! It was the 3rd snowiest February on record with a total of 31.9” of snow at Windsor Locks.

The weather pattern switched from very cold to very mild by late spring. In fact, May was the warmest on record with an average temperature of 66.1 degrees (6.6 degrees warmer than normal).

During the period from May through September, we had 18 days with a high temperature of at least 90 degrees at Windsor Locks, which is only 1 day above the annual norm. The hottest temperature this summer was 95 degrees on July 29th.

The summer season featured only a few severe weather events. A strong microburst produced damaging wind gusts of 90-95 mph in the North Haven area on June 23rd. However, no tornadoes were reported in Connecticut this summer and we were not directly affected by any tropical storms or hurricanes.

The autumn season (September, October, and November) was quite mild! September was the 3rd warmest on record and November was the 6th warmest on record. Overall, the autumn season tied for the 5th warmest on record.

Most of the year was marked by unusually dry weather. It was almost a daily topic during our weather broadcasts throughout much of the summer and fall. In fact, we ended the year with a moderate drought across much of the state. Total precipitation in Windsor Locks came in at 39.21”, which is 6.64” below normal. Total precipitation for the year in Bridgeport was 35.05”, which is 7.69” below normal.

Many daily temperature records were also broken in Windsor Locks and Bridgeport in 2015.

Meteorologist Mike Cameron

“Copyright 2016 WFSB (Meredith Corporation). All rights reserved”