Tanisha Boston (Photo: Provided)

Achievement: Tanisha Boston won first place at the Japanese language division of the 2015 Kentucky World Language Association State Showcase at Centre College in April. She sang the pop hit “Maigo no Kokoro.”

Background: The KWLA World Language Showcase and Competition is a day-long event designed to showcase students’ communicative and intercultural competencies that are aligned with state, national and international standards.

Other Japanese language division winners from Eastern High School:

John Ballard – 2nd place – film “The Horse from Shanghai"

Emma Garness – 3rd place – painting “Yoshitsune”

Why she wanted to enter: Tanisha has been studying Japanese for two years, and she is very interested in traveling to Japan. She said she doesn’t consider herself a singer, and she’d thought at first she might enter a piece of artwork, but she really liked the song, which is the theme for a show she’d seen online. She said the title of the song translates to “My Lost Heart.”

The day of the competition: She said there were judges for about 10 different languages, and that she was first interviewed in Japanese by her judge and then she performed her song for him. “If you didn’t understand the question, you could say so, in Japanese, and you were graded on that,” she said, adding that she was nervous at the beginning of her performance but that half way through she started feeling better and said it was fun.

After the performances there were different activities provided for the contestants, and she said her favorite parts were learning about a Chinese musical instrument and participating in a French dialogue.

Why she likes Japanese: She said she plans to continue studying Japanese and hopes to study other related languages such as Korean and Chinese. Her interest in languages began when her mother suggested she might pursue a career as a translator. She said she is interested in Japanese culture as well, explaining that she likes the level of respect found in the culture, citing examples such as their practice of removing their shoes in the house, bowing when they meet people of more experience and how they speak respectfully to each other.

Tanisha’s home life: Tanisha divides her time living with her mother Terea Scruggs who lives in Hurstbourne, and her father Jeffrey Boston, who lives in Douglass Hills. She has an older sister, a younger sister, a younger brother, and twin baby sisters.

Teacher Quote: Teacher Elena Kamenetzky thinks that Tanisha is extraordinary because “she has not only the motivation but the courage to really push her own boundaries. It takes a lot of courage to compete in a state language competition as a first-year Japanese student, let alone to sing in a second language in front of total strangers!”



Future plans: Tanisha plans to attend college and possibly study abroad. “After high school, I want to travel all over the world and see places I’ve never seen before.”

She enjoys: reading, writing, listening to music

MEET THE ACHIEVER

Achiever: Tanisha Boston

Age: 15

Grade: 10

School: Eastern High School

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1R5JMlf