Whether you want to count how many steps you take each day, keep track of sleeping habits, record what you eat, or see how many calories you burn, there’s a piece of technology or strategy to fit your lifestyle. Jawbone, the maker of wireless headsets and wristbands, joined the list when it announced on Wednesday a new wearable food-tracking service will be on the market soon.

"Now, we can track the calories you consume and burn," Jawbone spokesman Andrew Rosenthal said, Reuters reported. The goal for the Jawbone system, he added, is to put "all this data in context."

When it comes to weight loss, there is an overwhelming plethora of fads, diets, tricks, and tips. It can be overwhelming but becoming hyperconscious of the food you eat when you’re trying to stick to body-nourishing foods is key to achieving a healthier body. Whenever people keep track of their diets, they naturally tend to be more aware of the kinds of foods they’re putting into their body and at what rate.

Are most of my calories coming from breads, dairy, or meat protein? Seeing disproportionate amounts of unhealthy foods recorded in food diary logs can be encouragement enough to reevaluate their meal choices. Jawbone believes there’s a demand for an effective food management and tracker tool, and its new Up app can supply that demand.

“The reality is that behavior change is hard, and there aren’t many good tools to manage that process of managing your weight,” said Travis Bogard, vice president of product management and strategy at Jawbone, in an interview with VentureBeat.

There are many health trackers. See which ones are right for your lifestyle!

Jawbone UP24

Users will be able to log their food and water intake, along with the healthiness of their food. The app will offer restaurant menus and a food library for people to check calories before purchasing a food order. It also provides simple adjustment suggestions that will over time lead to a healthier you.

SuperTracker

It's a free online tool designed by the USDA ChooseMyPlate that utilizes both the 2010 Dietary Guidelines for Americans and the 2008 Physical Activity Guidelines in order to provide advice to attain healthy goals. It tracks weight progress, has an 8,000-food database, a tracker to record food items, physical activity trackers, and a place to build recipes and discover their calorie and nutrition breakdown.

MyFitnessPal

This app provides a section to record meals and drink consumption each day, along with a pre-loaded database of over two million food items. It logs your weight, goal weight, height, age, activity level, workout routines, and how many pounds you’d like to lose per week, and how you can get there. It also connects you to other users for support and motivation.

Fooducate

By providing a bar code scanner, the makers of this app believe it can help give a more thorough breakdown of the food users ingest. It won first prize by the U.S. Surgeon General Healthy App Challenge as a tool to grade each food as you scan or search for them. It provides how much fiber, sugar, whole grains, and more are inside each food and if they meet USDA requirements.

WebMD Food & Fitness Planner

Monitor closely and track your nutrients, fat, saturated fat, cholesterol, sodium, carbohydrates, fiber, sugar, and protein that come of each meal. More than 30,000 foods and beverages are included in the database, including popular brand names. Over time the app provides progress reports to help you reach your exercise and diet goals each week.

Food Diary

All you need is a simple notebook and pen. Each day, record meals and estimate portions of everything eaten. Some report using excel sheets make it easier to record and organize their diets and exercise schedules.

My Food Diary app

It provides seven different ways to record different meals with an 80,000-food item database and can be shared with a spouse or friend to record the same meals had together.

MyPlate by Livestrong

There are over 625,000 foods and 1,500 different fitness components to help track the food you eat and see how the calories burn thanks to this app. You can also compare yourself to users all over the country and see their calories and exercise breakdowns.

The Eatery

This unique app allows you to record what you’ve eaten by taking a picture of it and uploading onto a database. Users will rate the food item from fit to fat, share, like, or comment on each photo. Aside from user advice, it also provides eating strengths and weaknesses of each meal as per experts along with healthful suggestions for improvement.

Nutrition Menu

This app requires no Internet connection and still gives you access to a database of 92,000 different foods and many popular restaurant items. It provides a food score for each day in order to compare yourself and watch progression. There are also 149 built-in exercises.