Contribution

Wayne Allyn Root is a bestselling author. His latest book is: “ The Power of RELENTLESS! ” Dubbed by the media as “the Capitalist Evangelist,” Wayne is a former Libertarian Vice Presidential nominee, international business speaker, serial entrepreneur and conservative media personality – appearing on over 5,000 interviews in the past five years. Wayne’s web site: ROOTforAmerica.com .

Welcome to a sad and tragic Memorial Day.

What’s happening at the Veterans Administration should frighten every American to death. It’s like looking into a crystal ball at the future of America’s healthcare system.

Let me ask you a simple question: If I managed a small Dairy Queen and failed miserably, would you promote me to manage a nationwide restaurant chain? What if customers died because of fraud and incompetence under my management? Would any other private sector company hire me to manage a much bigger operation?

Well that’s exactly what’s happening in America right now. The VA is government-run health care. The VA was run so incompetently by government employees that the employees decided to commit fraud to hide their massive failure.

Because of that criminal decision, veterans died waiting for treatment that never came. Others committed suicide out of desperation and exasperation. Isn’t that called murder?

The mainstream media is covering up for Barack Obama once again. Journalists should be asking LOUDLY how a government that couldn’t keep up with the health care of our vets, could possibly handle the health care of all 317 million Americans.

Isn’t it “Groundhog Day” if you repeat the same mistakes and expect different outcomes?

So if we put the same government, and same incompetent government employees, that wrecked the VA in charge of the nation’s health care, why wouldn’t the results be the same? Why won’t the entire health care system collapse? Why wouldn’t there be patient deaths and suicides? Why wouldn’t the cost overruns drive the entire nation into bankruptcy?

If these are the results on a small scale, why would expanding government-run health care produce any better results on a larger scale?

Shouldn’t someone be making that connection? Shouldn’t someone be asking those important questions?

The VA scandal is the perfect warning sign for what Obamacare will bring to all Americans. The VA scandal is proof positive with government in charge of health care, it will bankrupt the entire country and countless Americans will die through incompetence, neglect, waiting lists and fraud. Our veterans are the canary in the coal mine. We are all headed for disaster.

The VA scandal is the perfect warning sign for what Obamacare will bring to all Americans. Share:

Even worse, this VA scandal is not new. Conservatives have warned about the dangers of government-run health care for many years, often using the Veterans Administration as Exhibit A.

My national bestselling book, “The Ultimate Obama Survival Guide” was released in April 2013. I wrote it six months before that. Almost everything hitting the news about the VA today was already known 18 months ago. Let me quote from my book:

“Take the Veterans Administration. A federal appeals court has ruled the VA suffers from ‘unchecked incompetence.’ That incompetence is killing our brave veterans. I bet you didn’t know 18 veterans commit suicide per day. Or that 85,000 vets are on waiting lists for care. Even a severely depressed vet can wait eight weeks to see a psychiatrist. Still want government to run your health care?”

So who couldn’t see this disaster coming? Government mismanagement. Substandard health care. Vets being treated horribly. Vets dying waiting on long waiting lists. Vets committing suicide. We knew all of this long ago. This isn’t new news.

About the only thing we didn’t know back then was that there was outright criminal fraud. We didn’t know government employees kept secret waiting lists to cover up the long delays. That’s not negligence or incompetence (the normal results of government employees). That’s government employees handing out death sentences.

What a surprise!

Conservatives like Sarah Palin and myself screamed about “Death Panels” and “death by rationing” years ago. I predicted in the media long before today’s VA scandal that sick Americans would be committing suicide after dealing with government bureaucrats. I warned grandma might die if the same government that runs the Postal Service and the VA was put in charge of grandma’s cancer surgery.

We told you so…a long time ago.

Government is a walking disaster. Government screws up everything it touches, while losing billions of other people’s money. Government-run gambling (OTB) went broke in New York recently. A government-run brothel went bankrupt in Nevada.

Can you imagine? Government can’t run sex or gambling businesses without screwing it up! How could putting government in charge of health care for 317 million Americans possibly work out?

The same government employees that brought us $17 trillion in national debt are in charge of health care – yet Obama promised Obamacare would save money and reduce the deficit. He also promised you could keep your health insurance if you liked it. And you could keep your doctor. And your insurance premiums would not go up.

As recently as a few weeks ago Obama bragged that 7 million Americans signing up for Obamacare proved it’s a “success.” Now we find out about half never paid even their first premium.

Have you ever in the history of the private sector heard of any company where half the customers never paid for the product? Have you ever heard of any private sector CEO in history get away with lies, misrepresentation or fraud on a scale this grand?

Do you now understand what Obama has done to America’s health care system? Forget the threat of losing your insurance, or your doctor, or your prescriptions. Forget the threat of massive premium increases you can’t afford. Or dramatic increases to your co-pay or deductible.

The real threat with government in charge is losing your life! Either government’s incompetence or criminal behavior will kill you, or after dealing with the idiots that run the government, you’ll just kill yourself.

This VA scandal is coming to a town near you. Soon. It’s called Obamacare.

Wayne Allyn Root is the national bestselling author of “The Ultimate Obama Survival Guide: How to Survive, Thrive and Prosper During Obamageddon.” Wayne’s Twitter. Wayne’s web site.

–

TheBlaze contributor channel supports an open discourse on a range of views. The opinions expressed in this channel are solely those of each individual author.