The cash-strapped Southern Nevada Regional Housing Authority has hired a $90-an-hour consultant to oversee the day-to-day operations of the agency's human resources department, even though it already pays an acting HR director to do the job.

Kathleen Lambermont, who established Lambermont Consulting LLC in September, was awarded the 6-month contract. She has over 25 years of state and local government experience and has demonstrated leadership in human resources, among other areas, according to her resume.

But she is also a friend of Las Vegas Justice of the Peace Karen Bennett-Haron, who is the wife of Fred Haron, finance director for the housing authority. The housing authority provides housing to thousands of low-income families in Southern Nevada and it receives most of its funding from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.

"I know Kathleen and I think very highly of her," Bennett-Haron said in October.

Executive Director John Hill refused to answer questions for this story before hanging up on the reporter. Some of the agency's board of commissioners raised concerns about the need to hire a consultant when Hill named Anthony Tyler acting HR director.

On Saturday late evening, Hill responded to a request for Tyler's current salary. His annual base salary is $70,012, which includes a 5-percent increase for acting pay and was effective Sept. 3.

Tyler didn't return a call seeking comment.

Former HR Director Sharon Williams was fired in April by Hill for communicating with the agency's oversight board without his knowledge. Shandra Hudson was named acting HR director, but soon after resigned.

Williams' total pay and benefits in 2014 was $121,368, according to Transparent Nevada.

Board members also questioned why a permanent HR director wasn't hired instead. Among the consultant's duties, Lambermont will help the agency transition until a permanent director is hired.

Judge: Consultant has good reputation

Bennett-Haron said she "did" tell Hill that Lambermont has a "good reputation," and that she's a "highly respected HR professional" with "impeccable credentials."

"I don't remember," she added when asked if she spoke to Hill about Lambermont before or after her contract was awarded. "I come in contact with Mr. Hill on several occasions. It might have come up in passing."

When Lambermont was asked how she heard about the job and what made her want to apply, she called the questions "slanting," before responding.

She then said she heard about the job through "lots of people in the justice community and in the HR community," and that included Bennett-Haron.

"I know her professionally," she said.

Bennett-Haron said she didn't see it as a conflict of interest for her because she didn't have any vested interest, and her husband "doesn't make any decisions" regarding the contract.

Deborah Laine, director of procurement and contracts for the housing authority, said there were three candidates for the contract. Each was asked the same questions and was requested to provide an hourly proposal rate, plus any overhead or additional expenses, she said.

"I would not be able at this time to provide the actual pricing," Laine said in writing, emphasizing the "notice of confidentiality" promised to consultants for their proposed rates.

Lambermont's bid application was submitted Oct. 6, the same day her contract became effective, according to documents provided by the housing authority. A request for the actual bid documents submitted by the two other candidates was not granted.

Lambermont can work 20 to 30 hours per week. Her hourly salary could increase to $100 per hour after 90 calendar days with satisfactory performance, according to a copy of her contract.

Reimbursements for traveling, educational or other business expenses must be approved in writing in advance.

The contract expires in April 2016 but can continue on a month-to-month basis until terminated by either party, the contract reads.

Her main duties include providing "the day-to-day and 'hands-on' management oversight of all functions of the HR department until such time as a permanent HR director can be identified."

Concerns raised

Housing Authority Vice Chairman Sanje Sedera said the contract raises concerns.

"I'm kind of baffled," he said in October of Hill not consulting with the board about this contract. "We need to have someone full time."

He said there are many qualified people who could have been hired as the permanent HR director instead of hiring both an acting director and a consultant.

"Hiring a part-time at a full-time salary, I don't think that's effective," he said.

Lambermont will also assist the agency in developing and administering a recruitment and selection process for the HR director, according to her contract.

She will also evaluate HR policies and procedures and provide recommendations for improvement.

"This organization has challenges," Lambermont said. "Perhaps I can bring some support to this agency."

Hilary McClain, with McClain Resources, was one of the other two candidates. McClain said she received a call from Hill in mid-September and he was rushing her to submit a proposal, which she did.

McClain, who has worked in human resources for 25 years and has owned her business for almost seven years, said she offered a 3-month retainer for $3,500 per month. She also offered a $2,500 one-time assessment fee, but didn't feel comfortable sharing the documents.

"It's less expensive, typically," she said of a monthly retainer. "It's a better way to go than the hourly rate. With an hourly rate it gets very expensive, very quickly."

But she never heard back on the contract decision.

Still, Laine said Lambermont Consulting was the most affordable. She said McClain's cost was 60 percent higher than Lambermont's.

"The ranking ... was based on actual quotes, this consultant position for Lambermont Consulting ... was the best price for the agency," she said in writing.

Contact Yesenia Amaro at yamaro@reviewjournal.com or 702-477-3843. Find her on Twitter: @YeseniaAmaro