Club for Growth Action Fund is at forefront of health care fight.

Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, talks to reporters as he emerges from the Senate chamber Sept 25 after his overnight crusade railing against the Affordable Care Act. (Photo: J. Scott Applewhite, AP) Story Highlights Tech investor Peter Thiel is largest donor to Club for Growth's super PAC in recent years, records show

Club for Growth is at forefront of outside efforts to strip funding for the health care law

The organization invested heavily in efforts to elect Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, who led a talkathon against the law this week

WASHINGTON — Ten individuals, led by prominent tech investor Peter Thiel, donated more than half the money that has flowed since Jan. 1, 2011, to Club for Growth Action Fund, a heavyweight anti-tax group that helped elect Sen. Ted Cruz and other conservatives to Congress and now is at the forefront of the battle to gut President Obama's health care law, campaign records show.

Those individuals have donated more than $10.7 million of the $19.9 million the super PAC has raised in that period. Last year, the conservative anti-tax group poured more than a quarter of its money — more than $5.5 million — into Cruz's Senate race in Texas, much of it to oppose Lt. Gov. David Dewhurst, whom Cruz toppled in the Republican primary.

Thiel, a PayPal co-founder and early Facebook investor who has backed Libertarian-leaning candidates, donated $2 million to the Club for Growth super PAC, records filed with the Federal Election Commission show. Five others have contributed at least $1 million.

STORY: Cruz's marathon Obamacare protest

Cruz has been a central figure in the conservative fight to defund the Affordable Care Act, leading a talkathon on the Senate floor that ended Wednesday after more than 21 hours. The push by Cruz and other conservatives to strip health care funds from a stopgap spending bill had raised the threat of a government shutdown next week.

More moderate Republican leaders and party strategists criticized the tactic as counterproductive because a defund measure has no chance of becoming law in the face of a Democratic-controlled Senate and a promised Obama veto, and they argue Republicans would be blamed for any shutdown.

In the end, the Senate voted Wednesday to move ahead with consideration of a House-passed spending bill to keep the government running temporarily. But the fight has divided the Republican Party, pitting high-ranking GOP incumbents, such as Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, against a new brand of conservatives elected in recent years and increasingly influential outside groups like the Club for Growth and the Senate Conservatives Fund, which this week called McConnell and the No. 2 Republican in the Senate, Sen. John Cornyn of Texas, "turncoats."

Club for Growth praised Cruz's speaking marathon.

"All this is about us getting Republicans to do what they all say they are for," said Barney Keller, a Club for Growth spokesman. "Every Republican says they want to defund Obamacare, so then every Republican should fight as hard as they can do to just that."

Keller said it was crucial for Republicans to act before Oct. 1, when people without health insurance can start signing up for coverage and "start to get hooked on the subsidies" available to lower-income Americans to comply with the law's mandate that most people get health insurance.

"It's creating a lose-lose situation for the Republicans," Brian Walsh, a veteran Republican strategist, said of the push by conservative groups. "Instead of focusing on all the problems with implementing (the health care law), the focus is on fighting within the Republican ranks, and it's only helping the Democrats politically."

In recent elections, Club for Growth has emerged as a leading player in efforts to oust Republicans it views as straying from its anti-tax, limited-government principles. The group helped toss out veteran Sens. Bob Bennett of Utah and Richard Lugar of Indiana in GOP nomination battles in 2010 and 2012, respectively.

The organization has several wings, a non-profit arm that does not have to disclose its donors and two political action committees that do. Its super PAC, Club for Growth Action Fund, can accept unlimited donations but must operate independently of candidates.

Robert Arnott, the CEO of a California investment management firm, donated $1 million to the super PAC between March 2011 and the end of April, according to FEC records. In an interview this week, he seemed untroubled by the Republican infighting.

"I'm not a Republican or a Democrat. I'm a Libertarian," he said. "I'm a believer in limited government." He said the health care law creates a "massive bureaucracy."

"Why screw up the economy to force into action something that's so sloppily written and that will be such a drain on the macro-economy?"

Thiel, who spent substantially to aid former Texas GOP congressman Ron Paul's 2012 presidential campaign, did not respond to interview requests from USA TODAY.

Other donors who have contributed at least $1 million to the super PAC since Jan. 1, 2011, include:

• Virginia James, an investor from Lambertville, N.J., who gave $1.7 million to the super PAC. Her donations to candidates in 2012 included $5,000 each to Cruz and Richard Mourdock, the Republican who beat Lugar in the primary last year but lost in the general election.

• John Childs, the leveraged buyout specialist and CEO of JW Childs Associates, who donated $1.1 million. He has served on the Club for Growth's board. He also contributed even more to American Crossroads, a Republican super PAC affiliated with former White House strategist Karl Rove, that has been an odds with more conservative GOP organizations.

• Jackson Stephens Jr., who runs a biotechnology firm in Arkansas, donated slightly more than $1 million, records show. Stephens chairs the Club for Growth board.

None responded to interview requests. A fifth $1 million donor, Houston homebuilder and veteran GOP contributor Bob Perry, died earlier this year.

Asked about the group's funders, Keller said: "Club members are champions for economic freedom, and we are honored to have their support."

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1fn3Ptn