WASHINGTON--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Tax Talk Today®, an online series of webcasts educating tax professionals on current and critical tax issues, announced the topic for its February program, Tax Update 2015, Part II: Business Federal Tax Including ACA. The Live webcast is scheduled for Tuesday, February 9, at 2 PM ET.

Richard G. Furlong, Jr., IRS Senior Stakeholder Liaison, SB/SE Division, Ryan Scarafile, IRS Lead Tax Law Specialist, Tax Forms & Publications, Merry Brodie, EA Principal, Brodie Accounting Services and Richard M. Reedman, EA, USTCP, CFE, FCPA, Principal of Reedman & Associates, will examine the changes that affect the preparation of 2015 Small Business tax returns, especially Schedule C Form 1040, Form 1065, Form 1120S and other changes from current legislation. Complete program description.

The broadcast will be Archived for 12 months for viewers who are unable to watch the Live program, or wish to complete a QAS Self Study CPE program. Viewers can earn 1 CPE for completing this program, and may email questions before and during the Live program.

Specific topics that will be discussed:

Protecting Americans from Tax Hikes (PATH) Act of 2015 Permanent Extensions of Expiring Tax Provisions Section 179 expensing R&D Credit Exclusion for gain on small business stock held for 5 years 5-year recognition period for S-corporation built-in gain 15-year recovery period for certain property Transit Benefits Parity Treatment of certain dividends of regulated investment companies (RICs) Five Year Extenders of Expiring Tax Provisions (thru 2019) Bonus or additional first-year depreciation for new property Work Opportunity/New Markets Tax Credits Look-through for controlled foreign corporations Two Year Extension (thru 2016) Film and television expensing Other Two Year Extenders Energy Extenders Wind Energy Credit (thru 2019 with phase outs) Solar Investment Credit (thru 2021) Energy Efficient Commercial Building deduction (thru 2016) Included in Act but Not Extender Provisions Information returns relating to wages and non-employee compensation Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs)

Filing 2015 Business Returns/2016 Tax planning topics Forms and Schedules Update Business Return due date changes Repair Regulations/Form 3115 update New Early Interaction Initiative on Payroll Taxes

ACA Update ACA changes from the PATH Act of 2015 “Cadillac” plans Medical devices Health Insurance Provider Fee Employer Shared Responsibility Provisions Employer Health Payment Plans ACA Reporting Requirements Small Business Health Care Tax Credit



Viewers needing Continuing Professional Education credit (CPE Credit) can take advantage of a Tax Talk Today subscription price of $270.00 or $18.00/credit for 15 CPE credits, which includes all 8 programs. Tax Talk Today is an IRS Approved Continuing Education Provider.

About Tax Talk Today, The Tax Show for the Tax Pro

An 8-program, 15 CPE, webcast series, designed to educate tax professionals with reliable information about complex tax issues. Tax Talk Today features roundtable discussions and real-time interaction with industry professionals, and IRS officials. Tax Talk Today collaborates with the IRS and the NAEA to provide content meeting CPE Credit requirements for CPAs, Enrolled Agents, Voluntary OTRPs, attorneys, and all professionals needing CPE credits in the tax area. Programs are available Live, Archived or Podcast. Contact Paul Lamonia at 202-559-9330 or Lamonia@TaxTalkToday.com or visit www.TaxTalkToday.com.