The rash of injuries to Avalanche depth at forward seemingly has become contagious.

Despite all of the injuries to third- and fourth-line centers and wings, Avalanche coach Patrick Roy has maintained his sense of humor.

When co-assistant general manager Craig Billington told Roy he was going to watch the Lake Erie team play, Roy said he didn’t need to.

“I said you just have to watch us tomorrow night,” said Roy, who has already used seven American Hockey League regulars this season, including five forwards. “But I’m very proud of our team. Our guys haven’t looked for excuses.”

The Avs have won five of their past seven games, and they were tied late in the third period in the two games they lost during that stretch.

Third-line center John Mitchell has rejoined the injury list after reinjuring his leg Saturday. Fourth-liner Marc-Andre Cliche will miss up to two weeks because of an oblique ailment, also suffered in the Avs’ 5-2 victory over visiting Dallas.

Jamie McGinn (back), Dennis Everberg (shoulder), Ben Street (hand), Jesse Winchester (head) and Patrick Bordeleau (back) remain out and won’t play Monday against Montreal.

McGinn might face season-ending surgery, Roy said. McGinn, who also can contribute on the first two lines, missed training camp and the preseason with the same back issue.

“He’s been evaluated every day by our team doctors,” Roy said, “and there’s going to be a decision that’s going to have to be made: Does he require a surgery or not?”

The Avs recalled forwards Colin Smith and Mike Sgarbossa from Lake Erie on Sunday; they probably will play with fellow Monsters regular Tomas Vincour against Montreal. Smith and Sgarbossa have 12 points apiece in 18 games for Lake Erie.

The Avs’ third line probably will feature Max Talbot, Daniel Briere and Cody McLeod.

The top six forwards are healthy: center Matt Duchene with Ryan O’Reilly and Alex Tanguay, and Nathan MacKinnon between Gabe Landeskog and Jarome Iginla.

Defenseman Brad Stuart (hamstring) also is out as the Avalanche continues on with just six defensemen.

“We’re not the only team this happens to. It just seems they all happen at once,” said defenseman Nate Guenin. “You get a guy who is playing well and then he’ll come down with an injury, and then he’s out and it takes time for him to get back into the groove.

“You feel for the player, but also the team. Then you can look at the other way, whereas it gives guys an opportunity they wouldn’t necessarily have. But there’s no feeling sorry for ourselves.”

Mike Chambers: mchambers@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikechambers

MONTREAL AT COLORADO 7 p.m. Monday, ALT; 950 AM

Spotlight on Max Pacioretty: The former Michigan Wolverines forward from New Canaan, Conn., leads Montreal in goals (11), points (19), plus-minus (plus-10) and shots (90). Pacioretty is listed at 6-foot-2 and 214 pounds but seems to play much bigger. He is very strong on his skates. He was a 2014 U.S. Olympian and, along with defenseman P.K. Subban of Canada, he is the pride of the Canadiens.

NOTEBOOK

Canadiens: They are 0-2-1 in their past three games and coming off a shootout loss against Buffalo at home Saturday. The Canadiens lost 2-1 at Buffalo on Friday and were shut out 5-0 by the New York Rangers in their previous game. … The Canadiens are 7-4-1 on the road. … Montreal is 16-7-2 despite allowing more average goals (2.48) than it is scoring (2.44) and allowing more shots (30.6) than it is producing (28.3). … The Habs beat the Avs 3-2 on Oct. 18 in Montreal.

Avalanche: Rookie goaltender Calvin Pickard will start his third consecutive game as Semyon Varlamov misses his sixth consecutive game because of a groin injury. … Coach Patrick Roy said he wants Varlamov to participate in a team practice this week and be evaluated by part-time goaltending coach Francois Allaire, who commutes to Denver from Quebec. Reto Berra will back up Pickard against the Canadiens. Berra or Pickard probably will be reassigned Tuesday or Wednesday; Roy said he does not intend to carry three goaltenders.