MINNEAPOLIS, Dec. 17, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- Gravie, a company that provides a new way for individuals to shop, compare, buy and manage their health insurance for free, has partnered with several new employers, bringing its total number of U.S. employer clients to more than 700 – collectively representing more than 20,000 people.

New employers Gravie recently signed contracts with include: Great Clips; Fan Maker; Hennepin Avenue United Methodist Church; Isles Bun & Coffee Co.; Mill City Running; Seven Sundays; and Bix Produce to name a few. In addition, Gravie also recently announced partnerships with Wake Technical Community College and Ivy Tech Community College – community college systems based in North Carolina and Indiana, respectively – to help their combined 75,000 students find affordable health insurance.

"From calling a cab to making a restaurant reservation, technology has changed the way we do a lot of things, yet we're only just beginning to see what it can do for navigating the individual health insurance market," said Abir Sen, Gravie CEO and co-founder. "Simply put, Gravie's free user platform has the power to do what the majority of employers cannot: help their employees shop the hundreds of health insurance options available to them without having to spend hours of administrative time calculating tax credits, keeping track of bills and coordinating payments."

Gravie has seen significant growth over the last 24 months – its revenues have grown almost 20 times and it now has more than 85 employees. The company attributes its growth to being at the forefront of providing the tools and resources needed to shop the individual insurance market, coupled with an increasing interest amongst employers to outsource burdensome health benefits administration to experts.

"From a bakery to a church, and from an athletic specialty store to a loyalty rewards company, these new customers show the wide range of employers and employees who can benefit from our services," added Sen. "We're thrilled to bring new health insurance options to these employers and are looking forward to helping their employees shop, compare, buy and manage their health insurance."

By switching from group insurance to offering employees individual health insurance through Gravie, companies have saved an average of 36 percent.

There are also benefits for employees. Gravie helps the employee figure out all the sources of funding available to them to pay for their health coverage, including the government tax credits introduced by the Affordable Care Act. 24 percent of Gravie's members get their health insurance for free. Gravie also offers support services to help their members find in-network providers, understand what is and isn't covered in their plan and answer questions about claims, among other services. Employees' response to the service has been positive: In ongoing surveys conducted by Gravie in January 2014 to present, 85 percent of customers said they would recommend Gravie to a friend or family member.

Gravie also recently launched the Gravie 101 eBook available here, and a Healthcare Options Tip Sheet, available here, which help employers and employees understand how Gravie works and their healthcare options respectively.

About Gravie:

Gravie helps consumers shop for, compare and buy their health insurance plan in both the private marketplace and through public exchanges. Gravie works directly with consumers as well as employers to find cost effective health insurance plans that fit the needs of the individual. Once consumers buy a plan through Gravie, they receive free ongoing support, which includes help finding in-network doctors and understanding what is and isn't covered in their plan, and access to experts who can answer questions about confusing bills and claims, among other services. Gravie is headquartered in Minneapolis. For more information, visit www.gravie.com.

Media Contact

Kira Bork

952-346-6317

kbork@webershandwick.com

SOURCE Gravie