During President Obama’s first two years in office, his party controlled the House and for a time had a supermajority in the Senate. Almost entirely on their own they enacted a nearly $1 trillion stimulus bill, Obamacare and Dodd-Frank financial regulations. Not for the first or last time, alternative suggestions from Republicans were dismissed out of hand.

Eric Cantor, who was sent on to the politician's afterlife (the private sector) by the voters of his district, penned an article strongly defending his former boss, John Boehner. His views are important to read, as they fully expain the Democratic Party/Republican Party collusion that has taken place over the past six years.

Following that, the American people elected Republicans to the majority in the House. And Mr. Obama’s liberal platform ground to a halt. Spending actually went down. Republicans, led by Speaker Boehner, provided the check and balance voters had demanded.

These are all lies. Spending increased, year after year. There were no checks on Obama – only blank checks, as Boehner approved the Cromnibus budget, which most people didn't even know the contents of, and continuing resolution after continuing resolution that kept the economic kamikaze pilots firmly in control of the finances of our nation.

But somewhere along the road, a number of voices on the right began demanding that the Republican Congress not only block Mr. Obama’s agenda but enact a reversal of his policies.

Another lie. None of Obama's policies – whether they be amnesty, abortion, spending, or anything else – was blocked.

Strangely, according to these voices, the only reason that was not occurring had nothing to do with the fact that the president was unlikely to repeal his own laws, or that under the Constitution, absent the assent of the president or two-thirds of both houses of Congress, you cannot make law.

But neither can Obama make a budget without congressional approval. In Cantor's eyes, only Obama can stick to his principles, not the Republicans.

Now we see that these same voices have turned to the threat of a government shutdown or a default on the debt as the means by which we can force President Obama to agree to their demands.

Another series of lies. There will always be enough money to pay interest on the debt, regardless of whether or not the debt ceiling is raised. And if there is a "shutdown," it will be caused by Obama vetoing a budget. And a "shutdown" will not shut down vital parts of the government.

The response I often hear to these points is: “Well, Republicans at least need to fight.” On this I agree. It is imperative that we fight for what we believe in. But we should fight smartly.

"Fight smartly"? Aside from the grammatical problems, Cantor gives no examples of how Republicans should "fight smartly."

During discussions over the debt limit in 2011, John Boehner and I negotiated one of the largest reductions in discretionary spending in history.

Really? Most of those cuts were in the military. Overall spending increased, year after year. This is Cantor's great achievement?

Democrats want to control your lives and spend more money. Republicans say they don't want to do these things but are very glad to secretly cooperate, making a show about "fighting smartly" with phony symbolic votes but in reality going along with the Democrats, because for establishment GOP congressmen like Cantor, the interests of the Chamber of Commerce overlap significantly with the interests of big government. Cantor forgot this, which is why he was send home by his district. The spectacle of such a tremendous loser presuming to preach to the rest of the GOP is ironic, to say the least.