BROOMFIELD — Mike Alvarado and Brandon Rios always walked in lockstep. Their styles are so tuned to clash with each other, their careers so intertwined, a third fight between them seemed certain.

Five years ago, within two months, Denver’s Alvarado and California’s Rios twice fought and won on the same cards at the National Western Complex Arena. And in the long route from the stockyards to world titles, Alvarado and Rios gave each other their first career defeats.

So a score was left to settle Saturday night at the FirstBank Center in the capper to what set up as a classic boxing trilogy, one that was supposed to echo the bloodied series between Micky Ward and Arturo Gatti, and Marco Antonio Barrera and Erik Morales.

The result came quickly. Rios battered Alvarado from the jump, rocking him with a right uppercut in the third round that sent Alvarado to one knee — the first time either fighter was knocked down in 23 rounds between them. Alvarado teetered from there.

Before the fourth round, the ringside physician held up two fingers in front of Alvarado’s face and asked him how many.

“Four,” Alvarado said.

Fight over. Rios won by technical knockout in a brutal end to the three-fight set. It will probably stand as a disappointing end to Alvarado’s career, although he wasn’t willing to make that concession.

“It was all in the preparation. I didn’t train like I should have,” Alvarado said while getting booed by the home crowd. “I got what I should have got. I’ll get myself out there again.”

Rios (33-2-1) was sharp throughout. He cut Alvarado (34-4) in the first round and marked up his face with hooks. And 5,988 fight fans started to mix “Ri-os” chants in with Alvarado “3-Oh-3” chants.

“It was my best fight ever,” Rios said. “My plan was to box from the outside and hit him with body shots.”

“He had nothing, zero,” said Bob Arum, who promoted the fight for Top Rank. “Alvarado looked like he had very little.”

Rios landed 120 of his 290 punches thrown in three rounds. Alvarado countered by landing just 20 of the 87 thrown. And Rios was throwing heavy punches — of 198 power shots, he landed 100.

“Our careers were on the line,” Rios said. “I had to prove to everybody that I’m here to stay.”

Alvarado’s best punch, a left hook in the second that pushed Rios back a step, failed to turn the tide. And Rios took over in the third before forcing a stoppage.

In their first two bouts, Alvarado and Rios battered each other bloody. In Carson, Calif., the two lobbed power shots and jabs with so much frequency, they had little time to move their feet. And Rios finally caught Alvarado with a body shot that tipped him toward a standing TKO.

Alvarado evened the score five months later, winning a unanimous decision and the World Boxing Organization world title.

Those first two bouts saw an incredible number of punches — an average of 158.1 per round, more than twice the welterweight average, according to CompuBox. And 65 percent of the punches were power shots.

But all those bloody brawls have taken a toll on Alvarado and Rios.

Alvarado is 34, with a 2-4 mark in his six most recent brutal bouts. And with legal trouble looming after an arrest this month for weapon possession in Denver, his next career move is on hold.

Rios, 28, remains a big draw in boxing. But with a 3-2 record since his first meeting against Alvarado, Rios hinted prefight that he may consider retiring, although he contradicted that after the fight.

For their trouble Saturday, Rios took home an $850,000 fight purse. Alvarado made $785,000.

In the co-main event, 23-year-old light heavyweight Gilberto Ramirez (31-0) of Mazatlan, Mexico, earned a unanimous decision victory over Maxim Vlasov (30-2) by three scores of 97-93.

Nick Groke: ngroke@denverpost.com or twitter.com/nickgroke