As some employers say they’re struggling to provide health insurance for full-time and part-time workers and their families, Kroger has it covered in North Texas.

Kroger, the second-largest U.S. grocery retailer, with sales of $96.8 billion last year, and the United Food and Commercial Workers Local 1000 have approved a new labor agreement for store employees in the Dallas-Fort Worth area and East Texas.

The contract covers 9,450 people working in 92 stores, Kroger said Friday.

Most employees will receive wage increases, some immediately and others over the 42 months of the contract, Kroger spokesman Gary Huddleston said.

The package covers pay and benefits, including health care for full-time and part-time employees. It includes pension benefits, which fewer employers offer these days. Employees also have the option to participate in the company’s 401(k) plan.

Kroger is the only major retail chain in the area with unionized employees. It has the second-largest share of the grocery market in Dallas-Fort Worth after Wal-Mart.

The contract was approved early, before a December deadline.

Union vice president Richard Hanna said the contract includes immediate pay increases of up to 35 cents per hour. The wage scale was modified to give increases to entry-level, top-level and part-time workers.

“It’s a very favorable contract. We’re very happy with it,” he said.

The agreement received yes votes from 87 percent of the workers, according the union’s website.

“We’re really proud to say that there were no significant changes in benefits. We’re still covering spouses. No one is being sent to the exchanges,” Huddleston said.

He was referring to Affordable Care Act’s online marketplaces where people can shop for insurance on their own. Some fear that companies will push employees out of their plans by making them part-time workers.

“Part-time employees are very important to us. They cover extra hours on the weekend and evenings,” Huddleston said. “If they become full-time employees, then their dependents can be covered under the health insurance.”

At Kroger, many part-time employees are students who are covered by their parents and older workers who qualify for Medicare, he said.

Hanna said health insurance coverage is for the life of the contract and isn’t affected by any changes that may come from Congress in the future.

Kroger Southwest division president Bill Breetz said: “The agreement is the outcome of thoughtful, respectful and productive work by both the company and union representatives.

“I want to thank our associates for supporting this agreement, as well as for the excellent service they provide every day to our customers and company,” he said.

Follow Maria Halkias on Twitter at @MariaHalkias.