Just when we thought National Republicans could do nothing more to trash their image and jeopardize their ticket this fall - considering the tragic-comic state of their presidential campaign and the kindergarten antics of their candidates - House Republicans have proved us wrong again.

They've brought forth a budget, actually a 10-year spending plan that would reduce spending dramatically. Since it comes in the wake of House Speaker Paul Ryan's promise of new spending priorities that would recognize the need to deal with poverty its been long awaited.

But its guiding spirit wasn't Ryan. Instead, these ardent budget-makers looked to another economic icon - Ebenezer Scrooge, Dickens's legendary skinflint and model of mean-spiritedness.

Forget democracy abroad, let's worry about Arizona

Rather than beef-up spending for the poor, the Grand Old Penny Pinchers voted to cut $3.7 trillion over the next 10 years from money for low and moderate income Americans - while taking nary a farthing from better-off Americans.

Their axe would miss little in the way of federal help for the less fortunate. Health care would loose $2.9 trillion. Food programs, including child nutrition, would see another $150 billion disappear. Pell Grants to help lower income kids get to college; some child tax credits; supplemental Social Security aid for the elderly and disabled poor; child tax credits - all would suffer serious cuts in the 10 year plan.

Admittedly, the House budget is a negotiating tool, full of non-starters. It even includes that hardy perennial loser a repeal of the Affordable Care Act.

But its assault on the weak and poor doesn't end there. Beginning in 2026 the House plan would cut federal food, shelter and medical programs for the poor by another 42 percent, according to the Center on Budget and Policy Proposals, a liberal think tank that monitors federal spending.

In fairness, it's worth noting that there's one form of spending the House GOP leaves untouched - something CB&PP calls "tax expenditures."

Every tax cut is another type of federal expenditure, a bonanza for one interest group or another in tax credits or rate reductions usually benefiting high income earners. It totals some $1 trillion, according to CB&PP. And, although it represents the most wasteful federal expenditure, according to Martin Feldstein, a conservative economist who's served several GOP presidents, it's left untouched.

Taxes are a third rail topic for Republicans - they don't dare increase them. That imperative is made stronger by the make-up of the current House GOP caucus: it's overwhelming rural and heavily Southern, representing deeply conservative states which, ironically, are hugely dependent on federal largess. They're the takers.

The liberal coastal states of the North and West, along with the industrial Midwest, are the payers in our federal system.

Not all Republicans have taken such a toxic view of taxes. In 1927 Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr, a Republican, wrote in a famous dissent, that "taxes are what we pay for a civilized society."

Alas, as a Republican idea it apparently died with Holmes.