Technical problems, discord plagued health care site

Documents reveal behind-the-scenes trouble at Maryland health exchange

The revelations came just days before Rebecca Pearce, the head of the exchange, resigned. State officials announced that move Friday night and pulled Carolyn Quattrocki from the governor's health reform office to serve as an interim replacement.

Since Maryland's online health exchange opened Oct. 1 for people to buy insurance under the Affordable Care Act — and immediately crashed — the two main companies in charge of the website have taken their fight to court, a corporate project manager was replaced and a high-powered consulting firm was quietly brought in to restore order. Though state officials initially said the crash of the online exchange was an unexpected and fixable problem, emails and documents obtained by The Baltimore Sun through state open-records laws outline serious issues before and after the launch.

Although state officials have provided the public scant detail about the troubled launch of Maryland's version of Obamacare, emails and documents show that the project was beset behind the scenes for months by an array of technical issues, warring contractors and other problems.

Just two weeks before the launch, Pearce visited the prime contractor's Linthicum headquarters and found a room of empty seats. She fired off an email questioning the company's commitment to resolve problems and reminding the contractors of what was at stake: "Tonight, I am begging. I don't know how else to say it: we have got to make this a reality."

Despite her proddings, in-fighting between contractor Noridian Healthcare Solutions and a key subcontractor, EngagePoint Inc., disintegrated amid finger-pointing and accusations in court papers. At one point, after Noridian severed contractual ties between the companies but continued to ask for help, EngagePoint CEO Pradeep Goel emailed Noridian officials: "Are you people on crack cocaine?"

Today, the exchange website, called the Maryland Health Connection, is still not operating properly for all users, and officials are scrambling to meet deadlines for the public to obtain coverage. The problems have triggered criticism from some political pundits and have proven embarrassing for Gov. Martin O'Malley and other state officials who touted the website before its launch.

Asked about the conflict between the project's contractors, Health Secretary Dr. Joshua Sharfstein said in an interview, "It's sort of like hiring a husband-and-wife team to do your roof and then they get divorced. The dispute did adversely affect the project. It was a distraction as we were launching the website and then working to address problems."

Lt. Gov. Anthony G. Brown, chosen by O'Malley to lead the state's reform efforts, claimed ultimate responsibility for the website problems last week after facing increased media and political pressure. But he said in a later interview that he had focused mainly on legislative and policy issues and depended on operational updates from Pearce's office. The reports noted everything was running smoothly and on track until September, when only minor problems were reported, he said.

"I certainly had the responsibility to ensure that if there were problems that required additional resources — changes in legislation or policies — that my responsibility was to make sure the exchange got what it needed," Brown said in an interview Friday. "And I relied on the reports that I received on the exchange. …But at no point was a red flag ever brought to my attention as if we have a problem here, we are not going to meet the launch date, or if we do meet the launch date we are going to significantly underperform."

Brown said the exchange was created as an independent agency with autonomy. Its board is chaired by Sharfstein and includes heads of the state's health care commission and insurance administration.

Sharfstein and other health department employees were copied on a number of emails that discussed problems with the exchange. Sharfstein and Brown are co-chairmen of the overarching Health Care Reform Coordinating Council, which is charged with implementing Obamacare in the state.

The shake-up at the health exchange began last week. O'Malley and Brown charged the state's chief technology officer with overseeing fixes and put Sharfstein in charge of operations, taking away Pearce's main responsibilities in managing the exchange. A few days later, she resigned.

Pearce, who was hired in 2011 at a salary of $175,000, declined to comment on problems surrounding the exchange or her resignation.

The emails provided by the state covered the two weeks before and after the website launch. They give only a limited behind-the-scenes view of creating and launching the exchange. Officials withheld an unknown number of emails, saying state law exempts them from disclosure because they involved the decision-making process of high-ranking executive officials.