Topics: Bernie Sanders, Editor's Picks, Elections 2016, Hillary Clinton, Innovation News, Sustainability News, Business News, News, Politics News

Throughout this Democratic primary season, Hillary Clinton has repeatedly cast herself as “a progressive who likes to get things done,” and her opponent, Bernie Sanders, as a foolish idealist whose ideas “sound good on paper but will never make it in the real world.”

“I want you to understand, I will not promise you something I cannot deliver,” she told a South Carolina crowd last Friday. “I will not make promises I know I cannot keep.”

But, contrary to these assurances of realism and pragmatism, Clinton has actually set forth a bold, sweeping agenda to transform America.

Her campaign website pledges that “Hillary will overturn Citizens United; end secret, unaccountable money in politics; end the era of mass incarceration; enact comprehensive immigration reform; make high-quality education available to every child; raise the minimum wage; [and] tackle dangerous risks in the big banks.”

Such intrepid ideas have little chance of passage in a United States Congress controlled by Republican lawmakers who are still trying to repeal President Obama’s Affordable Care Act, in an election year with narrow chances for a Democratic re-takeover of the Senate, and even less for the House.

This is a critique often leveled at Sanders, but it’s true of Clinton, as well.

So what’s the answer to this glaring roadblock?

The Vermont senator’s response is now familiar to many: a call for “a political revolution where millions of people stand up and say loudly and clearly that our government belongs to all of us.”

But what’s Clinton’s?

At last Thursday’s Democratic debate in Milwaukee, voters got a hint about the former secretary of state’s method of change.

“I believe I can get the money that I need by taxing the wealthy, by closing loopholes, the things that we are way overdue for doing,” she said. “And I think once I’m in the White House, we will have enough political capital to be able to do that.”

This idea of “political capital” is one of the few times Clinton has spoken about how she proposes to bring her campaign promises to lawful life.

It’s not very convincing.

President Obama’s efforts at bipartisan compromise have been continually blocked by Republican obstructionism, on everything from gun control to debt reduction to healthcare for veterans.

The president himself has voiced his frustrations with the GOP, saying in 2014 that “[the Republicans’] willingness to say no to everything — the fact that, since 2007, they have filibustered about 500 pieces of legislation that would help the middle class, just gives you a sense of how opposed they are to any progress.”

Clinton often pitches the notion that she is the logical heir to President Obama’s legacy, but, on this matter, she might have more in common with him than she’d like.

The Obama administration has been unable to push gun reform, immigration reform, police reform, or pro-labor trade agreements, among other issues, through Congress.