Few people complain about having those knee-weakening, body-trembling orgasms, but that’s probably because they’re not having them 100 times a day like Wisconsin man Dale Decker, who describes them as “disgusting and horrendous.”

“Imagine being on your knees at your father’s funeral beside his casket, saying goodbye to him, and then you have nine orgasms right there while your whole family is standing behind you,” he said, according to the NY Post. “It makes you never want to have another orgasm for as long as you live. There’s nothing pleasurable about it because even though it might feel physically good, you’re completely disgusted by what’s going on.”

Decker, 37, developed the mysterious condition known as persistent genital arousal syndrome (PSAS), which causes him to have 30 to 40 erections and dozens of orgasms daily, and at any time of the day regardless of what he’s doing. He began experiencing the uncontrollable orgasms after slipping a disk between his vertebrae (called a herniated disk), which probably irritated nearby nerves. During his subsequent trip to the hospital alone, he experienced five orgasms.

Although Decker suffers every day, having embarrassed himself in places like the grocery store, where “around 150 people” watched him orgasm, his entire family is also affected — the grocery store incident happened while with his kids. His young sons don’t understand what’s wrong with him, and he can’t build a good father-son relationship with them because he’s scared to take them places.

Meanwhile, his relationship with his wife, April Decker is falling apart. “We really struggle right now as he is unable to work and supply for his family, and I feel like all the strain is on me,” she said. Apart from failed sex, she said they also “argue over things that should not be affecting us,” and, because of nightly episodes, they’ve had to sleep in different beds. “That can be very frustrating. You want the comfort from another person, particularly your husband, but we don’t have that.”

Decker is a rare case when it comes to PSAS, which was first identified as a condition in 2002, because it normally appears in women. Despite studies on the condition, such as this one from 2012, which also found that the cause may be from a slipped disk, scientists still haven’t been able to find a way to treat it. Knowing this, Dr. Dena Harris, a New York City gynecologist, said that she hopes “he gets the help he so desperately needs,” according to the Post.

“Being aroused can be a wonderful thing, but this is not like arousal, it’s not even sexual,” Harris said. “It’s a horrendous spasm and it can be terribly painful. Suicide is always a concern when people suffer from this condition — they feel like they have no other way to escape it.”