Here at the shebeen, there's a reason why we keep the Chateau Petrus locked in a wooden box on the highest shelf behind the bar, but we keep the Prestone right down there in the well next to the house poteen, the Virginia Gentleman, the Old Homicide, and the gallon jug of Big Jim's Skullbuster Ethanol Infused Vodka. We keep the basics handy for days like today.



Tiger Beat On The Potomac seems befuddled as to why Hillary Rodham Clinton hasn't yet buried it in detailed policy briefs. After all, her campaign is more than 48 hours old!

But mainly, Clinton hasn't offered many clues about how her presidency would do more than serve as essentially Obama's third term: How would she try to fix flaws in Obama's signature health care law? Would she crack down on Wall Street or the National Security Agency? Would she break with Obama in pushing for fast-track trade deals?

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Because I am always here to help, I will now present a list of what we already know about a potential Rodham Clinton's presidency.

If she is elected, she unequivocally will accept the science of anthropogenic climate change and treat it as a crisis. This cannot be said of any of the Republican candidates, real or potential.

If she is elected, she unequivocally will support marriage equality, and oppose discrimination against our fellow citizens based on sexual orientation or gender identity. This cannot be said of any of the Republican candidates, real or potential.

Most Popular

If she is elected, she will not destroy the Affordable Care Act, an article of faith among all the Republican candidates, real or potential.

If she is elected, and despite her closeness to certain Wall Street interests, she will not destroy the Dodd-Frank reforms, another article of faith among all the Republican candidates, real or potential.

If she is elected, the DREAMers will get to stay in the country.

If she is elected, she will not sign a bill to eliminate the estate tax. (More on this one later)

If she is elected, Janice Rogers Brown will stay right where she is in the judicial food chain.

To get elected, she does not have to wink at state's rights, up to and including incidents of armed resistance.

To get elected, she does not have to equivocate on the science behind the theory of evolution as does any Republican candidate who seeks the votes of Republicans in Iowa.

To get elected, she does not have to peddle the snake oil of supply-side economics, nor does she have to peddle scare stories about the oncoming caliphate, nor does she have to create bogeymen about jackboots coming to steal your guns.

More, I suspect, to follow.

Jesus, this is going to be a long 19 months.