“In no way shape or form does anyone believe that Islam or the teaching of Islam has anything to do with what you saw on the screen [the shooting was captured on surveillance video that was played at the press conference]. That is abhorrent, it’s just, it’s terrible and it does not represent the religion in any way shape or form or any of its teachings. This is a criminal with a stolen gun [the gun was stolen from a Philly police officer in 2013] who tried to kill one of our officers. It has nothing to do with being a Muslim or following the Islamic faith.”

After this confession, newly elected Philadelphia mayor Jim Kenney, accompanied by other city mothers, held a press conference. As noted by Bizpac Review, Kenney was less than two minutes into his remarks when he began the tripe that the shooting had nothing to do with Islam. The mayor said,

As soon as Archer was taken into custody he not only confessed but gave reasons why he did what he did. Archer, a convert to Islam, said he did it for Islam although some in the media are changing his words to he did it for ISIS. He had pledged allegiance to the Islamic State and even gave a specific reason why he singled out a police officer for death. As he explained to officers, Hartnett upholds laws that are contrary to those of Allah’s.

Police officer Jesse Hartnett was sitting in his patrol car when a man, dressed in Muslim garb, ran up to him firing a gun. Altogether, 13 shots were fired, the last ones being when the attacker was right up to the car’s driver’s side window. The officer was struck in the arm by three bullets and despite being seriously injured, got out of his car and pursued the suspect. Hartnett fired his gun, hitting the fleeing culprit. Other officers managed to arrest 30-year-old Edward Archer about a block away. He is currently being held without bail on attempted murder and other charges.

The City of Brotherly Love does have a unique character that now goes beyond the way it treats members of visiting sports teams. This was fully on display in the aftermath of the shooting of a Philadelphia police officer on Thursday that people who have at least some common sense would describe as a terrorist attack.

It has long rumoured that the tombstone of comedian W.C. Fields was engraved with the words, “Better here than Philadelphia.” That turned out to be an urban legend; all that is written on Fields’ gravestone is his name, date of birth, and the date he passed away.

Philadelphians would be better off making their mayor the target of their boos instead of funerals and visiting sports teams

What Kenney said goes well beyond the throwaway line used by Obama, Hillary Clinton and even George W. Bush that Islam is a religion of peace. The mayor went on and on and on and on about how the shooting had nothing to do with Islam or its teachings that he undoubtedly has no clue about. The scary thing is it is entirely likely Kenney actually believes what he said.

As a Democrat, you can expect Kenney to blame the gun for the shooting even though police officers will still be allowed to possess firearms under Obama’s executive gun order. But to go on and on about the teachings of Islam is absurd. He doth protest too much.

It is tempting to feel somewhat sorry for Archer. He confessed to what he did and why he did it because he was proud of what he did. And he is being told that is not why he fired 13 shots at a police officer. He only shot at Hartnett because he is a black man with a stolen gun.

Since converting to Islam, Archer spent a lot of time on his religion. He travelled to Saudi Arabia and to Egypt, although Dems like Kenney undoubtedly think he went to Egypt to look at the pyramids.

Archer did not make up the fact that the law Hartnett and other police officers enforce is contrary to Allah’s teachings and Muslims are only bound by Allah’s law. Yet, the mayor treated him as a complete idiot who lied when he confessed to why he did what he did.

As far as Archer and those in the know are concerned, the shooter’s views are consistent with those of Abu-Bakr al-Baghdadi, the leader of the group he pledged allegiance to. But what does al-Baghdadi know about Islam compared to the all-knowing Philadelphia mayor? For those such as Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, we must delve into the root causes of what leads people into terrorism. The root cause of al-Baghdadi’s beliefs is he holds a Ph.D. in Islamic Studies from the Islamic University of Baghdad. Yet to the elite left, Baghdadi knows nothing about Islam and Archer is just another black man with a stolen gun. Nothing to see here, folks.

Philadelphians would be better off making their mayor the target of their boos instead of funerals and visiting sports teams.

Poor Archer. As Rodney Dangerfield might say, he don’t get no respect. It’s a tough job being a terrorist in Philadelphia where no matter what you do and say, no one in authority will believe you are one.