Share 0

Founded in 1884 by a group of community-minded women operating out of a rented one-bedroom house, Flushing Hospital Medical Center was the first of its kind to open its doors in the “World’s Borough.”

Flushing Hospital Medical Center offers a comprehensive range of primary and specialty healthcare services, including internal and pediatric medicine, ophthalmology, podiatry, OB/GYN, emergency medicine, hospice, ambulatory care, addiction treatment, psychiatry, wound care and rehabilitation, among others.

Offering a broad range of subspecialties, Flushing Hospital’s Department of Pediatrics provides care for acute and chronic illnesses in infants, children and young adults. The department’s specialty areas and services include a Pediatric Intensive Care Unit (PICU) and a Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU), as well as a newborn nursery, an infant apnea monitoring program for infants at risk for sudden infant death and an Early Intervention Program for infants with suspected or confirmed developmental delays.

Flushing Hospital’s expanded Cardiology Department provides inpatient and outpatient testing. With the addition of state-of-the-art equipment and staff, the Cardiology Department now provides a wider variety of services and advanced testing with better diagnosis and quicker results for both the inpatient and outpatient services.

In 2013, the hospital completed work on a brand new ambulatory care center, with the goal of providing a patient-centered outpatient environment for members of the community. In addition to meeting its goal, the Ambulatory Care Center helped to integrate the new electronic health record system and reduce waiting time.

“Through the creation of our new Ambulatory Care Center, we feel that we are providing a place where our patients can maintain their health by receiving regular, preventative care visits and avoid any serious issues that could result in unnecessary emergency department visits or hospital admissions,” Bruce J. Flanz, president and CEO of Flushing Hospital Medical Center, said in a statement.

A cornerstone of the Flushing Hospital Medical Center is its philosophy of combining traditional medicine of the East with the technology of Western medicine. All of the staff members, including physicians, nurses and administrative personnel, are multi-lingual, several speaking both Cantonese and Mandarin dialects of Chinese, as well as English.

In addition to its multi-lingual staff, the center caters to patients by offering signage and medical forms in Chinese.

In light of changes to the healthcare system, such as the Affordable Care Act, Flushing Hospital staff members have been debriefed on ways to help people to choose or enroll in the right healthcare plan.