According to the Garfield County Sheriff's Office, at about 4:30 a.m. detention officers found 26-year-old Jordan Lindsey Leigh Thompson unresponsive in her cell.

Jordan's sister, Brittany Baine (left), and longtime friend Larissa Smith want to know how she died.

The family of an inmate found dead in her cell less than 24 hours after her arrest is speaking out Sunday night.

Jordan Thompson, 26, was found unresponsive in her cell in Garfield County after being arrested for driving under the influence. Her family says she was a hard-working, funny and fearless mom. They say the reasons she was put in jail don't hold up, and they want answers as to how she died.

"I love her and I'll never ever forget her," said Thompson's sister, Brittany Baine.

Baine looks through photos of her sister to remember happier times.

"And this is all three of us. This is my mom and my sister and I," Baine said.

It was Saturday when Baine learned of her sister's death. Pictures are now the only way she'll see her sister again.

11/16/2013 Related Story: Authorities Investigate Inmate's Death At Garfield County Jail

Thompson was arrested in Enid Friday night for allegedly driving under the influence of drugs with her 3-year-old son in the car. She was taken to the Garfield County Detention Center, where she died hours later.

"I hate that I wasn't there for her. I wish I could've been at the jail for her, or something. I wish I could've just been there for her."

Baine says her sister was a devoted mother and wife and was not on drugs. The family says Thompson used prescription medication, and was tending to her son in the back seat Friday night when she swerved, got in a wreck, and Enid Police arrested her.

Thompson's family says she was hurt and left unattended in her cell, where she was found unresponsive.

"It's upsetting. I mean, we all wish we could've been there to say something to her," longtime friend Larissa Smith said.

Baine even got a tattoo as memorial for her sister.

"'There's No Better Friends than Sisters.' I just wish she was able to join us," Baine said.

The family says Thompson leaves behind a 7-year-old daughter, 3-year-old son and her husband. The medical examiner is now investigating her cause of death.