Right before Congress broke for recess, the debate over labeling food containing genetically modified organisms, better known as GMOs, once again dominated headlines here in Washington. The introduction of the Safe and Accurate Food Labeling Act – the second labeling bill introduced this session – now means opposing bills exist on both sides of the aisle, and reports of continued intransigence on the issue of GMOs followed. However, a bright light shined during a recent U.S. House Agriculture Committee hearing, where committee members and witnesses agreed that the time has come to stop the polarization around GMOs. We couldn’t agree more, and in fact believe there are far more opportunities for finding common ground than many might realize.

We know GMOs – like so many issues around how our food is grown – will likely continue to be debated in the public discourse. But surely something we can all agree on is the need for a robust, nutritious, and affordable food supply. To get there, we need every tool in the toolbox to deal with pressing issues like climate change and sustainability, along with the growing global population. Genetically modified seeds are just one of the many tools farmers and food companies can use to address those needs.

ADVERTISEMENT

We recognize that increasingly consumers want to know more about how the food they eat and feed their families is grown. They may not understand every element of the agricultural or food production process, but they want to have answers to the questions they seek and to the issues they care about. The polarization that has emerged around this issue is predicated on messaging that those producing our food supply are opposed to transparency.

So it may be surprising that the companies that develop GM seeds – BASF, Bayer CropScience, Dow AgroSciences, DuPont Pioneer, Monsanto Company and Syngenta – are committed to transparency and support a consumer’s right to know. Two years ago, these principles led to the creation of an initiative called GMO Answers, supported by these companies and many members of the agricultural community. This effort is designed to help drive a more open and transparent dialogue around GMOs and provide forums for consumers to get their questions answered by scientists, academics and other experts.

Recently, as a representative of our community, I participated in a panel discussion at SXSW Interactive with Ben & Jerry’s Social Mission Activism Manager, Chris Miller. We explored whether our seemingly “opposing” sides could find common ground on how our food is grown.

Much of our conversation revolved around examining transparency through labeling from a broader context. We both acknowledged that in order to look more broadly, we must first bring down the temperature on the public debate, particularly as consumers increasingly want to know more than just what ingredients are in their food. How many miles did my food travel? From which farm were certain ingredients sourced? Are the farming and manufacturing practices sustainable? What about the carbon footprint and water use? These are just a few of the questions consumers are asking about their food supply, making GMOs the tip of the iceberg in a broader discussion of transparency necessary for all stakeholders.

This broader view can open the door to innovative solutions. For example, already many are exploring how technology can assist in meeting consumers’ expectation for transparency. They are interested in knowing that the information is available, even if they may never seek out that information, and are open to technologies, such as QR codes or apps, that with a scan to their smartphones provides more comprehensive information about our food system.

Are these technologies necessarily the solutions we will reach in the end? Perhaps not – but by stepping back from the polarizing debate and political sound bites, and coming together, we can find common ground that ultimately brings transparency to consumers and supports innovations that promote choice, improve sustainability, and ensure healthy and affordable food for us all.

Enright is the executive director of the Council for Biotechnology Information and the head of GMO Answers.