No matter what your political beliefs, you probably long ago reached one conclusion about our nation’s public servants: As much as they love to hear themselves talk, many of them aren’t very good at it.

It doesn’t have to be that way. After all, Congress and the executive branch are famously filled with lawyers, wealthy business executives, academics and a sprinkling of doctors and career military officers, among other professionals. These serious and sober-minded roles presumably require critical thinking skills, independent judgment and incisive expression. Right? But if you ask most lawmakers or administration officials about a complex policy issue, they’re apt to spout tired talking points, poll-tested pabulum and stock phrases devoid of substance or originality. Their press releases are formulaic; and their speeches may be full of bluster, but they are short on imagination.

Story Continued Below

Last week, when speaking to an industry group that opposes the Affordable Care Act’s tax on medical devices, Hillary Clinton was vague: “On the tax itself, again, I think we have to look to see what are the pluses and minuses that are embodied in a decision about either to remove or alter or continue this particular piece of the Affordable Care Act.” This came just before she called for more “problem solvers” in Washington and, as politicians are wont to do, set herself above the partisan debate: “I just think we have to get out of the ideological wars that either we can’t change anything or we have to change everything, and begin to be smart and pragmatic problem solvers again.”

It’s as if, before entering the political world, they’re all given lessons on how to inspire without making promises, to insult without appearing mean and to be a politician without sounding like one—in other words, to avoid speaking straight.

Complaints about political language are hardly new. In a famous 1946 essay, George Orwell groused that it “is designed to make lies sound truthful and murder respectable, and to give an appearance of solidity to pure wind.” But if anything, doubletalk and weasel words proliferate now more than ever. They’re a manifestation of both parties’ desires to doggedly stay on message amid a rapacious 24-7 news cycle and the compulsion of some politicians to pass judgment—on Twitter, on TV or in Politico—on most of the issues that surface during it.

In doing research for our new book on political rhetoric, we came across five general categories of Washington-speak—the devices that today’s politicians use in their never-ending quests to one-up each other while, at the same time, appearing spontaneous—and productive—to voters. Here’s what you need to know to keep up with the best of them—if that’s what you want to do.

***

1. The polite knife in the back. Politicians like to be liked. So even when sticking it to an opponent, they have an incentive to stay positive. Even casual C-SPAN viewers will recognize the most common forms of this passive-aggressive approach.

Take “my good friend”—politician-speak for somebody he or she often can’t stand. “My good friend” is most commonly used on the House or Senate floors when addressing a colleague. Usually it’s a thinly veiled way of showing contempt for the other lawmaker while adhering to congressional rules of decorum. When Democratic Rep. Gene Green of Texas first arrived on Capitol Hill in the early 1990s, he recalled, “The joke we had was, when someone calls you their good friend, look behind you. I try not to say it unless people really are my good friends.’”

A linguistic cousin of “my good friend” is another term favored by an older generation of House members: “minimum high regard.” Former Rep. Martin Frost of Texas, who held several Democratic leadership positions during his tenure from 1979 to 2005, turned us on to this time-honored knock against political foes. Frost recalled “one House member saying to another during floor debate: ‘I hold the gentleman in minimum high regard.’” Frost helpfully translated the phrase for us: “It means, ‘You are an idiot.’”

There’s also “counterproductive,” which, as Brookings Institution President Strobe Talbott told National Public Radio, is “a word we use here in Washington to mean ‘stupid.’” And lawmakers have found they can get away with almost anything if they preface it with, “With all due respect.” That’s just what Maryland Democratic Rep. Chris Van Hollen did in a December 2013 MSNBC interview chiding Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul that Congress would be doing a “disservice” to workers by extending unemployment benefits. “With all due respect to Sen. Rand Paul, that is a ridiculous argument,” said Van Hollen. “Here he is blaming people who are out of work through no fault of their own, who are still looking for work—and that’s a condition of continuing to receive unemployment compensation.” Seems like there’s a lot of respect there.

2. Avoidance of the “L” word—at least publicly. Politicians generally shy away from calling each other liars outright. While not as taboo as it once was, it’s still considered bad form—at least in person—to accuse someone of out-and-out prevarication. (Just ask South Carolina Rep. Joe Wilson, who famously cried “You lie!” during Obama’s 2009 State of the Union Address and earned a formal rebuke from the House of Representatives.) Instead, today’s political figures use words like “disingenuous” in describing an opponent they see as a hopeless twister of the truth.

Here’s Republican National Committee Chairman Reince Priebus, complaining in March 2012 about President Obama’s comments that the courts would be guilty of judicial activism if they overturned the Affordable Care Act: “It’s sort of disingenuous and foolish as a lawyer and a former law professor.”

“Disingenuous” can even transcend lying to encompass a whole category of behavior that is despised, as when Obama visited Oklahoma in 2012 to discuss the administration’s record of domestic oil drilling. Far-right Sen. James Inhofe told a local newspaper: “I welcome President Obama to my home state, but his visit is disingenuous on a number of levels.”