When President Obama signed the Affordable Care Act into law, Vice President Biden made the enthusiastic off-color observation that it was a "big [expletive]ing deal." Support for the ACA rests on the truth of that statement. A "big deal" needed to be something more affordable that delivered the "care" by solving the challenge of the uninsured.

Last week, NBC News and the Wall Street Journal jointly released a poll showing just 27 percent of Americans "strongly" believe the ACA has been a good idea, with another 10 percent "not so strongly" supportive. On the other side, 39 percent strongly believe it has been a bad idea, and another five percent offer objections slightly less critical.

Yet the 44-37 total deficit to the negative side is a comparatively good day for the ACA. Double-digit popularity deficits have been the norm for the law throughout its five year history and have continued as it stumbles into its second year of implementation. A Fox News poll also conducted last week showed a 20 point gap against the law (58-38), and a Pew Research poll from late February put it down 12 points. It's becoming safe to assume the hated law is as lovable as it's going to get.

A myth that the ACA fixes the problem of the uninsured keeps true believers nodding positively. According to the Congressional Budget Office, the number of Americans uninsured at any given time in 2016 would have been 56 million without the ACA. But with the ACA in full swing, and assuming that it works as originally envisioned (a big "if"), the uninsured population is still expected to be 26 million.

Though popularly understood as a solution to the uninsured challenge, the best case scenario is that the fully implemented law resolves only about half of the problem.

We pay a high cost for that half solution. The ACA demands $165 billion in additional taxes over the next decade on the health insurance plans, prescription drugs and medical devices used by all of us. There are also changes in coverage mandates and much else greatly altering the care we had before the change. As it turned out, keeping the doctor we liked was far from a done deal.

Something affordable does not come from layering all this on top of the most expensive health care system in the developed world. Yet the "big deal" ACA saves the status quo by allowing the tiny cabal of big insurance companies and big government to continue to rule over the $9,000 per person we annually spend on care.

As has been noted here before, the CEO of the Game Show Network (a Democrat) and the liberal-leaning Brookings Institution are among many proposing to radically transform the ACA with a price-sensitive system that would replicate the high quality system used in Singapore. Everyone in Singapore is covered by catastrophic insurance against serious medical costs, but otherwise most of the health dollars are under the control of patients. As a result, a nation equally wealthy as ours universally covers everyone with high quality care for about a third of our cost.

The ACA's unpopularity may yet drive a Democratic Presidential candidate to adopt this marriage of universal coverage for the uninsured with free market price reform. GOP Presidential contender Jeb Bush advocated a similar idea this week.

But the President who created the ACA and those few who cling to support for the law still don't allow that it needs a major fix. The obstacle to getting a "big deal" done to provide true universal healthcare for everyone is those convinced the mission has been accomplished.

Ken Braun was a legislative aide for a Republican lawmaker in the Michigan House and worked for the Mackinac Center for Public Policy. He has assisted in a start-up effort to encourage employers to provide economic education to employees, and is currently the director of policy for InformationStation.org. His employer is not responsible for what he says here, on Facebook, or Twitter ... or in Spartan Stadium on game days.