How did Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas lose $400 million in its first year on HealthCare.gov?

Organ transplants, for one, as the Affordable Care Act kicked in and sick residents were no longer excluded for pre-existing conditions. Many flocked to Blue Cross plans that covered the expensive procedures and included doctors at the top health centers.

But it wasn’t just transplants. Knee replacements, dialysis treatment, cancer therapy and the process of getting the uninsured into the health care system all piled up.

“I could list a whole bunch of things,” said Dr. Dan McCoy, chief medical officer. “There was a significant amount of pent-up demand and costs.”

The state’s largest insurer wasn’t alone in misjudging the risk of covering people who signed up on the ACA exchanges. Last month, UnitedHealth Group said it would lose $700 million on exchange business nationwide and warned that it may eventually exit the segment.

Such results have renewed fears about the future of Obamacare, which is helping 17 million Americans get coverage through private insurance and Medicaid. Open enrollment is underway for 2016, and 317,000 Texans had signed up by Dec. 5.

To right the business, insurers are jacking up premiums, dropping some products and cutting their provider networks. Many eliminated out-of-network benefits beyond emergency care.

Blue Cross of Texas dropped its PPO for the individual market for 2016 and raised premiums on its HMO by almost 19 percent. It’s also changing the prescription formulary and some deductibles and co-pays in the HMO.

If insurers can find a way to slow the growth in costs without hurting patient outcomes, their exchange experience will seep into the employer insurance market, which accounts for about half the coverage in the country.

“This is a long journey, and we’ve only taken the first few steps,” McCoy said about the ACA.

In 2014, the first full year of the health care law, about two-thirds of insurers lost money in the individual market even as enrollment and revenue soared, according to McKinsey & Co. This year, Blue Cross Blue Shield units in 30 states are projected to post an aggregate loss for the first time since the late 1980s — and exchange losses are the key driver, said a Goldman Sachs analyst.

The Scott & White Health Plan, which expanded into the Dallas area last year, got walloped with high claims, too. For 2016, its premiums on the exchange are increasing an average of 32 to 34 percent. That compares with increases of about 5 percent in its commercial business, said CEO Marinan Williams.

Does this look like the beginning of the “death spiral” that many Obamacare critics have warned about?

“Not yet — I’m not ready to call that yet,” Williams said.

UnitedHealth CEO Stephen Hemsley said his company could not continue to have such losses: “We can’t really subsidize a marketplace that doesn’t appear at the moment to be sustaining itself,” he told analysts last month.

‘I am appalled’

About 1 million Texans buy health insurance through the federal exchange and about 85 percent get subsidies. That softens the hit from higher premiums but raises the costs for the federal government. And those who are healthy and earn too much to get assistance are feeling the sting.

“I am appalled and livid,” Diane Blythe of Dallas wrote in an email.

She included a note from her broker that showed her 2016 Blue Cross plan going up 28.5 percent for coverage that was more limited.

“This is not right,” she wrote. “I am still as healthy as ever.”

Williams of Scott & White said she hopes the market will stabilize in the next couple of years. Newcomers will learn how to navigate the system and stay healthier, she said. And more “young invincibles” will buy coverage, in part because penalties are rising for those who go without insurance.

But big premium increases raise the risk of what the industry calls adverse selection. Those who need care sign up for insurance and push up claims. And healthy people decide to not pay higher premiums because they don’t believe they’ll get their money’s worth.

If an illness strikes, they can sign up next time and not worry about being denied coverage, as in the past. Indeed, Blue Cross said it had a spike in high-priced claims from members who signed up during special enrollment periods; within the first month, they had 28 percent more claims over $35,000, the insurer said.

Smaller networks

Narrowing the provider networks can reduce costs in several ways. Insurers usually get better terms with doctors and hospitals because they funnel more patients their way. They can also coordinate care by sharing digital records and setting standards for treatment.

Smaller networks are generally seen as a negative, at least in Dallas. Blue Cross’ PPO is so large that most providers are included and customers are accustomed to having many choices. But Scott & White emphasizes a narrow network, arguing that it produces more patient satisfaction at a lower cost.

At the hospital company, Baylor Scott & White Health, employees in North Texas have been using a “preferred” network for two years. That has helped reduce health costs by $24 million, or 6 percent, for a group of 34,000 health care workers and dependents, said Gary Brock, chief integrated delivery network officer.

“Those aren’t estimates, they’re actual numbers,” he said.

The results are verified by a third-party audit, he said. Hospital admission and readmission rates were cut about 10 percent, and there was a nearly 5 percent increase in switching to generic drugs, Brock said.

Several corporate clients, including the city of Dallas, are offering the Baylor network at a lower out-of-pocket cost for those who stay within it, he said.

Blue Cross is getting into the same game. Starting in January, it will add a product for local companies that has fewer Dallas-area hospitals — and a lower price point. The strategy is reminiscent of its fix for the exchange business.

“It’s another lever to control costs,” McCoy said. “And we need all the levers available.”

Twitter: @mitchschnurman