Chip Baltimore

In this era of polarization and gridlock, perhaps it's naïve to expect elected officials to govern in the overall best interests of all Iowans. Listening to Iowa’s Democrats and too many of the media outlets, this past legislative session seemed to have been primarily about education funding — Democrats wanted the state of Iowa to spend more on education, Republicans felt prudent budgeting required the state to spend less.

But if we cut through the ever-loudening din of political talking points, the real question we should be asking is, “Why exactly DO we educate our children?”

In answering that question, we should be looking at the session’s record on measures that would grow Iowa’s economy, help businesses take advantage of our investments in science, technology, engineering and math (STEM), and ultimately provide well-paying jobs for all of our children once they become educated. Viewed through that lens, the session was an abject failure.

There is no better example of this failure than the Senate Democrats’ refusal to pass the Branstad administration’s proposed tax incentive for renewable chemical production. This legislation, a first-of-its-kind innovative proposal, would have built on Iowa’s global leadership in renewable fuels by incentivizing the production of building-block chemicals made from the biomass feedstocks that are a natural byproduct of the bio-refining that takes place at each of the ethanol and biodiesel facilities around the state.

By taking the lead in this next phase of the renewable fuel revolution, Iowans can build the supply chain for the kind of high-value consumer products like cosmetics, plastics, and pharmaceuticals that are currently produced from petrochemicals.

The bill would have been good for farmers and small communities all across rural Iowa by diversifying the downstream markets for corn and soybeans. That’s why the Department of Agriculture, the Iowa Corngrowers Association, the Iowa Soybean Association and the Agribusiness Association supported it.

The bill would have cemented Iowa’s leadership in biosciences and helped commercialize the research into which we already pour so many public resources. That’s why the Iowa Biotechnology Association, Monsanto, Dupont Pioneer, many of the businesses and institutions making up the Cultivation Corridor, and the Iowa Board of Regents supported it.

The bill would have helped bend the curve on carbon emissions by further building out the renewable fuels industry. That’s why the Environmental Law and Policy Center, the Renewable Fuels Association, and the Iowa Biodiesel Board supported it.

The bill would have brought the kind of growth and development seen already in Clinton, Fort Dodge and Eddyville, to dozens of other communities all across the state. That’s why the Iowa Chamber Alliance, Iowa Central Community College, the Smart Growth Coalition, the Iowa State Bar Association, the Professional Developers of Iowa, the Iowa Taxpayers Association, and many others supported it.

Importantly, the bill would have created jobs in which our children would apply the education we provide them, thereby allowing them to succeed on their own merits and provide for their families in the way Iowans have done for generations.

And as icing on the cake, we could have done all of this with ZERO fiscal impact to the state budget this year or next year, and without increasing the total amount of incentives available from the Iowa Economic Development Authority.

For all these reasons, the Iowa House of Representatives passed it on a bipartisan basis with 84 out of 100 votes. The House also included the proposal as part of its version of the final standings bill.

No one opposed the bill — except Senate Democrats. Many communities, industries, and leaders around the state recognized the benefits of this idea and urged Senate Democrats to pass this bill — but they refused. Why? They said it was because Republicans wouldn’t spend more on education. That approach seems to be the epitome of “penny-wise” and “pound-foolish,” or perhaps more accurately, putting politics before Iowans.

What’s the point in spending more than half of our state’s general fund on education if we turn around and drive our educated young people out of state to apply their Iowa-funded education? Blindly putting “education funding” ahead of everything else does not serve the interests of all Iowans. It’s simply an age-old tactic being used to help Democrats get re-elected.

STATE REP. CHIP BALTIMORE, a Republican from Boone, is chairman of the House Judiciary Committee. Contact: chip.baltimore@hotmail.com.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1MWjcFA