Pelicans fly in formation, and long lines of them are sweeping over Folly Beach again after a decade.

FOLLY BEACH — The “air force” is overhead again, long lines of pelicans gliding by, like the Edge of America used to see. Their return, like their disappearance, is a bit of a mystery. But it’s welcome.

“All of a sudden there’s 30, 40 — one day we counted 51. That’s something we haven’t seen at Folly Beach since, I don’t know when,” said Marty Morganello of the Surfrider Foundation.

It’s been, in fact, 10 years since large numbers of pelicans abandoned their nesting ground on Bird Key Stono, the sand bank at the mouth of Stono River between the island and Kiawah Island. But they’re back.

Beachgoers had been so accustomed to the seemingly endless streams of pelicans that they were nicknamed “The Folly Beach Air Force.” Then, abruptly, the numbers fell to only a few at a time.

Now they have returned in force, along with royal and sandwich terns.

Last year there were more than 200 pelican nests on Bird Key; this year there might be twice as many, said Janet Thibault, wildlife biologist with the S.C. Department of Natural Resources.

It’s part of a periodic, if sometimes puzzling, shift among nesting islands by shorebirds and a big reason why a half-dozen or so of the banks are preserved and protected along the length of the coast by state or federal managers, most closed to the public during nesting season.

The birds flock to the slivers of uninhabited, isolated sand where they, their eggs and offspring are more protected from predators and disturbances that include raptors, ticks, raccoons, dogs and man.

The problem is, the tiny islands erode, the high ground gets overwashed or the inlet dynamics change drastically enough to allow predators to close in. Even bobcats have swum to some islands, said Nathan Dias of Cape Romain Bird Observatory.

“That is just the name of the game for coastal beach nesting species,” Thibault said.

The return of pelican nesting to Bird Key is reassuring because of fears that it would be lost after a groin was built in 2013 to protect renourished sand at the Charleston County park on the Stono edge of Folly. Groins stop the sand flow down the surf line, and conservationists worried that Bird Key would be robbed of the needed supply.

But by 2014 it was clear that wasn’t happening. Sand, in fact, was building up.

“This time of year every inch of Bird Key Stono is being used by multiple coastal species such as American oystercatchers, tri-colored herons, glossy ibis, snowy egrets, as well as royal and sandwich terns and brown pelicans,” Thibault said.

What exactly chased away the pelicans is hard to tell.

“There are threats that we often can’t perceive,” said Felciia Sanders, DNR wildlife biologist. But they and other shorebirds that are a signature of the Lowcountry coast, returned.

“It’s not just pelicans,” Morganello said. “You see a constant stream of terns flying.”

Reach Bo Petersen at 937-5744, @bopete on twitter or Bo Petersen Reporting on Facebook.