Goop has a new CEO.

Media veteran Lisa Gersh, who ran Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia and helped found Oxygen Media in the late 1990s, is taking the reins at Goop, the lifestyle blog and commerce venture founded by actress Gwyneth Paltrow in 2008. She replaces Seb Bishop, who stepped down from that role earlier this year (he continues to serve as a consultant for the brand).

Goop is aimed squarely at affluent women between the ages of 25 to 45. The site and associated weekly newsletter feature a mix of musings from Ms. Paltrow and other contributors as well as lots of high-end fashion products from smaller designers, like the underwear brand Cheek Frills. Goop also features a heavy emphasis on food editorial content, such as this recipe for Chocolate Hazelnut Scones.

“I see this as hopefully a ‘next-level’ type of move,” said Ms. Paltrow of Ms. Gersh’s hiring (the two met through a headhunter). “We want to build the business out in all conceivable ways.”

Ms. Gersh, who also logged stints as president of strategic initiatives at NBC Universal and managing director of the Weather Channel, sees Goop at the forefront of a major trend: content blended with commerce.

“Today I think women buy and think about buying in a very different way,” she said. “They read about a product or see it on TV and say, ‘where can i get that?’ This is the kind of stuff we were thinking about at Oxygen years ago, and today it’s really opening up.”

But what about similar content/commerce blends, like say the email newsletter Daily Candy, which Comcast recently shuttered, or Gilt Groupe, which went from red hot a few years ago to layoffs and retrenchment.

Ms. Gersh argued that Daily Candy was mostly focused on local content, while Gilt has been driven by consumers seeking short-lived flash sales. Goop is blending content and commerce in a way that reflects the way people are using the Web in 2014, she contends.

Ms. Gersh and Ms. Paltrow say they want to expand Goop’s small roster of local city guides, and are also planning more pop-up retail stores during key periods–including one in Dallas this November. Both said they’d also like to experiment with more video.

Goop is also working with more top designers and will eventually roll out its own label.

Plus, Ms. Paltrow is exploring whether to start selling ads on Goop, and may look to start marketing the site more as well. In fact, Ms. Paltrow spent some time in New York last week during Advertising Week taking meetings with industry executives. “We’ve never really talked to advertisers before,” she said. “So we’re talking about running more ads and sponsorships.”

Ms. Paltrow also wants Goop’s audience to keep growing. “We’re also looking at syndicating content,” she said. “We’ve had this completely organic base [of fans]. We’ve never bought a mailing list or anything. Now we’re starting to get more aggressive about acquiring more users.”