Obamacare is expanding health insurance to millions of Americans. This will cause people to use more medical services, including those from hospitals, according to government forecasts. Enrollment in both Medicaid and private insurance, officials predict, will rise by 9 million people this year, while the number of uninsured Americans will drop from 45 million to 23 million by 2023. Hospital spending will continue to take up a third of total health care costs, as has been the case historically.

In 2014, the report in Health Affairs​ predicts, the country will spend nearly $960 billion on hospital care. From 2016 to 2023, the health care agency​ predicts that hospital spending will grow at a rate of 6.2 percent each year, or 1 percentage point less than it had in 2008, and 1.2 percentage points higher than in 2012.

"In this period of very slow health care spending growth, the place where spending is growing substantially faster than the economy is hospitals," Holtz-Eakin says.

Hospital costs were a key target of Obamacare. Reimbursement rates for Medicare ​are changing from a fee-for-service – or quantity – model, to one that will reward quality by keeping patients healthy and out of the hospital. Under health care reform, hospitals must demonstrate certain cost-saving measures, including cutting back readmission rates and avoiding wasting money on unnecessary tests.

Ashley Thompson, vice president and deputy director of policy at the American Hospital Association, says much of the decrease in hospital spending growth happened before the implementation of Obamacare, but that provisions in the law such as penalties for high readmission rates have influenced hospital behavior.

Holtz-Eakin says health care organizations know they are being watched. When the spotlight goes off them, he says, the question will be whether reforms stick or whether permanent changes will take place, resulting in less use of services and lower spending growth. Similar efforts at reducing the cost of hospital stays are underway among private insurance companies. ​



Paul Van de Water​, who spent 18 years at the CBO and is now a senior fellow at the Center of Budget and Policy Priorities, a research and analysis group, says health care providers across different medical specialties are gradually becoming enlisted in the effort to slow the growth of costs. Health care professionals within various medical fields are identifying procedures that should rarely, if ever, be done, because they don't seem to be worth doing or in some cases can produce harm, he says.

Other ways of lowering costs will include shifting patients to less expensive sites of care, including clinics or emergency centers. Similarly, changes in technology and procedures are affecting costs by reducing the length of time patients are kept in hospitals during surgery. ​Cataract surgery, for instance, can be performed in an outpatient setting. The laparoscopic technique, which uses small incisions for surgery, also reduces the amount of time a patient will take to heal.

[READ: 10 Changes In Surgery in 25 Years]

Ross points out that changing procedures from inpatient to outpatient is less resource-intensive, and therefore less expensive, but at the same time more procedures are being done. People who wouldn't have been a candidate for a hip replacement 20 years ago now are, he says. "We have less invasive surgical techniques, better rehab and better anesthesia," he says.

Regardless, hospital care continues to be more intensive and expensive than other health care services. Surgery or a week of inpatient care will cost more than a doctor's visit for the flu, for instance, says Andrea Sisko, ​ the lead author for the CMS study. "While there can be accounts [of lower spending] at an individual hospital or individual parts of the country, what we look at is all hospital spending at an aggregate level," she says.

Zuckerman ​agrees. "Even though there has been some movement of care out of the hospital, it's still the case that hospitals are really where expensive care is being provided. The patients that go to the hospital end up being the most expensive patients in the system," he says.