The Interwebs are buzzing about a new CNN/ORC International public opinion poll that has shaken up the order in the cast of “Undeclared,” also known as the half-dozen or so Republican 2016 presidential contenders.

Set aside for a moment one head-scratching poll result – Republican voters really, really want Mitt Romney to run for president again – and consider another: Dr. Ben Carson placed second in that poll, at 10 percent to Romney’s 20 percent. The retired neurosurgeon, who has quietly toured political hot spots like Iowa and New Hampshire but has yet to announce a PAC or do much obvious fundraising, is the second choice to Romney, ahead of better-known (and better funded) potential GOP candidates like Jeb Bush, Marco Rubio, Rand Paul or Ted Cruz.

For today’s Long Read we at Washington Whispers helpfully offer a Ben Carson Primer to help those unfamiliar with the good doctor (and his somewhat unorthodox political views) get up to speed. We begin with a few fast facts from TIME magazine, which you can find by clicking here; it’s baseline stuff about Carson’s background, his medical career and which Oscar-winning actor played him in a Hollywood biopic a few years back.

It’s not difficult to understand Carson’s appeal: his up-from-poverty story appeals to conservatives, he’s the only candidate this side of Rick Santorum openly espousing hard-core Christian values, which evangelicals love. Yet despite his hardscrabble upbringing and his legendary career performing brain surgery on children, to say that Carson’s been an outspoken critic of Obamacare is an understatement:

Yet Carson really set conservative hearts aflutter in 2012 with what they saw as a truth-to-power speech he delivered before President Barack Obama at the National Prayer Breakfast:

Having collectively heard a stump speech or two since 1938, the Whispers staff found the speech entertaining but pretty mild – Carson never addresses Obama directly, doesn’t look at the president during his remarks and even makes a pitch for what sounds like universal, cradle-to-grave health care, right around the 20-minute mark.

But what conservatives – and neglected evangelical voters – heard in the 30-minute speech was Carson delivering a withering critique of government, the welfare state, taxes and godlessness in American life, delivered to the face of president they believe embodies all those evils.

And that’s without even discussing Carson’s race. Republicans see him as the “anti-Obama,” a candidate of color with the kind of charisma and backstory that can break the Democrats’ hammerlock on minority voters.

Further propelling Carson: A "Draft Ben Carson" movement that has raised hundreds of thousands of dollars and generated some attention for the would-be candidate. The organization has set up shop in Iowa, and the web site insists it has a statewide organization already in place should the doctor decide to toss his surgical cap into the ring.

If you’re tempted to buy stock in Ben Carson for President, however, you might consider the liabilities as well as the assets in Carson’s ledger.

Google “Ben Carson and controversy” and you’ll find dozens of different stories regarding his views – and public remarks – on creationism (he believes in it), the violence in Ferguson (he thinks feminists are partly to blame) and less than enthusiastic views on gay rights. His remarks have gotten Carson prime spots on conservative radio and Fox News, but have led to his dis-invitation as a commencement speaker at Johns Hopkins University, where he was director of pediatric neurosurgery.