Oregon Republican Senate candidate Monica Wehby, right, with Arizona Sen. John McCain, speaks to supporters at the VFW memorial Hall in Gresham, Ore., on Oct., 2, 2014. (Photo: Greg Wahl-Stephens, AP)

SALEM, Ore. — Just five months ago, Oregon's Senate race looked as if it could be a tough one.

Republican Monica Wehby appeared to have all the right credentials to challenge incumbent Democrat Jeff Merkley. A pediatric neurosurgeon and mother of four, she appealed to moderate Republicans fed up with Obamacare and big government.

But polls now put Wehby behind by 10 to 15 percentage points.

A poll released last week showed only 52% of Republicans plan to vote for Wehby, while 22% said they're still undecided.

And conservative outside groups that had been helping her with independent spending, including one tied to the billionaire Koch brothers, have pulled their broadcast ads.

"At this point, the window is closing," said Jim Moore, a political scientist at Pacific University. "It's extremely rare for a candidate in this position to go on and win."

What went wrong?

Wehby faced an uphill battle from the start, Moore said.

"No one in the state knows her. She has to spend a lot of time explaining who she is," he said.

Though she won the primary handily, money for advertising did not come rolling in and she missed that first hurdle of introducing herself to the state.

She developed a snappy campaign slogan, defining herself as "doctor" Monica Wehby, Moore said, but the money never materialized. Campaign finance data collected by the non-partisan Sunlight Foundation show that Merkley has raised nearly $7 million, while Wehby has raised just over $2 million.

Then, a series of scandals dogged her campaign.

In April, news reports about a mother on trial for harming her children with unnecessary medical procedures detailed the fact that Wehby performed at least 10 of those surgeries.

In May, police reports from 2007, 2009 and 2013 surfaced claiming domestic violence. Wehby was accused of stalking an ex-boyfriend and harassing his employees. Her former husband also had complained about her behavior.

In September, Wehby refused a major Portland TV debate, the first candidate to do so in recent memory. She had declined the only televised debate in the primary as well.

More recently, her campaign took down whole sections of her website after BuzzFeed reported that parts of her health care plan mirrored poll questions tested by Crossroads GPS, a political group run by Republican operative Karl Rove, and part of her economic plan matched material from two other Republican politicians.

Last week, BuzzFeed found that parts of a health care column Wehby wrote used language taken from a similar plan promoted by her Republican primary opponent.

Wehby's campaign spokesman, Dean Petrone, said the scandals didn't affect her campaign.

"We've just continued running the campaign we always set out to do, based on the message that Monica is right on the issues," Petrone said.

"If people hear Monica's message on fixing the economy, her message on creating jobs and fixing health care — and these are all things that are in a bad state, especially in Oregon — if people hear her plan, I think people will come around and check out her candidacy," he said.

Merkley spokesman Andrew Zucker said the Democratic candidate has successfully worked to differentiate himself from Wehby.

"Our entire focus throughout the campaign has been where Jeff stands on the issues vs. where she stands on the issues," Zucker said. "Jeff, much like he's been for the last six years, has been laser-focused on telling the story of how he's fought for the middle class."

Salem voter Jeff Heyen, an evangelical Christian, said he disagrees with Wehby's liberal stance on social issues. But he still plans to vote for her.

"Until you see Jesus on the ballot, you are always going to be voting for the lesser of two evils," Heyen said. "Given those two choices, I'm going to pick Monica over Mr. Merkley any day of the week."

Oregon's vote-by-mail ballots go out this week and are due Nov. 4.

Loew also reports for the (Salem, Ore.) Statesman Journal. Follow her on Twitter at @SJWatchdog.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1wdmPji