For the second time this year, a terror group is using comments by Republican frontrunner Donald Trump in its propaganda efforts.

A pro-Islamic State group known as the al-Battar Media Foundation released a video Thursday that shows a photo of Trump superimposed on footage from the bombings in Brussels that killed 31 people and injured scores more.

Related: How Clinton’s Speech Capitalized on Disenchantment with Trump-Style GOP Foreign Policy

“Brussels was one of the great cities — one of the most beautiful cities of the world 20 years ago — and safe,” the former reality TV star says in audio taken from a phone interview on Fox News. “And now it’s a horror show — an absolute horror show.”

ISIS-linked video celebrates the Brussels attacks – and includes Trump’s claim that the city is a “horror show” pic.twitter.com/AkYYfo0OW8 — Mashable Politics (@mashpolitics) March 24, 2016

The roughly nine-minute video, titled “The Exile of Islam and Brussels Attacks,” features scenes from both bombing sites as well as imagery of an ISIS militant who took part in last year’s assault on the Paris offices of the satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo that killed 11.

The video is not the first time an anti-Western network has used the real estate mogul’s rhetoric to achieve its nefarious goals.

In January, a video purportedly produced by Somali terrorist group al-Shabaab, an al Qaeda affiliate, used a Trump quote in which he called for a temporary closing of U.S. borders to non-citizen Muslims "until our country's representatives can figure out what the hell is going on."

Related: Al Qaeda Is Using Donald Trump’s Comments to Recruit Terrorists...and He’s Ok with That

Two weeks prior to the clip’s release, former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said during a Democratic debate that ISIS was using videos of Trump espousing his position on Muslims in recruiting videos.

Clinton’s camp couldn’t offer hard evidence to back up the claim at the time, but shrugged it off when Trump demanded an apology.

The GOP frontrunner has yet to weigh in on the new propaganda video, but when he does decide to comment, probably on Twitter, he likely won’t back down from his previous statements or his isolationist stance that has only hardened in the wake of the latest terror attack.