. (Photo: David Wallace, David Wallace/The Republic)

It’s a shame, really, that Senate President Andy Biggs can’t meet a little boy from Peoria. His name is Paul and he’s five years old.

But then it’s not likely that the millionaire legislator would have to time to work Paul into his schedule, busy as he is running both the state Senate and his campaign for Congress.

Yet Biggs should take the time to Paul in the eye and explain to the little guy why he’s not worth helping.

Not even when it would cost the state nothing.

Paul is one of 30,000 Arizona children whom Biggs could help simply by getting out of the way.

Their parents are among Arizona’s working poor, people who earn too much to qualify for AHCCCS but not enough to afford decent insurance.

Every other state in the nation has a federally funded Children’s Health care Program that offers affordable options to parents like Paul’s.

Andy Biggs doesn’t think Arizona needs KidsCare, as Arizona’s long-frozen program is called.

Millionaire legislators may not need it but that five-year-old boy in Peoria? He really does.

Paul was born with craniosynostosis. Basically, it means his skull closed before his brain was fully formed. He’s had surgery to reshape his head but he has a variety of problems, including developmental delays, poor muscle tone and obstructive sleep apnea.

His mother, Christy, stays home with Paul and his two sisters. It doesn’t pay to work, given the cost of childcare. His father, Paul, makes just over the limit to qualify for AHCCCS.

But not enough, they say, to find private insurance they can afford, even with the $78 subsidy offered through the Affordable Care Act. The policies with manageable premiums and co-pays have deductibles they never could pay. The policies with reasonable deductibles cost too much.

Paul recently took a second job to scrape together what money he can for his son’s weekly therapy sessions but they don’t have money for the luxuries. Things like seeing the battery of doctors who should be overseeing the boy’s care and medical tests to monitor his health issues.

“I don’t know where to go, I don’t know how to help him,” Christy said. “We’re trying as much as we can. We save what we can but it’s really hard.”

Had Paul been born just a few years earlier, he could have been on KidsCare, Arizona’s version of the federal Children’s Health Insurance Program. But the Legislature froze KidsCare in 2010 to save money. It’s likely not a coincidence that we now have the nation’s third highest rate of uninsured children, according to a recent study by Georgetown University.

Rep. Regina Cobb, R-Kingman, has been pushing House Bill 2309 to lift the freeze on KidsCare.

It wouldn’t cost the state a nickel. The feds are funding it through at least 2017 and likely through 2019. Cobb’s bill has a safeguard in place, terminating kids from the program should federal funding be cut.

That was enough to convince 47 of 60 House members to support HB 2309 and send it to the Senate…

…Where it ran into Biggs. The Senate president has refused to allow the bill even to be heard.

Why, you might ask, should tens of thousands of children go without health insurance when it costs the state nothing to offer it? Why would we say no to a low-cost alternative for parents of the working poor when 49 other states have said yes?

Cue Biggs: “I don’t support KidsCare.”

Biggs’ spokesman hasn’t responded to my request to talk with him about why he doesn’t support helping 30,000 children when it’ll cost the state nothing.

I understand why he might not want to talk to me. But he really should talk to people like Paul’s parents.

“I would ask him why he won’t unfreeze it,” Christy said. “What’s the reasoning? It’s already paid for and it could help many children, including mine. I don’t understand.”

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1RTDPGp