Word is getting out about systemic pesticides, and it's bad news. These pesticides are the most commonly used pesticides in the world and they are everywhere — you and I are buying them and we don't know it. They are indiscriminate — they kill insects we don't like and insects we do. They are killing creatures that eat insects, like birds and fish. They are killing bees and butterflies in your backyard. And they could be undermining human health.

These pesticides are especially toxic to honeybees. Many scientific studies have linked systemic pesticides to honeybee colony collapse disorder. Because these are systemic pesticides, the poison circulates in the entire plant — in the leaves, roots, nectar, and pollen. Honeybees take the poisoned nectar and pollen back to their hives and inadvertently weaken their sisters and queen. Beekeepers are losing many hives, as many as 50 percent each winter.

These pesticides are far more toxic than others you might have heard of (such as DDT), and systemic pesticides are persistent — they can remain in soil and waterways for years.

So you could resolve not to buy these pesticides, right? But that's not easy to do. Nurseries will often pretreat plants and seeds with these pesticides — and they do not tell consumers this. Friends of the Earth did a nationwide study last spring on neonicotinoid contamination; neonicotinoid pesticides are systemic pesticides that have been linked to honeybee deaths. As part of the study, they looked at Boulder County. Friends of the Earth paid for bee-friendly plants purchased at Boulder's Home Depot and Louisville's Lowe's to be analyzed. The lab found that half of the plants had been treated with neonicotinoid pesticides. Overall, the researchers found that 51 percent of the plants they tested from across the U.S. (purchased from Home Depot, Lowe's, and WalMart) had been treated with neonicotinoids. The plants were not labeled as containing pesticides.

Advertisement

Research studies are now presenting troubling connections between systemic pesticides and human health, especially these pesticides' effects on neurons. The manufacturers of these poisons assure us they are safe for humans. You can decide whether you trust that.

Last fall a number of Boulder County activists came together to create People and Pollinators Action Network (PPAN); this new non-profit group focuses exclusively on pesticide issues. We are working to change state policy legislatively and to inform Coloradans on the consequences of pesticides. PPAN wants people to know that when they buy a plant at a store, it could contain systemic pesticides, even though it is not marked. And if it is labeled, the consequences of these systemic pesticides are not made clear. If you plant pesticide-treated flowers or vegetables in your garden, any insect that partakes of them — aphid, ladybug, bee, or butterfly — will die.

Several local organizations — including the Sierra Club-Indian Peaks Group and Bee Safe Neighborhoods — are also working on pesticide issues, and we have joined forces with PPAN. Our three groups will work together and separately, using our different strengths to inform Boulder County residents about these toxins. We believe you have the right to know about poisons that you are unknowingly buying and planting in your backyard. We believe you have a right to know if pesticides are being used on city and county public lands that your tax dollars make possible. We believe that neighbors should talk to each other about the environmental and health consequences of pesticide use.

What can you do in your own backyard to make it safer for pollinators? Don't use systemic pesticides, especially neonicotinoids. Plant untreated seeds and plants that bees and other pollinators like. Choose organic seeds and plants.

Ask before buying bedding plants or seeds: "Has this been treated with a pesticide?" If a shop can't guarantee that a product has not been treated, don't buy it. Ask your favorite gardening center not to carry plants and seeds that have been treated with pesticides.

Support stores that have pledged not to sell systemic pesticides — our coalition will be educating Boulder County residents on which stores these are this spring. Let dandelions and other "weeds" grow in your yard — they are important food for bees and other pollinators.

If you are as concerned about pesticides as we are, check out PPAN's Web site at www.peopleandpollinators.org for upcoming events.

Rebecca Dickson is the chair of the Sierra Club-Indian Peaks Group. Sue Anderson is a co-chair of People and Pollinators Action Network.