Talk about a sticky situation, a Florida mother of two, thinking she was using eye drops, instead poured super glue into one of her eyes, resulting in her left eye being painfully glued shut. Katie Gaydos told reporters that the problem began when debris flew into her eye from a man using a leaf blower and she went for what she thought were eye drops to help clear the debris from her eye, according to an October 9 report from Fox News.

Gaydos asked the man with the leaf blower to retrieve a bottle of Visine from her bag so she could apply some relief to her stinging eye. Instead, the man grabbed a bottle of glue used to apply false fingernails and handed it over to the woman. That’s when Gaydos poured the glue into her eye. She immediately screamed out in pain and yelled for the man to call 911, according to ABC News.

Gaydos is unemployed and was turned away by a doctor because she didn’t have any health insurance. She suffered in great pain for more than a week with her eye glued shut until WPBF 25 in Lantana, Florida, ran Gaydos’ story on Wednesday.

After learning about Gaydos’ plight, a different doctor from the same office from which she was turned away contacted her and offered his medical expertise. Not worrying about the money, the doctor offered to detach her two glued eye lids and scrape the residual glue from her cornea.

Gaydos said that the kind doctor applied Lidocaine around her eye and worked her eye lids until they finally opened. “He said I should get my sight back and not have permanent damage,” according to WPBF.

Unfortunately for eye drop users, mistaking glue for medicinal eye drops is not as uncommon as one might think. Dr. Pankaj Gupta told ABC News that he has seen several cases like Gaydos’ and said that the first thing one should do if this ever happens is to not panic and to seek medical help. “The eye cells will slough off and eventually loosen the grip of super glue,” Gupta told ABC. For more on the Florida woman mistaking super glue for eye drops, see the video accompanying this article.