Photo

MIAMI — The glitches in the new electronic health care sign-up system began almost immediately at the Jessie Trice Community Health Center, in one of this city’s poorest neighborhoods, and they never let up.

With a potential applicant by her side, Linda J. Lott, a certified application counselor, stood at her computer terminal and typed the word “Florida” into the insurance exchange network Web site.

“The system is down at the moment,” it read.

She smiled at Wesley Trumpler, 47, and explained, “We’ve had some slow times getting on, and we’re unable to get started.” An 800 number popped up. “People call this number, but they have had the same problem,” she added.

With that, she walked Mr. Trumpler over to a nearby chair, gave him a brief overview of the program — “This is Obamacare, right?” he asked — and asked if he wanted to come back.

Then she gave Mr. Trumpler, who is unemployed and is recovering from a gunshot wound, an appointment to come back next week to try again. He was thankful, not a trace of frustration on his face. He had heard about Obamacare, but, until he walked into the clinic for a medical appointment, he did not realize he could sign up for it beginning Tuesday.

“I need insurance,” he said, “but it’s too expensive.”

All day, trained application counselors typed in “Florida,” or got as far as entering some applicants’ personal information, before the system crashed. Sometimes the crash came when it was time to answer a security question. Other times applicants put in their security question answers but could go no further.

Out of nearly 72 applicants who sat down with counselors by noon, none were able to access the marketplace. All of the applicants were given appointments to come back another week.

“As with any system, there will be glitches in the first weeks and months,” said Annie Neasman, the president and chief executive of the community health center, in Liberty City, a predominantly black neighborhood, where seven counselors spent Tuesday explaining the program and trying to sign people up.

At Trice, counselors aimed to help fill out applications for most people who walked in to tend to their medical needs. Many of them were unemployed and unlikely to be eligible for the exchange, but counselors do not know that until the patients try to apply. If they are rejected, they are given an exemption letter so they are not penalized for not having insurance.

In Florida, which has the second-highest rate of uninsured people, and where the state government has rebuffed the program, allowing the federal government to run it, applicants faced obstacles even before they arrived here on Tuesday. The state’s Health Department opted not to allow counselors inside state health offices, although several South Florida counties defied that ban.

Only an estimated 35 navigators have been approved by the state so far to help answer applicants’ questions about the exchanges. Some nonprofit organizations, facing cumbersome rules and paperwork, decided to opt out of the navigator program.

Instead, much of the work is being done by counselors at health clinics that are working to sign people up as they come through the doors. Their help is crucial to the program’s success in communities like this. Several people did not have computers at home; others said they would have a hard time wading through all the information; some Haitians and Hispanics said they faced language barriers.

But there was no avoiding the delays on Tuesday.

“We’ve been running into some glitches,” Ms. Lott explained to the next applicant. “I want to give you fair warning, but if it happens, no problem, I will give you an appointment and you can come back.”

Ms. Lott also stressed that the information was private. It would either go directly into the Web site or it would stay with the applicant. Gov. Rick Scott has expressed concerns over privacy and has raised questions about the possibility of identity theft and fraud in a state that is awash with that kind of crime.

Bertha Stewart, 53, who is unemployed, stood by Ms. Lott’s side. Ms. Lott asked her whether she wanted to type in the information herself, and she said no. Computers, she said, are not her thing.

After long pauses, there was a moment of euphoria when they actually got past the security questions screen.

“Success,” Ms. Lott said.

But the moment did not last long. “Your account cannot be created at this time,” the screen said.

“Wow,” she said. “This is unbelievable.”

Ms. Stewart, who lost her housekeeping job three years ago, just smiled. She took the appointment card and then waited to be seen by a doctor for her asthma. She cannot afford insurance or her medications, so she is holding out hope that she will qualify for the exchanges or some sort of benefit.

“I am patient,” Ms. Stewart said. “That’s how you get stuff done. You are patient.”

Sitting in an office, Bleyette Georges, 45, chitchatted in Haitian Creole with another counselor. Ms. Georges, who has eight children, four of them grown, heard about Obamacare on the news and decided to sign up.

Her small store, which sold clothes, shoes and perfume, went under four years ago in the throes of the recession. She tried a restaurant, but that too failed. With no insurance, Ms. Georges said she had nothing to lose.

“I don’t know anything about it,” she said, “but I will apply and see. Money don’t come off trees, but there are no jobs out there.”

Her luck was no better. She did not even get to the security question. She was asked if she wanted an appointment.

“I want to come back,” Ms. Georges said. “Leave it an open appointment time for me.”

Her counselor, Lexilia Neptune, grinned and shrugged off yet another failed attempt.

“That’s OK,” she said. “We can wait.”