Doctor of Nursing (DNP) Donna Emanuele performs a routine pre-operation examinination for Ulysses Lewis Jr. Lewis is having surgery on his injured right hand. Emanuele runs the Summit Urgent Care in Palmdale, California and is responsible for the medical care of repeating and walk-in patients. The Palmdale facility works with patients who either have no personal doctor or those who can't afford to seek the help of a doctor. Emanuele examines and treats patients with a variety of illnesses during a normal work day seeing as many as 20 patients a day.

His wife caught the flu and was treated at Summit Urgent Care in Palmdale. Then his daughter became ill and sought treatment at the facility. Now it was his turn.

The middle-aged man in faded jeans and a green T-shirt stumbled into a treatment room in the early afternoon and told nurse practitioner Donna Emanuele he felt lousy, so lousy he couldn’t wait for an appointment with his family doctor, which would have taken several days.

The man was weak, had a sore throat and cough. Emanuele took his temperature — almost 100 — examined him and took a brief medical history. She determined he had the flu, prescribed an anti-viral medication and recommended Tylenol for his fever.

Scenes like this will become much more common as millions of Californians obtain health insurance under the Affordable Care Act. There are not enough doctors in many parts of the state, particularly in Palmdale and other underserved areas of Los Angeles County. Expanding the role of nurse practitioners — registered nurses with advanced degrees — and physician assistants trained through rigorous, specially designed programs to work as part of a medical team, could help substantially, according to a 2013 RAND Corp.study.

“You look at Los Angeles County and you see the definition of an underserved area,” said Cynthia Carmona, a director at the Community Clinic Association of Los Angeles County. “With the implementation of the Affordable Care Act, we’ll need all the help we can get.”

Within limits, both nurse practitioners and physician assistants can treat patients, make diagnoses and write prescriptions.

“Insurance will enable patients to get treatment before their illnesses are so far advanced that it’s almost too late,” said Emanuele, president-elect of the California Association for Nurse Practitioners.

But California is not on the fast track to granting greater autonomy to anyone without a full medical doctor’s license. Physician assistants must practice under the supervision of a doctor. And the California Medical Association successfully lobbied against a bill last year that would have enabled nurse practitioners to open their own clinics in areas where physicians are reluctant to establish offices.

At Summit Urgent Care, Emanuele works with a team of physicians who are available for consultation but not on site. On a recent Monday, the efficient, voluble woman with a cheerful bedside manner was putting in a 12-hour shift. Many patients had come in for flu, colds, sinus infections or bronchitis; one man had injured his knee on a trampoline; a teenage girl had a rash and blisters on her leg and foot; a woman had a urinary tract infection; a middle-aged man needed a physical; a young woman who’d just given birth wanted family-planning counseling. She treated most of the patients herself, prescribing medication when indicated. A few patients were referred to specialists.

Advertisement

“In California, we’re facing a massive challenge — we don’t have enough primary-care physicians to meet the need of the Affordable Care Act,” said Kevin Lohenry, director of the physician assistant program at USC’s Keck School of Medicine. “Medical schools aren’t increasing the numbers of students. We can help meet this challenge.”

When Lohenry was working as a physician assistant at a Chicago internal-medicine office, he saw 20 to 30 patients a day. His workload eased that of the physicians, he said, and enabled many patients to be treated in a timely manner, instead of having to wait for appointments.

Supporters of last year’s failed bill say allowing nurse practitioners to work without a physician’s oversight will help the newly insured in rural and underserved areas. The bill’s author, Sen. Ed Hernandez, D-West Covina, who chairs the Senate Health Committee, said he plans to reintroduce it.

The California Medical Association argues nurse practitioners need supervision in order to protect patient safety and maintain a high level of care.

“Nurse practitioners were never meant to be a replacement for primary-care physicians,” said Dr. Felix Nuñez, a CMA member and chief medical officer at Family Health Care Centers of Greater Los Angeles, which has clinics in Bell Gardens, Montebello, Downey and Hawaiian Gardens. “They didn’t go to four years of medical school and complete a residency. I have no problem working with nurse practitioners. But they work best in a team setting. Within that clinical team, they are able to provide a high quality of care. That’s what they’re trained to do.”

Still, almost 20 states have passed bills similar to Hernandez’s. Studies have revealed the quality of care provided by nurse practitioners and primary care physicians in those states was not appreciably different, said Dylan Roby, an assistant professor at the UCLA Center for Health Policy Research.

“This is a way to improve access,” Roby said. “Eventually we’ll hit a point when doctors will welcome them taking some of the burden because of all the newly insured people.”

Critics have said the increased autonomy could lead to a two-tier model of medical care in which the affluent will see physicians and the poor and those living in remote areas will be consigned to nurse practitioners and PAs.

“I’m really concerned that standards will not be held up,” Nuñez said.

On this particular day, Emanuele — who also works in the emergency room at USC Verdugo Hills Hospital in Glendale — has three medical assistants, though she is the only nurse practitioner on duty. The clinic sits on the ground floor of a medical building, adjacent to a hospital. There is an X-ray room, a lab where urine and blood samples are taken and tests are conducted for cholesterol levels, anemia and illnesses including strep throat, flu and mononucleosis. A half dozen beds, an EKG machine and a defibrillator take up another section of the clinic.

She generally sees about 25 patients a day. When the ACA is fully implemented in California, she expects that number will double.

“Pretty soon we’re going to have millions of newly insured people and not enough primary-care physicians to go around,” Emanuele said. “Who is going to take care of them, particularly in those areas where physicians are reluctant to practice? We feel that we’re certainly part of the answer.”

Corwin is a writer for the California HealthCare Foundation Center for Health Reporting at USC Annenberg.