Embracing profanity: Sammy J.

First, a disclaimer: I am a grown man who makes a living from writing smutty comedy songs and performing alongside a foul-mouthed puppet.

Fellow comedian Dean Watson recently argued that comedians would be funnier and more successful if they stopped swearing so much on stage ("Some clean comedy, please!", 5/4). I'd normally let this slide, but I haven't made a career out of corrupting today's youth to have someone go and ruin all my good work now.

Dean is a colleague – and a very funny one at that. As he rightly points out, since he doesn't swear in real life, to curse on stage would be out of character for him. As he also explains, there is a huge market for "clean" comedians, and I'm glad he is tapping into it.

The problem is, I do swear in real life. Constantly. Joyously. Often several times in a sentence. And I'm not alone; after all, our land is girt by profanity. Thankfully, over the years we have learnt to distinguish sadistic swearing from the casual cussing employed by most of the f---ing champions still reading this article.

Advertisement

Which brings us to the C word – "context". Any word in the English language has the ability to offend, if used with aggression or in the course of belittling someone. Just ask Adam Goodes. Equally, in the right hands, those choice words locked in society's rude cabinet can be deployed lovingly, charmingly and with distinction. Just ask Cate Blanchett, who dropped a gorgeous F-bomb backstage at this year's Oscars and was toasted for her wit and elegance all the same.

Needless to say, I am not Blanchett. I share none of her wit and only two-thirds of her elegance. But, like her, I know that a well-placed obscenity can work to win a crowd over, rather than repel them.

One of my songs, Keep It Clean, examines the history of the F-word while managing to say it 32 times in two minutes. I performed it at the Port Fairy Folk Festival to a crowd of 2000 ranging in age from five to 85. It was a risky move: despite what it may sound like, I was terrified of upsetting anyone. But the song challenges people to examine that word in isolation and questions why it should be given such undue weight, when there are so many better things in the world for us to get upset about – like Cory Bernardi. It got the best response of any song in my show, and not one complaint. Not even from the parents of the five-year-old girl dancing in the front row.

To suggest that comics swear only to "defy authority" ignores that, for many of us, the authority of these words is a thing of the past. Many who swear on stage aren't trying to break any taboos – in our minds, there's no taboo to break.

Yes, the first "dirty word" might get an easy laugh from a shocked crowd, but for the next 59 minutes it's all about the material you've written. Crowds can spot a lazy comedian a mile off, and they will respond by (a) not laughing, and (b) not coming back. It's a delightfully brutal business.

Of course, you might increase the size of your audience if you don't swear. But I could also increase my audience by forming a Justin Bieber tribute act and touring all the cities he doesn't visit. I would probably draw a huge crowd, but it wouldn't be the crowd I'm aiming for. I'll take a smaller cut of the pie and a chance to be myself any day.

So, if you're heading out to the Comedy Festival, please don't make your choices based on whether or not there's a language warning on the ticket. (If you do, I'm f---ed). Instead, research the show and decide for yourself if it's likely to entertain or offend you – but remember, the best ones will often do both.

And don't forget that some of the greatest comedy acts of the past 50 years – from Monty Python to Louis CK – swore regularly and unrepentantly, thrilling their audiences every step of the way.

Sammy J McMillan is a Melbourne-based comedian.