WASHINGTON — Texas is huge. Really vast. Iowa and New Hampshire? Not so much.

They’re definitely not big enough for two ambitious Texas Republicans, both laying the groundwork to run for president, which may explain the elbows that Gov. Rick Perry and Sen. Ted Cruz have directed at each other.

The latest jab came Thursday, when Perry dismissed the idea that Cruz — for all his star power — has remade Texas politics. “We all get our 15 seconds of fame, right?” he asked. “Whether it was Ann Richards or whether it was George W. Bush or whether it was Rick Perry or whether it’s Ted Cruz. … Ask me in eight years if Senator Cruz has made an impact on the state.”

When it comes to 2016, only one of these Texans can survive, at most. Since they occupy pretty much the same turf — the states’ rights, anti-Obama, tea party side of the GOP tent — they’re natural rivals.

Perry spent an hour with Washington reporters Thursday over lunch hosted by the Christian Science Monitor, itself a sign of his ambitions. It’s a venue that Cruz has yet to tackle.

Ideologically, there’s hardly any daylight between the two. Both would drastically curb federal power. Both revile President Barack Obama’s policies on gun control, border security and energy. Perry has resisted the health care overhaul; Cruz triggered a government shutdown with demands to repeal Obamacare.

Perry was no fan of that. Stumping in Iowa a few weeks after the government reopened, he called that episode a sign of dysfunction in Washington.

“Everybody gets to go out and do their thing. That’s his thing. My thing is governing,” he said.

Perry’s calling card is job creation. He barnstorms the country luring companies to Texas. He boasted Thursday that since he became governor, 37 percent of new private sector jobs created in the country were in Texas, thanks to the business climate he has cultivated.

“Think about that. One out of 12 people in America live in Texas. And 3 out of 8 new jobs,” he said.

It’s a boast that draws a snort from Cruz.

“Nothing drives me crazier than politicians who run around talking about the jobs they’ve created,” the freshman senator said a month ago in Austin. “Politicians are very good at killing jobs, but they don’t create jobs.”

The men and their staffs are careful to avoid tough, direct criticism. Cruz press secretary Catherine Frazier, whose previous boss was Perry, offered this when asked about the governor’s latest volley: “Senator Cruz has the utmost respect for Governor Perry and his leadership in Texas. He is proud to partner with him in representing 26 million Texans and defending the conservative principles that have made and will keep Texas strong for generations to come.”

At this month’s state GOP convention in Fort Worth, Perry ran a distant fourth, far behind Cruz, in a presidential straw poll.

Still, he’s eyeing another run. Calling his 2012 campaign “painful” and “very humbling,” he vowed that he would be far more ready in 2016, mentally and physically. If he does run, he said, it would be because “I’m a patriot. … I’m a competitor.”

He offered a scathing critique of the Obama administration on border security and climate policy.

“I’m not a scientist,” he said. But he insisted blaming carbon dioxide for climate change is far from settled science. “Short term, I’m substantially more concerned about Iran changing the temperature of New York” — an allusion to a nuclear attack — than about the possible impact of climate change decades from now.

Follow Todd J. Gillman on Twitter at @toddgillman.