Proposed state bill has doctors, nurses at odds over anesthesia care

Average salary for nurse anesthetists and physician anesthesiologists Nurse anesthetists Metro Detroit: $174,290

Michigan: $171,520



Anesthesiologists Metro Detroit: $269,890

Michigan: $263,230



Note: Annual wages have been calculated by multiplying the hourly mean wage by 2,080 hours. Source: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, May 2014

Road to anesthesiology Nurse anesthetists (University of Detroit Mercy)



Program: Nurse anesthesiology (University of Detroit Mercy)Nurse anesthesiology Degree: M.S. with a specialization in nurse anesthesiology Length of time: 27 months; more than 2,500 hours in operating rooms Applicants: Registered nurses with bachelor's degrees, typically in nursing, with at least one year of acute care experience



Physician anesthesiologists (University of Michigan)



Program: Anesthesiology (University of Michigan)Anesthesiology Degree: Medical degree Length of time: Four years of undergraduate medical education and four years of residency in anesthesiology at an average of 55-60 hours per week. Applicants: Holders of a bachelor's degree. Residents are graduates of U.S. accredited medical schools.

LANSING — Once a week, Mike Dosch typically works out of an operating room at Dearborn's Beaumont Hospital, formerly Oakwood Hospital, delivering anesthesia to his patients.



Dosch, a certified registered nurse anesthetist for 25 years, works as part of what's known in the industry as an anesthesia care team. A physician who supervises as many as four registered nurses will order an anesthetic, he said, and the nurse anesthetist will decide the best way to give it.



"(Physicians) help start cases; they are there available for consultation," said Dosch, also chairman of and an associate professor in the nurse anesthesiology department at the University of Detroit Mercy.



"Generally speaking, particularly with cases that are sort of routine, we don't see them much during the day."



More than 30 miles away, in Ann Arbor, Kevin Tremper, M.D., manages a team of 150 faculty anesthesiologists, 140 anesthesiology residents and roughly 120 nurse anesthetists as chairman of the anesthesiology department at the University of Michigan.



Doctors and nurses who give anesthesia care are battling over an important part of the treatment: which member of the health care team should be delivering the medicine.



A bill pending in the state Senate would remove Michigan's requirement that physicians supervise nurse anesthetists, effectively allowing registered nurses to order and administer anesthesia on their own before, during and after surgery. The bill also would allow nurse anesthetists to practice independently during obstetrics and diagnostic procedures.



The bill remains in the Senate's Health Policy Committee; it has not come up for a vote since testimony was heard in May.





Requirement 'on paper'?

Nurse anesthetists are registered nurses who have gone through advanced training in anesthesia care. They are licensed under Michigan's public health code.



A 1989 decision by then-Michigan Attorney General Frank Kelley further outlined the requirement that nurse anesthetists can give anesthesia under the delegation and supervision of a physician. That isn't limited to anesthesiologists; surgeons or other doctors on staff are able to sign off on the treatment plan.



"It's really just a supervision requirement on paper," said Anna Polyak, senior director of state government affairs for the American Association of Nurse Anesthetists. "Surgeons, they don't like to be a supervising physician if they don't have to be because, again, it's not their area of expertise."



The Michigan Association of Nurse Anesthetists says it has 2,300 members, with another 150 students and 400 more registered nurse anesthetists in Michigan who don't belong to the association. The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, however, estimated 1,780 were working in Michigan as of May 2014, the most recent data available.



Under Kowall's bill, Senate Bill 320, nurse anesthetists would be allowed to develop a patient's treatment plan; perform all tests and procedures related to treatment; order, prescribe and administer anesthesia, including prescription drugs or other controlled substances; and handle any patient emergencies that might arise during the procedure.



Nurse anesthetists only would be allowed to give anesthesia in a licensed health facility or other medical setting during surgery, obstetrical or interventional procedures or for diagnostic imaging purposes. Those services would not include chronic pain management, although nurses could give anesthesia to manage pain if delegated the authority by a physician.



Kowall said he plans to revise the bill to specifically exclude dental clinics from the list of facilities in which nurse anesthetists could practice without supervision.



"They're helping to keep the cost of health care down," he said.



Supporters, including the Michigan nurse anesthetists association, say that's one of the main reasons they're pushing the bill. Anesthetists are less expensive. (See box, above right.)





No opt-out

One number readily available is 17 — the number of states that have opted out of a Medicare physician supervision requirement since 2001, when a federal rule change first gave states the choice. Minnesota and Wisconsin are the only neighboring states to have done so.



Michigan can't opt out of the Medicare requirement because the state's definition of nursing practice doesn't include nurses giving anesthesia independently, the state's hospital association said in testimony. That would change if the bill becomes law, it said, although hospitals will continue to be able to adopt supervision requirements if they wish.



In 2010, the Institute of Medicine, a unit of the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, issued a report that called for nurses to play a larger role in the delivery of health care as the U.S. looks to lower costs and increase efficiency — all while its population grays. Requirements under the Affordable Care Act also mean more Americans now have health insurance, which adds to the potential patient load.



A study that year in the journal Nursing Economics found that nurse anesthetists practicing without a doctor's supervision was the most cost-effective form of care and "the only model likely to have positive net revenue in venues of low demand." That study was paid for by the national nurse anesthetists' association.



Since they are capable of giving the same anesthesia services, including on complicated cardiac or pediatric cases, its authors wrote, "anesthesiologists and CRNAs are interchangeable."



The supervision requirement isn't so much to dictate how the anesthesia is given, but to address other medical issues that arise, said Tom George, M.D., a physician anesthesiologist who practices in Kalamazoo and a past president of the Michigan Society of Anesthesiologists.



What happens, George said, if a patient wakes up from surgery and his left arm is numb? The medical issues, he said, are outside the realm of the nurse anesthetist.

Varying views

Whether anesthesia is safer when given by a nurse anesthetist or an anesthesiologist also depends on whom you ask — and who is funding the study.



A 2010 study in the journal Health Affairs found no significant increase in patient risk when anesthesia was given by a nurse anesthetist working without supervision. That study was funded by the national nurse anesthetists' group.



Separately, a 2000 study found that both the 30-day mortality rate among patients and the mortality rate after complications arise were less when anesthesiologists led the treatment. That study was mostly funded by the researchers, they wrote, with grants from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality and the American Board of Anesthesiology in Raleigh, N.C.



The Cochrane Library, a collection of databases specializing in health care research, concluded in a 2014 review of available research that no definitive answer is possible when it comes to which method of anesthesia delivery is best.



Nurse anesthetists, said Tremper, are "the — by far — best-trained, most-skilled nurses, period."



"They do a great job," he added. "We think working with us has been very effective in providing very safe care, and we think we have a lot of room to improve in improving postoperative outcomes, but just to avoid having a physician involved seems like not a good idea."



Lindsay VanHulle: (517) 657-2204. Twitter: @LindsayVanHulle

Related Links