Ryan O’Reilly centered the Avalanche’s best line Sunday against Columbus in Colorado. His blue-collar work set up several chances for Jarome Iginla and Alex Tanguay.

That included one shining opportunity early in the game, just minutes after Iginla’s unassisted opener 30 seconds in. O’Reilly won the puck in the Blue Jackets’ zone, then back-handed a pass from the corner to Iginla, whose shot went just wide.

The Avs’ top line — with O’Reilly centering two of their oldest players — produced seven shots in a 4-3 loss to Columbus. And together they have been the Avs’ brightest offensive light lately.

It is perhaps no coincidence, then, that O’Reilly’s name continues to surface as a potential piece in trade speculation. I asked him about it last week after an off-day practice.

“You know, I…” O’Reilly said, before stopping and sighing and changing course.

“I couldn’t care less. Knowing where we are, and how we’re playing, all that matters is tomorrow’s game and winning that game. And I’m not worried about anything else.”

As Terry Frei noticed after Sunday’s game, several agents were hanging out in the deep hallways near the Avs and Jax locker rooms. Not that that necessarily means anything. (I don’t know if O’Reilly’s agent, Pat Morris, was among them. But I wasn’t looking.)

O’Reilly stands out as a potential trade piece because of, among other reasons, a sour history of contract negotiations with the Avs. And because he’s a player with enough talent and ability to attract any number of teams’ attention.

At the last minute before proper arbitration was set to begin in the summer, O’Reilly and the Avs agreed to a two-year, $12-million deal in July. It was more than the $5.525 millioni the Avs initially offered. And the O’Reilly camp likely still wants a $6.75 million-per-year deal when he becomes an unrestricted free agent in 2016.

But it’s settled for now. Sorta. Avalanche general manager Joe Sakic said in July that O’Reilly’s contract was not part of a sign-and-trade deal.

But that was then, before the season. And now, the Avs remain in last place in the Central Division with time dwindling away from playoff contention.

“You never know what they’re planning,” O’Reilly said last week. “For me personally, I can’t control any of that. It’s just my play.”

O’Reilly’s play, as a solid and effective top-6 type center, makes him a valuable piece. The Avs, it seems, would want defensive help in any trade this season (every team needs more or better defense).

Potential partners could include teams with expendable pieces looking to separate themselves (Montreal) or teams on the bubble looking for a spark (Toronto, Winnipeg). But all’s quiet in early January.

For now, O’Reilly said he’s focused on getting the Avs over and through their own bubble.

“I think we can turn this around and get into the playoffs,” he said last week. “That’s the only thing I’m worried about.”