A Virginia woman has been arrested for allegedly attempting to provide material support to the terrorist group ISIS.

Heather Coffman, 29, began exchanging messages with an undercover FBI official in July. Coffman allegedly believed the undercover agent was a fellow ISIS sympathizer and offered to put him in touch with her contacts, according to an affidavit filed by the agent.

She was charged on Wednesday with “making a materially false statement about an offense involving terrorism,” per the Associated Press.

ABC News cited charging documents that accuse Coffman, who is married and has a 7-year-old daughter, of “conspiring and attempting to provide material support” to the terrorist organization.

According to CNN, she attracted the suspicion of the FBI through her social media activity. In addition to an account under her own name, she had several Facebook accounts under aliases such as “Heather Obeida La’ahad” and “Ubeida Ametova.”

US World and News Report writes that these accounts “reportedly ranged in their extremist support, but included pictures of armed militants, the Islamic State group’s iconic black flag and correspondence sympathetic to the militant group targeted in Iraq and Syria by the U.S. military and a host of international allies.”

According to the Associated Press, when was asked by a Facebook friend why she posted pro-ISIS images, Coffman replied, “I love ISIS!” The AP also reports that one of her accounts listed her job as “jihad for Allah’s sake,” and expressed her desire to become a “shaheed,” or martyr.

Her defense attorney, Mark Henry Schmidt, told the Washington Post:

As far as I know, she hasn’t traveled anywhere. Her connections with the outside world would be on the Internet. I imagine you can get into trouble on the Internet, but I imagine you can also think a lot more’s going on than really is. If nothing else, this is certainly a cautionary tale about the Internet.

Jim Carafano, the vice president of Foreign and Defense Policy Studies at the Heritage Foundation, said, “ISIS is pure evil. Supplying material support to these terrorists in my mind is about as despicable an act as I can imagine.”