Senate ends flawed Medicare payment formula

The Senate on Tuesday overwhelmingly approved a bill to change the way Medicare pays physicians, putting a permanent end to the need for “doc fixes” on Capitol Hill.

The bill, which passed 92-8, will now be sent to President Barack Obama. He is expected to sign it.

Story Continued Below

Eight Republicans voted against the bill: Sens. Ted Cruz, Mike Lee, David Perdue, Marco Rubio, Ben Sasse, Tim Scott, Jeff Sessions and Richard Shelby.

The deal marks a rare bipartisan policy achievement, made all the more significant considering that health care legislation has essentially been frozen in Congress since the contentious passage of the Affordable Care Act five years ago.

The $210 billion plan was negotiated personally by House Speaker John Boehner and Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi and also was overwhelmingly approved by their chamber late last month. It got through the Senate just hours before providers would have seen a 21 percent cut in payments.

The legislation repeals the old Medicare payment formula, called the Sustainable Growth Rate, and replaces it with a new one. It also funds the Children’s Health Insurance Program and community health centers for two more years. It will be paid for by having high-income seniors cover more of their Medicare costs and by requiring basic co-payments in Medigap plans.

The bill’s passage in the Senate was not without some snags.

Republicans insisted on a vote to repeal the Affordable Care Act’s individual mandate — the first time the GOP-controlled Senate has voted to do away with a major piece of Obamacare. Because of a required 60-vote threshold, it fell along party lines 54-45.

The Senate also voted on GOP amendments to force the legislation to be fully paid for and to rewrite how the program incentivizes quality. Both failed.

Democrats insisted on three amendments to extend funding for the children’s insurance program, add funding for other health programs and eliminate a cap on Medicare therapy services. All failed, but the amendment to do away with the therapy caps was only two votes short of approval — the closest of the night.

The SGR replacement policy was developed by a bipartisan group of health staffers in both chambers over a year ago. Earlier this year, Boehner and Pelosi began working on a way to pay for it. A small part of the resulting package is paid for with entitlement reforms. Yet $140 billion of the bill is not paid for at all in the first decade.

Democrats were motivated to do a deal to ensure that CHIP would be reauthorized, as well as to provide funding for community health centers. Republicans like the entitlement reforms. Both parties praised the elimination of future “doc fixes” and the creation of a system that they hope will reward quality instead of quantity in Medicare.

Republican Sens. Kelly Ayotte, Susan Collins, Dean Heller and Rob Portman voted in support of the procedural motion that would have paved the way for four years of CHIP funding. Ayotte and Portman will face reelection in 2016.

The underlying SGR legislation was widely backed by physicians, hospitals and others in the health care system.

“If we can pass this bill tonight, it will be a major, major accomplishment,” Sen. Orrin Hatch, chairman of the Finance Committee, said shortly before the bill’s passage. “It will put in place much needed reforms to the Medicare program — something that hasn’t happened in a long time.”

Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell said the bill’s passage is a sign that Congress is “back to work” under Republican leadership. And the legislation’s overwhelming approval is a sign that both parties can support Hyde-style restrictions preventing the federal funding of abortions, with exceptions for rape, incest and the mother’s life, he added.

“The overwhelming majority of Americans who support the principles of Hyde should welcome the strong Democratic show of support,” McConnell said.

The bill’s funding for community health centers restricts those facilities from conducting abortions. Democrats pushed back on the restrictions but ultimately supported SGR repeal.

But they made clear that they won’t support Hyde restrictions in other legislation that is not appropriations, such as a human trafficking bill under debate in the Senate.

The SGR bill will avert the need for short-term fixes to stop the significant cuts that would be triggered under the payment system, which dates to 1997. The SGR will remain in place for five years as providers transition to the new system. Moving forward, physicians will be paid more if they meet quality criteria. The specifics of those criteria will now be developed.

Some critics, as well as the CMS Actuary, warn that the new system could be just as volatile as the old. The actuary, who is independent of the Obama administration, said last week that under the new formula, future “doc fixes” still will be needed to prevent major cuts to providers.

Brett Norman contributed to this report.