Law firm Hogan Lovells announced that former Maryland Insurance Commissioner Therese Goldsmith has joined firm’s Health practice and the Insurance Industry sector group as a partner in the Baltimore office.

Goldsmith was appointed as Maryland’s insurance commissioner in May 2011 by then-Gov. Martin O’Malley and served in that role until this past January when the newly elected governor, Larry Hogan, took office.

While serving as Maryland’s insurance commissioner, Goldsmith played a key role in the state’s implementation of the Affordable Care Act. She also held leadership positions with the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC). She served as the 2014 vice chair of the NAIC’s Market Regulation and Consumer Affairs Committee and the NAIC’s Market Actions Working Group. She also chaired the NAIC’s Market Regulation Accreditation Working Group and represented the NAIC at the Cybersecurity Forum for Independent and Executive Branch Regulators.

Prior to serving as Maryland’s insurance commissioner, Goldsmith was a commissioner on the Maryland Public Service Commission for nearly two years, where she was responsible for regulating public utilities. Prior to that, she was a White Collar Litigation partner at Hogan & Hartson, a predecessor firm of Hogan Lovells.

Goldsmith’s practice at Hogan Lovells will focus on insurance regulatory matters and healthcare issues. In regard to the Insurance practice, she will provide strategic support in corporate transactions, insurance M&A and financing transactions, restructuring of insurance groups, demutilizations, insurance insolvencies, regulatory investigations, and legislative initiatives, among others.

With the Health group, Goldsmith will advise health insurance issuers regarding compliance with the Affordable Care Act and other governing laws and regulations, represent healthcare clients in connection with fraud and abuse matters, and assist in developing compliance plans and conducting internal audits and investigations.

Hogan Lovells is a law firm with 41 offices plus five associated offices around the globe, with more than 2,500 lawyers and over 800 partners firmwide.