Medi-Cal set to expand coverage to undocumented children Felix Gonzalez was pulling a typical 13-year-old stunt earlier this month when he piled a friend from his Woodland neighborhood onto the back of his bicycle. The boys were gaining speed until their bike tipped over, sending them into a violent skid that sheared the skin from Felix’s right elbow.



What might have been a quick doctor’s visit for other parents turned into a strained discussion for the Gonzalez family. Was the elbow bleeding enough to require stitches? Would it get infected without medical attention? Felix, an undocumented teen, doesn’t have insurance that covers visits to the local emergency room. Parents Gabriela and Victor Gonzalez, Mexican immigrants accustomed to raising four boys on a tight budget, made a run to Walmart for bandages and ointment and hoped the gash would heal on its own.



Starting May 1, Felix and roughly 170,000 other undocumented children in California will have more options during such crises. They’ll gain access to not just emergency coverage but dental care, check-ups, mental health treatment and other vital services following an unprecedented Medi-Cal expansion that provides full coverage to all low-income children in the state, regardless of immigration status.



Home to more immigrants than any other state, California will be the largest in the U.S. to cover undocumented low-income children, joining Washington, Illinois, New York, Massachusetts and Washington D.C. The expansion, effective next month, was approved by Gov. Jerry Brown in the October 2015 state budget.



That effort is a major step in meeting the larger challenge of insuring the state’s 2.4 million undocumented immigrants mostly left out of California’s health reform push. With county health departments and now Covered California taking steps to cover the population, local advocates and community clinic counselors are trying to match eligible families with affordable coverage options that will give them access to the same preventive services as their neighbors.



Currently, California’s undocumented immigrants are excluded from purchasing plans under the federal Affordable Care Act and only have access to select Medi-Cal programs for limited populations such as women with cervical or breast cancer and minors seeking substance abuse treatment. Those who aren’t insured by employers get their health care through a patchwork of county services, safety net clinics and emergency department visits. Others choose to go without screenings and shots and allow treatable conditions such as diabetes to become life-threatening.



“There is a sentiment that we need to move toward more and more coverage,” said Sarah de Guia, executive director of the Pan-Ethnic Health Network, an Oakland-based nonprofit group that has been on the frontlines of health advocacy for immigrants. “To have people not being able to access health care services as we move toward expansion just doesn’t make sense.”



About a quarter of the 3.8 million Californians under 65 who remain uninsured are not eligible for coverage due to their citizenship status, according to a March 2016 report from the California Health Care Foundation. Immigrants in California make up 6 percent of the population and 10 percent of the workforce, according to the think tank Pew Research Center.



The Medi-Cal expansion for undocumented children is exclusively state funded and is expected to cost the Department of Healthcare Services about $132 million annually. A 2015 study from the Public Policy Institute of California concluded that about half of the state’s undocumented immigrants - or about 1.5 million people - have incomes low enough to qualify for Medi-Cal.



With the stalling of recent legislation seeking to expand Medi-Cal to income-eligible adult immigrants, other efforts are in the works to get more people covered. Earlier this month, Covered California announced that it would seek a federal waiver to allow undocumented people of all ages to buy insurance with their own money. Nearly 50 California counties are also offering, or planning to offer, limited coverage to undocumented families. That’s up from just seven at the beginning of 2015, according to a California Healthline report.



To qualify, children must be under age 19 and belong to a family defined by the state as low income. Children who are already enrolled in restricted scope Medi-Cal - about 120,000 in California - will be able to transition to a full scope plan without filling out a new application. (Source: The Sacramento Bee)

Story Date: April 21, 2016