Topics: Apparatus, Apple, E-Z Pass, Edward Snowden, FISC, Giorgio Agamben, iPhone, Jonathan Lethem, National Security Agency, NSA, Prism, Silicon Valley, smartphones, Spying, Surveillance, Technology News, News, Politics News

In Jonathan Lethem’s 1999 neo-noir novel, “Motherless Brooklyn,” the E-Z Pass — the electronic, automatic toll-paying device — plays a brief but significant role. Speeding through Manhattan en route to Brooklyn, a kidnapper with his hostage in tow slips through a toll booth without pause, paying automatically with his black car’s E-Z Pass. Tracking the kidnapper, two small-time detectives get stuck: Without an E-Z Pass, they must wait to pay manually, and the kidnapper passes freely into the city’s constant flows.

“Cars whirred passed us,” describes the protagonist and narrator, one of the detectives who happens to have Tourette’s syndrome. “Eatmepass!” he blurts.

In the halcyon years of 80’s and 90’s technological innovation, many devices were framed in the popular imagination like Lethem presents the E-Z Pass: tools for freedom, speed, anonymity and unfettered flows. An Apple 1984 Superbowl ad promised that Apple computing would enable users to live freely and resist oppressive regimes. But as we have learned (and keep learning over and over again) with the recent barrage of revelations about our near-totalized surveillance state, our government now laughs at this idea of cybernetic freedom.

A leaked National Security Agency slideshow called Apple customers “zombies.” Smartphones in hand, we are always-already counted and tracked. And so too with the E-Z Pass, as was reported this week in Forbes and as my colleague Andrew Leonard flagged: “New York City has been tracking the movements of cars equipped with E-Z Pass RFID tags all over the city — not just at the toll booths for which New York drivers presumably purchased their E-Z Passes to get through.”

While the authorities have issued assurances that this previously unknown E-Z Pass surveillance is merely used to gauge traffic flow, insisting that the cars’ identification is anonymized, the possibility of mission creep is high. The president had also assured the public that U.S. citizens’ communications data caught in NSA dragnets was protected from warrantless surveillance; leaks from whistle-blower Edward Snowden have obliterated faith in any such assurance. And while, by the current letter of the law, the police or intelligence agencies are required to obtain warrants to track vehicles with GPS systems, the ability for authorities to abuse E-Z Passes as inbuilt tracking devices seems a reality hard to avoid in this epoque. I will again cite my favorite poem by late-modernist George Oppen: “A populace flows Thru the city… We have chosen the meaning/ Of being numerous”; to live with the technological benefits of communication and ease of travel and movement, we have (often unwittingly) chosen to live countable, trackable and tracked lives.

I think back to the heady days of Occupy’s first flush in late 2011, when near-daily we’d snake through the streets of lower Manhattan in careening, cop-dodging, unpermitted marches. New York’s streets bacame a new and thrilling terrain for many of us then. The flows of the city grid — move, work, shop, consume, move again — were stalled by and for us in those brief slices of spacetime. But there was the great tendency too, for many participants (us journalists especially) to experience those moments consistently through the lens of our smartphones, clutched in hand to live-tweet, live-stream, live-recount. Did we perhaps forget, smartphones held high, to embrace the paroxysm of claiming new space together?

A striking photograph from that time, used on the cover for one Occupy theory journal, “Tidal,” seems to show a crowd of thousands pushing against a chain link fence, defended on the other side by just a handful of cops. The fence, you think when first glimpsing the image, will surely break under the mob’s force – they’ll overwhelm the police and take the space. The barrier around New York’s Duarte Square (pictured in the Tidal photo) was partially breached that day, but the crowd did not bring it down en masse.

On a closer look, it’s clear that there was no crowd pushing together in the first place. At least half of those photographed are clutching cameras, or holding smart phones, observing each other observing each other and transmitting it out to the viewers at home. In my humble opinion: Above all, militarized police crackdowns stunted the weird constellation that was Occupy. But, a tendency — realized and encouraged through platforms like Twitter — to recount to ourselves and the Internet in realtime meant we often missed opportunities for real living. “I wanted the moments of my life to follow and order themselves like those of a life remembered. You might as well try and catch time by the tail,” wrote Jean-Paul Sartre in his 1938 novel, “Nausea,” unknowingly portending our now prevailing social media proclivities. These apparatuses insidiously (and not always happily) shape our very subjectivities — how we get to be and become — government spycraft aside.