Gov. Bruce Rauner has decided that allowing Illinois municipalities to declare bankruptcy is an important tool to minimize union influence and membership rates in the state.

Chicago, which he says "is in deep, deep yogurt" with pension obligations, seems to be his primary concern. The logic of reducing pension debt through bankruptcy works like this: The Windy City and other local governments can only break their agreements promising pensions to retired employees if they get around federal and state constitutional protections for contracts. Enter federal bankruptcy, which allows an insolvent municipality to renegotiate its debts. Enter Rauner, too, who must change Illinois law if he wants to let the state's larger municipalities file for bankruptcy.

Voters and politicians in the state should know that Rauner's proposals generate more heat than light. In the two biggest city bankruptcies in our national history, Detroit and Stockton, Calif., even the Republican leaders in both cities decided, in the end, that it would not be a good idea to cut too deeply into their pension commitments. Why?

First, in Detroit it became apparent that the city had few fat cats on the pension rolls. Indeed, cuts to pension income would sink hundreds of city retirees below the poverty line. This was a painful humanitarian reality, but so, too, was it an economic one: When a city comes out of bankruptcy, it must be able to keep up with its obligations under its bankruptcy plan. More concentrated local poverty would harm the city's people — as well as its bank account.

A second main argument against cutting pension benefits showed up in Stockton. Officials there determined that cutting benefits would make the city uncompetitive for hiring public employees, especially police. That was a hard pill to swallow for a city with a troubling crime rate and no cash to spare on competitive wages.

The cities did not spare retirees entirely, to be sure. Instead of cutting pension payments, both cities canceled pension health care benefits. These cuts were extremely painful to retirees, but in the end they were politically and morally preferable to the alternatives for one reason: The Affordable Care Act was there as a safety net. The ACA provides that even an ailing 85-year-old retiree is able to find some kind of health care coverage. With the ACA on the chopping block, both at the Supreme Court and with Congress, will that safety net still be there if Illinois cities file for bankruptcy?

The reality of pensions in city bankruptcy is much more about fiscal facts and humanitarian imperatives than Rauner's partisan anti-union rancor might suggest. The decision to preserve most pension payments but rely on the ACA as a safety net for health care was made by Republicans in both cities. Stockton had Republican mayors in the years leading up to, and during, the bankruptcy. Detroit's bankruptcy plan was written by an emergency manager who was appointed by Michigan's Republican governor, Rick Snyder. Like Rauner, Snyder has made anti-union right-to-work laws a centerpiece of his administration.

Republican leaders on the ground in both cities simply ran into the hard truth that their municipalities would be even worse off — as a debtor, as a city — if they cut their retirees' pensions. There is every reason to think that Illinois municipalities would run into these and other hardships if they did decide to cut deeply into pension benefits.

It looks like Rauner is trying to make municipal bankruptcy part of his bid to out-Walker Wisconsin Republican Gov. Scott Walker when it comes to breaking unions. But it is not at all clear that cutting pension obligations is the best antidote to too much debt. Or yogurt.

Michelle Wilde Anderson is a professor at Stanford Law School and a scholar of city poverty, governance and municipal bankruptcy.