Republicans have maneuvered all year to avoid a fiscal cliff in 2015. Now it looks like they’re going to get a Denali-sized one.

With the nation's borrowing authority set to lapse as early as November, and money to keep the federal government and road construction projects funded increasingly likely to run dry around the same time, the end of 2015 increasingly has the makings of a very unhappy holiday season for Washington.

Story Continued Below

Indeed, the ongoing inertia of Congress could produce a year-end scramble on those big-ticket items, as well as the looming expiration of billions in tax breaks.

That’s bad news not just for lawmakers’ hopes of an early Thanksgiving break. It's essentially become GOP doctrine that dealing with weighty issues individually rather than in one mega-package yields better results for fiscal conservatives. Tax and fee increases are more likely to be tucked into those grand measures, Republicans say; taking on each piece of legislation discretely offers more time for scrutiny and fewer opportunities to lard up a catch-all measure.

“The more that you can have a clean debate on these issues, obviously the better off you are and I think we win on the spending issue,” said Sen. John Thune of South Dakota, the No. 3 Senate Republican. But “around here, when a critical mass starts to hit and everything hits the fan at the end of the year, they all have a tendency to get grouped together. I’d be surprised if that probably doesn’t happen.”

“We’re out of time now. And I think they’ll have to come together in some large package between now and the end of the year,” sighed Sen. Roy Blunt (R-Mo.), who blames Democratic intransigence for the predicament. “I don’t know that it produces more or less spending. But it certainly produces a worse process.”

Congress could hardly have orchestrated the coming storm any better had they intended to: Democrats and Republicans are now aiming to change the new shutdown date from Oct. 1 to mid-November, which is almost exactly when the Treasury Department is expected to run out of "extraordinary" measures to stave off the need to raise the debt ceiling, according to sources in both parties.

Highway policy expires on Oct. 29, yet Congress built in wiggle room that could buy more time without another infusion of funds. And those pesky tax extenders with benefits for mass transit users and homeowners still need retroactive action to give taxpayers their breaks for 2015.

Moreover, Republicans will need Democratic votes to do any of those things, particularly raising the debt ceiling, which could trigger a rebellion from conservatives if spending isn’t cut commensurately. Perhaps the only way avoid a default is by stitching together a coalition of defense hawks, appropriators and pro-infrastructure Republicans, along with most Senate Democrats. The thinking is that they would come together on a broad budget deal that raises the debt ceiling, makes cuts in some areas while increasing spending in others, and clinches a long-term deal on highway spending.

“It may end up a big deal, it may end up in certain pieces. But until they get their act together it’s hard to say what’s going to happen,” Sen. Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.) said in an interview. “Everyone’s waiting for the Republicans.”

This isn't necessarily how Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) wanted to play things; McConnell is said to be wary of the White House pushing a sweeping deal that raises the stakes of fiscal negotiations and increases the possibility of calamity. McConnell tried to put the infrastructure issue to bed earlier this year to shrugs from the House, and people who speak with him frequently say there’s still some hope that they can deal with each issue individually. As of right now, the dates do not all line up.

But it’s easy to see how they could. And Democrats are pushing for a big bargain, believing it’s to their advantage.

“They should be done at the same time. Why have two big fights? Do it once and get it over with,” said Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.) in an interview.

That could force Congress into a painful pre-Thanksgiving fiscal cliff in which it’s impossible to know "exactly how it’s going to end up,” in the words of Senate Majority Whip John Cornyn (R-Texas).

“I don’t know if it’s possible to deal with them separately,” Cornyn said. “We gotta pass the debt ceiling but I can’t see people voting for it without some way to actually deal with the debt and deal with spending.”

A big legislative package, he added, might not be “a bad thing because it gives us a little more flexibility to look at this package to see what combination we need.”

Though the House typically leads on spending matters, Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio) appears likely to struggle to even pass a short-term spending bill past Sept. 30 to set up the budget negotiations. House conservatives are demanding he take a hard line on defunding Planned Parenthood, even threatening to force a vote to depose the speaker.

So McConnell, who’s gotten Washington out of several jams via back-channel negotiations with Vice President Joe Biden and Reid, is already being looked at as the GOP point man.

“The House has been dragging its feet. So I’m beginning to think more and more that Sen. McConnell ought to take the lead,” said Sen. Barbara Mikulski (D-Md.), her party's leader on spending issues.

But the challenge is daunting for McConnell. The debt ceiling will be a difficult lift for his Republican members without spending cuts. Raising domestic spending caps is anathema to the GOP. And an infrastructure bill that lacks logical funding mechanisms will alienate other Republicans.

There's also significant skepticism among many lawmakers about a big legislative package, particularly after the passage of the leviathan Affordable Care Act that many of today’s Republicans rode into Congress opposing.

“If you just do everything one at a time, we’re better off,” said Sen. Tim Scott (R-S.C.), a staunch conservative.

And that’s just the Senate. Many members of the raucous House Republican Conference will have their own ideas about a catch-all fiscal negotiation if Reid and McConnell can put something together.

Though a budget deal combining the four major moving parts will shrink the list of eligible GOP votes to support it, it could also help some fence-sitting Republicans find a way to vote for it. Save for confrontational lawmakers like Sen. Ted Cruz and the House Freedom Caucus, most members of Congress don’t want to be tagged with precipitating financial disaster just ecause they didn't get everything they want.

“It’s often easier to do a bigger deal,” Schumer said. “Because there’s enough in there that people will vote for if they don’t like other pieces.”