Top Dems host party to celebrate Obamacare rulings

Congressional Democrats celebrated the Supreme Court’s decision to uphold a core tenet of Obamacare during an intimate party on Wednesday hosted by the party’s two senior-most lawmakers.

Just off the House floor, Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid (D-N.V.) and House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) cheered on the Affordable Care Act just weeks after the court ruled that a contested section of the controversial law was constitutional. The lawmakers, wearing stickers that proclaimed “ACA works,” touted the law as one of the strongest “pillars of economic and healthcare success” in legislative history.

Story Continued Below

“The fact is we wrote an iron-clad constitutional bill so let us take credit,” said Pelosi to cheers from the 100-person crowd. POLITICO was given exclusive access to the event. “I hope you all take a great deal of personal satisfaction in what you did to make it happen and because of you…. 17 million more Americans are insured. The quality of care has increased, the cost overtime is decreasing. It is a remarkable fulfillment.”

Obamacare has faced a steady stream of court challenges, but the Supreme Court has twice sided with President Barack Obama’s administration to rule that the federal government can impose a levy on individuals who don’t purchase health insurance and that tax subsidies are available to individuals in any state.

The most recent decision, on the tax subsidies, came down in June.

Senior Democrats have stood behind Obama’s signature achievement, even as the law’s popularity plummeted after it passed in 2010. Republicans capitalized on Obamacare’s early troubles during the 2012 and 2014 elections, forcing some vulnerable Democrats to distance themselves from the law.

At the event, Pelosi said it was a “courageous” vote for some Democrats that she argued was now paying off as more Americans get insured. The California Democrat praised Reid, the late Sen. Ted Kennedy and former Rep. John Dingell (D-Mich.) for their work to push the healthcare law forward.

“Nancy, We did this together,” Dingell shouted from the back of the room.

Reid said the two Supreme Court decisions were a “stamp of approval” that Democrats passed a significant piece of legislation.

“I feel so fulfilled about having a stamp of approval on two separate occasions from the Supreme Court and now maybe, maybe, finally…. the naysayers, the Tea Party-driven Republicans, will leave the American people alone and let hem enjoy their healthcare,” Reid said.

Both Pelosi and Reid thanked the attendees for their work on the healthcare law.

“It couldn’t of happened without you,” Reid said.

The guests included Democratic staffers from the House and Senate who helped craft the bill and industry supporters like the AARP. Reps. Louise Slaughter of New York, Xavier Becerra of California, Jared Polis of Colorado, Ben Ray Lujan of New Mexico, Maxine Waters of California and Rosa DeLauro of Connecticut all attended, as did former Reps. Bart Stupak, George Miller, Rush Holt and Bart Gordon. Secretary of Health and Human Services Sylvia Mathews Burwell and former secretary Kathleen Sebelius also attended.