A quick history lesson for the next presidential election. Which political party took Social Security from the independent trust fund and put it into the general fund so that Congress could spend it? Which was the same political party that eliminated the income tax deduction for Social Security withholding and the same political party that started taxing Social Security annuities? It was the Democrats and they tell you that the Republicans want to take your Social Security away.

Jim Dandy

I’d like to make a comment about the Cluster. I think they do a good job providing for the needs of the people who need food items. I’d like to see it moved actually back towards Robinson Street where all the other help is for the people. I think it would be best. It’s just not a good time for Pottstown to see that for anybody who wants to come live here.

It’s amazing about the transgender bathrooms. We already have them. Many stores have he, she and family bathrooms. Others have he and she bathrooms, one bathroom for everybody. You go in and you lock the door. What’s going on now is ridiculous.

Night Light

Donald Trump has offended women, African Americans, Mexicans, Muslims, people with disabilities, people’s appearance and most of all he has personally bad-mouthed the party he claims to be a part of. I don’t know about you but I don’t see any way Donald Trump can win with burning every bridge that he had to cross to get where he is today. What a disaster for the Republican Party. Better luck in 2020.

Advertisement

This one is especially for you Ted Cruz. You are out of here. Yippee. Yahoo. Hurray.

You hear all these Republicans saying they want it to be like Ronald Reagan and trickle-down economics. Did any middle- or lower-class people see any increase in their pay? How did that affect them? Besides that, Reagan fired the air traffic controllers when they went on strike for more money. So he wasn’t for the middle class. He was for the higher-ups just like Donald Trump. Do you think a billionaire is going to help the middle and lower class? I don’t think so.

A Bunch of Hot Air

After Indiana’s primaries, Sen. Cruz dropped out and he was going to stay until the end and do the contest in Cleveland. I think he really dropped out because he didn’t want to bring any embarrassment to his father. What Donald Trump said might have been half true but I think he dropped out because of his father.

Vince Papale, yes you are a hero. What happened to you since you retired? And to vote for Pat Toomey? What a disgrace.

The Beast

I would like to give a shout-out to the Gilbertsville Ambulance Company. They picked me up off the floor twice and took me to the hospital. They did a wonderful job and they were very compassionate.

Carol from Gilbertsville

This is to answer Big John North Coventry. Not all people are included in not being able to afford Obamacare. The only ones who can’t afford Obamacare are the ones who have to work and pay for their own and pay for the ones who don’t want to work. As long as you don’t work you get free health care while the working man still suffers.

Walmart founder Sam Walton said there was only one boss, the customer, and he can fire everybody in the company from the chairman on down simply by spending his money elsewhere. Over the last year that customer has indeed taken his business elsewhere fueling a series of epic setbacks for the retail giant.

Chief Wahoo

Short and sweet. Here we go. We got Trump versus Clinton. Trump I guess you could say is a bad dream and Clinton is a nightmare. That’s it.

In West Virginia, Hillary Clinton met the press to cover a question-and-answer group. She knew the questions ahead of time and the answers but she got caught off guard when a miner asked her what she would do for them. Her answer was to close the mines. She forgot the miners are union members and she needs their votes and their money. The answer should have been “I will do my best to bring new jobs here.” She does not work very good under pressure.

John Kennedy gets a pass but not his brother Ted. Regarding the Catholic/Democrat debate, John served and died long before the Democratic leadership turned the party to the left and evil path where it continues to progress worse each year. I was a Democrat until their fall and voted for John Kennedy as well as Harry Truman.

Info Depot

Sound Off is a forum to spur dialogue from residents of the communities we serve on topics of interest in those communities. Fair game are comments that raise issues of note or amplify ongoing debates.

We will not publish comments that are potentially libelous, slanderous, mean-spirited, vulgar or inappropriate. Publications of Sound Off comments are at the sole discretion of the publisher.