The countdown is on in New Orleans for one of the biggest games of the year.

Kickoff to the Black and Gold's 2014 regular season against their archrivals, the Atlanta Falcons, is set for Sunday, but many Saints fans are worried they'll be left in the dark and won't be able to cheer on the home team due to an ongoing dispute.

At Mid-City Yacht Club in the 400 block of South St. Patrick Street spirited football fans cheer on their favorite college football team. And ever since DirecTV's stopped transmitting Raycom stations, owner Jeremy Sauer has been busy setting up his own line of defense.

"I have three methods of defense. I had to rearrange wires that haven't been used in years just to be able to have both DirecTV and the backups that I needed in order to show all the games," Sauer said.

He spent 10 grueling hours setting up an antenna, a cable box and sound system for six of his 10 televisions.

"Our Saints crowd is very devoted. They come here specifically for the quality of the TVs and the setup we have," Sauer said.

"From the moment it ended last year, we're looking forward to that first game. I'd like to just sit at home and watch it by myself with family and friends," football fan Mike Heid said. "I'm not going to be able to do that so I'm going to have go to a bar."

The Raycom blackout on DirecTV has been going on since Monday and negotiations continue. The Raycom group owns or manages 53 television stations nationwide.

That includes WVUE, the Fox television affiliate in New Orleans. Tom Benson's Louisiana Media Company owns the station, but turned over all operations to Raycom late last year.

The Alabama-based station group employs staff and makes programming-related decisions. Over the past week, Raycom and DirecTV have offered opposing perspectives on the impasse, with both sides telling viewers they hoped for a resolution.

Viewers can receive the game over the air, using a television antenna. They will not, however, get the game as part of the NFL's Sunday Ticket package.

Broadcasts of local teams are blacked out from that subscription package.

Such disputes between local broadcast affiliates and cable and satellite operators have become more common in recent years, with tens of millions of dollars in compensation usually at stake.

"For this week, I think I would improvise but if this goes on for a while I don't know what we'll do," football fan James Thompson said. "I think that's when you have to look at more serious options."

All this is happening as many Saints fans prepare for Sunday's kickoff.