Democratic House Speaker Michael Madigan and Senate President John Cullerton held their first meeting with Republican Gov.-elect Bruce Rauner on Thursday, emerging to say they will put the negativity of the campaign behind them and work together on the state’s dire budget problems.

“I think we had a very productive meeting this morning,” Madigan said after a two-hour get-together at the private Chicago Club in Chicago. “I pledged to the governor that we’re going to work with him professionally.

“I think there’s a general agreement among the three of us that in light of the expiration of the tax increase in January, the biggest problem facing the state right now is the budget, and the budget deficit,” Madigan said. “And Gov. Rauner understands that and he’s working with his people to try and get a better understanding of precisely where the finances are on this current budget.”

Madigan said the Democratic leaders stressed the most pressing challenge is the $4 billion-a-year budget hole that will be created Jan. 1 when portions of a temporary income tax increase are set to expire. Rauner, who takes over for defeated Democratic Gov. Pat Quinn on Jan. 12, campaigned to fully phase out the tax increase over four years.

Cullerton said Rauner offered no specific budget plans, saying the meeting was “more of a get-to-know-you” following a bruising campaign season. He added, “he was very nice.”

“We didn’t get into apologies, but we talked about moving forward and working together and that’s what we want to do,” Cullerton said.

“We’re waiting to hear what he would have to say about his budget, we told him that’s the most important thing he can do,” Cullerton added.

Rauner was more tight-lipped, saying only that it was a “good meeting and we look forward to many more working together.”

Rauner, a wealthy suburban equity executive, blasted the two Chicago Democrats during the campaign as key players with Quinn in a corrupt Springfield culture that he plans to upend. But the reality is that overwhelmingly Democratic majorities in the House and Senate mean Rauner has to chart a careful course in order to accomplish his goals.

At the meeting, Rauner reiterated his call for lawmakers to avoid action on any major legislation when they return to Springfield next week for the lame duck veto session, even as Quinn has vowed to push ahead with his desire to raise the state’s minimum wage to at least $10 an hour.

Madigan and Cullerton said it was too early to say whether lawmakers will vote to increase the minimum wage before Rauner takes the helm in January, though Madigan said he is “encouraging” members of the House to support an increase. Rauner has said he favors an increase only if tied to pro-business measures such as changes in the state’s workers’ compensation system and limits on liability lawsuits.

Businessman Bruce Rauner prepares for his term in office after winning the 2014 election.

“He repeated what’s been reported, that he would prefer that significant items not occur until he becomes the governor, which is a reasonable request,” Madigan said. “We explained there are some minor items that will probably be moving through the legislature between now and January, and we’re going to tell him what they are as soon as we know what they are.”

“We’re currently working with Democratic members of the House, encouraging them to support the minimum wage,” Madigan added. “We’ll have a better understanding sometime next week where the vote count is on that issue.”

At an event later in the day, Quinn scoffed at Rauner’s suggestion that lawmakers should avoid action on major proposals until he and a new crop of legislators are sworn into office early next year.

“You’re not sworn in for part of your term, every day counts. Every day of your term, you have to be ready to do your job,” said Quinn, in his first comments to the media since the Nov. 4 election. “And I would say to all the legislators, this is not holiday time, this is working time. Your job is to work for the public good, and I would say on the minimum wage if you really want to help people back home, raise the wage and do your job because that’s what the people want you to do.”

At an appearance to highlight open enrollment for insurance coverage under the federal Affordable Care Act, Quinn pointed out the overwhelming support for a nonbinding ballot question asking whether the state’s $8.25 an hour minimum wage should be hiked to $10 by Jan. 1.

“The people of Illinois spoke last week, 2-1 margin,” Quinn said. “Raise the minimum wage. That’s the best way to help many, many people escape poverty.”