There is little time for the two sides to reach a deal. It's all on Reid and McConnell

It’s now the Harry and Mitch show.

After Senate Democratic leaders rejected a proposal Saturday by Sen. Susan Collins (R-Maine) to end the budget impasse, the burden to find a solution now falls squarely on Majority Leader Harry Reid and Minority Leader Mitch McConnell — two shrewd tacticians who have a long, complicated and contentious personal and political history with each other.

Story Continued Below

Republican senators, eager for a way out of a shutdown fight that has roiled their party’s brand, reacted to the leadership discussions positively, believing that the two crafty dealmakers could concoct a proposal to reopen the government and avert the nation’s first-ever default as soon as next week.

Reid, however, was notably more dour.

When asked if he is confident he could reach a deal with McConnell, Reid told POLITICO: “No.”

( PHOTOS: Lawmakers arrive for budget showdown)

“I’m just doing my best, I’m not confident in anything in the way Republicans have acted,” the Nevada Democrat said.

McConnell, along with his close ally Sen. Lamar Alexander (R-Tenn.), quietly met with Reid and Sen. Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.) early Saturday to find a way out of the first possible default in U.S. history when the Treasury Department begins to run out of money Oct. 17. While senators said it was a positive discussion, how the impasse is resolved from here remains a major question going forward.

“Very pleasant” was how Reid described the meeting.

“They had a good talk this morning,” said Schumer, who has had about a dozen Senate Republicans reach out to him in recent days pushing for a deal.

“We had a good meeting,” McConnell added.

( Also on POLITICO: House takes back seat after W.H. rejects budget plan)

McConnell is widely viewed as being in a disadvantage in the talks. The GOP leader wants a way out of the politically damaging crisis, and Reid is not willing to give a whole lot.

McConnell, sources said, is eager to lock in lower-funding numbers at next year’s $967-billion level after the automatic sequestration cuts take effect. That number is too low for Democrats, but sources familiar with the talks said they were willing to agree to a stop-gap spending bill until mid-January at the $986 billion level before the new round of sequestration cuts take effect. It’s unclear whether McConnell would go for that.

Moreover, Democrats want a long-term increase in the $16.7 trillion national debt ceiling — potentially through next year — something Republicans blocked in a 53-45 vote in the Senate on Saturday afternoon. They want something far longer than what Collins proposed, which was through the end of January.

It’s far from clear whether Republicans will get anything out of Obamacare, even though GOP demands to gut the controversial law was the chief disagreement that spurred the first government shutdown in 17 years. Potentially, Republicans may get a two-year delay of the 2.3 percent medical device tax in the law, given the levy’s unpopularity even among Democrats. Moreover, in recent days, Republicans have been asking for a requirement for income verification of Obamacare subsidies as part of a deal.

( Also on POLITICO: House floor tactics spill into acrimony)

But it remains to be seen whether Democrats will accept those Obamacare demands, especially since they have drawn a hard-line against any negotiations and instead called for a “clean” increase to the national debt ceiling and extension of government funding.

Reid said Saturday that the fight over the health care law is no longer the issue for the GOP in the shutdown fight. The issue, he said, was “to do anything they can do divert attention from the fools they’ve made of themselves on Obamacare.”

Reid said that he and McConnell would probably speak by phone before markets open Monday and during a rare Sunday session of the Senate.

Follow @politico