Topics: From the Wires, News

HONOLULU (AP) — Jurors who decided the fate of a former soldier convicted of killing his 5-year-old daughter said their labored deliberations ended with eight of them wanting him sentenced to death and four of them wanting him to spend the rest of his life in prison.

Because they couldn’t agree, Naeem Williams will be sentenced to life in prison without possibility for release for the 2005 beating death of his daughter, Talia.

Weighing the decision meant considering the violent beatings Williams said he inflicted on Talia to discipline her for bathroom accidents, graphic descriptions that one juror said will haunt him forever.

“I have a 4 1/2-year-old granddaughter, and for the rest of my life in her I’m going to see the girl,” juror Clarence Kaona told The Associated Press. “I’ll never get those autopsy pictures out of my mind.”

He voted for the death penalty.

“I’m a little disappointed,” he said. “I feel like we let the girl down.”

It was the same jury that convicted Williams of murder in April that deliberated for about seven days before deciding they couldn’t agree on a sentence. An indication of their turmoil was their announcement that they had reached their verdict Thursday afternoon but wanted to wait until Friday morning to read it because some of them were “emotionally drained.”

The concept of sending someone to his death is unfamiliar in Hawaii, where capital punishment was abolished in 1957, before the islands became a state. But this jury had to make that decision because Williams’ crime occurred in military housing and he was tried in the federal court system, where the death penalty is available.

“It is difficult to obtain a death penalty in a state such as Hawaii where the people have not voted for the death penalty on a state level,” said Richard Dieter, executive director of the Death Penalty Information Center in Washington, D.C.

“This is a difficult crime, a child, but the death penalty is a huge step,” he said. “It’s a punishment that for some states is outside of their standards.”

U.S. District Judge J. Michael Seabright set an Oct. 14 hearing to formally sentence Williams.

Williams was bracing for the death penalty, his attorney John Philipsborn said. “Both of us were relieved,” Philipsborn said. “I think he was very grateful for the outcome.”

After the hearing, Assistant U.S. Attorney Darren Ching, who handled the case, and Florence Nakakuni, the U.S. attorney for Hawaii, hugged outside the courtroom. Ching got a kiss from his wife.

“We put forth the best case we had, and we respect the verdict,” said Steve Mellin, trial attorney with the Justice Department’s capital case section.