A native son who went on to be an award-winning journalist at both The Denver Post and Rocky Mountain News died Aug. 15 at home in his sleep.

Paul Hutchinson, 66, was a hard-nosed reporter who worked best when he was championing the underdog.

During his dozen years — 1985 to 1997 — at the Post, Hutchinson covered a variety of beats and assignments, including hard news investigations.

In February of 1997, “Hutch” as he was known in the newsroom, was awarded first place in the Colorado Associated Press Editors and Reporters contest in the public-service category for a series on Denver’s troubled Head Start program for preschool children.

The articles, which detailed irregularities and questionable business practices by the Head Start chief, led to the executive’s resignation along with other staff resignations.

“Hutch was a rare gem — a skilled wordsmith who could out-research Sherlock Holmes,” said Billie Stanton, one of his former Post editors.

“He was also a pain. We once spent 30 minutes arguing about a comma.”

Hutchison extensively covered the birth of the Colorado Rockies as well as immigration issues.

Whether it was chasing down a reluctant source, poring over files, or shepherding copy, Hutchinson was passionate in his work.

“Hutch’s frequent bursts of fury, his yelling, his stomping about, all underscored his deep passion for the written word, for the story, for the truth,” Stanton said.

Born in Denver, Hutchinson graduated from Denver East High School. In his youth, Hutchinson was a paper boy, throwing the Rocky Mountain News.

In November of 1960, on Election Day, John F. Kennedy campaign brochures found their way into every paper on his route, said Julie Hutchinson, Paul’s sister.

“When the circulation director for the Rocky visited him that afternoon, Paul promised never to do it again,” she said.

Hutchinson was studying journalism at Metropolitan State College of Denver when the department chairman, Greg Pearson, encouraged him to apply at the Rocky Mountain News. The News hired him as a police reporter, Julie Hutchinson said.

Hutchinson’s journalism career took him to New Orleans with the United Press International, the Kansas City Star and the Boulder Daily Camera, before returning to Denver where he went to work at the Post in 1985.

After leaving the Post, Hutchinson spent time fishing, shooting pool and bike riding.

Eight years ago, he underwent open heart surgery and about a year later suffered a massive stroke.

Doctors told him he would be extremely limited in recovery, “he would never drive a car again.” But they had “never dealt with Paul Hutchinson before,” Julie said.

He indeed drove, including a pickup truck with a camper shell. Hutch kept a pool cue and a fishing pole in the truck bed, in case either mood struck. And they did.

“He came back about 95 percent” from the stroke, Julie said. “He was still enraged — on a daily basis — by politics and still followed the Denver Broncos with great passion.”

This December, Hutchinson and his wife, Becky, were to celebrate 40 years together.

A celebration of Hutchinson’s life will be held at 4 p.m. Friday at the Mount Vernon Event Center, 17173 Mount Vernon Road, Golden.

Kieran Nicholson: 303-954-1822, knicholson@denverpost.com or twitter.com/kierannicholson