Video

Image Government 'to expand work-for-dole' 1:34 Play video According to reports, the federal government will expand the work-for-the-dole scheme this year.

JOBLESS Australians will be forced to work for free collecting rubbish, maintaining parks and volunteering in aged care homes, as the federal government expands its work-for-the-dole scheme this year.

The Liberal Government's tough new plan will again make work-for-the-dole compulsory and anyone who turns down a job close to home will lose the payment.

Local councils will be encouraged to recruit volunteers from Australia's army of 805,000 unemployed to pitch in with community chores, including rubbish collection and park maintenance.

Non-profit aged care homes and charities are also expected to offer unpaid work to the unemployed.

The "dole jobs'' are likely to be limited to three-month stints, to prevent employers replacing their permanent workforce with unemployed volunteers.

Assistant Minister for Employment Luke Hartsuyker said Prime Minister Tony Abbott was "very focused'' on expanding work-for-the dole.

Mandatory work-for-the-dole was introduced under the Howard government in the 1990s, but the program was altered under Labor and unemployed people were no longer forced to participate.

Mr Hartsuyker confirmed the Coalition's expanded scheme would be compulsory.

"I'm looking at new and innovative ways to involve people in work-for-the-dole,'' he said on Sunday.

"We are talking to not-for-profit entities about creating work-like placements for jobseekers so they can gain skills.

"We think everyone who is capable of working should be working.''

Mr Hartsuyker also flagged a crackdown on dole recipients who turn down jobs.

He said anyone who refused to work would lose their Newstart payment.

"We will be looking very sternly upon anybody who refuses a job,'' he said.

"We expect people, when a job opportunity is presented, to take that opportunity.

"We take a very dim view of people who refuse a job and stay on benefits.''

But Mr Hartsuyker said most unemployed people on Newstart were genuinely searching for work, and some had been on the dole so long they had trouble finding employment.

"Very few people refuse jobs,'' he said.

"Some people are challenged in finding work.''

From July 1, the government will pay long-term unemployed aged 18-30 a $2500 "job commitment bonus'' if they find a job and stay working for 12 months.

If they remain working for at least two years, they will be paid an extra $4000 bonus.

The government expects the scheme will lure 36,000 young Australians into paid work each year, at a cost to taxpayers of $157 million over three years.

The government will also pay employers up to $3250 for each mature-age worker, aged 50 or older, they hire.

It estimates 22,000 older workers each year will find a job as a result, at a cost of $197 million to taxpayers over three years.

The long-term jobless - those out of work longer than a year - will be paid up to $6000 to cover their relocation costs if they move to a regional area to take up a job.

They will be paid up to $3000 to take up a job in another city.

Mr Hartsuyker said the money would reimburse people's removal and travel costs, as well as the cost of paying a rental bond for a new home.

The government has set aside $39 million for the relocation scheme over the next three years, but expects just 680 people a year to use it.

Mr Hartsuyker said the government would not force unemployed people to move towns or cities to find work.

Australian Local Government Association president Felicity-ann Lewis said councils would insist the federal government cover the cost of workers' compensation and training for work-for-the-dole volunteers.

She said councils would have to induct the volunteers, provide occupational health and safety training, and conduct police checks.

"The days of waking up and saying, 'Can I help?' and someone handing you a shovel are well past,'' Ms Lewis said.

"We want to do our bit to help people get their first step on to the jobs ladder, but we would want to see some contribution (towards the cost).''

National Welfare Rights Network president Maree O'Halloran said the government should focus spending on wage subsidies for employers to hire the long-term jobless.

"Our experience is that work-for-the-dole costs a lot of money and at the end of the program a person usually doesn't get a job,'' Ms O'Halloran said.

The number of Australians on the dole jumped 20 per cent last year, with 805,398 people receiving unemployment benefits last November.

Of those, 224,812 people had been out of work for at least a year.

###