Colon cancer is a lifestyle disease.

Your genetics plays a part in it, but only a part. A lot more depends on your personal choices: how much physical activity you do in a day; the number of chemicals, additives and toxins you take in, by mouth, called “food;” how careful you are about limiting sugar, especially artificial sugars. Lifestyle, lifestyle, lifestyle ...

Colon cancer is also a very common disease in America, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Every year about 140,000 Americans are diagnosed with colorectal cancer and more than 50,000 people die from it, making it our second- leading cancer killer.

And here’s the cheerful part: Colon cancer is highly preventable. Diet and exercise are extremely helpful, and screening people over 50 for abnormal growths (and cutting out “pre-cancerous polyps”) has also reduced the number of people over 50 getting colon cancer. That’s the good news.

The bad news turns my stomach. Colon cancer is rising dramatically in women and men aged 20-49. That was the subject of last week’s column, which has spilled over into this week's column because there is so much more to say.

■ What’s behind the rise? The first answer is, as always, “It needs more investigation. Doctors don’t really know.”

But then some of American’s leading cancer doctors go on to tell you exactly what to do to help prevent colon cancer. So that makes me think they really do know. And a lot of it has to do with the processed foods we eat and how fat we’ve become.

Dr. Robert C. Wender is the American Cancer Society’s chief cancer control officer, and here are his suggestions to young adults who’d rather not suffer from bleeding rectums, bloody stools or any of the other digestive upsets and deaths linked to cancers of the colon or rectum: “Stay at a healthy weight. Eat a lot of healthy food, mostly vegetables and fruits, and avoid unhealthy foods, especially desserts, snacks, sugar, soda and other sugary drinks.” (Note: That makes sugar and soda unhealthy foods.) He goes on, whether or not anyone 20-49 is paying attention: “Eat less red meat (beef, pork and lamb) and processed meats (hot dogs and some luncheon meats). And be sure to get regular physical activity.”

Anything else?

“Find out your family history,” Dr. Wender writes on the official ACS website. “And take any symptoms seriously. There is no such thing as normal rectal bleeding. If you notice blood, a change in the color or size of your stool, a new pain, or a change in your bowel habits, get checked out by a doctor.”

But what kind of doctor? Ah . . . that’s a lifestyle choice, too. You have to find one who understands the link between cancer and food. It’s not always easy, but it can save your life.

■ Red alert time: In 2013, The World Cancer Research Fund completed a detailed review of more than 7,000 clinical studies covering links between diet and cancer.

And guess what? Processed meats — including bacon, sausage, hot dogs, salami and virtually all red meat used in frozen prepared meals — are so strongly linked to cancer, many health experts consider them too dangerous for human consumption.

“Consumers should stop buying and eating all processed meat products for the rest of their lives,” is the way the Institute for Natural Healing puts it.

There is no serious plea to stop eating processed meats and foods on the CDC website. I looked. On the page called “What Can I Do to Reduce My Risk of Colorectal Cancer?” processed meats are not even mentioned. Instead, the CDC waffles with this wish-washy statement: “Research is underway to find out if changes in our diet can reduce your colorectal risk.” Research is underway? Seven thousand studies aren’t enough?

Listen up, dear younger readers: There is a lot you can do prevent colon cancer, the disease that caused the death of both my mother and father. Educate yourself about the pros and cons of early screening. Eat smarter. Exercise more. Move toward a healthy weight. Reduce your sugar intake. Find ways to alleviate stress.

And if you see something bloody in the toilet, call for help.

Marilynn Preston is a fitness expert, personal trainer and speaker on healthy lifestyle issues. She has a website, marilynnpreston.com, and welcomes reader questions, which can be sent to MyEnergyExpress@aol.com.