On we go with our countdown of the Good Guys of 2014, people who made our world a little better, our government a little more accountable and our tax burden lighter.

#9 Kristi Rosenquist

Anyone fighting Minnesota’s green energy, crony capitalism establishment knows there’s only one resource to turn to for backup — Kristi Rosenquist, citizen wind and renewable energy watchdog extraordinaire.

“No one is looking out for citizens, nobody,” Rosenquist said. “None of the agencies, none of the regulatory bodies. Absolutely nobody is looking out for the interests of consumers, landowners, residents and ordinary citizens.

Rosenquist, a consultant who owns a hobby farm with her husband, Bob, is as knowledgeable as any high priced energy attorney but she volunteers her time.

In 2010, she opposed billionaire T. Boone Pickens’ Texas-size industrial wind turbine proposal for southeastern Minnesota farm country with a billboard —“Pickens Gets the Gold Mine, We get the Shaft.” Pickens pulled out and the $180 million project is now dead in her back yard.

Google “Rosenquist” today, and 425,000 mentions pop up, give or take. This past year alone, Rosenquist advised wind development opponents in her home state as well as Alabama, Iowa, Maryland, Michigan, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin.

–Tom Steward, Watchdog.org Minnesota Bureau–

#10 Jonathan Gruber

What? Jonathan Gruber, the best person of the year?

Surely not the MIT economist and Obamacare architect who called American voters stupid and admitted a lack of transparency was necessary to get Obamacare passed.

Well, yes, he is.

Public officials are not supposed to say the things Gruber did in a series of videos that came to light during the second half of the year. No matter what they might think, they are supposed to stick to the talking points, assure everything is being done in the best interest of the country, the poor, the oppressed and let’s not forget, the children.

Gruber’s greatest accomplishment is not helping write one of the most complicated, unpopular pieces of legislation in the nation’s history. Or that he collected six-figure consulting fees from several states while duping them with his projections.

It’s that he told everyone, proudly and honestly, how big things actually get done in Washington.

Even if he didn’t mean to.

–Eric Boehm, Watchdog.org Washington Bureau–

#11 Wayne Stenehjem

“Whenever the people are well informed, they can be trusted with their own government; that whenever things get so far wrong as to attract their notice, they may be relied on to set them to rights.”

Thomas Jefferson wrote that in 1789, and it holds true today. North Dakota Attorney General Wayne Stenehjem is one of Jefferson’s modern day defenders.

Stenehjem’s office has worked hard to enforce North Dakota’s very strong open records laws that apply broadly to all aspects of government. Good laws only work when we have public officials like Stenehjem willing to enforce them.

He has helped keep open records process accessible to the general public, and has been unwilling to accept technicalities or excuses from public officials for not following those laws. In doing so, he has set a strong precedent for enforcing the state’s transparency laws for future leaders.

North Dakota is a more open state, with better governance, because of Stenehjem’s work.

–Rob Port, Watchdog.org, North Dakota Bureau–

#12 John Adams

State Rep. John Adams was one of few elected Republicans who dared question Gov. John Kasich. And now because of term limits he is out.

Adams is one of the limited-government legislators who thought Kasich’s 2010 election heralded a sea change in Ohio. The governor’s proposed

tax hike on drilling for gas and oil, increased state spending and the expansion of Medicaid under Obamacare disabused them of the notion.

As assistant majority floor leader in the House, Adams fought to block Obamacare expansion in the Legislature and gathered signatures for a formal protest when Kasich expanded Medicaid unilaterally.

He and other conservatives worked for meaningful labor law, defined-benefit pensions and municipal tax structure reform.

With Kasich loyalists running the Ohio Republican Party and Kasich happy to lean on his bully pulpit, Adams’ contrarian leadership will be missed.

–Jason Hart, Ohio Watchdog–

#13 Scott Wagner

When he first got to Harrisburg, newly elected State Sen. Scott Wagner couldn’t help but notice a few of the portraits of former state lawmakers hanging in the hallway of the Pennsylvania Capitol.

Alongside portraits of lawmakers who served with honor were four who had been convicted of crimes. Nobody seemed to care much about it until Wagner, R-York, introduced a resolution condemning the practice of hanging portraits of dishonored lawmakers.

The portraits didn’t come down, but not long after plaques were affixed to those four portraits chronicling their misdeeds.

Since then, Wagner has helped spur the ouster of the Senate majority leader, challenged public-sector unions, pushed for public pension reform and urged lawmakers to re-evaluate everything, including the Capitol’s electric bill.

Wagner’s penchant for speaking bluntly — he compared union leaders to power-hungry dictators like Hitler — has been criticized. The criticism is unlikely to silence him.

–Andrew Staub, PA Independent —

#14 Bloggers in the Heitman case

Kristy Herron, Susie Taylor and Andrew Howe used their blogs to raise questions establishment media didn’t about the death of an Oak Ridge School District employee.

Traditional media initially didn’t do much investigating in the case. Just last month, the same coroner who ruled that Alex Heitman committed suicide in 2011 recently lost his job due to allegedly tampering with a dead body.

Heitman’s family said that before his death he had discovered taxpayer money had been used to buy methamphetamine.

The three bloggers, none of whom knew Heitman, and none of whom are journalists by training, refused to accept the suicide ruling blindly. There was no coroner’s report, they wrote, and law enforcement has been far less than transparent in providing information.

A growing number of people in Oak Ridge now believe Heitman didn’t take his own life and two area newspapers eventually had to re-examine the case.

Herron, Taylor and Howe say traditional media avoid bringing negative attention to their communities. Blogging, they contend, is necessary for communities to stay informed and offers the opportunity for candid discussion of community problems.

–Chris Butler, Tennessee Watchdog.org–

#15 The Confidential Source

One of our best people for 2014 is the Confidential Source.

That means Watchdog really can’t name this best person of the year. It’s confidential — and we’ve agreed to keep the identities secret. But you know who you are.

You make many of our investigative reports possible. We appreciate your tips, information, observations, complaints and concerns. Sometimes

your emails and calls turn into great stories, sometimes not. Yet they are always deeply appreciated.

Along with gratitude and praise, here are a few tips of our own:

We like records and hard evidence. The more, the merrier. Since we can’t name you as a source, we must find other ways to prove the story is true.

There are conspiracies in the world, but we’re not part of them. When we tell you that your identity will be kept confidential, you can trust us. Our professional reputation is at stake.

Some of you prefer to be anonymous as well as confidential. However, there are times we really need to ask you questions about the information you’ve sent our way. Sometimes we must drop otherwise promising stories because we can’t verify details.

Thanks again — and we look forward to hearing from you again in 2015.

–Mark Lagerkvist, New Jersey Watchdog–

#16 Greendale Village Board of Trustees

The Greendale (Wis.) Village Board of Trustees stood up to its own parents and its Board of Education in 2014.

The Greendale Board of Education had asked that polling places be removed from schools after parents, reacting to the 2012 Sandy Hook Elementary School shootings in Newtown, Conn., argued they increased the risk of gun violence.

Sandy Hook parents themselves had never asked for voting to be moved somewhere else after the deaths of 26 people.

Concerned about voter disenfranchisement and added costs, village board members asked that taxpaying residents weigh in on a nonbinding referendum on the November ballot. Advocates, worried taxpayers without children would tip the scales in the other direction, asked the board to quash the referendum.

The village board refused until the school board agreed to withdraw its request to remove the polling places.

–Adam Tobias, Wisconsin Reporter–

#17 Brandon Presley

With the shifting gusts of public and political opinion, politicians generally spin like a weather vane.

But despite headwinds from two governors and the Secretary of Energy, Brandon Presley, commissioner for the Public Service Commission’s Northern District, has remained steady and straight.

Presley is one of the few elected officials in the state to decry the oft-delayed “clean coal” Kemper Project power plant. When the other two members of his commission voted to allow Mississippi Power to continue work on the plant, he was Dr. No.

A plant that was supposed to cost $2.8 billion now has a price tag of $6.1 billion and counting, making it one of the most expensive power plants per kilowatt hour in U.S. history. Construction, already a year behind schedule, has cost Mississippi Power ratepayers millions of dollars in increased power rates.

Presley, a Democrat and the former mayor of Nettleton, has gotten PSC opinion to blow in his direction. Earlier this year, the PSC told Mississippi Power until the plant is proven to be in commercial operation it will not hold hearings to decide whether Mississippi Power or ratepayers will pay for building Kemper.

Presley didn’t waver from his convictions and that’s laudable.

–Steve Wilson, Mississippi Watchdog–