4. Put the family bikes on a gondola — or rent them nearby — and take them to the bike park at the top of the mountain, where you can choose your adventure for 50 miles’ worth of fun. Check out the fast-paced, expert-level downhill flow trails that come close to 2,200 vertical feet, or ride down the greens for a gentle, easygoing trip that still allows beginners to try out berms, banked turns and bridges, but only if they want to. Through Aug. 29, the bike park is open Wednesday-Friday until 7 p.m. for twilight runs, as well.

Looking for something tamer? In town, the paved, multi-userecreation trail winds along the Yampa River for four miles, and has access points in quite a few places — including at West Lincoln Park and around downtown. There are designated picnic areas, and the route winds through botanical gardens.

To cool off, hop in a tube and take the scenic float down the Yampa. Several outfitters offer tubes for rent from 10:30 a.m.-4 p.m. daily (backdoorsports.com, buckingrainbow.com and onestopskishop.net). Cost is $18-$20, and the shops shuttle you back. The trip goes for two miles and takes one-three hours, depending on how fast you want to get out of the water.

Get there: The bike park is at 2305 Mount Werner Circle, 970-879-6111, bike.steamboat.com. Bike access pass costs $37 adults, $27 under 12.

Dine: Good food at a Holiday Inn? Who knew? But Rex’s American Grill & Bar (3190 S. Lincoln Ave., 970-870-0438, rexsgrill.com) is that rare treat; a casual eatery that works well for families, with reasonable prices, a huge patio with mountain views, live music most nights, excellent service and a menu of well-executed dishes that makes it hard to decide. Should you go with the remarkably not-greasy chicken-fried chicken with a side of cheddar mac or a crispy-edged brick-oven pizza topped with truffled steak (kids’ versions available), or fish tacos with orange-scented rice?

Stay: The Porches (2096 Indian Summer Drive, Steamboat Springs, 866-500-6673, theporches.com) have everything a group needs to make a vacation happen — up to five bedrooms in a fully furnished house, including a well-stocked kitchen. And then there are the porches with their rocking chairs and views, and the “barn,” a lodge of sorts, with a heated outdoor pool, hot tubs, billiards, kids’ games, a fitness center and a steam room. You may never leave. Rates start at $575 a night for a four-bedroom or $3,625 per week.

Experience family-friendly high country fun in …