Topics: Bernie Sanders, Gallup, Health Care, single payer, Elections News, News, Politics News

A majority of Americans support the single-payer, “Medicare-for-all” style health care system proposed by presidential candidate Bernie Sanders.

A new Gallup poll found that almost six in 10 U.S. adults would prefer a federally funded health care system that provides insurance for all Americans.

Gallup presented the three leading presidential candidates’ proposed health care policies, without naming the candidates, and asked participants what they thought of them. A majority of Americans agreed with Sanders’ proposal, without knowing that it was his.

A substantial 58 percent of Americans said they favored the idea of replacing the Affordable Care Act (ACA), also known as Obamacare, with a Medicare-for-all style system.

Only 37 percent of Americans, just over one-third, opposed replacing the ACA with single-payer.

Views predictably split on partisan lines.

Almost three-fourths, 73 percent, of Democrats or Democratic-leaning Americans support replacing the ACA with a Medicare-for-all style system. Only 22 percent oppose this.

A sizeable 41 percent of Republicans or Republican-leaning Americans also support replacing Obamacare with a single-payer system, while 55 percent oppose it.

Only 16 percent of right-wing Americans support keeping the ACA in place, whereas many conservatives “apparently want the ACA repealed to replace it with an even more” progressive health care system, Gallup found.

The poll shows that the single-payer universal health care system proposed by Sanders, a system that has been adopted by almost every industrialized nation in the world, is in fact wildly popular.

Democratic presidential front-runner Hillary Clinton has flatly insisted that such a single-payer system will “never, ever come to pass,” yet the current system she and the Democratic Party support is fact significantly less popular, and incredibly divisive.

A slight majority of Americans, 51 percent, agreed with Donald Trump’s policy, to repeal the ACA. Another 45 percent of Americans would oppose this.

Less than half of Americans, 48 percent, expressed support for Hillary Clinton’s policy, to keep the ACA in place. Another 49 percent disagreed.

Roughly one-third, 35 percent, of Americans said they would favor either keeping the ACA in place or replacing it with a federally funded universal health care system. Among Democrats and Democratic-leaning Americans, 59 percent support both policies.

If those who support either option were forced to choose between the two, however, more than two-thirds, 64 percent, would prefer a federally funded single-payer style system.