These babies were born recently at Sterling Regional MedCenter:

Marissa Ashlyn Roth

Kristi and Joe Roth of Sterling are parents of a girl, Marissa Ashlyn Roth, born Nov. 6, 2014, weighing 7 lbs. 2 oz. and measuring 19.5 inches long. Grandparents are Rob and Pam Hicks of Akron and Cal and Carletta Roth of Morrison. Great-grandparents are Barb and Gene Eisenbarth of Keenesburg. Welcoming Marissa home are siblings Quinn and Hayden Roth.

Tobin Dale Lanckriet

Sorsha and Kristopher Lanckriet of Holyoke are parents of a boy, Tobin Dale Lanckriet, born Nov. 7, 2014, weighing 6 lbs. 13 oz. and measuring 19.5 inches long. Grandparents are Sue and Ray Zen of Sterling and Karen and Dale Jacoby of Holyoke. Tobin was welcomed home by his sibling, Bryan-Lei Lanckriet.

Zayden Allan Richards

Brittany Spotts and Brandon Richards of Sterling are parents of a baby, Zayden Allan Richards, born Nov. 28, 2014, weighing 7 lbs. 11 oz. and measuring 21 inches long. Grandparents are Tiffany and Allan Marrinan of Brush, Brad Spotts, Melinda Petersen of Brush and Darin Richards. Great-grandparents are Claudia and Ben Spotts, Kyle and Shauna Jerome, and Charolette Osborn.

Mya Joyce Huery

Ashley Loomis and Nicholas Huery of Sterling are parents of a girl, Mya Joyce Huery, born Nov. 11, 2014, weighing 8 lbs. and measuring 20 inches long. Grandparents are Robert and Debra Loomis of Merino and Caroline Huery of Colorado Springs. Great-grandparents are Leda Salmon and Bud and Elaine Loomis.

Advertisement

Damon King Lei

Brandy Sator and Trevor Lei of Sterling are parents of a boy, Damon King Lei, born Nov. 13, 2014, weighing 7 lbs. 3 oz. and measuring 21 inches long. Grandparents are Robert and Jennifer Sator of Sterling and Paula Cornett of Julesburg. Great-grandparents are John and Georgia Guernsey and Gerald and Pauline Lei. Great-great grandmother is Jane Heimbegner. Welcoming Damon home was his sibling, Levi Aaron Lei.

Nicolai Leopoldo Lucero

Lexi and Anthony Lucero of Sterling are parents of a boy, Nicolai Leopoldo Lucero, born Nov. 13, 2014, weighing 7 lbs. 14 oz. and measuring 20 inches long. Grandparents are Karen and William Wallace of Arvada and Leota Lucero of Leadville. Great-grandmother is Gloria Lucero of Leadville.

Josiah Crouch

Tara Maestas-Loft and Joshua Crouch of Merino are parents of a boy, Josiah Crouch, born Nov. 16, 2014, weighing 7 lbs. 1 oz. and measuring 19.5 inches long. Grandparents are Jennifer Gerbitz and Jeff Loft, and Cheryl Williams and Ken Crouch.

Merit Raymond Julius

Jessican and Jim Julius of Crook are parents of a boy, Merit Raymond Julius, born Nov. 17, 2014, weighing 7 lbs. 4 oz. and measuring 20 inches long.Grandparents are Sandy and Larry Kent of Fruita, Jeff Been of Grand Junction, Charles and Cindy Julius of Julesburg and Debbie O'Conner of Rhame, N.D. Great-grandparents are Stan and Lois Zaremba of Lawrence, Kan., Nina McNeel of Silt, and Paul and Ann Been of Grand Junction. Welcoming Merit home were Clayton, Nate, Charlie, Laurel and Ethan.

Elizabeth Victoria Anderson

Jessica and Paul Anderson of Holyoke are parents of a girl, Elizabeth Victoria Anderson, born Nov. 17, 2014, weighing 6 lbs. 13 oz. and measuring 17.25 inches long. Grandparents are Julian and Victoria Martinez of Holyoke and Mac and Janet McBroom of Guffy. Great-grandparents are Art and Joyce Mimnaugh of Benson, Ariz. Elizabeth was welcomed home by her sibling, Gabriel Anderson.

Nolan Luke Smith

Jasmin R. and Adam K. Smith of Sterling are parents of a boy, Nolan Luke Smith, born Nov. 19, 2014, weighing 8 lbs. 4 oz. and measuring 20 inches long. Grandparents are the Thompsons of Hurst, Texas, and the Smiths of Atlanta, Georgia.

Perrin Everett Leis

Katherine and Josiah Leis of Merino are parents of a boy, Perrin Everett Leis, born Nov. 20, 2014, weighing 8 lbs. 3 oz. and measuring 19.5 inches long. Grandparents are Ben and Pat Root of Salem, Ore., and Dan and Cindy Leis of Merino. Great-grandparents are Dorothy Leis, Walter Graham and Myra Nelson. Welcoming Perrin home were his siblings, Jude and Charity.

Josyah Lyam Dixon

Alyx and Taiit Dixon of Sterling are parents of a boy, Josyah Lyam Dixon, born Nov. 21, 2014, weighing 7 lbs. 8 oz. and measuring 20.5 inches long. Grandparents are Devin and Krista Johnson of Dailey, Rodney Daily of Sterling, and Les and Kristi Dixon of Haxtun. Great-grandparents are Richard and Barsha Daily, Dean and Dena Sonnenberg, Dan and Sherry Johnson, Larry and Twila Emory and Ken Kelly.

Faith Alina Baray

Jazmine Puga and Vincent J. Baray are parents of a girl, Faith Alina Baray, born Nov. 26, 2014. Grandparents are Ellina and Francisco Baray of Sterling. Great-grandparents are Pete and Diana Monroy and Emma Baray. Great-great-grandmother is Roberta Gomez.

Baylon Hunter Curtiss

Destinee Curtiss is the mother of a boy, Baylon Hunter Curtiss, born Nov. 28, 2014, weighing 5 lbs. 2 oz. and measuring 18.5 inches long. Grandparents are Dennis and Trudy Monroe and LeRoy Curtiss of Akron. Great-grandparents are Leonard and Pearl Gates. Welcoming Baylon home was his sibling, Zoe Adelle Delgado Curtiss.

Kinzley Carolyn Schumacher

Megan and Steven Schumacher of Peetz are parents of a girl, Kinzley Carolyn Schumacher, born Nov. 28, 2014, weighing 6 lbs. 2 oz. and measuring 18.5 inches long. Grandparents are Steven Walters of Woodstock, Ill., and the late Carolyn Walters, and Wayne and Diana Schumacher of Peetz. Great-grandparents are Maynard and Norma Jean Schumacher and Peggy Plimmer. Kinzley was welcomed home by her big brother, Kasen.

Azaylee Shantell Canvasser

Tamera Canvasser and Mark Huerta are parents of a girl, Azaylee Shantell Canvasser, born Nov. 28, 2014, weighing 4 lbs. 11 oz. and measuring 17 inches long. Grandparents are Tammy Fitzgerald of Sterling and Russell and Anne Canbasser of Stoneham. Great-grandmothers are Carole Bishop and Joy Weatherspoon of Califino. Welcoming Azaylee home were her siblings, Vanessa, Patrick, Jacob and Muzette.

Emelia Ann Stoebner

Amanda and Greg Stoebner of Sterling are parents of a girl Emelia Ann Stoebner, born Dec. 8, 2014, weighing 7 lbs. 10 oz. and measuring 20 inches long. Grandparents are Harry and Sandy Richardson of Toronto, Ohio, and Larry Stoebner of Tripp, S.D.

Madelyn Faye Williams

Chelsi Sheley and Chase Williams are parents of a girl, Madelyn Faye Williams, born Dec. 4, 2014, weighing 6 lbs. 10oz. and measuring 19.25 inches long. Grandparents are Lee and Kathy Stump of Sterling, Dave Sheley, and Craig and Cheri Williams of Sterling. Great-grandparents are Walt and Mary Williams, Patty Wolfe, Gary Johnson and Mary Wadley. Madelyn was welcomed home by her siblings, Kirsten and Cole Williams.

Eithan Alden Vick

Shelby Vick of Akron is mother of a boy, Eithan Alden Vick, born Dec. 2, 2014, weighing 7 lbs. 5 oz. and measuring 19.75 inches long. Grandparents are Ralph Vick of Wellington, Ross Alcorn and Mary Respecki of Limon.

Adeline Paige Serrato

Tia Paige and Michael Anthony Serrato of Sterling are parents of a girl, Adeline Paige Serrato, born Dec. 3, 2014, weighing 6 lbs. 14 oz. and measuring 18.5 inches long. Grandparents are Tracey and Mark Trimble of Pueblo and T.J. and Paula Powers of Sterling. Welcoming Adeline home was her sibling, Talon Patrick Serrato.

Baylee Ann Giadone

Jenny and Adrian Giadone of Sterling are parents of a girl, Baylee Anne Giandone, born Dec. 11, 2014, weighing 7 lbs. 11 oz. and measuring 20.5 inches long. Grandparents are Doris and Matthew Korbe of Sterling and Roy and LouAnn Hockaday of Pueblo. Great-grandparents are Dominic and Evlynn Giadone and Barbara and Wayne Keeney. Baylee was welcomed home by her siblings, Brandon, Emily and Chloe.

Sophia Brianna Marie Payne

Cassandra Monroy Payne of Sterling is mother of a girl, Sophia Brianna Marie Payne. Grandparents are Anabertha Fetzer of Merino and Brian and Angela Payne of Sterling. Great-grandparents are Pete and Diana Monroy, Jake and Josie Lockman and Sandra Payne.

Cooper J. Collins

Lillie and Daniel Collins of Sterling are parents of a baby, Cooper J. Collins. Grandparents are Cal and Sallie Boden of Sterling. Welcoming Cooper home were siblings, Oliver and Jaylin.