Author Series: From Paducah with Love! Hear Stephanie McDowell Carter, Owen Kim Blaisdell, Dann Patterson , E.J. Able, Tom Russell and others read their page from the NEW Bill Ford book "From Paducah With Love". The book and original art works are exclusively sold at Ruth Baggett Gallery. Bill and the authors will be available for autographs. The Gallery will open at 1:00PM on Sunday.

This is a 6-week series that goes from June 14 to July 19, 2016. If you’ve taken Gaye’s Introduction to Stained Glass the next step in your journey is Copper Foil Stained Glass. In this Intermediate Class you will take on a more intricate pattern and continue to gain experience in cutting, grinding, foiling and soldering glass. We are offering an array of pricing opportunities as you may or may not want to invest in the tools necessary to continue making stained glass after class. Pattern books will be available prior to the start of class to inspire you on your suncatcher or 8' x 10? panel. Gaye will be more than glad to help you determine a successful project.

If you’ve taken Gaye’s Introduction to Stained Glass the next step in your journey is Copper Foil Stained Glass. In this Intermediate Class you will take on a more intricate pattern and continue to gain experience in cutting, grinding, foiling and soldering glass. We are offering an array of pricing opportunities as you may or may not want to invest in the tools necessary to continue making stained glass after class. Pattern books will be available prior to the start of class to inspire you on your suncatcher or 8' x 10? panel. Gaye will be more than glad to help you determine a successful project.

If you’ve taken Gaye’s Introduction to Stained Glass the next step in your journey is Copper Foil Stained Glass. In this Intermediate Class you will take on a more intricate pattern and continue to gain experience in cutting, grinding, foiling and soldering glass. We are offering an array of pricing opportunities as you may or may not want to invest in the tools necessary to continue making stained glass after class. Pattern books will be available prior to the start of class to inspire you on your suncatcher or 8' x 10? panel. Gaye will be more than glad to help you determine a successful project.

If you’ve taken Gaye’s Introduction to Stained Glass the next step in your journey is Copper Foil Stained Glass. In this Intermediate Class you will take on a more intricate pattern and continue to gain experience in cutting, grinding, foiling and soldering glass. We are offering an array of pricing opportunities as you may or may not want to invest in the tools necessary to continue making stained glass after class. Pattern books will be available prior to the start of class to inspire you on your suncatcher or 8' x 10? panel. Gaye will be more than glad to help you determine a successful project.

This is a 6-week series that runs from June 14 to July 19, 2016. If you’ve taken Gaye’s Introduction to Stained Glass the next step in your journey is Copper Foil Stained Glass. In this Intermediate Class you will take on a more intricate pattern and continue to gain experience in cutting, grinding, foiling and soldering glass. We are offering an array of pricing opportunities as you may or may not want to invest in the tools necessary to continue making stained glass after class. Pattern books will be available prior to the start of class to inspire you on your suncatcher or 8' x 10? panel. Gaye will be more than glad to help you determine a successful project.

If you’ve taken Gaye’s Introduction to Stained Glass the next step in your journey is Copper Foil Stained Glass. In this Intermediate Class you will take on a more intricate pattern and continue to gain experience in cutting, grinding, foiling and soldering glass. We are offering an array of pricing opportunities as you may or may not want to invest in the tools necessary to continue making stained glass after class. Pattern books will be available prior to the start of class to inspire you on your suncatcher or 8' x 10? panel. Gaye will be more than glad to help you determine a successful project.

We were so excited when Shannan contacted us about teaching as we are like the rest of the craft world these days — in LOVE with Modern Calligraphy. This class focuses on learning the basics of the pointed pen with an emphasis on modern calligraphy. Students will learn how to set up workspace, use an oblique pen holder with pointed nibs, prepare calligraphy nibs for writing, and learn the basics of the lowercase alphabet. There will be a $25 kit fee collected the day of class. Your kit includes an oblique pen holder, a package of nibs, calligraphy practice paper, a bottle of black Sumi ink, Paperglaze exemplars, pencil, a wooden ink well, and paper goods for envelope addressing practice. Yours to keep! This class is perfect for beginners – bring nothing but your enthusiasm!

Pageant for ages 2-12! This pageant is all natural with two categories including beauty wear and outfit of choice. The outfit of choice will be a cause your family supports or can relate to, example being aunt battled breast cancer child wears pink outfit. The cause doesn't have to be a medical cause it could be for abused animals, the sky is the limit! $50.00 entry fee per child non refundable. All proceeds from this pageant will go to wounded warrior project! This pageant is all about giving back! Ages 2-3 and 4-5 will be from 10-12 and ages 6-8 and 9-12 will be from 2-4. Every child leaves with a crown! The winners titles are tiny miss red, petite miss pink, little miss yellow and preteen miss purple. Colors represent heart disease, breast cancer, Alzheimer's disease and American troops! Cause from the heart will be on sashes so the winners identify as a group!

For those who have made at least one project with an armature, dive into something a little bit more complex with this fun Forest Folk developed by Lee Charlton. We will create a posable armature with broad base, learn face felting basics, and use locks and flat felting to create clothing and texture. The possibilities are endless with this creative and colorful project. This class is perfect those who have done some needle felting, even if it is just the Friday or one other class with Sara – All supplies provided. Class price: $115

BEGINNER 3D NEEDLE FELTING WORKSHOP Enjoy making a 6” Hedgehog and learn the basics of 3D needle felting construction: making an armature, working with roving, wrapping techniques, creating shapes, and applying top coat colors and textures. Sara Renzulli is a remarkable teacher! Beginners leave her class after four hours of instruction with a critter that actually looks like the critter it’s supposed to represent. This class is perfect for beginners – All supplies provided. Class price: $75

We have fallen in love with art journaling at Ephemera Paducah. It is a fantastic way to explore new techniques, try a bunch of new stuff without fear, and have it all for review in a spiral-bound journal you can take wherever life leads you. This four-week series will give beginners the confidence to start an art journaling practice and give experienced journalers tools and tricks to enhance their adventures. We’ll meet four consecutive Tuesdays in June from 1 to 3:30 pm each week. The registration fee includes your journal and weekly additions to your arsenal of tools — my favorite “have to have” art journaling supplies. Class price: $125 (includes 4 weeks).

We have fallen in love with art journaling at Ephemera Paducah. It is a fantastic way to explore new techniques, try a bunch of new stuff without fear, and have it all for review in a spiral-bound journal you can take wherever life leads you. This four-week series will give beginners the confidence to start an art journaling practice and give experienced journalers tools and tricks to enhance their adventures. We’ll meet four consecutive Tuesdays in June from 1 to 3:30 pm each week. The registration fee includes your journal and weekly additions to your arsenal of tools — my favorite “have to have” art journaling supplies. Class Price: $125 (includes 4 weeks).

We have fallen in love with art journaling at Ephemera Paducah. It is a fantastic way to explore new techniques, try a bunch of new stuff without fear, and have it all for review in a spiral-bound journal you can take wherever life leads you. This four-week series will give beginners the confidence to start an art journaling practice and give experienced journalers tools and tricks to enhance their adventures. We’ll meet four consecutive Tuesdays in June from 1 to 3:30 pm each week. The registration fee includes your journal and weekly additions to your arsenal of tools — my favorite “have to have” art journaling supplies. Class price: $125

We have fallen in love with art journaling at Ephemera Paducah. It is a fantastic way to explore new techniques, try a bunch of new stuff without fear, and have it all for review in a spiral-bound journal you can take wherever life leads you. This four-week series will give beginners the confidence to start an art journaling practice and give experienced journalers tools and tricks to enhance their adventures. We’ll meet four consecutive Tuesdays in June from 1 to 3:30 pm each week. The registration fee includes your journal and weekly additions to your arsenal of tools — my favorite “have to have” art journaling supplies. Price: $125

?It’s summertime, and you know what that means?!?!? Mama needs a night out! Pack up your favorite markers and coloring books (or just buy some when you get to the shop) and enjoy a relaxing evening at Ephemera Paducah with other adults who Love. To. Color. We’ll have some cool products to show you as well as new books. All things related to coloring are 10% off during Color Between the Wines. Because of the popularity of this event you must register online! If you register for more than one person, we’ll have that number of seats saved for you together under your name. Minimum age to participate 21.

You don’t have to have any experience to come to Mixed Media, just an adventurous spirit and no fear of getting messy. For the next few months, we’ll be exploring ways to make your mixed media projects interesting using the book Surface Treatment Workshop as our guide. If you are a Kindle reader, it’s available for download now on Amazon, or we have hard copies available in the shop. All materials are supplied. When you shop during Mixed Media Day/Night all merchandise (excluding commissions) is 25% off. You don’t have to have experience to attend our monthly Mixed Media workshops, but the minimum age for participation is 16.

You don’t have to have any experience to come to Mixed Media, just an adventurous spirit and no fear of getting messy. For the next few months, we’ll be exploring ways to make your mixed media projects interesting using the book Surface Treatment Workshop as our guide. If you are a Kindle reader, it’s available for download now on Amazon, or we have hard copies available in the shop. All materials are supplied. When you shop during Mixed Media Day/Night all merchandise (excluding commissions) is 25% off. You don’t have to have experience to attend our monthly Mixed Media workshops, but the minimum age for participation is 16.

Join us for a workshop, perfect for beginners and experienced folks, alike, where we’ll spend the day creating two (2) fun or whimsical or meaningful collages with layers of paint, paper, fabric, 3-D elements, glitter and all kinds of cool stuff. At the end of the day we’ll pour resin on top of them which will harden in about 12 hours. Your pieces will be ready for pick-up the day after class. You’ll have a choice of canvas sizes the smallest being 12? x 12? and largest 18? x 20?. Although all supplies are included in this workshop, you are encouraged to bring personal items to include in your collages. If the items are precious, photocopies do just as well. No experience is necessary, but the minimum age to participate is 14. Price: $125

If you’ve been interested in Bible Journaling, now is your chance to give it a go! This technique-intensive workshop is designed to answer your many questions about what pens, inks, paints and adhesives work best in your Bible. Included in your registration fee is a practice journal as well as some of our favorite tools and supplies to get you on your way. We’ll spend time learning how to use your own handwriting (and like it!) for lettering as well as some easy ways to introduce illustrations in your journaling even if you can’t draw a stick! The recommended ESV Single Column Journaling Bible can be found on Christianbooks.com or our local Christian Book Store. If you’ve already started a Bible Journaling practice, feel free to bring yours!

Spend a Saturday morning jumping into an embroidery lesson! Your registration fee includes your choice of Rebecca Ringquist’s Dropcloth Samplers in stock, cotton print fabric backing, an embroidery hoop, needle and your choice of a Sublime Stitching floss set. These supplies, plus a couple of hours of instruction, will get you well on your way! Minimum age to participate is 12. Price: $35.

This upcoming May will welcome the 4th annual First Baptist Church-Martin Spring Auto Show! Every year has grown more & more, and this year we are planning for our biggest turnout yet! Registration will be from 9 a.m.-12 p.m. with registration set for $20/per vehicle ($15 early bird registration through May 17th) There will be music, concessions, vendors, & door prizes given throughout the day. Swag bags will go to the first 40 entries. Award system consists of "top 30" with over 10 specialty awards. All proceeds goes to FBC's youth missions, which enables our next generation to spread the gospel of Jesus Christ to a lost world. Please come join us for a fun-filled day!!! For a flyer, use the contact email. Thank you & God bless!

SHERIFF KEVIN BYARS & THE KENTUCKY SHERIFFS' BOYS & GIRLS RANCH 33rd ANNUAL CHARITY GOLF SCRAMBLE Proceeds to benefit the Ky. Sheriffs' Boys & Girls Ranch summer camping program for Kentucky youth

Sunday, May 1 from 3-6 p.m., the United Methodist Churches of Marshall County will host Praise in the Park, at the large pavilion in Mike Miller Park. Local praise bands will perform various genres. Come and enjoy free hamburgers, sides, and desserts. Youth and children activities are planned.

Season of Honor: Caring for the Caregiver is a support group designed to educate the caregiver while providing spiritual and emotional encouragement. The topic of the next meeting on May 2, 2016, will be "Strategies and Encouragement for Successful Caregiving." The presenter will be Charles Moore, Senior Pastor, First Baptist Paducah. The meeting will be held at 6:30 p.m. in the Fellowship Hall, Entry 5, at First Baptist Paducah across from Keiler Park.