LONG BEACH >> Kelly Colopy, who formerly managed the public mental health network in Salt Lake County, Utah, took over as director of Long Beach’s Department of Health and Human Services this week.

Colopy, a Human Services professional with 17 years of experience, has been familiarizing herself with the staff and operations at the 107-year-old department, one of three city-operated health jurisdictions in California. The other two are in Pasadena and Berkeley.

The Health Department delivers services from 10 facilities around the city. Annually, its work includes immunizing more than 16,000 patients, conducting more than 7,800 food facility inspections, inspecting more than 12,000 rental units and delivering more than 306,377 food nutrition vouchers. The department’s annual budget that will be $119.9 million in 2014. About 85 percent of the funding comes from grants.

Colopy sat down with the Press-Telegram for to talk about her new job.

Q: How will your experience from your previous job affect how you serve in your new position?

A: I have a real feel for how a lot of different programs work together to coordinate, to partner and to have a strong impact on the individuals in communities. Public Health is not just the health department’s focus. It’s really great opportunity for partnerships with Parks and Recreation, for Development Services, for all the nonprofits that are involved with the communities and for the school systems.

My ability to bring all of those people together around a common goal and message and really work with the communities is, I think, one of the reasons I was brought into this position.

Q: What are some of the challenges facing the department?

A: The Affordable Care Act is coming in. One, it allows for a lot more health care for people, so that’s actually a really great opportunity. The Health Department is applying to be a certified enrollment entity. We’re going to be working with the state to be able to reach out and support and enroll people. We see that really as an opportunity to be able to engage more and more people in health care services.

Q: Long Beach is one of three cities in California with its own local health agency. How do residents benefit from having a local agency?

A: It makes us much more nimble. We’re very aware of what’s going on in our communities. We’ve had one person diagnosed (this week) with the West Nile Virus. We’re able to test quickly, we know exactly where it is, and we’re working with our communities to address it.

Q: What are your first goals as the city’s health director?

A: My overall vision for our department is that all members of our Long Beach community live in healthy communities and have the education, access and support to live a healthy lifestyle. This means that we’re working in our communities to make sure they are safe, clean and have easy opportunities for healthy eating and exercise.

Advertisement

I want to make sure our community members know about good nutrition, physical activity and the health and mental health services they have available to them and that they can access the healthy food, places to exercise and health care services. If people don’t feel safe in their neighborhoods, they are less likely to be out exercising. If healthy food isn’t at a local store and affordable, people are less likely to seek the healthy option. People are more likely to live a healthy lifestyle if others around them are doing the same. It’s important to help develop these networks of support to increase commitment to a healthy lifestyle.

My areas of focus over the next year include: Increasing coordination and integration of physical and mental health services leading to improved health outcomes, reducing diabetes and obesity among youth and adults, increasing access to housing and supports for our homeless population and ensuring the Health and Human Services Department is a key partner city and community efforts to improve community safety, neighborhood improvement efforts and other issues that impact health and also in enhancing coordination with education, economic, and social service partners to address the social determinants of health.

Q: Anything you’d like to say to residents?

A: I really want to make sure that as we’re moving forward that the Health Department becomes that place that everybody turns to for really great health information as well as the services that are needed and we become the partner for communities in building what they’re working on.

Kelly Colopy

Age: 48

Former position: Network Director for Optum Salt Lake County

Past jobs: Associate Director of the Salt Lake County Human Services and Community Services Departments, Research Director for Substance Abuse at the Utah Department of Human Services

Education: Master’s degree in Public Policy from Duke University, bachelor’s degree in Political Science with a minor in Mathematics from Smith College

Eric Bradley can be reached at 562-499-1254