Wisconsin Well Woman Program enrollment declines in Northwoods Submitted: 05/25/2016 RHINELANDER - You probably hear from your doctor or loved ones how important cancer screenings can be.



But getting one isn't always affordable if you don't have insurance or not enough coverage.



Enrollment in the Wisconsin Well Woman Program seems to be declining.



That's because more women are getting insurance through the Affordable Care Act.



The program offers breast and cervical cancer screenings to women at no cost if they are uninsured or underinsured.



That preventative care has saved lives.



"Without the screening, they would not have known that they had the breast cancer or the cervical cancer, and then the program had also helped them with their treatment services," said Wisconsin Well Woman Program Coordinator Nichole Peplinski.



The program also helps setup additional screenings and treatment if a patient is diagnosed with cancer.



Nine counties in the Northwoods have at least one provider that offers the screenings.



Though need for the program has gone down, coordinators want women to know it's still an option if they qualify.



"The women are between the ages of 45 through 64, are uninsured or underinsured, and meet income eligibility requirements for the program," Peplinski said.



The program hopes to serve about 5,000 women across the state now that there's a healthcare marketplace.



For more information on the Wisconsin Well Woman Program, click the link below.





Story By: Anthony DaBruzzi - You probably hear from your doctor or loved ones how important cancer screenings can be.But getting one isn't always affordable if you don't have insurance or not enough coverage.Enrollment in the Wisconsin Well Woman Program seems to be declining.That's because more women are getting insurance through the Affordable Care Act.The program offers breast and cervical cancer screenings to women at no cost if they are uninsured or underinsured.That preventative care has saved lives."Without the screening, they would not have known that they had the breast cancer or the cervical cancer, and then the program had also helped them with their treatment services," said Wisconsin Well Woman Program Coordinator Nichole Peplinski.The program also helps setup additional screenings and treatment if a patient is diagnosed with cancer.Nine counties in the Northwoods have at least one provider that offers the screenings.Though need for the program has gone down, coordinators want women to know it's still an option if they qualify."The women are between the ages of 45 through 64, are uninsured or underinsured, and meet income eligibility requirements for the program," Peplinski said.The program hopes to serve about 5,000 women across the state now that there's a healthcare marketplace.For more information on the Wisconsin Well Woman Program, click the link below.

Text Size: + Increase | Decrease -

Email this article to a friend:



* Your Name: * Email Address: * Recipient Name: * Email Address: Comment/Question Enter the code you see below:



Code: