Key & Peele are a comedy team, but they ask, in a terrific bit, a very serious question: What if we treated teachers with the same reverence as we treat professional athletes?

The duo present "Teaching Center," a fictional show about teachers being offered major contracts (with bonuses tied to student test score performance) worth millions of dollars, with one teacher stunning the education world by announcing she is taking her talents to another city. At Radio City Music Hall, a calculus teacher is drafted by a school, and is given the obligatory baseball cap and jersey (with the announcers noting that he was the son of a humble NFL player who lived paycheck to paycheck).

It's August, which means we're approaching both the NFL pre-season and the warm-up to the start of school. Many of us (myself included) will be watching and waiting to figure out which quarterbacks will be starting in the fall, and what impact Tom Brady's four-game suspension will have on the AFC East standings. How many wonder how the nation's teachers will fare with their often-troubled or troublesome students, or whether their salaries will be enough to pay their mortgages, or even whether they'll be given the dignity of attending to their own children and families as they prepare everyone else's for the world?



[SEE: Political Cartoons on the Economy]

Ask female teachers who – despite being in a field dominated by women – are often not allowed to take a brief break to pump breast milk for their own babies. The Affordable Care Act requires that hourly workers be given the time and a place to do so, but salaried workers, including teachers, are not. Since teachers' schedules are so regimented (How many of us have a job where we are not allowed to go to the bathroom when we want?), it's pretty difficult to grab the 15 or so minutes needed to complete the task.

Meanwhile, states across the nation are taking on teachers unions as though they are a splinter faction of the Islamic State group (a comparison presidential candidate Scott Walker cheekily made on the campaign trail, touting his assault on public sector unions). They want to take away teacher tenure and cut pay. The idea is that the bad teachers will be weeded out, and the good ones will stay, content to work for low-to-middling wages and making sure kids do well on those all-important standardized tests.



[READ: The GOP's Education Plan Gets an F]