Ron Hillard knows he is blessed.

Thirteen years ago, he looked for a way to share his blessings.

Mr. Hillard, who worked as a biomedical engineer, started a medical clinic next to Back Mountain Harvest Assembly. With the help of his wife at the time and a local doctor, they opened up the small clinic in a house next to the church.

They saw about 400 people that year, Mr. Hillard remembers. They called it the Hope Center.

Last year, more than 5,300 patients visited the center for help.

The center started with three volunteers. Now, more than 60 volunteers help each year with a variety of services.

Uninsured and underinsured clients use the center for everything from dental hygiene to audiology to physical and occupational therapy. People can also get free legal advice and Christian counseling.

On a Thursday in February, patients were greeted by Kathy Heffner and Sarah Derhammer, both retired, who called themselves “Frick and Frack” and their “trainee,” 22-year-old Marisa Del Gaudio. She is going to physician assistant school at Marywood University in the fall and was there to gain volunteering experience.

Volunteering, they said, is a way to give back and feel good themselves.

“It makes our problems go away,” Ms. Derhammer said.

“It’s almost like a party,” Ms. Heffner said.

The trio helped check in James Levitski, who was at the center to see a chiropractor. At the center, a professional will help him with stretching his neck and shoulder for free. Elsewhere, he would have had to pay out of pocket, which would have been difficult.

“If you have a problem, they’re more than welcoming,” he said.

The center sees patients without insurance and those who have insurance that doesn’t cover certain conditions. Uninsured patients might be self-employed or unemployed, not able to get insurance through their employer or be between jobs. The underinsured might be military veterans who can’t or won’t go to a Veterans Administration hospital or people with Medicare, which doesn’t cover all medical expenses or expenses for most dental care or eye exams.

“We’re trying to work through the holes in the government system so we don’t leave anyone behind. We don’t want to leave anyone behind,” said Pat Colladay, a director at the clinic.

The center doesn’t keep records of which patients have insurance, Mr. Hillard said. Anecdotally, they have seen some confusion with the Affordable Care Act from patients, Mr. Colladay said.

Although the act expanded health insurance coverage to more Americans, it doesn’t guarantee increased access to health care services, according to the Association of State and Territorial Health Officials. The Congressional Budget Office estimates that 23 million people will still be uninsured by 2019. That population will be undocumented immigrants, people who are exempt from the coverage mandate and can’t afford other health insurance options and people who make too much to qualify for Medicaid, ASTHO said.

“Free clinics will still play a major role in servicing these populations,” said an ASTHO fact sheet on free clinics.

In March 2015, The Hope Center moved its operations to 205-207 Main St., Luzerne. The move from the Back Mountain brought it closer to the valley’s population, and closer to people who could be patients. The facility is two miles from six high-rise home to the elderly, Mr. Hillard said.

The move also gave the facility more room. Their first building was about 1,200 square feet. The current facility is 9,000 square feet.

The supply of patients is unlimited. Their own resources have limits.

“We see more people now, but we also do more,” Mr. Hillard said.

Keeping the clinic running costs about $10,000 each month, Mr. Hillard said. Those costs include upkeep, liability insurance, buying generic medicine, utilities, school taxes and supplies. The center does not receive any funding from the government, he said.

An all-volunteer group helps the directors run the clinic. They are looking for a podiatrist as well as dental assistants. They’re always happy to hear from dentists, doctors and audiologists who want to volunteer.

All of those medical professionals give immediate help, but the goal is longer-term hope.

“We want to give hope to people who are hurting,” said Mr. Colladay, “and help any way we can.”

Contact the writer: bwellock@citizensvoice.com

Where: 205-207 Main St., Luzerne.

Contact: Call 844-239-3405 or email hopecenter

wv@gmail.com. They also have a Facebook page, The Hope Center of the Wyoming Valley.

Medical clinic: Available from 6 to 8 p.m. Mondays and Thursdays.

Legal clinic: Available from 6 to 8 p.m. Monday.

Chiropractic services: Open from 6 to 8 p.m. every other Thursday.

Dental cleanings: Every Monday from 6 to 8 p.m. by appointment.

Medical necessary dental extractions: Mondays and Thursdays from 6 to 8 p.m. by appointment.

Audiology services: From 5:30 p.m. to 8 p.m. every Wednesday.

Pastoral counseling: Available every night the clinic is open.