The world’s largest sporting event kicked off in Brazil this week, while the tea party scored big when Dave Bart won a primary against House Majority Leader Eric Cantor, R-Va. Meanwhile, in Iraq, al-Qaida-backed militants play a more dangerous game, occupying cities and sending the country back into violence. Data Mine has the scoop for you on all fronts.



Brazil spent $11.3 billion on World Cup: Brazil’s side is favored to win the World Cup title, but its poverty stricken citizens don’t feel like winners. The South American nation loves the beautiful game but activists are protesting the costs of hosting Mundial, including the deaths of eight workers who helped build the stadium in Rio de Janeiro. The World Cup website details the times and scores for matches.



7,200 votes: That’s how many votes Cantor lost by in the Republican primary of Virginia’s 7 th Congressional district on Tuesday. The election of David Brat, an economics professor with tea party leanings, are making established Republicans wary ahead of 2016. The conservative-leaning tea party may enjoy a boost against incumbent Republicans in 2016 as politics are becoming more polarized than ever, according to the Pew Research Center.



Courtesy of Pew Research Center

500,000 Iraqis left Mosul: Citizens fled the second-biggest city in Iraq this week as al-Qaida-backed forces took control, marching closer to Baghdad, prompting President Barack Obama to say that Iraq needs help and to reexamine how the U.S. could intervene.

52 percent of U.S. unfavorable on Obama: More people now view the commander in chief negatively than they do favorably, a Gallup poll this week showed. Only 47 percent view Obama favorably, the least positive personal assessment of the president ever. Factors playing into this rating could be the recent scandal concerning medical care for veterans and the controversial release of Army Sgt. Bowe Bergdahl. In the past, there were only three other times when his unfavorable rating exceeded his favorable rating: once in October 2010 just before midterm elections, and twice in late 2013 during the tumultuous rollout of the Affordable Care Act.



Courtesy of Gallup

Don’t forget Dad this Sunday! Father’s Day is America’s smallest gift-giving holiday, according to the National Retail Federation, and a “blip on the retail sales radar compared to Christmas and Mother’s Day.” Nevertheless, the average person is expected to spend $113.80 on gifts this year, down a bit from $119.84 last year, a survey from the Washington-based group showed.