Living in Boulder has been described as existing in a bubble removed from reality inhabited by eclectic people who eat granola and tofu. We have been called the "Republic of Boulder" isolated from the normal world because of our progressive politics and slow growth policies. Coloradans from the eastern and western counties tend to think Boulder is a weird place where spandex is the dress code and marijuana decorates the street medians. Observers from afar think we are self-indulging with everyone biking, jogging and eating organic food with great concerns about our individual and collective carbon footprint.

Although some of these charges have merit I have come to believe the Boulder Bubble, the loss of touch with the real world, is changing. Today I see a dedicated and widespread outreach beyond our city limits by dozens of non-profits who travel to Guatemala, Kenya, South Africa, Haiti, and the Amazon Basin to carry out humanitarian missions. Members of several faith communities regularly travel to South and Central America to build schools, efficient cook stoves and water purification systems. Boulder's sub-bubble, the University of Colorado is among the top four universities in the country to send graduates to the Peace Corps. CU has a very robust International Education Program that enrolls hundreds of students for study abroad every year.

Advertisement

During the 2013 flood multitudes of CU students left their comfort zone and assisted disaster victims.

Somehow the Boulder Bubble has burst from its old introspective image of being an aloof corner of the Front Range to a community that cares about other people within and also beyond the city limits. Boulder's Sister City Alliance is further evidence that normal people in this town make commitments to build bridges of friendship in six different countries. The Dushanbe cyber café is now reconfigured as a language school. The Mante, Mexico group continues its health efforts by sending cataract lenses for surgery to be performed by local doctors. The long-standing Tibet dental and health care projects continue in health education. The Yamagata sister city outreach includes exchanges of television broadcast footage while the Kenya friendship group is developing water and sanitation projects. Dozens of trips to Yateras, Cuba have provided medical supplies, environmental education materials, and music/art initiatives under the umbrella of the Boulder-Cuba sister city organization. More delegations are departing from Boulder in January and March.

During the 40 years I have lived here it has become apparent why folks from other parts of the country think there is a bubble over this county. Thousands of transplants who now call Boulder their home brought dreams and imagination to make this place better than where they came from. A surprising number of my friends who are grandparents have come to Boulder to be closer to their children and grandchildren. Dozens of bright entrepreneurs have relocated to this area such as the Boulder Ambassadors. For whatever the reasons the people who have arrived in the 1990's and in the 21st Century have done meritorious works in business, environmental initiatives, art, music, sports, and scientific breakthroughs. With blossoming successes in these and other categories wealth increased and the economic bubble became more apparent. Spatial growth restrictions may have constrained affordable housing and yet job growth continued essentially unabated. We did not become a gated community but the invisible fence forced more and more workers and students to reside in more distant locations beyond Boulder's borders.

Boulder has received many titles as a result of greater emphasis on physical fitness, remarkable hiking trails and bikeways and a green, healthy lifestyle. The number one national rankings that Boulder has earned include the Brainiest City, the Happiest town, the top Well Being place, the Best City to raise an Outdoor Kid, Platinum (best) Biking town, best LBGT family friendly town, America's Foodiest Town, Best City to Live In, and Healthiest City to Live and Retire.

Boulder has become a magnet that attracts gifted individuals, creative businesses, and distinguished federal researchers. What is troubling is how to serve those who have been less fortunate such as low wage earners, vulnerable seniors, youth and others who are barely caught by the safety nets of Emergency Family Assistance Association (EFAA), Attention Homes, Mother House, Thistle and Habitat for Humanity housing efforts, and Community Food Share. There are many others to list including Boulder County Housing and Human Services, Sister Carmen Center, Boulder Shelter for the Homeless, Safehouse and Share-A-Gift. The hypothetical bubble traps hundreds of individuals and families including the homeless and frail of spirit.

To redress the imbalance between comfortable elitism and those in the lower rungs of economic strata it might be useful to encourage city and county governments in collaboration with the private sector to elevate the investment in human needs (i.e. housing, job creation, health delivery) comparable to what we do in environmental stewardship. The so-called bubble with its known advantages coupled with augmented human services could become a model of social justice worthy of national recognition.

Spense Havlick, of Boulder, is a member of the Camera's editorial advisory board.