Dawn Buckingham (left) and Susan King.

By Brian Bethel of the Abilene Reporter News

District 24 candidate Susan King admits it's been a long road to the May 24th runoff election.

"While the March 1st primary was like a sprint, the runoff election has seemed like a marathon," King said in a statement to the Reporter-News.

King, serves as District 71 state representative, is facing off against Dr. Dawn Buckingham, an Austin ophthalmologist, for the Republican nomination in increasingly contentious race.

King won the most primary votes earlier this year, she and Buckingham defeating a field of four other candidates to secure their right to a runoff.

Democratic candidate Jennie Lou Leeder will square off against the winner in November.

Buckingham said in a statement that her own campaign has come "a long way" since it was announced last June, the candidate traveling to every county in the district "multiple times."

"(Voters) all have a common message they give me: secure the border and stop Obamacare," she said.

Buckingham said that she has met "many individuals who feel that career politicians are out of touch" adding that district residents tell her they are tired of not being able to trust political leaders who compromise principles and turn to supporting special interests after being elected.

The present war between King and Buckingham began over requests that the city of Abilene release medical information, including the contents of a 911 call, which King maintains are private.

King, who suspended her campaign temporarily in late 2015 to seek treatment for depression, now has an injunction to prevent the information from being released until a Nov. 21 trial date.

King's privacy protection suit maintains that she and her husband, Abilene physician Austin King, were not provided with copies of open records requests and were not advised of their rights to submit arguments to the Texas Attorney General to protect private health and other personal information.

At the time, King said that the attempt to release the records was a ploy by Buckingham and others to discredit her "by falsely attacking my health records."

Matt Langston, a spokesperson for the Buckingham campaign, responded by calling King a "liar and a liberal" fighting the city of Abilene from releasing "multiple — and potentially campaign damaging — 911 incidents that occurred at her home where police officers were involved."

In a March 18 Reporter-News story, King's campaign spokesman, Bryan Eppstein, said that city records that the event was "a medical emergency response to an individual's critical state of mental health and depression," adding that there was no 911 call that prompted community response.

When responders, including mental health officials, arrived at King's home, she made a 911 call herself "concerned that someone was attempting to break into her home," Eppstein said.

King said Thursday that she has "campaigned hard and overcome obstacles with my personal health and will offer no excuses when this election is over."

In late April, King, released a statement saying Buckingham should apologize to voters and veterans, especially given Abilene's strong ties to Dyess Air Force Base, for withholding information about financial ties to South Dakota-based National American University.

King said that more than 72 percent of Buckingham's campaign contributions at the time came from shareholders and board members of NAU, maintaining that Buckingham's resume failed to show that she served on the entity's board from 2013-2015.

King's campaign said the online school "preys upon and dupes veterans and their GI Bill funding," with online college degree courses costing two to 20 times more than degrees from community colleges and state universities — and often leaving veterans with "insurmountable college loan debt after GI funding is depleted," and with "worthless degrees that don't help them get civilian jobs."

In a televised debate in early May, King and Buckingham threw darts at each other over the long-term fate of the Abilene State Supported Living Center.

King criticized statements by Buckingham that she supported the center after noting her opponent had served on the state's Sunset Advisory Commission.

The group, which examines the efficiency of state agencies, in 2014 made a recommendation to shut down six out of 13 state supported living centers. The living center is Abilene's fourth-largest employer with 1,240 employees, according to the Abilene Industrial Foundation's website.

King said Buckingham had been "disingenuous" in comments supporting the living center because of her Sunset Commission role, Buckingham countering by saying the commission never specifically targeted Abilene's facility.

"Again, Susan King has issues with the truth," Buckingham said.

Buckingham said her opponent has and "continues to lie and mislead voters."

King retaliated that Buckingham has engaged throughout the campaign in "a mudslinging campaign with false attacks."

King's strategy has been building grass roots support in the sprawling district's 17 counties, an approach that she said was perhaps a "little old-fashioned," but one she argues has served her well.

But challenges remain, she said. Buckingham is "heavily outspending us," King said, meaning the campaign has to "depend on our friends, neighbors, and supporters turning out to vote."