The House Appropriations Committee approved a plan on Wednesday for adjusting the state’s $1.47 billion fiscal year 2016 budget by $88.9 million.

The unanimous vote was hard won. Rep. Mitzi Johnson, D-South Hero, chair of House Appropriations, spent two days trying to finalize the bill with GOP and Democratic members who refused to give on positions. Johnson described the approval process as “a big lift with a lot of tough choices.”

Most of the big issues were addressed early on, and as the committee neared a final vote, the disputes were over how to spend a small pot of leftover money — and a $10.3 million problem that remains unresolved.

A $67.4 million overspend in Medicaid was the biggest portion of the mid-year adjustment. The Shumlin administration and lawmakers used $10 million from general fund, $10.3 million in one-time money from the state health care resources fund and $47 million in federal funds to cover the unanticipated costs. Under the Affordable Care Act, the state has expanded Medicaid to Vermonters who previously were uninsured. The ballooning number of Medicaid patients (about 200,000, or a third of the state’s population) is driving up costs. Another $10 million in unanticipated state spending was covered by small bumps in revenues from a variety of funds.

The administration’s original plan included $7 million for the Department for Children and Families, some $3.3 million of which would have come out of the general fund, to cover the cost of hiring new social workers for the 1,370 children now in state custody. Andy Pallito, commissioner of the Department of Finance and Management, reduced the state expenditure on DCF by $310,000 on Tuesday as part of a plan to address a $3.22 million downgrade in general fund revenues. (The package also included a transfer of remaining funds, $425,000, from the Vermont Enterprise Fund to the bottom line for the budget adjustment.)

Most of the fraught discussion in committee was not about the Medicaid hole or $3 million in adjustments made by the Shumlin administration in response to a revenue downgrade on Tuesday.

The debate was over $550,000 in available funds and the vexing problem the Shumlin administration left for lawmakers to resolve — a 53rd week of Medicaid that was not included in the original fiscal year 2016 budget.

Johnson says the Shumlin administration didn’t tell lawmakers in House Appropriations about the 53rd week issue until last fall. As Rep. Kathleen Keenan, D-St. Albans, put it, the Legislature passed a budget last year with a built-in deficit.

That deficit hasn’t gone away. The $10.3 million shortfall in Medicaid, which is an obligation on the state’s books for fiscal year 2016, now must be addressed in the governor’s 2017 budget.

The shortfall complicated the closure of the budget adjustment act.

Members of the committee argued for hours over how to spend the available $550,000. Should they apply it to the 53rd week? Should they tap $900,000, the maximum allowable amount, from a $6.8 million rainy day fund to help pay for the deficit? What about the Shumlin administration’s proposal to hire more social workers to address the heavy caseloads that Rep. Kitty Toll, D-Danville, in an emotional plea said led to the deaths of two children and a social worker?

“I would put the money toward the children so there is some kind of signal from this building that there is a problem,” Toll said.

“I agree with Kitty, we have an obligation, aside from our political stripes. We’re here to serve Vermonters,” Rep. Anne O’Brien, D-Richmond, said. “My hope is for a compromise. We do have differences, and I have a lot of faith we can work through those differences with each side giving up a little.”

Republicans threatened to vote no on the bill if the committee refused to address the 53rd week problem. Democrats were equally dug in on sending additional money to DCF.

Johnson implored committee members to reach a compromise. “I want to put something on table so people don’t feel like there’s only one path, yes or no,” she said. “We’ve worked hard on the fiscal year 2016 budget in total. If we could change things that would make you more comfortable and get to place where people can support it great. If there are major differences we understand there are yeses and nos for many people.

“I don’t have that luxury, I’m chair and we need budget adjustment,” Johnson said. “I need to vote yes. I’d like to get to the best thing we can. I have to vote yes — even on the pieces that I hate.”

Reps. Bob Helm, R-Fair Haven, and Marty Feltus, R-Lyndonville, were adamant that the committee had to put some money toward the 53rd week problem. When Dems offered an olive branch — dividing up the $550,000 between DCF and the 53rd week — they relented.

In the end, they decided not to use rainy day funds to help plug the 53rd week hole. Instead, in a symbolic gesture, lawmakers applied $225,000 from available funds to the $10.3 million problem. The remaining $225,000 was divided up between the Department for Children and Families ($190,000) and the expansion of a needle exchange program ($35,000).

CORRECTIONS: This article originally said the 53rd week was a Pay Act issue. That was incorrect. The $10.3 million hole is from a 53rd week Medicaid payout that was not included in the fiscal year 2016 budget. Also, Rep. Bob Helm lives in Fair Haven, not Barnard. The FY 2016 budget is $1.47 billion, not $1.55 billion as first reported.