Topics: 2016 Elections, aol_on, Donald Trump, Editor's Picks, Iowa, Marco Rubio, Ted Cruz, Elections News, Life News, Politics News

1.

If he hadn’t died in 1992 from complications related to AIDS, Arthur Russell, the poet-exile of Oskaloosa, Iowa, would be 64. Making a home among New York’s queer underground, rubbing shoulders with Allen Ginsberg and John Cage, Russell, an avant-garde cellist, journeyed far from his Iowa home. But Iowa lingered in his music. “I close my eyes and listen to hear the corn come out,” are the words that open his posthumous album, “Love Is Overtaking Me.” The song’s speaker is waiting in the fields for an illicit tryst.

I stand among a transfixed crowd in Smokey Row, a coffeehouse in Oskaloosa, with people who must have attended school with Russell. We listen to Ted Cruz, who happily disdains the kind of trysts Russell enjoyed. Cruz wears a powder blue gingham shirt and cowboy boots. Today, more than usual, he delivers a gleeful sneer.

“God bless the great state of Iowa,” says Cruz.

“Amen!” cries the man next to me, who wears a ball cap, jeans and a studded belt. Cruz, whose father is a baptist preacher, knows how to transform a political town hall into a religious revival. He modulates between breathy purrs and staccato exhortation. He deploys well-practiced pauses. He uses anaphora better than any other presidential candidate. Soon the crowd is punctuating his stump speech with amens and c’mons and yeses.

Cruz is standing on a stage under a bright marquee with his name on it. Smokey Row’s old-timey decorations—sepia photos of vintage cars, an oversize Pepsi bottlecap, a sign for Kresge 5¢ and 10¢, the store that became Kmart—match Cruz’s folksy demeanor. The ceilings are high and the floors wood. Cruz makes a joke about how, when the pope was in town, Obama made things awkward by answering to His Holiness. The crowd is delighted.

Other of Cruz’s jokes have more sinister implications. He tells one where the punch line is about using pesticides on regulators, another about how, after his presidency, countless members of the media will have checked themselves into therapy. A favorite of his involves padlocking the IRS and relocating its employees to the southern border. “Think about it, sir,” he says. “Imagine you traveled thousands of miles in the blazing sun, you’re swimming the Rio Grande, and the first thing you see is 90,000 IRS agents. You’d turn around and go home, too!”

Imagine it, indeed. One might pause to imagine the suffering endured by migrants under that sun, but Cruz has the crowd under his spell. These former neighbors and classmates of Arthur Russell burst again into cathartic laughter.

2

Thirty miles north of Oskaloosa, a much quieter crowd listens to Marco Rubio. He speaks from a makeshift stage inside Brownells, which claims to be the world’s largest supplier of gun parts. In 2012, after the Sandy Hook massacre, Brownells sold three-and-a-half years of ammunition for the AR-15—the semi-automatic rifle used by Adam Lanza—in three days.

CEO Pete Brownell, introducing Rubio, tells us that the building we’re in, a new facility, “stands for support of firearm owners across the world.” It is vast. We had to cross several hundred yards of cement to arrive at the event’s scattering of folding chairs. Bobcats roam wide aisles stacked to the sky with inventory.

Brownell gives the stage to Jack Whitver, the chairman of Rubio’s Iowa campaign and a former star wide receiver for Iowa State University. He says, “If you’re looking for someone that can win, look to Marco Rubio.” If Cruz exudes zealotry, Rubio’s campaign sells pragmatism.

Rubio wears a blue campaign fleece over his white shirt and tie. He looks worn out. The crowd only applauds twice: once when Rubio mentions abolishing the Affordable Care Act, and once when he ends. But these aren’t the same people who cheered for Cruz in Oskaloosa. A lot of the attendees here are dismayed with the state of the Republican Party. They especially dislike Donald Trump. They say that Trump is “too aggressive,” that “he’s making things worse,” that he “seems a little far out.” He embarrasses them. They tend to be upper-middle-class and, against Trump, they practice what we might call Republican respectability politics.