Denver Zoo resident Billy the elephant eats more than 100 pounds of hay and produce every day. Nearby orangutan Mias receives daily treatment for cystic fibrosis.

With the prices of animal food, veterinary care and zoo maintenance on the rise, the zoo is seeking to increase admission prices to feed and care for its more than 4,000 animals.

Zoo officials Wednesday will ask a City Council committee for permission to charge $2 more across all age groups during the March-October high season, resulting in a $17 general admission, zoo spokeswoman Tiffany Barnhart said this week. During the November-February offseason, the zoo wants to charge $1 more, resulting in a $13 general admission.

The zoo is not seeking to increase annual membership fees.

“I think that everyone certainly understands the increase in costs because they’re seeing them at home, as well,” Barnhart said. “I haven’t heard of opposition.”

Denver Parks and Recreation supports the fee increase.

“The rate increases seem to be minimal, and their costs have gone up with new exhibits,” said Jeff Green, spokesman for Denver Parks and Recreation. ” It’s in our best interest to have a zoo that’s well-maintained.”

The zoo last raised admission fees in 2012 to help fund operational costs for the Toyota Elephant Passage. Tickets were raised by $2.

Since 2012, the price of Billy’s hay has increased 77 percent, zoo officials said. Frozen meat is up 27 percent, dry food is up 18 percent, frozen fish is up 12 percent and medications are up 150 percent.

“We must provide the highest-quality care for all our animals,” Barnhart said.

Zoo facilities also are showing their age, Barnhart said. The cost of maintaining them has jumped 39 percent since 2012.

Barnhart said there are nine scheduled free days in 2014 and 69 percent of zoo guests get free or discounted admission, whether through a free day, program or coupon.

The council’s Infrastructure and Culture Committee plans to meet at 10:30 a.m. Wednesday in Room 39 at Denver’s City and Council Building.

The proposed price increase would begin in September.

Elizabeth Hernandez: 303-954-1223, ehernandez@denverpost.com or twitter.com/literally_lizzy