Sioux Falls, SD

The number of homeless people living in Sioux Falls is growing again, after a steady decline since 2009.

Whether they're living on the streets, under a bridge, or at a shelter, winter can be the most difficult season for homeless people.

According to the latest data from the Homeless Advisory Board, 618 people are homeless in the Sioux Falls area.

"It's a small proportion of the community at-large, but it's a number that we should be working towards making smaller every day," Sioux Falls City Council Member Michelle Erpenbach said.

Different organizations across the city, including the Bishop Dudley Hospitality House and the Sioux Empire Homeless Coalition, are doing something to raise awareness. There will be vigils remembering the homeless who've died this year, including 46 year-old Irma Jacqueline Swiftbird. She is believed to have died from exposure to the cold earlier this week.

"These are real people. Irma is a real person. She's come year after year to our memorial service to other homeless people. She died in a parking ramp," Melanie Bliss said.

Melanie Bliss of the Sioux Empire Homeless Coalition says that people can stereotype homeless people into adults that abuse drugs or alcohol, but that's not always the case. She says if a person spends 30 percent of their income on housing they are precariously housed. If someone spends 50 percent of their income on housing, they're imminently homeless. She also points to the 46.9 percent of students in the Sioux Falls school District on free or reduced lunch, saying families are living in poverty and can't afford food or rent.

As we reach colder winter temperatures, Erpenbach challenges the community of Sioux Falls to put themselves in the shoes of the homeless community to see the difficulties of surviving the winter.

"Watch the weather report on the news in the evening and think about how you're cozied up in your house or you're driving in your warm car or whatever it is you're doing. I want you to think about that not being around you," Erpenbach said.

A challenge the city council member hopes will raise awareness to a serious issue.

"I think we have to think about that one person that kind of fell through the gaps this week. How many more are we going to let fall through the gaps before we really do step up as a community," Erpenbach said.

For a look at some of the week's events you can visit the Bishop Dudley House Website or the Sioux Empire Homeless Coalition's Facebook Page.