Editor's Note: The Times-Call's Take Two series revisits people and situations we have written about in the past. Take Two stories run on Mondays.

The organization hoping to force a Boulder County election on the idea of putting county government under a home-rule charter is nearing its petition signature target, according to one of that group's leaders.

"It's still going," Mary Smith, a founding member of the Boulder County Community Rights Network, said last week about the status of the petition drive that began last summer.

"We're just a couple thousand signatures short of our goal," Smith said.

BCCRN activists have contended that a home-rule charter would give Boulder County the authority to prohibit or more strictly regulate activities that threaten the county's communities — activities such as the use of hydraulic fracturing to free up underground oil and gas deposits in unincorporated parts of the county.

The organization has been circulating petitions that would, if enough signatures are gathered, put a question on Boulder County voters' ballots to ask whether a 21-member home-rule charter-drafting commission should be created to write a proposed county charter. That document would be submitted to voters in a later election.

Advertisement

Colorado law specifies that such a petition have signatures from at least 5 percent of the qualified registered voters in the county, according to the County Clerk and Recorder's Office. As of Feb. 2, total voter registration in the county was 242,717, so the 5 percent rule would require valid signatures from 12,136 of those voters.

Boulder County Community Rights Network's Smith has said the group's goal is to collect and turn in 16,000 signatures, in order to provide a cushion in the event some of the signatures are rejected when the completed petitions are reviewed by the county clerk.

Smith said last week that her organization's members are undeterred by court rulings that have thrown out voter-approved fracking bans or moratoriums in Longmont, Lafayette and Fort Collins. She said the group's members believe their community-rights approach is backed by the Colorado constitution.

"We don't believe the court is the ultimate authority," Smith said "We believe the people are the ultimate authority."

Last November, Boulder County commissioners extended the county's moratorium on accepting new oil and gas development applications until at least July 1, 2018.

The commissioners, however, have said their legal staff has advised that a home-rule charter wouldn't give the county any more authority under Colorado law and the state constitution to permanently prohibit fracking.

"We've maintained from the get-go" that a home-rule charter "really wouldn't give us that power," Commissioner Deb Gardner, chairwoman of the county board, said last week.

If it did, Gardner said, the commissioners themselves would have pursued asking voters to authorize the writing of such a home-rule charter document.

Last May, the Boulder County Community Rights Network sought unsuccessfully to have the commissioners schedule a special July 2014 election on the proposal to create a charter-drafting commission. The organization then fell short of having the required number of petition signatures to try to get the issue on the November general election ballot.

County attorney Ben Pearlman said last year that even if the backers of the charter-commission proposal were to collect enough registered voters' signatures to force an election on the issue, the Board of County Commissioners would still have the discretion of deciding when to schedule an election on the question.

Pearlman said the commissioners could put the question on a regularly scheduled election ballot or could hold a special election

John Fryar: 303-684-5211, jfryar@times-call.com or twitter.com/jfryartc