World leaders disembarked from carbon-spewing jets in New York on Earth Day last Friday to sign the Paris climate treaty, the world’s costliest accord.

In line with President Obama, Hillary Clinton says the treaty is a “historic step forward” against “one of the greatest challenges” of our age, while Bernie Sanders argues that it “goes nowhere near far enough.”

John Kasich has “serious concerns” that the agreement will hurt the economy; Donald Trump is not a “great believer” in man-made climate change and might ditch the treaty; Ted Cruz says he’d do the same because it was agreed to by “ideologues.”

The reality is that we need to respond to the real problem of climate change, but this well-intentioned treaty is a hugely expensive way of doing very little.

Ambitious promises

The accord talks a big game. It doesn’t just commit to capping the global temperature increase at 2 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels. The text says the world’s leaders commit to keeping the increase “well below 2 degrees Celsius” and will try to cap it at 1.5 degrees Celsius.

This is just rhetoric. My research and the only peer-reviewed published assessment of the agreement used the United Nation’s favorite climate model to measure the impact of every nation fulfilling every major carbon-cutting promise in the treaty between now and 2030. I found that the total temperature reduction will be just 0.086 degrees Fahrenheit by 2100.

Even if these promises were extended for 70 more years, they would reduce temperature rises by 0.3 degrees Fahrenheit by 2100. This is similar to a finding by scientists at MIT. It’s feeble.

We will hear claims from green campaigners that the treaty will do a lot more, but we should check their math. Such claims are based on unrealistic scenarios in which governments do little now but embark on incredibly ambitious carbon reduction policies after 2030. Given that it’s hard to know whether the Paris treaty will withstand the results even of this year’s U.S. presidential election, it seems foolhardy to predict that governments will suddenly become dramatically more ambitious 15 years from now.

History gives us extra reason for skepticism. The only global treaty to cut carbon – the Kyoto Protocol – failed when it was never ratified by the U.S. and was eventually abandoned by Canada, Russia and Japan. Even before then, the treaty had holes in it so big that it was never destined to achieve anything.

Invest in R&D

In the 1990s and 2000s, we learned that the only sure way to make substantial emissions cuts was a major economic recession. Obviously, we are unlikely to hear even the most climate-alarmed presidential candidate calling for an economic downturn.

By the United Nation’s own reckoning, this treaty will achieve less than 1% of the emission cuts needed to meet its target temperatures. Ninety-nine percent of the problem is left for the leaders of the 2030s to deal with.

And what does it cost to make such feeble cuts? U.S. promises alone – to cut greenhouse gas emissions 26%-28% below 2005 levels by 2025 – would reduce gross domestic product more than $150 billion annually.

Trying to cut carbon dioxide, even with an efficient carbon tax, will make cheap energy more expensive, which will slow economic growth. Green technology is still inefficient (that’s why it still requires significant subsidies).

What is needed to solve global warming is a massive increase in green energy technology research and development. This is by far the most effective and efficient way to find breakthrough technologies that will be so cheap, they can outcompete fossil fuels. If that happens, we will have fixed global warming, because everyone will switch to those cheaper, green energy sources.

The innovation coalition backed by philanthropist Bill Gates, business leaders and about 20 governments to double global green energy research and development is an excellent initiative and is likely to achieve far more than the Paris treaty. But the Gates fund is just a start. A panel of Nobel laureates for the project Copenhagen Consensus on Climate found that we shouldn’t just double R&D but make a tenfold increase, to reach at least $100 billion a year.

Sadly, that will not be the focus of the treaty signed at the UN on Earth Day. Amid the political sloganeering for and against, we should bear in mind that we need to respond to climate change, but this treaty will do very little at a very high cost.

Bjorn Lomborg is director of the Copenhagen Consensus Center and a visiting professor at Copenhagen Business School.

Read or Share this story: http://vtd-tar.co/1StoQRJ