Childcare for my two-year-old son costs £9,000 a year for a nursery in a somewhat ramshackle old building in the east Midlands. Like many parents I wonder where on earth the money is going. But in a remarkable act of transparency, the nursery has thrown open its books, warts and all – and it is extraordinary to see where the cash really goes.

My son attends Castle Lane Day Nursery in Market Harborough, Leicestershire, which is independently run by friends Vikki Underwood, 47, and Harriet Wakefield, 27, who took over the struggling business three years ago by borrowing £10,000 each from “the bank of mum and dad”. The nursery only has an Ofsted rating of “satisfactory”, which may put off some parents. But I chose it because it was immediately obvious that staff morale is high and that they all care deeply for the 235 children on their books.

Wages

If we have four children in the baby unit we need two members of staff, which is not cost effective

Unsurprisingly, the biggest monthly outlay is on paying their 16 staff “just above minimum wage”, which accounts for almost 50% of their expenditure. Wages totalled £121,560 in the last tax year. The Family and Childcare Trust says that, nationally, wages for frontline staff account for more than 75% of childcare costs due to government staff: child ratios of 1:3 for under twos; 1:4 for two to threes; and 1:8 for over threes. “If we have four children in the baby unit we need two members of staff, which is not cost effective, but this is sometimes what can happen,” Wakefield says.

Directors’ pay and profits

The directors themselves work full time at the nursery and take home £1,300 a month each in salary and dividends. That is equivalent to £8,000 a year in salary topped up to £15,600 a year with dividends – hardly a fortune. The previous year’s accounts show a net profit of 9%, but after tax and the salary top-ups, the few thousand pounds left are invested back into equipment such as a new deck for the toddlers’ play area.

Rent

It was a surprise to see how much goes to pay for the building. Rather than shelling out money to pay handsome rewards to the directors, parents such as myself are actually spending 9% of their fees on rent (a £22,589 annual spend for the business) and 10% on business rates, utilities and building repairs.

Administration costs

The recent price rises, I was told, are largely due to increased administrative pressures from the push to meet the requirements of the Early Years Foundation Stage (EYFS) framework and statutory managerial responsibilities including training provision, which is no longer provided by the local authority due to spending cuts.



Facebook Twitter Pinterest Vikki Underwood (left) and Harriet Wakefield from Castle Lane Day Nursery

“The amount of paperwork staff have to get done means we are paying out a full-time salary to cover this, outside of the [staff:child] ratios,” Wakefield says. “There is always someone in the unit every day who is a spare member of staff who has to do their learning journeys, termly reports or displays.”

It also appears that around £6 of my monthly bill is subsidising government spending cuts as the county council no longer provides regular training in children’s safety or first aid, meaning the cost is pushed on to the nursery and subsequently passed on to parents.

And the duplication of efforts has an impact on fees: a child’s two-year check-up by a health visitor is now supposed to be supported by a report from the child’s nursery or childminder, if they have one, as well as a lengthy questionnaire filled in by parents – all of which provide much of the same information.

New regulations

A constant barrage of new and updated statutory requirements and regulations around care, health and staff provision also mean additional man hours to pay for, and thus fee increases. For example, from December 2014 all childcare providers were required to comply with the food information regulation, meaning every snack or dish “from a rice cake to lasagne” has to be labelled for all 14 allergens, and an alternative option be provided. Cooks have to keep information charts to show parents on request, and parents themselves are prevented from bringing in homemade goods or foodstuffs not on the charts, even for their own children’s birthday.

For Underwood and Wakefield it is a constant juggling act between “implementing new policies every month, which takes hours and therefore money, and trying not to put our costs up too much because we are parents ourselves and we know what it’s like.”

Election pledges

Every snack or dish 'from a rice cake to lasagne' has to be labelled for all 14 allergens, and an alternative provided

The election pledges made by the various parties to date include Labour’s promise to increase free childcare for three- and four-year-olds from 15 hours to 25 hours a week, while the Liberal Democrats say they would give 15 hours free childcare to all two-year-olds, which is currently only available to low-income parents of two-year-olds.

But from what I have seen of the accounts at my son’s nursery, this expansion of free childcare will benefit parents but fail to address the struggling small businesses that are trying to provide the promised services.

I have always felt that my nursery costs were reasonable given the amount of development I have seen in my son since he started attending part time aged six months. But it is clear that the system is in need of major reform as there appears to be a mismatch between political promises of providing free childcare and the reality of enabling parents and providers to balance the books.