Mrs. Johnson was a 6-year-old girl in Panama when teachers at the Salvation Army’s school there taught her to read and write.

On Tuesday, she returned some of the goodwill extended to her decades ago, volunteering with more than 100 others at the non-profit’s annual Christmas dinner at the

Colorado Convention Center in Denver.

“You cry with them, you laugh with them, some people have nobody,” said Johnson, who would give her last name only. “Some people come out of jails, some have no family. I’m their family.”.

There didn’t appear to be any tears at the dinner, which organizers expected to draw more than 1,700 people by the time the serving was done.

Santa Claus was there to give presents to each child. And there was a photo stand where attendees could have pictures taken of themselves and their families.

Whether one person or 10, “you can have your photo taken,” Salvation Army Divisional Commander Lt. Col. Dan Starrett said.

“I am so grateful they support us, because we are a poor family,” said Marisol Veana, 23, who came to the event with her daughter, Ashley, 3, and other members of her family.

The children, she said, wanted to open the presents right away. “They want to open them now, but they have to wait until midnight.”

Danitza Morales, 8, sat patiently, coloring at a table with seven other members of her family as they waited to have dinner. “I didn’t think I would sit on Santa’s lap,” she said with a smile.

“This is great,” said her mother, Marisa Gutierrez, 47.

Ryan Johnson, 28, volunteered to help, and brought along his two young children and his wife, Kayla, 29.

“I feel like this is what life is all about; it puts in perspective how fortunate you are,” he said.

The event was a chance for his son Leon, 4 and daughter, Aria, 2, to learn about those who have less, he said.

Ron Kay, 52, and his son, Ben, 17, also volunteered to help. “As a kid its not the biggest thing you want to do on Christmas Eve,” Ben said. “But it is really great to see how you are helping people out.

“I want our family to keep doing this because it is a great thing to do and it is what the season is about.”

Safeway provided 850 pounds of ham, 200 pounds of potatoes, 10 cases of cranberry sauce and 250 pies for the meal, and 70 of the grocery chain’s employees were among the corps of volunteers.

Tom McGhee: 303-954-1671, tmcghee@denverpost.com or twitter.com/dpmcghee