Topics: alberto brandolini, Carly Fiorina, center for medical progress, Chris Hayes, Climate Change, Election 2016, GOP 2016, james west, Jeb Bush, Marco Rubio, Planned Parenthood, sarah kliff, Elections News, Media News, News, Politics News

If you’re searching for advice on using the Internet without losing your mind, the classic xkcd web comic “Duty Calls” remains the gold standard. After all, no matter how much technology changes, as long as there are humans using it, the Internet will be full of people; and many of them will be wrong. So unless you figure out a way to log-off — and, more important, stay logged off — you’re just going to have to find a way to deal.

In terms of usefulness, however, there is a close second to xkcd’s masterpiece: the “Bullshit Asymmetry Principle.” Coined by Italian software developer Alberto Brandolini, the BAP is a newer member of the canon, first appearing in a January 2013 tweet. But if you’ve already come across the BAP, it was probably through the now-iconic picture taken during the “lightning talk” Brandolini delivered last year in Rome:

The Bullshit Asymmetry Principle



Brandolini’s Law:http://t.co/WHi3NI3NRq via @ziobrando pic.twitter.com/8wFboEQAZU — Brian John Spencer (@brianjohnspencr) November 23, 2014

For those of you who can’t see embedded tweets and aren’t familiar with the BAP already, it goes like this: “The amount of energy necessary to refute bullshit is an order of a magnitude bigger than to produce it.” And if you’ve ever been on the Internet before — or had a conversation with a 9/11 Truther — it’s likely that you don’t need me to explain the BAP to you, because its truth is utterly (and painfully) self-evident.

But if you want a more specific example, look no further than the grotesque and meaningless postmodern spectacle broadcast by CNN and the Republican Party earlier this week. Because with three hours and 11 candidates at its disposal, the former “most trusted name in news” unleashed a Pacific Ocean-size amount of bullshit. It was so voluminous, in fact, that even those in the media who wanted to refute it couldn’t.

“We could literally spend the entire show fact-checking the debate,” MSNBC’s Chris Hayes said on Thursday, explaining why he was going to focus instead on the night’s “three biggest lies.” (Note: Without commercials, “All In” runs about 45 minutes.) And while that sounds hyperbolic, it’s not. In perfect honesty, I could easily spend this whole column doing the same. But I’ll follow Hayes’ lead and limit myself to three examples.

I’ll concentrate on (in ascending order of awfulness): Carly Fiorina’s bullshit about Planned Parenthood, Jeb Bush’s bullshit about his older brother’s national security record, and Sen. Marco Rubio’s bullshit about climate change. In each case, the candidates made statements that were either blatant lies or grossly misleading; and in each case, mainstream media held its nose, kept walking, and left others to clean up the mess.

Of the three, Fiorina’s bullshit was the least harmful; but it was possibly the most shameless. Speaking of the deceptively edited anti-Planned Parenthood video that the deceptively named Center for Medical Progress recorded through deception, Fiorina described “a fully formed fetus on the table, its heart beating, its legs kicking, while someone says we have to keep it alive to harvest its brain.”

Clearly, viewers were supposed to infer that this grisly scene was recorded by the CMP’s moles. It was not. As best as Vox’s Sarah Kliff — who watched all 12 hours of the CMP’s footage, and described Fiorina’s claim as “pure fiction” — can tell, Fiorina is describing a mix of stock footage, which was not shot inside a Planned Parenthood, and the unsubstantiated claims of a former fetal tissue procurement. Both come from other CMP releases.