Town marshal welcomes police dog Carlos, remembers Opie

Canine Officer Carlos brings back a toy to Log Lane Village Marshal Fred Cook while playing fetch Dec. 10 in the Log Lane Town Park. Carlos, 2, is new to the Log Lane Village Marshal's Office, having been brought to town around Thanksgiving. ( Jenni Grubbs / Fort Morgan Times )

Shown here in May 2014, late Log Lane Village Police Canine Opie rests after chasing down his red toy. Opie was put to sleep Sept. 27 after arthritis left him unable to get up, according to Marshal Fred Cook. (Jenni Grubbs / Fort Morgan Times file photo)

Log Lane Village has a new officer in the town's Marshal's Office. He's covered in black hair and is full of energy. But he's also only 2 years old and a bit skittish around women and very overprotective of Marshal Fred Cook.

His name is Carlos, and he's a German shepherd.

While Carlos is the town's new canine officer, he has some big paw prints to fill.

Remembering Opie

Until last fall, Opie was the town's canine officer, and he was beloved by the community. For several years, Opie was a common sight at Town Hall or wherever Cook happened to be.

But last September, just as Opie was about to be retired as a police dog, his health took a turn for the worse.

Log Lane Village Marshal Fred Cook scratches behind new Canine Officer Carlos' ears Dec. 10 in the Marshal's Office at Town Hall. Carlos, a German shepherd with black hair, came to Log Lane from Germany, where he received his initial police dog training. (Jenni Grubbs / Fort Morgan Times)

On Sept. 27, Cook recalled, "he was down on his hips and couldn't get up."

The concerned marshal took the police canine to the veterinarian, who told Cook the bad news: 9-year-old Opie's arthritis had taken over, and the dog would never be able to get back up and enjoy life again.

The vet told the marshal that Opie was already on a high enough dose of pain medication for the arthritis that there was not much else that could be done. More pain meds would only lead to liver and kidney failure.

Cook made the difficult decision to put his beloved companion and partner to sleep.

"For as big as he was, he held up pretty well," an obviously still mourning Cook said Dec. 10. "It was a hard decision. It's still hard to think about him."

The Log Lane community mourned with Cook after Opie's death, offering sympathies to the marshal and other town staff.

Cook said it was a loss for the whole town, especially the little kids who used to pet and play with the gentle canine officer.

New police dog

Cook knew long before Opie was put to sleep that a new police canine was headed for Log Lane.

The original plan was for Opie to retire in the fall and just become the office dog at Town Hall while the new police canine finished training with Cook.

But that did not work out, and it took a little longer for the new dog to come to Log Lane — or for Cook to be ready for another police dog.

"In some ways, it's good," the marshal said of getting another canine partner so soon after Opie's passing. "It does help me recover. And living alone, it's some company."

He picked up Carlos Thanksgiving morning at Denver International Airport after the dog took a 13-hour flight and spent 2.5 hours in customs.

"He wasn't happy about being kept in that kennel all that time," Cook said.

From DIA, Cook took Carlos to Brush and then to Wellington for some more training with Nunn Police Chief Joe Clingan, who also helped train Opie.

Back in Log Lane, Carlos is settling into life with Cook, who is helping the dog get used to living in the United States.

That is not to say everything went smoothly at first.

A couple Saturdays ago, "I called Joe, and said, 'There's something wrong with this dog. His tongue's turned orange,'" Cook recalled, explaining that color changes in dogs' tongues can mean serious health issues.

He said that Clingan took the call seriously, saying that they could return Carlos to Germany and get another police dog if necessary. But Clingan also asked Cook what the marshal had been feeding Carlos.

"Cheetos," Cook said he replied, leading Clingan to bawl him out for the joke. "I was trying to get him used to American food. What's more American than Cheetos and Egg McMuffins?"

Cook said that Carlos "still has a lot of puppy in him," but the joke call to Clingan also shows how much spirit the marshal has left in him.

"He's still on German time," Cook said. "Sometimes he wants to play at 2 a.m."

And of course, Cook also is still getting used to Carlos, who currently understands and answers to commands in German, not English, due to having been trained as a police dog in Germany for things like officer protecting and searching buildings.

But the marshal is adapting — learning to say "nein" for "no" and "platz" for "down" — and he said he and Carlos were bonding.

Next up for Cook and Carlos will be working with Fort Morgan Police Sgt. Jim Parks and FMPD Canine Officer Carr on more tracking, article searches and sniffing out nine types of narcotics.

"He's showing tendencies right now to be a passive alert dog," Cook said of Carlos, "so we'll go that way. With DNA, (prosecutors) like not to have dogs' DNA on an article. With passive alert, he just sits down when he finds something" or uses his nose to direct to an area or object instead of grabbing it with his mouth.

And while Opie was a very happy-go-lucky veteran police dog, Carlos is still a rookie and is much more suspicious and wary of people. Cook advises not staring at him and not offering a hand and pulling it away suddenly.

But the marshal also said he expects not to need those warnings for too long.

"Opie was a happy dog. Carlos will be, too," Cook said. "All of my dogs start out this way, and they turn into big people lovers."

He said the nervousness and extreme protectiveness Carlos shows right now will fade and tolerance of others will grow, especially as the marshal and his canine partner come to know and understand each other.

But in many ways, Carlos is a dog who wants to play and run and have fun, Cook said.

"He'll play fetch until I'm tired," he said.

Before long, the big, black German shepherd will be a familiar sight in Log Lane, just like Opie was.

Jenni Grubbs: jgrubbs@fmtimes.com, Twitter @JenniGrubbs or tout.com/jennigrubbs