Activist investor Bill Ackman is ratcheting up pressure on Allergan Inc.’s board to join forces with Valeant International Pharmaceuticals Inc. by calling on Allergan’s lead director to meet with Valeant on the prospects of a merger.

Ackman sent a letter on Monday to Allergan /quotes/zigman/217110/delayed /quotes/nls/agn AGN director Michael Gallagher, saying that Chairman and Chief Executive David Pyott has a “conflict of interest” on the merger issue. Ackman holds nearly 10% of Allergan shares and is aggressively promoting the idea of a merger with Valeant.

Ackman went on to say he is concerned about “governance failures at the company and is writing an open letter so these issues can be address in a transparent manner.”

The letter points out that Allergan has been unreceptive to the idea of a merger, and charges Pyott with putting up the company’s defenses out of fear of losing his job. The letter goes on to express disappointment that Gallagher, who has spoken with Ackman by phone with Pyott and the company’s general counsel on the line, has refused to meet with Ackman without Pyott present.

Pyott apparently has met with a number of Allergan shareholders, who Ackman says have been misled about Valeant.

“During these meetings, Mr. Pyott, we are told, has denigrated Valeant, including making false and/or misleading statements about Valeant’s business model, [research and development] strategy, accounting practices, financial performance, and operating approach,” Ackman’s letter states.

Bloomberg Bill Ackman

Allergan officials issued a prepared statement that said: “Allergan maintains an open line of communication with stockholders and welcomes their feedback. However, as a co-bidder with Valeant Pharmaceuticals, we believe that Mr. Ackman’s views and interests are not aligned with those of other Allergan stockholders. We note that Mr. Ackman’s rhetoric focuses on, among other things, the benefits he sees in a transaction with Valeant.”

Valeant, a generic drug specialist, is seeking to buy Botox maker Allergan in what would be a $46 billion unsolicited offer. Valeant made its offer April 22 and was rebuffed by Allergan a few weeks later. Allergan said at the time that the deal “substantially undervalues” the company.

Ackman is calling for a shareholder vote on the deal, which would value the company around $155 a share. Allergan was trading slightly lower in Monday’s action to $159.68.

More from MarketWatch

Sidestepping Obamacare, Indiana finds new way to close coverage

AstraZeneca rejects higher ‘final’ offer from Pfizer

Pfizer ‘the creep at the bar’ after another AstraZeneca rejection