Jim Houser, co-owner of Hawthorne Auto Clinic, received $16,000 in federal health insurance tax credits last year, a significant help as he tried to keep prices down in a competitive field.

But it's help that many businesses don't realize is available, state officials say.

In late 2013, business owners were alerted that a new one-stop shopping website, Cover Oregon, was about to make insuring employees easier, while also qualifying businesses for tax credits.

Cover Oregon never got off the ground, and nor did its plans for a small business exchange website. Though individual Oregonians can use the federal website, HealthCare.gov, to enroll, small businesses in Oregon cannot.

Still, Oregon businesses with up to 25 employees can tap available tax credits, even without a fancy website. All they have to do is check eligibility, ask their carrier to confirm that their plan qualifies, and then apply at tax time.

"The small business tax credit is very much available, and it's available in Oregon even though we don't have a (small business exchange) yet," said Berri Leslie of the state Department of Consumer and Business Services. "We have done a lot of outreach to small businesses in the last three months, and what we're hearing from so many folks is that they don't actually realize there are some good options that are available right now."

The 2010 Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act set up tax credits of up to 35 percent of their costs of coverage to subsidize employee health coverage for businesses with fewer than 25 employees. In 2014, those credits jumped to as much as 50 percent.

The catch: Small businesses must sign up for coverage equivalent to policies that meet federal requirements, such as would have been sold on the small business exchange site that was planned.

Notwithstanding its problems with the Cover Oregon project, the state is still exploring purchasing a small business exchange in time for the 2017 plan year. The difference this time? State officials will need to get legislative approval for any such deal, and they're trying to buy something that's cheap and ready to go off-the-shelf.

Later this year the state will seek bids and compare them to what it would take to move to the federal small business exchange. Using the federal version could present a challenge because Oregon uses a unique methodology for setting small business rates.

Once the state has a website set up, employers will be able to set a defined contribution amount and let their employees shop among a variety of plans — something that would save the average small business owner a lot of time and thought.

As things stand now, Houser says he has to organize staff meetings at which employees talk about their health needs and providers — "things we don't need to know and things we don't need to be involved in," he said. With an exchange, "we could just send the employees to shop and one person could go with Kaiser and one person could go with Providence, and another person could go wherever."

-- Nick Budnick

— Nick Budnick

nbudnick@oregonian.com

503-294-5083

@nickbudnick