Governors have told the president that they need help with the battle over Obamacare. Dems complain OFA is MIA

Barack Obama’s campaign spun off into its own mega-grassroots political group last year, striking fear into the hearts of conservative groups with promises to sell the president’s agenda across the country.

But now, heading into midterm election season, Democrats are asking: Where’s the juice?

Story Continued Below

Organizing for Action raised $26 million last year, but officials say they aren’t planning to unleash any of that cash to help Democratic candidates buy TV ads. Instead, they’re planning to pressure Congress to pass liberal bills, staying out of electoral politics altogether.

Some strategists and state party operatives are frustrated that even at a time when vulnerable Democrats are fighting to hang onto the Senate and incumbents are being bombarded with negative ads from conservative groups backed by brothers Charles and David Koch, OFA is not stepping up the air cover.

( Also on POLITICO: Democrats' would-be Karl Rove)

Democratic governors also complained about Obamacare when they were in town over the weekend, telling President Obama that they need help as the battle over Obamacare has moved from Washington to the states.

Obama spoke to the group on Tuesday night and touted volunteer efforts to sign up 4 million Americans under the health care law.

Democrats point to key battleground states like North Carolina, Arkansas and Louisiana as places where OFA’s resources are needed to combat mega-spending by conservative groups like Americans for Prosperity. OFA is organized under the tax code in the same way as the Koch brothers-backed group.

“I think in states like North Carolina you kind of have to have all hands on deck to help someone like [Sen. Kay Hagan],” said Thomas Mills, a North Carolina-based Democratic consultant. “Hagan could certainly use some help. She’s a first-term senator. She’s not well-defined. She needs help in defining herself before AFP does that for her.”

( PHOTOS: Senators up for election in 2014)

Arkansas Democratic Sen. Tom Pryor could also use air cover as he tries to fend off Rep. Tom Cotton (R-Ark.). Cotton has gotten high-profile support by several conservative groups that have run ads in the state.

Veteran Arkansas Democratic consultant Robert McLarty said the pro-Cotton ads have significantly outweighed the Pryor ads in recent weeks.

“They definitely have beefed up a lot more,” said McLarty of the number of ads attacking Pryor. “It’s been pretty significant in ads favoring [Cotton] or against Pryor.”

Some Democratic strategists point to that as the exact reason why OFA is needed. They are concerned that OFA is hurting the party’s chances of holding the Senate by taking money away from other outside groups, while having little impact. If the Democrats lose their majority in the Senate, OFA’s work in pushing for Obama’s agenda will be pointless anyway.

“They are certainly attracting a lot of big donors. But if I were one those donors, I would be asking what they’ve done with my money,” said one strategist.

( PHOTOS: 10 must-watch House races in 2014)

Another Democratic operative said that the downside is, “Democrats are getting outspent as heavily as they are in the Senate with Americans for Prosperity and they could be pushing back.”

In stark contrast, Priorities USA, the pro-Hillary Clinton super PAC, sent a missive to donors asking them to contribute to efforts to keep the Senate and take back the House.

Authors: