If there were any wiggle room, the Avalanche would have considered Tuesday’s loss to the Los Angeles Kings an inevitable off night. The bounces went the other way, and Colorado was faced with an early two-goal deficit against elite goalie Jonathan Quick.

But the Avs can’t afford off nights, and the Kings’ 5-2 victory at the Pepsi Center severely diminished their already-slim chances of making the playoffs.

“We got nothing,” Avs forward Alex Tanguay said. “At this time of year, you need the desperation, and tonight they had more than us. It showed. They got every bounce, every break. Those are crucial points. It’s very disappointing.”

Los Angeles is among five teams Colorado is chasing, and the gaps got wider after the Kings chased goalie Calvin Pickard from the game in the first period and cruised to 2-0 this season against the Avs in Denver. L.A. extended its lead to six points over the Avs, and Minnesota also won Tuesday, putting the Wild 10 points ahead of the Avs.

Avs Mailbag: Pose a question for Terry Frei, Mike Chambers

The Avs have 15 games remaining, including 13 against Western Conference teams — and 10 against conference teams in front of them. So the push for the playoffs is not over. A big winning streak could make it interesting. But Colorado hasn’t won four consecutive games all season, failing to make it four in a row Tuesday.

And … goalie Semyon Varlamov has another groin injury.

Pickard, who was called up from the minors Monday and entered the game with a .936 save percentage — tied for first among NHL goalies with at least 14 games played — was pulled 14:15 into the game after allowing three goals on eight shots. But he wasn’t to blame. Marian Gaborik (power play) and Brayden McNabb scored on skilled redirections, and Jeff Carter produced his team-high 23rd goal with a magnificent wrist shot after a ghastly defensive-end turnover.

“It was a tough start for me. The goals weren’t bad goals, but I got a find a way (to stop) at least one of them,” Pickard said. “It was just one of those nights. I wasn’t getting many bounces going my way early on, and before I knew it, there were three in the back of my net.”

PHOTOS: Colorado Avalanche vs. Los Angeles Kings, March 10, 2015

Avs coach Patrick Roy didn’t pull Pickard because he was playing poorly.

“I just wanted to change the rhythm of the game,” Roy said. “Every time Calvin has been called up, he’s played really well for us.”

“It was the story of the night,” Roy said of the Kings’ two quick goals. “To me, the big surprise is, how come (the Kings) aren’t in the playoffs? They are so good. There is no reason for these guys not to be in the playoff picture right now.”

Tyson Barrie scored 12:53 into the game to trim the Kings’ lead to 2-1, but McNabb scored less than two minutes later, and Kyle Clifford made it 4-1 late in the second period.

Clifford was tied up with defenseman Brad Stuart, but his one-handed poke check pushed the puck under third-string goalie Reto Berra.

The Avs got back within two with Tanguay’s tap-in 8:27 into the third, but just as with Colorado’s first goal, the Kings answered on the next shift with Jake Muzzin’s wrist shot past Berra.

Mike Chambers: mchambers@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikechambers