Hurricane Ivan was slowly moving toward the Alabama coast with punishing winds of more than 100 mph and editors began asking for a volunteer to drive south toward Mobile and cover landfall — one that could and likely would devastate coastal communities.

Growing up on the flat, flat plains of West Texas, I had seen tornadoes. Even though I had only worked at the paper in Montgomery for about a month, I don't turn down opportunities to cover rare events, especially those that are historic, unique or likely to be consequential – good or bad. I wanted to cover the hurricane.

STORIES BY SEBASTIAN KITCHEN

So, the next morning, after boarding my Great Dane Buster, I climbed in my truck, picked up photographer Mickey Welsh and headed south — although not quite as fast as we would have liked because state troopers close southbound traffic before hurricanes and allow people to use all of the lanes going north to evacuate faster.

Yes, I volunteered to drive south toward a hurricane with a laptop, camera, photographer, maps and some nonperishable food — and no idea where we would stay. That September night in 2004, I watched from a fifth or sixth floor hotel room as transformers blew and an entire section of the city lost power. Mickey and I watched as small waterfalls of rainwater came through leaks and poured into the hotel lobby.

Ivan shifted in the last hours. And Mobile, which at one point looked to be the target, suffered property damage, but avoided catastrophe. Gulf Shores and some communities farther east were not as fortunate.

Crazy or not, I have volunteered to drive toward the eye of a hurricane, slept in a tent to cover the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina and traveled to Colorado trying to find a man who police were interested in after his parents were beat to death in their home. I found his house and knocked on the door, but there was no answer. Police later arrested him and he pleaded guilty to beating them with an ax handle.

My mom and my then-girlfriend (now wife Melody) are not always amused — at all — with my work decisions – to drive toward a hurricane or knock on a suspected killer's door. Or work hours. Or sources who know where you live and leave packages in the mailbox. But the beauties and blessings of being a reporter are experiencing so much and meeting so many people that most others would never have the opportunity to experience.

I walked more than 40 miles with marchers in 2005 honoring the 40th anniversary of the Selma to Montgomery Voting Rights March, re-enacting the historic march now being depicted in the hit movie "Selma." Some original marchers joined us and told their stories. Alabama state troopers, whose previous members once brutally attacked the activists, now walked with them – there to protect them while they walked along Alabama roadways.

I rode the historic ferry at Gees Bend, which was closed for more than 40 years to stop black voters from going to the polls and participating in civil rights events, with U.S. Sen. John McCain when he was running for president. McCain, for some reason, took an interest in the people of Alabama's impoverished Black Belt (named for the soil) even though most of those residents would never vote for him.

And I have been invited into the homes and businesses of countless people who wanted to talk about issues that affected them, about the death of a family member, or to watch a debate or speech with them and listen to their response.

However, those are not a typical day for me. I write about local government and politics. I spend more time sitting in the back of the council chambers at City Hall keeping tabs on the Metro Council than chasing storms. Meetings — I know — very exciting. Or poring over hundreds of pages of documents — emails or personnel files or audits or budgets. Again – very glamorous.

But there's a very good reason. Most rational people do not have the time to monitor public officials and their activities — and they need to be monitored. So, reporters and news organizations play a vital role in keeping an eye on public officials and their actions — where they are spending money or what laws they are enacting.

The public has a right to know — should know — what those officials are doing and why.

So, while this industry has undergone and continues to undergo a massive overhaul and there are not the resources there were to dedicate to news coverage, news organizations and reporters still have a serious duty to watch public bodies and officials and ensure they are acting in the best interests of the public — whether those people ever read the newspaper or web site or not. We are all affected.

I take that duty very seriously.

And while some of us in this business (which unfortunately faces the same realities as every other business) have concerns about the future of the industry and are uncertain about the direction and longevity, I do not know of many places of employment that would encourage me, and pay me, for these experiences.

And I don't know what else I would do anyway.

Meet Sebastian Kitchen

Age: 37

Born and raised in Lubbock, Texas

Education: Graduated from Texas Tech University (Guns up!)

Family: wife Melody and Great Dane Buster, and a host of loved ones spread from Texas to Ohio

Experience: Worked from 2000 to 2004 at the Lubbock Avalanche-Journal in Lubbock, first writing obituaries while I was in college, and then writing about city and county government, politics, higher education, surrounding counties in the Texas panhandle and New Mexico, and agriculture; 2004 to 2006 at the Montgomery Advertiser in Alabama writing about state and local government and politics, and civil rights; 2006 to 2008 at the Mobile Press-Register writing about state politics; and returned to the Montgomery Advertiser in 2008 as an assistant editor and writer to revamp state government and political coverage.

Time at The Courier-Journal: Just over a year, started in December 2013 (After being told the winter was not too bad, I arrived in Louisville just in time for the worst winter in 20 years.)

Random fact most people do not know about me: I officiated two weddings in Texas. People do not have to be ordained to legally officiate weddings in Texas (I am not sure Rick Perry knows I did this on his watch.)

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1BXj9rd