The Denver Post’s 14th Underground Music Showcase finished strong Sunday, with day parties raging in full force and nearly 150 acts scheduled from noon until late into the night.

The festival, which highlights the best local independent artists, featured more than 400 performances at nearly 20 venues along South Broadway over four days.

Attendance numbers were not immediately available, but UMS Event Director Kendall Smith said the weekend drew more music fans than last year. UMS 2013 saw an estimated 16,000 people, and 2012 hosted roughly 14,000 attendees.

View photos from the 2014 Underground Music Showcase

“Last night was a record Saturday night,” Smith said Sunday. “It was probably the largest crowd UMS has ever seen.”

Smith attributes the steady growth to the showcase’s programming.

Acts ranging from the psychedelic Denver-based rock duo Sunboy to the internationally recognized rappers People Under the Stairs hit the main stage at Security Service Federal Credit Union building’s parking lot off Broadway over the course of the festival.

Diana Prulhiere, who moved to Denver two months ago from Charleston, W.Va., attended UMS for the first time. She said she had little knowledge about the performers but liked “that there are so many bands and performances so close together in such a short time. It’s a good way to get exposed to music you might not be familiar with or hear on the radio.”

Breckenridge Brewery provided beer at the main stage, as well as at more than a dozen South Broadway venues.

“It’s more about the Denver bands for me,” said Ryan Workman, the company’s field marketing manager, who was able to sneak away from work to listen to his favorites. “Colfax Speed Queen was maybe the best show.”

Larry Nix, the drummer of Colfax Speed Queen, said before his set Friday night at 3 Kings Tavern that the show would be “a disaster, in the best way. We’re going to break some legs.”

They nearly did. A fierce mosh pit broke out during the performance, with beer showers and whiskey shots flying in the air to the frenetic tune of the band’s thrashing, which Workman described as “almost like dark, surf punk.”

Other highlights from the end of the fest included a glitter shower during Ned Garthe Explosion, a bandmate’s wedding proposal at the end of The Royal’s set, and a guerrilla, secret show staged by Rubedo in the vacant lot by Kitty’s South Adult Entertainment Center.

“That’s what I loved about this year,” Rubedo vocalist Kyle Gray said. “It’s even more underground than The Underground Music Showcase.”

Jordan Gonzalez contributed to this report.