Mayor Megan Barry (Photo: Submitted)

Nearly seven months ago, Davidson County voters overwhelmingly said the county’s residents should get their fair share of jobs on Metro government projects.

In the final count, 58 percent of voters supported a charter amendment that would require companies contracting with Metro on construction projects of at least $100,000 to hire 40 percent of their workers from within the county. The charter amendment also set a goal of having 10 percent of those workers be previously low income earners.

Last week state legislators acted to overturn the will of the voters by prohibiting local governments from requiring contractors to hire local workers on projects funded by local taxpayer dollars.

The actions by the General Assembly are disappointing, but not entirely surprising. In fact, I predicted this would happen on the campaign trail. It follows a trend in recent years of the state legislature undermining local control.

I should note that most of the Davidson County delegation to the General Assembly did stand with the majority of voters who approved this charter amendment.

Sens. Thelma Harper, Steve Dickerson and Jeff Yarbro voted against this legislation, as did Reps. Bo Mitchell, Bill Beck, Jason Powell, John Ray Clemmons, Harold M. Love Jr., Sherry Jones and Darren Jernigan.

They should be commended for their efforts. Reps. Mike Stewart and Brenda Gilmore, who were excused that day but have been strong supporters of the local-hire initiative, and the lawmakers from outside of Nashville who stood up against this bill, also deserve credit and thanks.

Buy Photo Nashville’s voter-approved local hire rule faces opposition from the state House and Senate. (Photo: File / The Tennessean)

As Sen. Dickerson noted in asking his colleagues to give us a chance to let the process work, my administration has taken great strides to implement the charter amendment in a way that would meet the goals of the voters without creating a chilling or prohibitive set of rules that would negatively impact contractors or our local economy.

We accomplished this by bringing a group of contractors, labor representatives and community advocates around the table over the course of three months to chart a path forward that worked — as well as possible — for all those involved.

The fact of the matter is that most contractors I’ve spoken with like the idea of having local residents work on local projects, but the availability of a trained and ready workforce has been the prohibitive factor in that process.

Working with the group, we took a two-pronged approach that sought to implement the local-hire charter amendment language while also creating a program designed to withstand any actions by the state to overturn the will of the voters of Davidson County.

First, when drafting the rules and regulations, we listened to the concerns of contractors and labor and created a phased-in penalty system that would give companies time to build the workforce in Davidson County over the next four years.

This system also would institute waivers for noncompliance if those contractors could reasonably show that, despite their best efforts, the workforce simply didn’t exist within Nashville to fulfill their contract.

Second, and I believe most importantly, we created the Nashville Construction Readiness Partnership (NCRP), which is a collaborative effort between my administration, the Nashville Career Advancement Center (NCAC), contractors, labor and community advocates to help recruit, train and identify construction workers in Davidson County who will be job-ready for local projects.

The NCRP will address those concerns by making available that pool of workers who can be used not only on public projects in Nashville, but also on private projects here and elsewhere throughout the Middle Tennessee region — a win for contractors and Nashvillians seeking good-paying jobs in the construction industry.

Megan Barry is the seventh mayor of the Metropolitan Government of Nashville and Davidson County.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/214Q455