REPORTING FOR DUTY Joy Schmuckal, LPN, CST, a 70-year-old surgical scrub nurse at Northwest Michigan Surgery Center in Traverse City, Mich., hopes to work 2 more years before retiring.

Worried about retirement? You're not alone. Our 2014 annual salary survey found that despite a recovering economy, many are still feeling the effects of the recession — and it's especially hard on retirement-aged Baby Boomers who don't feel they've saved enough along the way to comfortably call it a career, and who feel forced to work into their golden years.

"There just isn't enough money to survive on a day-to-day basis as well as plan for the future," says Kathi Gascho, RN, BSN, CASC, director of nursing at the Camp Lowell Surgery Center in Tucson, Ariz.

In this year's salary survey, in which nearly 900 surgical facility leaders shared with us the size of their paychecks, a major theme emerged: Nearly one-third of the OR managers and nurses we surveyed are working into their golden years — some because they want to, others because they have to. One of the hardest things about retirement? "It's knowing when it's time to retire," says Jeanie Skibiski, CRNA, MHA, of Mercy Orthopedic Hospital in Ozark, Mo. "I know people in their 70s who want to keep working. I think when it's not enjoyable anymore is when you need to quit."

Download "2014 Salary Survey: How Does Your Paycheck Compare?" results for

Ambulatory Surgery Centers and Hospitals.

The squeeze on salaries

The economy may be on the rebound, but surgical administrators say they are still feeling the squeeze of the recession and rising healthcare costs on their paychecks.

"My company is not even keeping up with inflation," says one nurse.

"With the volatility of insurance companies and the steady decline in reimbursement rates, raises and bonuses are being seen less and less in positions of management," adds another.

More than half of ASC and hospital respondents (52% and 54%, respectively) received a raise within the last year. Yet, half of both groups of leaders say their salaries are largely staying the same when compared to the last couple of years, thanks in large part to rising costs and lower reimbursements.

"I am blessed to be in an occupation I am passionate about," says the CEO of one surgery center. "However, each year it takes hard work to succeed, as vendors increase costs and payors decrease payments at the same time as they are increasing premiums."