Congressman Ralph Abraham says ISIS is “spreading like wildfire” and poses a threat to the United States. (Photo: Melinda Martinez/mmartinez@thetowntalk.com)

The day may come when U.S. Rep. Ralph Abraham would support sending U.S. ground troops to fight ISIS directly, but it's not here yet.

But Abraham, R-Alto, said the United States needs to step up efforts to combat the threat posed by ISIS and similar "radical Islamic terrorists."

"ISIS is now a global threat. It is a threat to the United States. If you look at the map of where ISIS is now compared to where they were two years ago, they are spreading like wildfire," Abraham said Wednesday while talking to Town Talk staff members in Alexandria.

U.S. ground troops should be used in the war against ISIS "only as a very last resort to protect our national security and only if we have a winnable strategy laid out by this administration," he said.

"I'm tired of sending our good people over there just to get killed, and we end up losing the country anyway like we did in Iraq or Afghanistan."

Abraham is a U.S. Army veteran who is chairman of the Subcommittee on Disability Assistance and Memorial Affairs of the House Committee on Veterans' Affairs. He took office last month as the representative for the 5th Congressional District, which includes the Central Louisiana parishes of Rapides, Avoyelles, Catahoula, Concordia, Grant, LaSalle and Winn.

The U.S. is already conducting airstrikes against ISIS, and President Barack Obama now is asking Congress to approve an Authorization for the Use of Military Force, or AUMF, against ISIS.

Obama has said the AUMF is in line with "our core objective to destroy ISIL." It would include authority for a "systemic and sustained campaign of airstrikes" as well as support and training for forces on the ground. It does not call for the deployment of ground troops in Iraq or Syria.

Abraham said the AUMF being sought is too restrictive — "like taking a knife into a gunfight."

"What he's asking us to do is tie his hands behind his back," Abraham said of Obama. "The AUMF the president is sending down is not a good one. I don't ever want to give the enemy a timetable."

The requested AUMF has a three-year limit.

Ground troops from Turkey, United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia and Jordan, along with Kurds, are "willing and able to go" against ISIS, but they need more leadership from the United States, Abraham said.

He said additional measures by the United States should be taken before U.S. combat troops are part of the discussion.

"If it's for national security to protect our people, then we have to do it. But before we do that, I want to see the airstrikes increase from very few a day to several dozen a day.

"I want to see the Kurds armed, and I want to give leadership to the countries that are ready to commit troops," Abraham said.

He said the U.S. needs forward air controllers who can tell pilots of the allied forces which targets need to be destroyed by airstrikes.

"We've got special ops over there already in a training role, and we need more of those."

Abraham said the Obama administration has failed with its policies in Iraq, Afghanistan, Syria, Libya, Yemen and elsewhere "because we have not had a strategic plan to win."

"These countries are case in point, over and over again, that we go in not to win. We go in for containment. That's not going to work with ISIS."

On another topic, Abraham, who is a physician, said he thinks there's a chance for Congress to revisit health-care reform because of an upcoming U.S. Supreme Court case involving a challenge to the Affordable Care Act.

Abraham said the GOP is working on health-care legislation that would address the health needs of the poor and would keep two of the favorite aspects of the ACA — allowing children to be on a parent's health insurance policy until they turn 26 years old and not allowing insurance coverage to be denied because of a pre-existing condition.

Abraham believes some moderate Democrats would support such reform.

"Horror stories of the ACA where you can't find a doctor" and where a patient is prescribed "second-tier" medication because the doctor's first choice of medication isn't on a formulary are building a critical mass for health-care changes, he said.

The ACA is often referred to as Obamacare, and President Obama would veto any congressional action to repeal the ACA. But Abraham thinks the Supreme Court ruling potentially could undo Obamacare.

"The Supreme Court is going to take up the subsidies to the employer mandate in March, next month. We will get a ruling in June, maybe July at the latest, but we think the Supreme Court will rule 5-4 on that issue that the subsidies are not a legal thing," Abraham said.

The Supreme Court will hear a lawsuit that targets the federal subsidies helping millions of people buy health insurance. The lawsuit says the subsidies should be available only in states which created health exchanges. Louisiana is not one of those states. The federal government has established exchanges where states have refused to do so.

Abraham said if the Supreme Court rules the subsidies are unconstitutional, "really it's going to affect everybody, because what will happen then is you will have the ACA basically imploding on itself."

He said that would put "8 million, maybe 10 million, immediately out of insurance."

"We're looking forward to see what the Supreme Court is going to rule," Abraham said.

Read or Share this story: http://www.thetowntalk.com/story/news/local/2015/02/18/abraham-us-ground-troops-last-resort-isis-fight/23644613/