Share This Story 991 Tweet Share Email

VILLATINA, La Torre, Colombia

Janeth Milena cradles her mother gently on a small sofa as she recalls the moment her own life ended.

She was 22 when her mother, Maria Nelly, not yet 50 at the time, was diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease.

Milena set aside her dream of becoming a psychologist and faced her fate. She would spend day after day in this one-bedroom brick house on a long, dirt road in the hilly outskirts of Medellin, caring for her mother as they both slipped further and further from the lives they had.

While Milena accepted her role as a caregiver, she was troubled by something else. Her grandfather was also stricken by the mind-robbing disease in his mid-40s. And her mother's affliction was not random chance. It had been her destiny, and could now be Milena's destiny, too.

She, and possibly her two sons, could already be carrying the roots of the terrible disease.

"At that moment" when her mother was diagnosed, she says, "I realized my life was over."

Milena's family has deep genetic roots in Medellin and the surrounding region, the District of Antioquia. The people of this region, the paisas, have known of families cursed with this mind-robbing disease since long before doctors had a name, Alzheimer's, to describe it.

It's been a multigenerational mystery among the small rural towns and impoverished barrios that ring Medellin. La bobera, they call it. The foolishness. It steals wisdom and competence, not in the twilight years, but early, in the heart of middle age.

For generations, the curse lurked in the impoverished barrios and steep hillsides of this northwest region of Colombia, a land scarred by violence and shrouded in a culture of mystery.

Villagers in Antioquia once believed la bobera had a mythical cause. It was a hex placed by a witch, or a wronged priest, some said. Others believed it was caught by touching a certain tree.

Even once Alzheimer's became known, la bobera was perplexing for how frequently and how early it struck some families in the towns that ring Medellin, the country's second-largest city.

Nearly two decades ago, scientists traced the cause to a single genetic mutation passed from generation to generation. Locals call it the paisa mutation.

Milena's family is among 26 extended clans of about 5,000 people who are known carriers of the mutation. It's the largest known familial cluster of early-onset Alzheimer's in the world.

“I don't worry. It would consume you if you start thinking about it. ” Hugo, study participant

Those who have the mutation are destined to have it claim their ability to think, work or function — and ultimately their lives. Their symptoms begin usually in their mid-40s, followed by an inevitable decline that leads to death about 10 years later.

Because the mutation, which a genetic test can detect, is a biological guarantee of Alzheimer's, anyone who carries it is a near-perfect subject to test a new treatment. Unlike the more common type of Alzheimer's, which may or may not develop in any aging person, there is no doubt about predicting the disease's arrival in these patients. Scientists know who will get it and about what age they will get it.

So testing an Alzheimer's treatment on this group is a matter of the scientific method: Take a new drug or therapy and give it to people who carry the mutation. Form a control group to test for the placebo effect. If the onset of Alzheimer's disease in those people who carry the mutation is delayed or halted in a significant way, the therapy may work.

These characteristics of the people with the paisa mutation — all with the same genetic guarantee, all living in the same region — make them the ultimate controlled test group for doctors or scientists.

Now, a medical study organized in Phoenix is pursuing just that.

Led by doctors in Colombia and at Phoenix-based Banner Alzheimer's Institute, and run with funding from the National Institutes of Health and Banner, the drug trial aims to recruit 300 members of these families and test them for the trait. Then, 200 people with the mutation will be given experimental drugs or a placebo. Another 100 people who do not carry the mutation will also get a placebo.

The medical experiment is a departure from other Alzheimer's disease studies, which have waited until the disease has already wrecked the brain to test whether an experimental drug could reverse the course.

The Colombian study will test people while they still think clearly. These participants have their memory intact, though they carry the mutation that will one day scuttle their cognitive ability.

The $100 million-plus study has been underway for a year, and doctors expect it to last four more years. Soon after that, they could have their first answers about whether the experimental drug — one in a class of drugs that attack a similar biological target — can help stop Alzheimer's if people take it early enough.

But what's at stake is more complicated than whether the drug works. The trial will also test the timing of the therapy as well as the very idea that Alzheimer's disease can be knocked off its course if doctors and patients intervene soon enough.

The first question about the trial is whether it can help families like Milena's. If it does, it could be the first truly significant treatment known to delay Alzheimer's — a medical breakthrough.

Hugo is a horse caretaker who is participating in the medical study. Here, he is pictured at his ranch in El Retiro, Colombia.

(Photo: Ken Alltucker/The Republic)

But because all those families trace their Alzheimer's to one unique mutation, a follow-up question will be whether the study will help those outside Colombia. What will it mean for the tens of millions of other people worldwide who are also destined to get the disease?

Across the metro region from Villatina, in El Retiro, an agricultural hub known as the region's bread basket, a man named Hugo stands outside a small stable atop a grassy hillside and describes how his father and grandfather succumbed to Alzheimer's too early in life. Because the study's ethics committee prohibits using the names of people enrolled in the study, The Arizona Republic agreed to use only Hugo's first name.

Hugo knows he, too, may be cursed. But rather than resign to his fate, he will attack it with the same strength and vigor he brings to his job caring for horses at a stable.

"I don't worry," Hugo said. "It would consume you if you start thinking about it."

If Alzheimer's is going to take Hugo, it will need more force than the dozen or so horses that he tames and tends to every day.

The conquistador

In the mind of neurologist Kenneth S. Kosik, the mutation rode to Colombia aboard the chromosomes of a Spanish conquistador.

While there is no way to track every generation in centuries of mostly undocumented history back to a single individual, Kosik has learned enough that he is confident the genetic roadmap he has traced leads to Spain.

Kosik's conquistador story is pieced together from genetic maps, years of interviews and expertise. It also comes from years of study in a land where death — from the days of European oppression to the cocaine wars under the ruthless grip of cartel boss Pablo Escobar — is central to the cultural identity. Medellin once held the regrettable distinction of murder capital of the world.

The conquistador left the Iberian Peninsula during the 16th century and headed for the remote Antioquia region. He was in search of gold or other riches.

Spanish colonizers at the time were laying claim to great swaths of the new world, sometimes killing but also coupling with the members of indigenous tribes they found across Central and South America, giving rise to the populations of Latin America today.

In truth, the exact origin of this particular conquistador is not known. Those who live in Antioquia traditionally hold that their ancestors were from the Basque region of Spain. Some believe they were Jewish settlers who had moved to Spain before embarking for the Americas.

“When you are in Colombia, you are a little swayed by the magic of the county.” Kenneth Kosik, neurologist

Researchers have scoured regions of Spain such as Extremadura for likely ancestral roots of this mutation, but they've been unable to find any living carriers. But that does not disprove the idea. It's possible that the European family with the mutation simply died out.

"The reason I think the case is very strong for a Spanish conquistador is that we all have small changes in the (DNA) letters that are characteristic of our ethnic origin," Kosik says. Of the Colombians who are affected with the mutation, "all the changes we find are from the Iberian Peninsula."

Regardless of his origin, the conquistador likely carried his genetic anomaly to Colombia and passed it on to his heirs, either in a one-time tryst or some other coupling.

It's possible that the carriers in the early generations that followed didn't even know of the mind-scuttling effects of the paisa gene. Life in the colonial wilderness, with little medicine and few modern guarantees of safety, could be brutal. Carriers may not have lived long enough to experience the gene's deadly destiny.

And any such genetic mutation has a chance of reaching a dead end. Had its early carriers been wiped out by war or famine, or had their children simply drawn different genes in the genetic lottery of conception, the conquistador's mutation would have died in its early years.

While the mutation's origin cannot be definitively pinpointed, that matters little the the more than two dozen extended families who are carriers today. The families, unaware of their genetic curse, grew large and the mutation thrived.

“Human beings have to be understood as a whole. We are not body and spirit, one side or the other. They are not separate.” Lucia Madrigal, nurse

Many carriers were in remote villages where marriage options were limited and inter-marriage among cousins or other relatives was common. The genetic trigger was unknown to the families, but the effect of la bobera was very real. It was a wide, dark thread in the fabric of a fatalistic culture.

Centuries after Spanish colonization, the mutation continued to thrive. It cut down grandparents and parents, brothers and sisters, aunts and uncles in towns such as El Retiro, the home of Hugo the stablehand.

That thriving genetic trait eventually prompted Kosik to follow a young Colombian neurologist who had discovered the afflicted families in the hills of the paisas, to do research that would ultimately help bring the new drug trial — the possible medical breakthrough — to Colombia.

But it would first take two key people to make the connection with Kosik and U.S. researchers. Both of those individuals came from the tiny village of Yarumal located deep in the Andes Mountains.

The clinic

Lucia Madrigal had been an attentive fifth-grade student in Yarumal when her teacher began to act strangely. The teacher would forget things, repeat herself. And then one day, the the 45-year-old instructor didn't show up for class.

An inquisitive Madrigal sought out the teacher's nephew and asked why she no longer was at school.

"What happened? What happened to her?" Madrigal asked the boy.

"She has some type of spell," the nephew told her.

That was a common belief at the time in Yarumal, about 50 miles north of Medellin. Those with memory problems must have taken herbs from a magician, or they sipped a potion that brought on some sort of witchcraft. Some who came down with the disease were "bobo," or stupid, or it was a normal part of aging.

Although she did not forget the reminder of the frailty of life, a young Madrigal had other ambitions that commanded her time and attention.

Lucia Madrigal is a psychologist who played a pivotal role in the medical study. She works at the neurosciences division of the University of Antioquia in Medellin.

(Photo: Ken Alltucker/The Republic)

She dreamed of becoming an artist or a concert pianist. But in a family of 19, there was no money to spare for art or music lessons. So she stuck with her schoolwork as a conscientious student, completed primary school and enrolled in a university to study science and the law.

She liked science because it unlocked the mysteries of life. She was equally drawn to law. "Because I like to fight," she says.

She married as a young woman and had a child when tragedy changed her path. Her husband was shot during a robbery that turned violent. Left to support a 6-month-old baby on her own, Madrigal took a job as a nurse at a Yarumal hospital.

She later moved to Medellin to work at the University of Antioquia's hospital and take courses in medicine and psychology.

She learned it was important to know the clinical side of medicine, but it was equally important to get to know the human being under her care.

"Medicine gets dehumanized," Madrigal said. Doctors "just see the pain, but they don't see the people. Human beings have to be understood as a whole. We are not body and spirit, one side or the other. They are not separate."

Madrigal was able to apply her growing expertise when she began to work with a young neurologist at the university named Francisco Lopera.

Lopera, who was serving as a resident after graduating from medical school, worked at a medical clinic with regular hours.

In 1984, a man from the rural pueblo of Angostura arrived at Lopera's clinic. The man couldn't remember much, couldn't work and needed round-the-clock care. That's not uncommon for people who develop Alzheimer's disease, usually in their late 60s, 70s or even older.

But one fact that bothered and intrigued Lopera. The man was just 47.

The family

Genealogies are critical in Alzheimer's research.

At the clinic, every patient is questioned by Lopera, Madrigal or another staff member about family medical history: parents, siblings and grandparents. These detailed reports may yield no useful information. Or they may mean everything.

When Lopera questioned the Angostura man's family, he learned that his father, grandfather and three other family members died young after suffering similar symptoms. The family would later be dubbed "Colombia One."

Another doctor referred a second family to Lopera. This man also had loss of memory and other symptoms of dementia, and Lopera and his staff then sleuthed the man's family history and uncovered a startling fact: 70 family members had suffered a similar fate.

"I knew we had something big, something important," Lopera said.

A tienda, or small store, located in Villatina, La Torre, a small community located on the outskirts of Medellin, which is the second-largest city in Colombia.

(Photo: Ken Alltucker/The Republic)

They would travel to small towns and villages throughout Antioquia, research baptism registries and interview town elders. Lopera and Madrigal worked tirelessly, visiting small villages on weekends to gather family histories.

Madrigal would meticulously note the family histories on 3- by 5-inch index cards. Those notes would become the backbone of a detailed chart showing the family names and birth dates and small, darkened squares or circles that showed men and women who carried the curse.

"I went to these municipalities to reconstruct the dementia stories of the relatives of the past," Lopera said.

For Lopera, it was a fascinating exercise as a medical detective. With Madrigal's help, he assembled the histories of families in small villages who had fallen to la bobera for generations.

Through the 1980s, they were able to identify 12 families that each had multigenerational accounts of relatives who exhibited similar symptoms — repeatedly asking the same questions, forgetfulness, agitation and other telltale signs of the disease.

“I am still in contact with the brothers and sisters of my friends who are already dead.” Lucia Madrigal, nurse

At the time, they still did not describe it as Alzheimer's, which is often confirmed after an autopsy shows the disease's hallmark, so-called amyloid beta protein deposits, or plaques, that accumulate in the brain.

But it was clear the dementia that struck down people during their prime had importance beyond these families, Antioquia and even Colombia.

Madrigal, who had not forgotten her childhood teacher, said it was difficult to witness the disease, particularly when it afflicted childhood friends and families.

"Most of them are all my age," Madrigal said. "I am still in contact with the brothers and sisters of my friends who are already dead."

Lopera was convinced there was something linking these families from disparate villages, but he did not yet have the medical evidence he needed to prove such a link.

To prove this theory, he would need a DNA signature, something unique to the paisas that set them apart from Alzheimer's patients across the world.

In October 1992, a Harvard neurologist came to Bogota to deliver a talk on the biology of Alzheimer's disease. After the talk, Lopera made his way to the speaker and introduced himself. He explained his discovery, the many families with the same early onset of dementia.

The Harvard neurologist was Kenneth Kosik. He wanted to know more.

"When you are in Colombia, you are a little swayed by the magic of the county," Kosik recalls. "It was very clear that he was telling me something that was special and unique."

The following morning, Kosik says he boarded a plane for Medellin for what would turn out to be a more than two-decade venture. It would change his career and potentially the lives of thousands of Colombians.

The proof

In a region with closely guarded burial rites in remote villages, the request was not an easy one to make.

But Lopera and Kosik needed a brain.

If they wanted to start the arduous process of pinpointing a single gene potentially responsible to this familial cluster, they first needed to verify a test subject had Alzheimer's disease. And such a diagnosis would require finding the telltale amyloid beta plaques in the brain. And that would require a sliver of brain tissue that could be examined by microscope.

In 1995, Lopera finally found a potential donor in Angostura. Along with Carlos Aranjo, a neuropathologist from the University of Antioquia, Lopera approached the children of a middle-aged woman who had died from the disease.

All of the woman's children agreed to donate their mother's brain tissue to advance the scientific pursuit — except one. The holdout, a son, protested the donation during a family get-together following the woman's death.

A former police officer, the son was rumored to be a hit man for local narcotrafficantes — drug traffickers.

"One of the dead woman's sons became suspicious about why the city's doctors wanted his mother's brain tissue," Kosik wrote an article published in a science magazine, The Sciences. "... He made the situation tense, and as he drank, the possibilities for trouble increased."

However, the town's mayor, a village medicine man and Lopera were able to assuage the man's suspicions. He relented. The doctors could take his deceased mother's brain.

Lopera and the other doctor removed the woman's brain during a brief stop on the way to the church. Lopera's colleague immediately flew it to Kosik's lab in Boston. There, they found the plaques.

She had Alzheimer's disease. They could begin the hunt for a DNA signature unique to la bobera.

Lopera and Kosik were on their way. They were convinced that within the donated brain was DNA that contained one rare genetic misspelling responsible for so much misery.

The wait

During the mid-1990s, the era of genetic medicine was percolating to life.

It would not be until 2000 that President Bill Clinton and British Prime Minister Tony Blair would announce a rough draft of the human genome had been completed. And it wasn't until 2003 when the ambitious project was deemed complete.

But during the 1990s, gene hunters seeking DNA clues to human disease hunkered down in labs worldwide focused on areas of the human genome.

For Lopera and Kosik, that meant figuring out what part of the genome contained that faulty DNA responsible for the Colombian cases.

"Finding a genetic mutation is like finding a needle in a haystack," Kosik says.

They were certain, however, that it was a mutation that caused the patterns. Lopera's detailed genealogies suggested what is called an autosomal dominant mutation. That is when one parent carries the mutation, and each child carries a 50/50 chance of inheriting this ticking time bomb.

Other scientists focusing on Alzheimer's disease, too, were hunting for a wayward mutation that would trigger Alzheimers' disease.

A mutation occurs when the building blocks of the genetic code, labeled A, T, C and G, are misspelled. A single misspelling in the long line of genetic bits that make up the human DNA can be the difference between a healthy individual and one who faces disease.

In 1995, a Department of Veterans Affairs medical geneticist uncovered a site on chromosome 14 believed to be responsible for early onset Alzheimer's disease. Peter St. George Hyslop, a University of Toronto geneticist, also was hunting for a genetic marker.

Hyslop had been tracking another family from Calabria, Italy, cursed with a similar pattern of early onset. Hyslop identified a gene on Chromosome 14 as a trigger. He named it "presenilin" – shorthand for presenile dementia.

Lopera and Kosik worked with a geneticist from Washington University in St. Louis to identify a presenilin mutation unique to the Colombians – the paisa mutation. Lopera and Kosik detailed their findings about the family in a 1997 study that appeared in the medical journal, Journal of the American Medical Association.

There are dozens of mutations unique to the presenilin gene, and later research identified two other genes also believed to be a trigger of early Alzheimer's disease.

Kosik and Lopera had the genetic proof they were looking for.

A barrio in Villatina, La Torre, a small community located on the outskirts of Medellin.

(Photo: Ken Alltucker/The Republic)

The Paisa mutation could be easily identified to predict with virtual certainty whether a person would get the disease at an early age.

Perhaps they could find a way to modify or change gene somehow to slow or halt the disease. However, in the late 1990s, there was no such drug, device or technology available.

In 1997, there was nothing doctors could do to stop it from coming for people like Janeth Milena's mother, who would be diagnosed five years later.

Milena was just a teenager, full of hope and unaware of the scientific discovery unfolding at the university lab in Medellin, several miles away along the congested streets from her hillside barrio.

About this project

Solving the Alzheimer's mystery

The Arizona Republic and other media organizations were invited to Medellin, Colombia, to observe a potentially groundbreaking medical study involving a large family that carries a rare genetic mutation that guarantees they will develop Alzheimer's disease early in life.

The study is being conducted by the University of Antioquia in Colombia and by Banner Alzheimer's Institute of Phoenix.

Republic reporter Ken Alltucker spent three days in Colombia touring research facilities, interviewing doctors and scientists, and talking with family members who are involved in the study. Alltucker covers health care as a member of The Republic's watchdog team. He has written about the Affordable Care Act, consumer health, insurance, prescription drugs and hospitals.

How to reach him:

ken.alltucker@arizonarepublic.com

Phone: 602-444-8285

Twitter: @kalltucker