Matt Wuerker Honey, I shrunk the mandate

Filed for bankruptcy in the past six months? Had medical bills you couldn’t pay in the past two years? Been a victim of domestic violence? Received a shut-off notice from a utility company? If you don’t want to buy insurance under Obamacare, you don’t have to. No penalty.

The individual mandate may be the most despised part of Obamacare, but the reality is that it’s much smaller than people think. It’s riddled with exemptions, hardships and other loopholes that allow millions of people off the hook for enrollment by March 31.

Story Continued Below

Some exceptions are part of the law. Some were added to quell political fires.

If you had a plan that was canceled and think the alternative costs too much, you get a pass. And it’s not an out just for this first rough year. According to a decision this month by the administration, you may be able to escape the obligation of the mandate for the rest of the Obama presidency — if you can deal with the paperwork.

( PHOTOS: Obamacare in the Mississippi Delta)

If you are one of the several million low-income people who would qualify for Medicaid expansion — but your state opted out of expansion — you won’t be required to buy coverage.

These and other changes to the mandate encapsulate many of the challenges the administration has faced during the four years of implementation since the Affordable Care Act law was passed.

The White House needs the mandate to make its policies work, as it creates new insurance markets operating under new rules.

It needs the exemptions to make the politics work — or at least to take the edge off some of the sharpest political backlash, like the outcry over the canceled plans that people had been told they could keep.

( PHOTOS: 20 quotes: More Obamacare, less work)

From the start, the Affordable Care Act mandate — or as the White House calls it, “the individual shared responsibility” — had outs. People who really couldn’t afford health care wouldn’t have to buy it under criteria spelled out in the law. Polls have shown that the message never got through to large portions of the population, and the anger over the mandate combined with objections to the costs contributed to the persistent antagonism to the “government intrusion” of the law.

Rejection of the mandate animated the tea party, sparked the Supreme Court challenge, was a pivot point in the government shutdown and led to multiple House GOP votes to repeal or delay it, including votes just this month.

But the breadth of the exemptions could cause other problems. There’s that three-year allowance for canceled plans. And there’s hardship exemption No. 14: “You experienced another hardship in obtaining health insurance. Please submit documentation if possible.”

( PHOTOS: 25 unforgettable Obamacare quotes)

The Republicans are gleefully claiming that if the administration is handing get-out-of-mandate free cards to anybody who wants one, the Democrats should join them and repeal the darn thing.

“There’s a real question whether the White House has abandoned the individual mandate — the heart of Obamacare itself,” House Speaker John Boehner said recently. “The White House quietly added a new hardship exemption for everyone, and it seems like they’re hoping no one will notice.”

Health law backers say the GOP is exaggerating the changes, but that doesn’t mean some aren’t worrying about whether it’s been too watered down. Tim Jost, a well-known health lawyer who backs the law, said the vagueness of some exemptions troubles him.

“Can I say, ‘I don’t like the options available,’ or ‘I’d rather spend my money on whatever,’” he said. “I just don’t understand where they are going with these very wide-open hardship exemptions, and I think they are opening the door to some real mischief.”

Insurers, which priced their policies based on the expectation that the mandate will drive otherwise reluctant (and relatively healthy) people into their plans, are watching closely for any further erosion. Premiums could soar without healthy customers to balance the cost of covering sicker people with pre-existing conditions, now required by law.