Pelosi sought to link Radel to the GOP's move to require drug tests for food stamps. | AP Photos Pelosi avoids calling for Radel resignation

House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi isn’t calling for Rep. Trey Radel (R-Fla.) to resign after he pleaded guilty this week to cocaine possession.

But she sought to link Radel’s behavior to Republicans move to cut food stamps and require recipients to get drug tested before receiving them.

Story Continued Below

“The inconsistency on the Republican side to say, we’re going to cut $40 billion out of food stamps and by the way you should be drug tested before you can get food stamps, when people are voting to do that are engaged in that activity,” Pelosi (D-Calif.) told reporters on Thursday.

During the farm bill debate earlier this year Republicans, including Radel, overwhelmingly supported a provision that would allow states to drug test food stamp recipients.

Radel pleaded guilty to misdemeanor cocaine possession on Wednesday and announced later in the day he would take a leave of absence to receive in-patient treatment for addiction. He has given no indication that he will resign.

Republicans have compared Radel’s arrest and guilty plea to the 2006 incident that ultimately led to former Rep. Patrick Kennedy (D-R.I.) pleading guilty to driving under the influence of prescription medication after crashing his car into a U.S. Capitol barricade. He left Congress temporarily to seek addiction treatment. Kennedy remained in Congress with the support of Democrats until 2011, when he opted not to seek reelection.

Pelosi pushed back at the comparison to Kennedy, saying he used his problems to try to improve drug addiction policy.

“Patrick Kennedy took the lead in passing the mental health parity legislation, which had important provisions regarding addiction in it. And that’s really important and that is well served by the Affordable Care Act,” Pelosi said.

She said Kennedy ultimately did decide to step down.

“I’m not suggesting that Congressman Radel do that — that’s a decision that he and his family have to make,” Pelosi said. “But I think if they want to compare themselves to Patrick Kennedy, they are setting a very high standard for themselves because he used his personal challenges to make a difference in public policy for our country that makes a big difference in improving the lives of the American people. That’s a tough act to compare yourself to.”

Rep. Jim Clyburn (D-S.C.) echoed the criticism of Republicans, saying the incident should remind members that addiction is an illness that needs to be treated not punished.

“I feel very strongly that illnesses are illnesses and they are to be treated that way,” Clyburn, the No. 3 in the House Democratic caucus, said. “I believe that it is disingenuous for our Republican colleagues to start looking for scapegoats or doing these sorts of comparisons.”

He also pointed to an incident on Tuesday when Virginia state Sen. Creigh Deeds (D), a former gubernatorial nominee, was stabbed by his son one day after he was released from a Virginia psychiatric hospital because a bed couldn’t be found for him.

“We just saw a public official in Virginia who came close to losing his life because our mental health system failed his family,” Clyburn said. “I think this ought to highlight for all of us the necessity to treat illnesses as illnesses and stop looking for scapegoats.”

Authors: