Just in time for Halloween, Chapman University recently released its latest Survey of American Fears, which tries to suss out which phobias are most common.

So what frightens Americans the most? Insects, the sight of blood, unemployment, germs?

Nope. Of the 89 potential fears the survey asked about, the one that the highest share of Americans said they were either “afraid” or “very afraid” of was federal government corruption. It was also the only fear that a majority of Americans said they shared.

Fears shared by highest percentage of Americans Fear Percent Afraid or Very Afraid Corruption of Government Officials 58.0% Cyber-terrorism 44.8% Corporate Tracking of Personal Information 44.6% Terrorist Attacks 44.4% Government Tracking of Personal Information 41.4% Bio-Warfare 40.9% Identity Theft 39.6% Economic Collapse 39.2% Running of out Money in the Future 37.4% Credit Card Fraud 36.9%

This is … bizarre. But perhaps not completely surprising, given that other surveys have found upward trends in the shares of Americans who believe A) government corruption is widespread, and B) government is untrustworthy.

Even so, these surveys have never asked about whether Americans were terrified of such apparently ubiquitous corruption.

I was curious whether fears of government corruption varied much by political ideology, so I asked the researchers at Chapman to send me a breakdown of the data. It turns out that those who self-identify as conservative or extremely conservative are most likely to be afraid of government corruption. But a majority of every ideological group shares this fear, except (very narrowly) those who lean liberal.



Source: Chapman University Survey of American Fears

Conservatives and extreme conservatives are also more likely than others to say they’ve voted for a specific political party or candidate as a result of their fears.



Source: Chapman University Survey of American Fears

Note that this question referred to voting as a result of any fear at all, not necessarily fear of government corruption. That said, lots of other political/government-related terrors were close to the top of the survey’s list of most widely held fears. These included government tracking of personal data (41.4 percent), gun control (36.5 percent) and Obamacare (35.7 percent).

Obamacare actually frightens a higher share of Americans than does becoming seriously ill or dying. Which seems ironic at first, and then when you think about it, makes complete sense. You’d have to not fear illness or death to be really, truly terrified of Obamacare.