The Rockies’ dynamic duo left the mighty Dodgers feeling mighty blue Saturday night at Coors Field.

Carlos Gonzalez launched a two-run, walk-off homer off Yimi Garcia in the ninth inning, lifting the Rockies to an 8-6 victory. DJ LeMahieu opened the inning by singling to right.

Colorado’s second consecutive victory over the Dodgers prevented the Dodgers from inching closer to clinching their 14th National League West title. Los Angeles’ magic number remained at two as it looks to close out San Francisco in the division race.

If Saturday’s magic moment belonged to CarGo, whose game-winner was his 39th homer of the season, the night belonged to the incomparable Nolan Arenado, who launched his 40th homer in grand style.

At game’s end, Arenado waited for CarGo in the mosh pit at home plate and gave him a bear hug.

“We’re having a lot of fun together,” Gonzalez said. “It’s tough late in the season when you know you’re not going anywhere and you are playing games against teams that are (headed to the playoffs).

“But I keep telling Nolan, ‘Whatever happens, just continue to fight, because you are having a special year.’ It’s the same thing for me.”

Arenado and CarGo are indeed on the verge of something memorable. The last time the Rockies had two or more players hit 40 home runs in the same season was in 1997 when Larry Walker hit 49, Andres Galarraga 41 and Vinny Castilla 40.

Arenado began his night with a teaser.

In the Dodgers’ first at-bat, the Rockies lined up in an extreme shift to the right side of the infield for the left-handed hitting Chase Utley, leaving Arenado all by his lonesome on the left side. No matter. Arenado glided toward second base, vacuumed Utley’s grounder, did a 360-degree turn and threw Utley out by half a step to end the inning.

Arenado’s second act would have been the show-stopper, had it not been trumped by CarGo’s game-winner.

Arenado, 24, stepped to the plate with the bases full in the first inning and sent left-hander Brett Anderson’s 2-2, 94 mph fastball over the center-field wall for the third grand slam of his young career.

The slam made him the seventh Rockies player to hit the big 4-O, the first since Todd Helton pulled off the feat in 2001.

“It’s pretty cool, pretty special,” Arenado said. “And I’m happy to get it out of the way, to be honest.”

Added manager Walt Weiss: “There’s not much more to say. Nolan just keeps adding to his unbelievable season.”

Arenado also became the first Rockies player to hit 40 home runs since the humidor was installed in 2002. And while critics will howl about the Coors Field effect, 21 of Arenado’s 40 homers have come on the road.

“It feels good, because I can hit on the road, too,” he said. “I know that people question that about players here sometimes.”

Arenado, in line for his third consecutive Gold Glove, leads the National League with 121 RBIs. According to the Elias Sports Bureau, only one major-league third baseman has led his league in RBIs, won a Gold Glove and hit 40 or more homers in the same season. That would be Hall of Famer Mike Schmidt, who hit 48 homers and drove in 121 runs for the 1980 Philadelphia Phillies.

“That would be pretty cool. Pretty awesome, to join that kind of company,” Arenado said. “I have a lot of respect for Mike Schmidt.”

Adding to the Rockies’ 16-hit onslaught was a 4-for-4 night by Justin Morneau, his most hits since getting four on Sept. 6, 2014 vs. San Diego.

Struggling starter Kyle Kendrick, whose one-year, $5.5 million contract is nearing its end, pitched like he’s always pitched at Coors Field this season. Badly.

He struggled through five-plus innings and frittered away the Rockies’ early leads. In his final game on the Coors Field mound in a Rockies uniform, Kendrick gave up six runs on seven hits, including a two-run homer in the second to Andre Ethier.

It was the 33rd homer served up by Kendrick, the most in the majors. Twenty-one of those home runs came at Coors, where Kendrick finished 2-6 with a 7.62 ERA in 13 starts.

Kendrick has pitched five innings or fewer in nine consecutive starts, the longest streak for a Rockies pitcher since Alex White had nine such starts from Aug. 7 to Sept. 16, 2013.

The Rockies’ bullpen bailed Kendrick out, pitching four scoreless innings to set up the victory.