click to enlarge The Thermals, an indie rock and punk trio from Oregon, perform at the Chapel. “Desperate Ground” is the group’s most recent album.

Classical pianist Murray Perahia appears in concert, performing works by Bach, Beethoven, Schumann and Chopin. [8 p.m., Davies Symphony Hall, 201 Van Ness Ave., S.F.]

Lectures

Harold S. Luft: The health-policy investigator and director of the Palo Alto Medical Foundation Research Institute discusses where health care is going in the Affordable Care Act era. [6 p.m., Commonwealth Club, 595 Market St., S.F.]

Zara McDonald: The president of the Felidae Conservation Fund discusses the history and ecology of mountain lions and the challenges of sharing habitats with them. [7:30 p.m., Randall Museum, 199 Museum Way, S.F.]

‘Reporting Israel’: Haaretz editor Aluf Benn and the Atlantic magazine’s Jeffrey Goldberg discuss Netanyahu-Obama relations and other Israel-related issues. [7 p.m., Jewish Community Center, 3200 California St., S.F.]

Literary events

Kelly Corrigan and Anna Quindlen: The bestselling authors, whose new memoirs are “Glitter and Glue” (Corrigan) and “Lots of Candles, Plenty of Cake” (Quindlen), discuss their work. [7:30 p.m., Nourse Theater, 275 Hayes St., S.F.]

WritersCorps: Youth and teaching artists from the WritersCorps program join Zimbabwean author NoViolet Bulawayo for an evening of readings and performances. [6 p.m., Contemporary Jewish Museum, 736 Mission St., S.F.]

Michelle Richmond: The novelist talks about “Golden State.” [6 p.m., Book Passage, 1 Ferry Building, S.F.]

At the colleges

Botany bites: Foothill Music Theatre presents “Little Shop of Horrors,” the carnivorous plant musical and spoof of 1950s sci-fi flicks. [7:30 p.m., Lohman Theatre, Foothill College, 12345 El Monte Road, Los Altos Hills]

Blacks in science: Math instructor Ronald Page moderates a panel of African American mathematicians and scientists. [Noon, City College, Diego Rivera Theater, 50 Phelan Ave., S.F.]

Chris Haughey: The co-founder of Honduras-based Tegu , which makes sustainable, community-building toys, speaks. [5:30 p.m., Atrium, Peterson Building, 550 416 Escondido Mall, Stanford University, Stanford]

Indie band

The Thermals, an indie rock and punk trio from Oregon, perform at the Chapel. “Desperate Ground” is the group’s most recent album. [9 p.m., 777 Valencia St., S.F.]

Local activities

Ballet concert: The San Francisco Ballet presents “Program 3.” Yuri Possokhov’s “Firebird,” set to Stravinsky’s score, is one of three dances on the bill. [8 p.m., War Memorial Opera House, 301 Van Ness Ave., S.F.]

Jazz stars: Bobby Hutcherson (vibraphone), David Sanborn (saxophone), Joey DeFrancesco (organ) and Billy Hart (drums) take the stage in an evening of musical alchemy. [7:30 p.m., SFJazz Center, 201 Franklin St., S.F.]

Night out: “Third Thursdays” night in the Yerba Buena area, features extended hours and special events at culture sites. Participating venues include the Cartoon Art Museum. [5 to 10 p.m.; www.thirdthursdaysf.org]

Dance party: Mezzanine launches “House of Mezzanine,” a monthly house party featuring top electronic acts and dance-music DJs. Pat Mahoney and Music of Love are among the evening’s featured acts. [9 p.m., 444 Jessie St., S.F.]

Nojo: The beef tendon salad, with watermelon radish, bean sprouts, daikon and kansuri, is highlighted today. Also look for the tempura of tree-oyster mushrooms, with Japanese sweet potatoes and Meyer lemon. [231 Franklin St., S.F.; (415) 896-4587]

Stand up

Comedy show: Kung Pao Kosher Comedy’s “Comedy Returns to El Rio” series, now on Thursdays, presents its February show. Featured comics include Diane Amos and Zahra Noorbakhsh. [8 p.m., El Rio, 3158 Mission St., S.F.]

Museums

Decibel points: The California Academy of Sciences hosts “Universal Rhythm NightLife,” a night exploring the science of sound and rhythm. Guests include UC San Francisco neuroscientist Adam Gazzaley. [6 to 10 p.m., Golden Gate Park, S.F.]

At the public library

Musical conversation: The Canada-based Lafayette String Quartet appears in a conversation moderated by musicologist Kai Christiansen. [7 p.m., San Mateo Main Public Library, Oak Music Room, 55 West Third Ave., San Mateo]