There have been 8 drug overdose deaths in the first

four months of 20-16 in La Crosse County, that's according

to the County Medical Office.

A roundtable hosted by Wisconsin Senator Tammy Baldwin

is looking at the growing opioid and heroin epidemic.

News eight's Eric Jacobson was there .

and joins us now with what experts were saying.

Martha,

Officials from law enforcement .

the medical field and treatment experts expressed

their concern about the growing drug problem with

Senator Baldwin at today's forum.

And while each brought up different ideas .

they all agree that more needs to be done to stop

the epidemic.

I view the opioid edit and heroin epidemic as a crisis,

as an emergency.

Given the stigma that is connected to heroin addiction,

to prescription drug addiction, those conversations

sometimes don't start in communities.

One of the biggest concerns raised at the roundtable

was increasing the amount of treatment programs in

the area.

The treatment and diversion programs, that's another

name for that, have shown promising results, in terms

of people not returning back to their drug use edit

But we know funding is somewhat limited for that.

Expanding funding for those treatment programs is

something Senator Baldwin thinks is necessary.

There we are truly talking about dollars and resources

to be able to have comprehensive treatment at a time

when somebody is open to seeking it.

Doctors from Gundersen also spoke on imporving the

prescription drug monitoring program .

particularly across state lines.

That way you can't get prescriptions from multiple

providers.

Making it easier for providers to look up and figure

out how many you are getting and where you are getting

them from.

I believe there's a federal role to play in better

coordinating those databases so that we can keep more

people safe.

Despite the problem .

Baldwin says the collaboration between these local

agencies will go a long way in getting drugs off the

streets.

The people who are dealing with this epidemic in various

facets are talking together and are problem solving

together, and it's making a difference.

In La Crosse, EJ, N8.

Another concern brought up by some at the roundtable

was the Affordable Care Act.

Despite more people getting covered .

experts are concerned that insurance companies are

not covering enough when it comes to treatment options.

Some of which cost in the thousands of dollars.

Thanks Eric.

Senator Baldwin also announced her V-A reforms regarding

opioid abuse were being included in a larger legislative

package on capitol hill.