State to consider beefing up notices for Medical Assistance applicants

Minnesota officials said this week that they want to better notify Medical Assistance applicants about chances that the state could seek to recover the cost of their medical coverage in certain circumstances after their death.

The issue came up Wednesday during a meeting of the MNsure board of directors in St. Paul, where health exchange officials said they have heard complaints about the policy that predates MNsure. When people age 55 and older use MNsure and wind up with Medical Assistance coverage, there's a chance the state will claim repayment for coverage costs from the enrollee's estate.

If the enrollee's spouse is still living at the time of the enrollee's death, or if they have dependent children, the state would delay any such claim.

Earlier this week, the News Tribune reported on the cases of three Pine County couples who say they didn't know about the estate claim provision.

MNsure and the state's Department of Human Services (DHS) say notice is provided when people apply, but the three couples in Pine County said they were not told about the estate claims when they went through the MNsure application process.

"Given the recent news that this provision is surprising to Minnesotans, we are working with DHS to try and clarify some of the language that's right on the application," said Allison O'Toole, the MNsure chief executive, during Wednesday's board meeting.

In a statement Wednesday, DHS said it was reviewing communications to see if improvements could be made.

Minnesota created the MNsure exchange in 2013 to implement the federal Affordable Care Act, which requires almost all Americans to have health insurance or pay a tax penalty. People use the MNsure website to enroll in Medical Assistance, which is Minnesota's version of the state-federal Medicaid program.

The three couples in Pine County would not have qualified for Medical Assistance before the federal health law. Minnesota agreed to expand its Medicaid program by extending eligibility to people with incomes up to 138 percent of the federal poverty line, and the asset test also was eliminated, said state Sen. Tony Lourey, DFL-Kerrick. In the past, a property owner's land and home could make them ineligible for Medical Assistance, but that no longer was the case. Suddenly, more people — including those with low incomes but who had other assets such as homes — qualified for the program.

Lourey told the News Tribune earlier this month that he is working on legislation that would remove the estate claim provision for people using Medical Assistance for health care; it would not change the estate claim to recover the cost of long-term care, such as in nursing homes. Lourey said he also wants to legislatively remove the claims that were placed in 2014 and 2015.

Lourey said he thinks the cost to the state would be small, because he doesn't think Minnesota has actually pursued any estate claims related to the health insurance side of Medical Assistance.

In a statement, DHS said the number of liens against real property have not gone up since the health law changes went into effect.

"Because the people under the ACA and affected by estate recovery are relatively young (55-65) recovery numbers are not going to be higher," the department said.

MNsure board member Phil Norrgard said Wednesday the issue highlights inconsistencies in Minnesota's public health insurance programs, because the state doesn't attempt to recover from the estates of people covered in the MinnesotaCare program. People going through MNsure also can wind up with coverage in MinnesotaCare, which covers a group often described as the "working poor."

O'Toole said the state does not seek to recover costs for people who obtain tax credits through MNsure for private health insurance policies. She called the situation "a DHS, not a MNsure issue."

The News Tribune contributed to this report.