By Nick Sones

So President Barack Obama has finally released his 2016 federal budget.

The spending plan for the coming fiscal year is better than the one we have now, but it's not without its flaws. Or, as a Congressman or Senator would say, "I disagree with the language of President Obama's budget."

(The full text of President Obama's budget for fiscal year 2016 can be found here. The budget offers both liberal and conservative ideas.)

The administration's spending plan discusses the nation's broken immigration system, including a very Republican idea. it would fix the " ... nation's broken immigration system by continuing to strengthen U.S. border security, cracking down on employers who hire undocumented workers, modernizing the Nations legal immigration system, and providing a pathway to earned citizenship for hardworking men and women who pay a penalty and taxes, learn English, pass background checks, and go to the back of the line."

as stated on page 58. The Republicans' majority should love this portion of the president's budget because of the English-speaking requirement. The United States does not have a national language.

There's the argument to be made that the de facto language of the United States is English, however for all intents and purposes, the United States does not have a national language. T

he other Republican idea is the following, which is found on page 58, "The Congressional Budget Office [CBO] has estimated that the immigration bill that passed with bipartisan support in the Senate would reduce the deficit by about $160 billion in the first decade and by almost $1 trillion over 20 years."

This is a Republican idea because the Republican Party constantly talks about the need to reduce the budget deficit. Obama's budget reduces the budget by almost $1 trillion dollars over 20 years.

The budget also has several tax breaks for the middle class, and working class people, while also calling for tax increases on the rich. The budget calls for continuing the Child Tax Credit (CTC), which benefits 16 million working families with children, while calling for expanding the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC).

In layman's terms what this means is the following as described in the budget: "The EITC and CTC provisions benefit 16 million families and 29 million children and have likely encourages thousands to parents to enter or remain in the workforce," as stated on page 54.

This is a Republican idea once again, and it is also a democratic idea. It is an American idea because it helps working families and it ensures that working people remain in the workforce rather than leave the workforce and collect unemployment benefits.

As in past years, the budget proposes to institute the Buffet Rule, requiring that wealthy millionaires pay no less than 30 percent of income--after charitable contributions--in taxes."

This is a good idea, and a start to eliminating wealth inequality in these United States.

A concern that the Democrats need to raise here is what happens if 30 percent of a millionaires' income is in charitable donations. If that occurs, it appears they will be able to skip paying the 30 percent in income.

Another idea that can be both loved by democrats and republicans is the following on page 56, "the budget would lower the corporate tax rate to 28 percent, with a 25 percent effective rate for domestic manufacturing, putting the United States in line with major competitor countries and encouraging greater investment here at home."

This is an idea where both sides can compromise because it allows for tax cuts. The budget also calls for the following "... the budget would impose a one-time transition toll charge of 14 percent on the up to $2 trillion of untaxed foreign earnings that U.S. companies have accumulated overseas."

This is one of the main points of the president's budget and it's a big issue for house and senate democrats. They have wanted a policy like this for years and now they have it.

The budget significantly shows that Obama's signature piece of legislation, The Affordable Care Act (ObamaCares), is working.

As stated in the budget for Fiscal Year 2016 on page 60 "since the full implementation of the ACA began in 2014, millions of people have enrolled in either private insurance through the Health Insurance Marketplace, or coverage through Medicaid and the Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP).

As a result, the number of uninsured Americans has dropped by an estimated 10 million.

In short, there's a little for both parties to love and hate in the administration's spending plan, which is why we'll be having this discussion for a while.

Nick Sones, a Shippensburg University student, is a periodic contributor to PennLive.