WEST PALM BEACH, Fla. - The high cost of health care is jumping even more for thousands of Florida families.

Families with healthcare through "Florida Healthy Kids" are finding out this week that their rates will soon be doubling.



The spike is due to Florida Healthy Kids needing to meet minimum requirements of the Affordable Health Care Act.

The board for Florida Healthy Kids says one of the most expensive changes is the elimination of a lifetime insurance cap.

Until now, if a patient's care needs cost more than a million dollars to the insurer, the company could simply stop paying.

For better or for worse the change leaves more than 34,000 kids in Florida and thier families, that don't qualify for subsidies, feeling the squeeze.

"You, we're kind of blindsided by this?" Asked NewsChannel 5's Jared Werksma. "Absolutely, 100 percent blindsided" answered Deanna Kirkpatrick of Lake Worth.

Kirkpatrick says her 9-year-old son has been insured by Florida Healthy Kids since he turned eligible at age 5.

"And it's excellent coverage." Said Kirkpatrick.

But now the cost is doubling for her first born.

"$456 a month for 2 children. $299 Just for the 9 -year-old. Every month!" Says Kirkpatrick.

And she's just 18 months from the premium doubling for her three-year-old as well.

"I would like to not blame state government but I whole hearteldy do." Said Kirkpatrick.

However, the Florida Healthy Kids Board of Directors has something to say about that.

"This has nothing to do with the governors or the legislatures position on medicaid expansion or any of that, says Wendy Sartory Link, the chair of the board.

"This is not something you're happy about obviously?" Asked Werksma.

"Well, we're happy we're able to offer a full pay plan still as an option but certainly we're not happy about the increased cost, no," said Link.

Link says the state is only required to offer the subsidized plan but decided to continue the full payer option as a convenience. Families like the Kirkpatrick's say there's nothing convenieint about the cost.

"So do they have any options right now?" asked Werksma. "Sure," answered Link. "They can go through the federal market place. They can get private insurance."

Kirkpatrick says her family has already contacted the broker who helped she and her husband enroll for insurance through the federal health care exchange. She says however her family handles this crisis, she thinks the state could have handled it better.

"I'm angry but i think I'm more sad because I think a lot of kids are going to get dumped out into the system and I think it's going to just increase the cost of healthcare more than it already is, said Kirkpatrick.

The premium increase for Florida Healthy Kids families that don't qualify for subsidized plans will takes effect October 1.

Healthcare professionals say if you're affected by this premium hike you can enroll your kids in private insurance or through the federal exchange immediately. If you have insurance through your employer, check the policy because you may need to wait for open enrollment.