LEE COUNTY, VA (WJHL) – A major decision made during Denny DeNarvaez’s time as Wellmont Health System’s President and CEO was the closure of Lee Regional Medical Center in Southwest Virginia. Wellmont pointed to reimbursement cuts associated with the Affordable Care Act, “extremely” low community use, and a lack of consistent physician coverage, as the primary reasons for its closure one year ago.

Last week, News Channel 11’s Kylie McGivern brought us inside the public hearing, nearly 500 people strong, in support of reopening Lee County’s only hospital. Tonight, she reports why the hospital authority feels this time will be different.

Tom Clarke, President and CEO of Kissito Healthcare in Roanoke and Councilman of the Lee County Hospital Authority (created 6 months ago), says on top of the Lee County community voicing emotional testimony for a hospital, the numbers speak to a need that exists.

“This is a community of 25,000 people. And if you look at communities around Tennessee and around Virginia, it’s sort of unheard of not to have a hospital in that size,” Clarke said.

The absence of Lee County’s only hospital, many say, has left a gaping hole in the region’s healthcare.

“If you look at the closure of hospitals, they’re usually very long processes, there’s public awareness, maybe an urgent care center in its place. There’s usually a combination for primary care, and that type of thing. Unfortunately, this was very sudden,” Clarke said.

News of the closure last year sent shock waves throughout the sprawling community.

“That’s when we knew, is when they released it to the public,” Lee County Administrator Dane Poe said. “We knew there was gonna be some changes at the hospital. What they had identified to us as early as July was, the original plan was to shut down portions of the hospital, but not the entire facility. And they had pretty much indicated that they were NOT planning to shut the entire thing down,” Poe said.

Wellmont told News Channel 11, “There were conversations with community leaders about our ability to maintain sufficient physician coverage and sustain hospital operations. It was uncertain at that time whether we were able to keep the hospital open.”

After the October 1, 2013 closure, Wellmont says it continued to operate primary, and some specialty practices, and expanded resources around 20 miles away at Lonesome Pine Hospital.

News Channel 11 asked Clarke in he and the Hospital Authority’s research, if he felt there was any alternative that would have prevented closing Lee Regional Medical Center.

“You know, it’s always difficult to reopen something once its been closed. And I’ve often thought, if only we could have all sat down at the table earlier. I think there were options. And the biggest option is, something that the federal governments actually created for these situations – the Critical Access Hospital (CAH).”

CAHs are largely rural, community hospitals that receive cost-based reimbursement from Medicare.

According to the Lee County Hospital Authority, based on numbers from US Census 2013 estimates, in Tennessee,

11 of the state’s 15 CAHs serve populations smaller than Lee County. In Virginia, 6 out of the 7 CAHs serve populations smaller that Lee County.

Wellmont told News Channel 11:

“We gave serious consideration to multiple options and explored several new models of care delivery, including the critical access hospital option, and closed as the absolute last resort. Because of the very complex issues the hospital faced, including physician coverage and financial issues resulting from low inpatient census, relatively low medicare and commercial use, and a high percentage of uninsured, we could not envision long-term sustainability.”

“The population of a county is just one factor that contributes to sustainability. Other factors such as physician coverage, payor mix and community use must also be considered. It is accurate inpatient use of the hospital declined significantly over the last several years of the hospital’s operation. Community use of the hospital will be essential to future success, and in large part, the community has to determine what services it will support to ensure the viability of those services. By looking at a full spectrum of care delivery and service options, the hospital authority will have a better chance at achieving a sustainable model for the future.”

“We feel very confident that we will be profitable out of the box, maybe the first year as we ramp up there will be small losses, but our forecast is for a profitable operation second year and beyond,” Clarke said.

Clarke told News Channel 11 he and other members of the Hospital Authority sat down with Wellmont Wednesday, in a meeting he walked away feeling positive about. News Channel 11 was told there will be an announcement within the next couple months regarding the Authority’s ability to purchase the hospital from Wellmont. Keep in mind, the Authority should also have word from the state on whether its Certificate of Need has been approved, by the end of the year. The Certificate of Need is for the opening of a 25-bed CAH.

With Wellmont poised to make a decision on whether or not to merge and with what health system by the end of the year, Clarke said after Wednesday’s meeting, the Hospital Authority is no longer concerned about how a potential merger could impact the sale of Lee Regional Medical Center. Clarke said, and Wellmont confirmed, that whatever agreement they come to will have to be accepted by any potential future merging health system.

Copyright 2014 WJHL. All rights reserved.