SHARE Affordable Care Act

Special Section: Videos, interactive maps, summaries and local coverage of Obamacare



By of the

Health insurance premiums in the public sector increased 1.2% on average this year, compared with a 7.1% increase in the private sector, based on an annual report by M3 Insurance, the state's largest insurance agency.

The report also showed a sharp increase in health plans with high deductibles, with 34% of the plans offered now having an annual deductible of $1,250 for individuals and $2,500 for families.

That was up from 28% last year and 14% in 2007.

The survey is based on 554 M3 clients, most of them in Wisconsin, ranging in size from three to more than 5,000 employees and offering 1,091 different health plans.

Rich Twietmeyer, executive vice president of employee benefits for M3, attributed the small increase in premiums in the public sector to the additional flexibility in designing plans, such as higher deductibles, and increased competition among insurers after the passage of Act 10. The law curtailed collective bargaining for most public employees and made it easier for government entities to make changes in health benefits.

M3's clients include 215 school districts throughout the state. "They've been able to adapt and improvise," Twietmeyer said.

The 7.1% average increase in premiums for private employers stems partly from taxes and fees of about 3% from the Affordable Care Act, said Brian Meyer, M3's director of risk management for employee benefits.

Excluding the fees, the average increase was in line with recent years.

According to the report, the average total annual cost of health benefits for each employee in 2014 is:

■In the public sector, $16,733, up slightly from $16,532 last year.

■In the private sector, $11,101, up slightly from $11,009 last year.

The average annual cost per employee is a different measure and doesn't correlate with the average increase in annual premiums.

The difference in costs between the public and private sector in the report stems partly from more of M3's clients in the public sector being in rural areas, which have higher costs, Twietmeyer said.

Employers in the private sector also are more likely to self-insure, or pay most of the medical claims of employees and their families themselves, he said, and this can lower costs.

The increase in costs varied by the size of the employer and throughout the state.

The areas with the highest overall costs were northwest Wisconsin and north central Wisconsin.

Costs also were higher for health plans with broad networks of doctors and hospitals compared with plans based on health maintenance organizations.

The cost of health benefits per employee averaged $10,412 for HMO plans compared with $13,075 for plans known as preferred provider organizations.

Surveys on the cost of health benefits themselves vary. M3's report provides a snapshot of Wisconsin.

As in past years, employers turned to changes in the design of their plans to control costs, such as increasing out-of-pocket maximums.

The share of the premium paid by employees overall was basically unchanged:

■Private-sector employees paid 25% of the total cost for single coverage and 31% of the cost for family coverage.

■Public-sector employees paid 11% of the cost for single and family coverage.

Meyer, the director of risk management, said the share of premiums paid by employees has remained fairly steady over the years.

One change gradually taking hold is contracts with hospitals and doctors partly tied to their performance on quality measures and outcomes, Twietmeyer said.

For now, the contracts generally focus on targets, such as managing diabetes and other chronic diseases. But this is just the start.

"It is going to change the model on how they deliver care," Twietmeyer said.