— If Buccaneers rookie quarterback Jameis Winston is distracted by the battle that’s raging between him and the woman who accused him of sexual assault, it’s not showing on the field.

A day after his attorneys filed a countersuit against his accuser, Winston earned praise from coach Lovie Smith for his ability to remain focused on the football aspect of his life.

“That’s one thing you won’t say about him, (that) he’s not focused,” Smith said. “He’s into football and trying to get better. That’s who he is. And we definitely saw that (Saturday), like we did (Friday).”

It wasn’t just Winston’s focus that was sharp on Day 2 of rookie minicamp. After turning in an erratic throwing performance on Day 1, Winston was more on point on Saturday.

He’s also proving to be a quick study. Winston has only had about a week to examine the offensive playbook, but he’s already impressing his new coaches with his knowledge of it.

“He’s been cramming like it’s the final exam, and he’s doing a good job of it,” Smith said. “We’ve seen marked improvement from the moment we gave him his playbook. Jameis is a bright guy. He’ll be able to get it all.”

Reach out

When the Bucs traded up four spots to select little-known Hobart College offensive lineman Ali Marpet with the 61st overall pick in the draft, they made history.

They also left a lot of fans wondering what they were doing.

The Bucs made the 6-foot-4, 307-pound Marpet the highest-drafted Division III player ever, but did they reach too far in grabbing the Hastings-on-Hudson, New York, native?

It seems not.

A look back at scouting reports and mock drafts suggests the Bucs didn’t reach at all.

For example, WalterFootball.com’s second-round mock draft had Marpet going 63rd overall to Seattle, where one of WalterFootball’s scouts said Marpet would be “a great fit for the blocking scheme.”

Meanwhile, Sports Illustrated’s second-round mock had Marpet going 64th overall to New England, where Don Banks wrote that the Patriots would be fortifying “their offensive line with a prospect who plays in the tough, battling style they most admire from their grunts up front.’’

And Bleacher Report, in its Day 2 mock, had Marpet going 72nd overall to the Rams, saying, “Marpet presents value due to his versatility. The Division III product can compete to start at center or guard.”

Stick around

Of the 55 players attending rookie minicamp, 36 are doing so on a tryout basis. After two days of work, it looks like a couple of those getting tryouts might get the chance to stick around a little longer.

“The process is still ongoing, so I can’t really point anybody out (specifically) right now,” Smith said Saturday. “But we like a couple of our tryout players, and in a few days, you’ll see the ones we’re talking about.”

Fireballer

Winston’s arm strength is said to be one of his greatest assets. Some of his fellow rookies at minicamp are finding out the hard way just how strong of an arm he has.

“You guys don’t even know,” wide receiver hopeful Kaelin Clay said when asked about Winston’s throwing ability. “He threw one to me today and it ripped my glove. He has some power behind that arm.”

rcummings@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7979

Twitter: @RCummingsTBO