By Jason Hart | Ohio Watchdog

Ohio’s Medicaid expansion is wildly over budget, but people who rely on the state’s legacy press probably have no idea.

Newspapers reporting on Ohio General Assembly budget negotiations have failed to mention the Obamacare money — meant to pay for Medicaid expansion through June — ran out in February.

Gov. John Kasich said Thursday he doesn’t plan to ask the quasi-legislative Ohio Controlling Board to approve new Medicaid expansion spending. Video of Kasich’s remarks are available from Youngstown Vindicator reporter Marc Kovac.

In 2013, the governor won approval from the Controlling Board to spend $2.56 billion in Obamacare money on Medicaid benefits for able-bodied, working-age childless adults from Jan. 1, 2014, through June 30, 2015 .

The Controlling Board appropriation ran out in February, and Kasich’s Medicaid expansion will likely be more than $1 billion over budget by July.

Watchdog reported this in early March, but Ohio’s newspapers still haven’t caught on.

A brief Associated Press piece about Medicaid expansion funding, published Thursday on the Akron Beacon Journal’s website and elsewhere, failed to mention Kasich’s Obamacare expansion burned through its approved funding four months early.

AP reporter Ann Sanner also neglected to mention this in a column published Thursday by Dayton Daily News and other outlets. In fact, both AP stories about Kasich’s latest remarks provided little information about Medicaid expansion funding.

What else did the AP overlook?

Kasich’s Obamacare expansion was 74 percent over budget in February, has cost more than $300 million per month since December and will consume roughly 10 percent of Ohio’s General Revenue Fund spending if continued for the next two years.

Because the $2.56 billion Controlling Board appropriation is gone, Kasich’s Department of Medicaid is spending Obamacare money under budget authority lawmakers meant for children, pregnant women, impoverished families, the elderly and the disabled.

Toledo Blade reporter Jim Provance wrote a story about comments by Kasich regarding Medicaid expansion, but Provance provided almost no information about what the expansion has cost since January 2014.

Editors at the Blade and several of Ohio’s other major papers have openly advocated for Medicaid expansion and bashed the policy’s critics. In 2013, newspapers celebrated Kasich’s implementation of the expansion over General Assembly disapproval.

While treating federal spending as free money, Ohio’s press has given the Republican governor and potential presidential candidate a pass on false claims his Obamacare expansion does not increase federal spending.

For more than two years, Kasich has insisted he’s paying for his Obamacare expansion by bringing Ohio money back to Ohio. In reality, the expansion is paid for with new spending from a federal government already $18 trillion in debt.

Even the Congressional Research Service, a nonpartisan agency advising members of Congress, has debunked Kasich’s rhetoric — but none of Ohio’s newspapers have acknowledged the fact.

Knowing Ohio reporters seemingly don’t care what Obamacare expansion costs or where the money comes from, Kasich keeps repeating his refuted talking points in friendly national interviews, including a Tuesday segment with Megyn Kelly on Fox News.