ELLWOOD CITY -- U.S. Rep. Keith Rothfus, R-12, Sewickley, spent more than an hour at the Ellwood City Municipal Building during a town hall meeting, discussing a wide range of issues confronting the federal government in this election year.

A member of the House of Representatives conservative Freedom Caucus, he supported the removal of former House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, and the installation of Paul Ryan, R-Wisc., into what is generally regarded as the federal government's second-most powerful elected office.

Under Ryan's leadership, Rothfus said the Republican Party needs to be a party of "proposition, not opposition."

"It's incumbent on us to show the people what our ideas are," he told a group of about 20 people in the Ellwood City Council meeting chambers.

The stop was part of a district tour that included visits to see the Beaver County commissioners Tuesday and the Lawrence County commissioners Friday.

Among those attending the session in Ellwood City were Council President Connie MacDonald, borough Manager Robert Villella, Ellwood City Area Chamber of Commerce Director Raymond Santillo, Ellwood City Area School District Superintendent Joe Mancini, Ellwood City Area Public Library Director Veronica Pacella, borough Solicitor Edward Leymarie and several borough department heads.

Rothfus was strongly critical of the recovery from the 2008 recession, which he called weak. Growth in the gross domestic product since 2009 has been in the 2 percent range, compared with expansion of around 4 percent during the 1996-2000 boom and a peak of 4.7 percent in 1999.

To restore strong growth in the economy, tax reform would be necessary, Rothfus said. The United States has one of the world's highest effective corporate tax rates, which restricts businesses working in a global market. At the same time, though, he acknowledged that the tax code enables larger corporations to avoid paying the high tax rate while saddling smaller companies with the full freight.

Rothfus said one issue was "at the top of the agenda" in the House: plans to target tax reform and deregulate businesses.

"We have to lower the overall tax rate in exchange for getting rid of the special interest loopholes," he said.

One recurring theme in Rothfus' comments was a call for decisions to be made by people on the local level, rather than having mandates imposed by what he said are out-of-touch experts based in Washington.

"They can construct the perfect model, but it's divorced from reality," he said.

In addition to his call for tax reform and a promise to come up with a viable alternative to the Affordable Care Act, Rothfus was critical of the nuclear treaty with Iran. He called it the "world's largest exporter of terror."

The congressman wrapped up his comments by extolling the virtues of Pennsylvania's 12th Congressional District, which stretches from the Ohio state line to Johnstown and includes a range of businesses from banking and agriculture to manufacturing and energy exploration.

"Just about everything that happens in this country happens in this district," he said.