It's not a matter of memorizing some random information.

A U.S. government class in 2006 in Arlington, VA. (Photo: Andrew Councill for USA TODAY, 2006)

Requiring students to pass the citizenship exam will reduce both the amount and the quality of civic education in our schools.

The test is easy. You can see all the questions and answers in advance and just memorize the right choices.

OUR VIEW: Make schoolkids pass the same test as new citizens

If passing this exam comes to be seen as adequate preparation for citizenship, schools will notice that their students can pass after cramming for a couple of hours. They will cut their semester-long civics courses as unnecessary preparation. They will prefer to dedicate that semester to math or science, which involve much more sophisticated and challenging tests.

Requiring the citizenship exam would make sense if our students didn't already study civics or face tests. It would establish a floor, a minimal level of competence. But more than 90% of recent high school graduates have spent a semester in a civics course, and most have also spent a year on U.S. history. Their teachers gave them tests. In many states, they also faced a standardized test on civics or social studies.

Then why do so many adults fail basic questions about the U.S. political system? Because we have forgotten what we learned in civics class. Too often, the subject wasn't inspiring or challenging and didn't build habits of following and discussing the news.

The problem with civics is not that we fail to teach it. The problem is that civics is often viewed as a set of disconnected facts, not as a challenging and inspiring subject that will continue to interest us after high school.

Arizona's measure requiring that students pass the citizenship test will make that problem worse. The citizenship exam requires, for instance, that you know that "27" is the correct answer when you're asked how many constitutional amendments have been passed. You don't need to understand reasons for or against those amendments, or have any sense of why they were important.

A month after students pass this test, they will forget the number 27. But they might retain the message that being a good citizen is a matter of memorizing some random information. That seems like an excellent way to turn people off.

Peter Levine is associate dean for research at Tufts University's Jonathan M. Tisch College of Citizenship and Public Service.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1DS90JK