Spring break will once again be front and center at Tuesday's Panama City Beach City Council meeting. The city will vote on several spring break ordinances that could bring some dramatic changes to our beaches.

Everyone's favorite ordinance to debate over, banning alcohol on the sandy beaches during spring break, is on the agenda on Tuesday. The city council may also make rental scooters a thing of the past on the beach.

Spring break is expected to once again take center stage at Tuesday's city council meeting.

"There was rapes last year, there was riots, there was gunshots, I mean these people come down here and think they can do whatever they want," said Panama City resident, Autumn Gore.

The city will vote on several spring break ordinances, one would ban alcohol on the sandy beaches during spring break.

"I love to have a beer on the beach, but after this last banning I've really enjoyed the beach being so clean," said Panama City Beach resident, Kevin Foutas.

"We live here we love these beaches we don't want them looking a mess," said Thomas Manger, a Panama City resident.

Another ordinance could raise the penalties for open containers in public parking lots from $50 for a first offense to $150.

"Once everybody respects our town then these Walmart parties in the parking lot can slow down" said Panama City Beach resident, Matthew Bruhn.

And those rental scooters locals are all too familiar with could soon be history. The city will be voting on an ordinance banning scooter companies from replacing any scooters that are stolen, sold, or damaged. The goal is to reduce, and possibly eventually phase out, rental scooters over the next three years.

"You mix the alcohol, the parties, the irresponsibility with the fact that they're gonna just drive up and down the streets wildly and they think that people have to respect them when it's a two way street," said Bruhn.

"It's a thing that draws people here, it brings in tourists, it brings in income, it brings in money," said Panama City Beach resident, Louis Naas.

One of the ordinances in particular has caused quite a bit of controversy among the community. The city is looking at defining spring break from March 1 through March 31. Some locals say that covers it, but others say it doesn't go far enough.

"I think that's plenty far enough," said Manager. "You know how it works down here, it tails off towards the end, we don't have as many kids down here."

"So that's only a month and really spring break goes from the middle of February to the end of April," said Foutas.

An ordinance prohibiting throwing anything off of balconies and climbing balconies may also be voted on.

"It's called crabbing where they go from one balcony to the next," said Naas. "I don't know how they can ban it if people are gonna do it they're gonna do it."

"I used to be a lifeguard and we would have to drain the pool once a month because someone threw a glass bottle from the fourth floor to the fifth floor," said Foutas.

City officials expect a big turnout for Tuesday's City Council meeting. It'll once again be held in the Arnold High School auditorium to handle the crowd.

It starts at 6 p.m.