Donald Fish, Montana Tribal Leader Council Navigator, said, “It's a lot better if you have someone that is knowledgeable about accessing the resources online and to steer you and guide you through the process.”

Organizers say they often hear concerns from people about how to sign up and say they want people to be educated - not intimidated.

GREAT FALLS -- On Wednesday, representatives from across north-central Montana are providing free training and education to Native Americans about the federal health insurance marketplace.

Certified application counselors are on hand to help people who qualify fill out applications for the Affordable Care Act.

The special enrollment period is open to anyone who is not currently enrolled in coverage.

The online federal marketplace is where Montanans can shop for health insurance plans and receive financial assistance to purchase insurance.

Organizers of the event say they often hear concerns from people about how to sign up, and say they want people to be educated - not intimidated.

Donald Fish, Montana Tribal Leader Council Navigator, said, “It's a lot better if you have someone that is knowledgeable about accessing the resources online and to steer you and guide you through the process.”

The event is being held at Heritage Hall at Great Falls College-MSU until 6 pm on Wednesday.

A press release from Tina Bundtrock, an enrollment specialist with the Community Health Care Center, says that if you buy health insurance in the federal marketplace and your income is up to $70,650 for a family of four, you can enroll in a zero-cost sharing plan.

This means you won't have to pay out-of-pocket costs like deductibles, copayments, and co-insurance when you get care.

You can get (or keep getting) services from the Indian Health Service, tribal health programs, or urban Indian health programs.

You can also get services from any providers on the Marketplace plan.

Native Americans in federally-recognized tribes can enroll at any time.

For more information, call Bundtrock at 406-791-9270.