GRAND RAPIDS, MI — U.S. Rep. Bill Huizenga broke away from the Washington, D.C., beltway Wednesday afternoon to answer readers' questions on a variety of topics.

Some questions, including the Affordable Care Act and income inequality, were pointed and worked to get at the issues affecting West Michigan families on a day-to-day basis. Another mentioning a popular Netflix show was more lighthearted, showing our nation's leaders actually do binge-watch like the rest of us.

The hour garnered many questions in the post's comments feed, in addition to some sent by email and Twitter. Here are a few highlights from the conversation:

Affordable Care Act

Readers asked the congressman about problems with President Barack Obama's signature healthcare law, from its delays and whom it covers. Another wondered if universal healthcare seen in other countries could make a difference in the U.S.

... I do not support "Universal" healthcare in the Canadian/European sense b/c I don't believe it is successful in lowering costs and expanding high quality healthcare. We are seeing story after story about hard working taxpayers seeing their premiums AND their deductibles increase. And how about the Pelosi and Reid claim that it would CREATE jobs? It has done the opposite as we saw from the recent GVSU study. Since Obamacare is not living up to the promises made, that is why you are seeing POTUS delaying and choosing not to enforce provisions of a law that he helped write and signed into law. I don't believe he has the legal authority to do what he is doing and I expect that there will be continued legal challenges much as which happened with the President's "Recess Appointments" that was overturned by the Supreme Court.

One such case involving recess appointments, National Labor Relations Board v. Noel Canning, has not yet been overturned by the court but has been argued. Analysts argue the court appears ready to strike it down.

Economics

Coupled with low approval ratings and being on pace as the least productive Congress ever, one wondered what Congress can get done.

Well, we are certainly trying, despite the very different world views in this divided government. I think the real question is can we make significant change legislatively in the short run. Probably not. But there are smaller issues such as my Mergers and Acquisitions bill that just passed the House unanimously, that will mean real job opportunities here in WM as small biz owners retire or sell their biz. On a much larger scale, Tax reform as well as regulatory reform would have a major impact. Now, that could be negative or positive depending on the form of "reform."

"House of Cards"

Huizenga isn't yet caught up on the hit Netflix show — he's still working through season one — but early indications show his life in D.C. isn't all that thrilling.

... The only thing truly realistic about the show is that the Whip has a black suburban and a body guard and that the Washington Monument is still on the National Mall. Other than that, it is all pretty unrealistic. I'm glad that my life isn't that exciting...

Read more of the congressman's responses, here: Recap of live chat with West Michigan Congressman Bill Huizenga

Andrew Krietz covers breaking and general police/fire news for MLive | The Grand Rapids Press. Email him at akrietz@mlive.com or follow him on Twitter.