There are some quite serious things happening in the country and in the world – things our elected officials are, or should be, addressing. So can we please stop with the silly questions to candidates or potential candidates?

That means, stop speculating, ad nauseum, in print about whether Mitt Romney will make another run for the presidency in 2016. Romney says he’s not interested. His wife says he’s not interested. His sons say he’s not interested. But no matter how many times these things are said, stories are still written, with the caution that the candidate didn’t rule it out . What does that even mean? Since when did, “No, I’m not running” cease to qualify as a “no”? The same has happened to Sen. Elizabeth Warren, a Massachusetts Democrat, who has said repeatedly that she is not running for president. But the possibility is so delicious to the media – or maybe, it’s just too boring to think about a 2016 that right now looks pretty limited – that such stories and TV commentary are often accompanied by the observation that if Hillary Clinton doesn’t run, then Warren will probably step in. (Why? Do modern presidential campaigns require a blonde female to be legitimate?) No means no, people.

[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on Hillary Clinton]

With Romney, there’s a story there – but it’s not about Romney not ruling out a presidential run. It’s about a party that is still figuring out a way to bring its diverse (and warring) factions together and getting them to rally around a candidate. And none of the other contenders appears to be doing that, just yet, so it’s sort of understandable that some activists might want Romney to think about it. But the story ends there as long as Romney says he’s not running.

To say he or she “didn’t rule it out” isn’t a news development. It’s a tactic for reporters to speculate about anything in the absence of actual news. I saw this first-hand when I did an interview with Vicki Kennedy, widow of the late Sen. Edward M. Kennedy, in 2010. I’m not running for his seat, she said. Clearly. "There is only one Senator Kennedy," she said, equally clearly. I’m not running.

The magazine story went online the Saturday night before the print edition came out. The following day, a front-page article appeared in the Washington Post, with various people talking about what an appealing candidate she would be for the job. It would have been a great story, except that it was made moot by Kennedy’s clear statement that she was not, in fact, running. But did the paper kill the story? Nope. They just stuck in a line noting Kennedy’s comment, with the caution, “but she did not rule it out.” Yes, she did rule it out. She said she wasn’t running.

All of this recalls the old "Saturday Night Live" sketch where John McCain, playing himself, rejects every possible version of that "are you running?" question – including whether he would run in the future against a zombie Jimmy Carter:

[GALLERY: Editorial Cartoons on 2014 Congressional Elections]

And in Kentucky, where there’s a somewhat interesting Senate race and lots of issues to talk about – e.g., coal, the expansion of Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act – what is the pressing issue now in the media? It’s whether Democrat Alison Lundergan Grimes voted for President Barack Obama or not. Her refusal to say one way or the other has pundits declaring her challenge to Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell done for. Well, no – she’s been disfavored for a win since the beginning, since she’s a Democrat running against a powerful Republican in a conservative state. Whether she voted for Obama is pretty meaningless, since he didn’t even come close to winning the state in either election. To be fair, Grimes invited the question in seeking to separate herself from the unpopular president, and it just looks bad to refuse to answer it. But does it matter? If she did vote for him, so what? It had no impact in Kentucky. And if she didn’t, so what? She’s running to represent the state, not applying to be his campaign chair.