On Thursday, the Supreme Court passed a ruling in favor (6-3) of President Obama’s controversial healthcare law. The ruling holds that the 2010 Affordable Care Act subsidies will continue not only for eligible Americans living in states with their own health insurance exchanges, but also for individuals in the 34 states that rely on the federal exchange. This means that 6.4 million Americans, who would otherwise have been left uninsured, can hold onto their Obamacare subsidies.

The news immediately caused healthcare stocks to rally. The ruling especially goes in favor of hospitals, which used to be the default option for uninsured Americans, prior to Obamacare. Obamacare, and now the latest ruling, ensure that majority of their clients will now be insured, which in turn will help boost profit for hospitals. The top grosser for the day turned out to be Tenet Healthcare Corp. (NYSE:THC), which surged a wholesome 12.27% to close at $56.02. The healthcare services company manages 80 US hospitals and more than 400 outpatient facilities.

HCA Holdings Inc. (NYSE:HCA), which operates 165 hospitals, shot up 8.85% to reach $90.75, while Universal Health Services, Inc. (NYSE:UHS), which owns 235 healthcare centers, went up 7.76% to close at $140.78.

According to Fred Weiss, a portfolio manager at Atlantic Trust Private Wealth Management who invests in healthcare, "Most hospitals have had rising margins the past few years from Obamacare…So if they were making 12% margins, now they make 16%. That's 30% more profits."

Apart from hospitals, health insurers were also beneficiaries of the ruling as it became apparent that individual insurance market will continue to stand. UnitedHealth Group Inc. (NYSE:UNH) rose 2.68% to close at $122.4. Stocks of Aetna Inc. (NYSE:AET) and Humana Inc. (NYSE:HUM) shot up even higher by 4% and 7.2%, respectively. This particular stock gain mostly centered on reports that Aetna, the second-biggest US health insurer, was close to acquiring Humana, with a deal on the cards as early as this weekend.

The S&P 500 healthcare index overall went up 0.5%, following the news. As per Thomson Reuters’ data, the S&P 500 healthcare sector currently trades at 24.3 times analysts’ consensus on future earnings, and the S&P 500’s forward price-to-earnings (P/E) ratio stands at 17.6x. According to Michael O’Rourke, chief market strategist at Greenwich, Connecticut-based Jones Trading, "While any change in policy would've been a surprise, affirming the status quo removes a lot of uncertainty from the sector." The day ended with only the healthcare sector posting a gain in the S&P 500 portfolio.