Funds flowing to startups after passage of Affordable Care Act

Reza Khadjavi, CEO of Shoelace, delivers his presentation during Boomtown demo day at the Boulder Theater last December.

Boomtown's 5th class McSquares, Broomfield: Handheld, interactive whiteboards that can be used individually or snap together to create larger, collaborative displays MaaxMarket, Boulder: An artificial intelligence platform for small business which automates online marketing efforts including email marketing, social media and real-time website visitor tracking Fanzee, Boulder: A content management platform which helps create, distribute and track marketing content through social media influencers Caliber, Boulder: Software that provides B2B companies personality insights on their buyers to improve marketing and increase sales FansUnite, Vancouver: Big data and analytics for the trillion dollar online gaming industry Spiffly, Boulder: B2B platform designed exclusively for the $150 billion natural/organic food industry HealthTech Mindful Labs, San Diego: A tool to both track and reduce stress levels through monthly hair sample analysis coupled with a mindfulness app that provides stress management techniques Patientory, Atlanta: Enables patients to create their own health history data archive and gain access to data from physicians, health insurers and other relevant parties VisibleHand, Denver: Mobile software solution that tracks guided observations and patient-centered best practice Advertisement Agathos, San Francisco: Provides physicians with insight on treatment cost, prognosis and treatment results from other physicians, performance statistics and peer evaluations

Boulder accelerator Boomtown this week announced an April 13 demo day for its fifth class of technology startups — including the first-ever cohort of health focused companies.

Boomtown started its health accelerator, HealthTech, in January after Colorado Permanente Medical Group joined with them in sponsorship. CPMG is the group of physicians who care for Kaiser Permanente members in the state.

The collaboration is a way for doctors to keep up with innovations in health care, said Katie Richardson, pediatrician and director of physician experience for CPMG.

"The face of healthcare is going to change dramatically over the next five to 10 years," Richardson said. "With those changes are going to come changes in the way I deliver care. Getting involved at the startup level is very important (because) I can help influence how (innovation) looks moving forward."

Demand for innovative solutions is up across the nation. Health tech operations are "one of the top recipients of venture capital funding," according to Tom Base, managing director for HealthTech.

According to a report from Wall Street Journal, the first half of 2015 set a record for investment, with $3.9 billion funneled to biotechnology, digital health and health-care services. And Mercom Capital Group reported that capital in health IT doubled from 2013 to 2014, part of a five-year trend of increasing investor interest in the sector.

The rush to form and fund innovative companies was created in part by the passage of the Affordable Care Act.

"That started this national conversation about the cost of health care and how are we best going to drive down costs," said April Giles, president and CEO of Colorado Bioscience Association. "Not only do we need to invest in innovation, but there is more focus on prevention and health and wellness.

"These are the forces pushing everyone to respond. There's opportunity there for businesses."

Another force is propelling Boomtown to tweak the way it operates: The evolving exit strategy for startups.

"More and more exits are (being) done through acquisition by corporations," said Toby Krout, Boomtown's co-founder and executive director. Because of that, the accelerator has made a point of picking entrepreneurs with "exit DNA" as opposed to "growth DNA."

"They want to exit and start another thing. So it's beneficial for them to have contacts with those corporations and major players so they are poised to do that, and we will be focusing on increasing Boomtown's relationships with those entities."

To register for the demo day, visit http://bit.ly/1Wu8nzE.

Shay Castle: 303-473-1626, castles@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/shayshinecastle