Jennifer Winn and Ethan McCord traveled atypical paths before placing their names on the Republican primary ballot in Kansas.

These running mates from Wichita shunned politics much of their lives, but experienced tragedy a world apart that crushed their confidence in government's capacity to serve interests of the common person.

Carrying scars of deadly proportions and without campaign experience, Winn stepped forward as a candidate for governor and McCord accepted the role of candidate for lieutenant governor. Overwhelming favorites in the GOP primary are Gov. Sam Brownback and Lt. Gov. Jeff Colyer.

"I'm the fed-up citizen. That's what I am," said Winn, who operates two small businesses. "We're both on the same page as far as — I'm tired of politicians. I'm tired of personal agendas. We, as elected officials, are to work for the people. Period. That's not what happens."

McCord, a former U.S. Army Ranger and Iraq combat veteran, said their campaign wouldn't be driven by a drum beat of sound bites typical of candidates striving to leave a mark in 30 seconds or less. It was clear from the outset, he said, their policy positions would defy partisan label.

"I checked Republican because there was no box for human," he said. "Just like I found out in war, there is no just straight black and white. There's a lot of gray in between everything. It's the same here."

Where they stand

McCord and Winn filed paperwork Feb. 14 in Topeka and set about sharing their perspective on reform.

They agree Kansas government must become far more transparent by fully disclosing the financial role of lobbyists, who primarily serve a wealthy minority. During a visit to the Capitol last week, they expressed support for a bill to test live streaming on the Internet of the House and Senate.

"We're not able to participate in these things because everybody is working 9 to 5. Nobody can come down to Topeka for a meeting," Winn said.

If elected in November, they would seek to alter K-12 public education by trimming overhead and pouring cash into classrooms. Neither are fond of the Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare, and would give no ground on the U.S. Constitution. Their administration would target tax relief at working families and small businesses.

Winn and McCord said their campaign would emphasize the necessity of legalizing marijuana.

"I am not for prohibition on a plant that government has no right to control," Winn said. "I'm not for discrimination of any individual based on their choices of who they go home with, or what religion they are, or sex they are or what color they are. Those to me, shouldn't be boundaries."

In Winn's view, state sentencing laws should be amended to cease incarceration of nonviolent drug offenders. The judicial system, she said, should openly embrace jury "nullification" in which a defendant could be acquitted regardless of the law if jurors believed conviction to be an injustice.

Winn's moment

Winn, 42, was born and raised in Wichita, where she brought up her four children. She operates a landscape business and a separate company involved in janitorial work. She led a largely nonpolitical life.

"I was probably one of those people who thought due process would always be done and our representatives and senators were truly looking out for the interests of the people," she said.

Her perspective changed in April 2013 when her son, Kyler Carriker, was seriously wounded in a botched robbery that killed marijuana seller Ronald Betts. Carriker allegedly helped arrange the pot deal, but when the buyers arrived the scene turned into a shootout. Carriker isn’t accused of firing at anyone, but will go on trial for first-degree murder under a law allowing prosecutors to bring murder counts against those participating in a crime resulting in a fatality.

"It was a dreaded phone call. I didn't know at that moment whether my son is dead or alive. The police were very uncaring, very dry, very cold," Winn said. "It was a moment that any parent would dread, let alone the next day your son being arrested for first-degree felony murder."

The experience led Winn to devote more time to scrutinizing the government system in Kansas, and she didn't like the result.

"I knew early on that I couldn't walk by a wrong. That's just not who I am," she said.

Some have accused Winn of attempting to leverage a 2014 gubernatorial campaign into better treatment of Carriker.

"Running for governor doesn't change my son's situation," she said. "I say, 'No, I'm running to save your son.' "

McCord at war

The California native raised in a conservative — make that "extremely conservative" family — signed up for the U.S. Navy after Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on the East Coast. He was stationed in Wichita, a disappointing assignment for someone yearning to more actively serve his country.

"So, I joined the Army," said McCord, who deployed to Iraq with a belief U.S. politicians wouldn't ask him to die in an unjust war. "All of that came crashing down on me in Iraq when I realized ... I was fighting a war against people who were just like me."

McCord concluded he had less in common with political leaders sanctioning military action than Iraqis suffering through years of bloodshed.

"There were no 'Muslim terrorists' over there who were trying to take our freedoms," he said. "They didn't want our Coke and jeans over there. They didn't hate us for that. They hated us because we'd been there for so long and so many of them had been dying for so long."

In Baghdad in July 2007, an AH-64 Apache helicopter killed two Reuters reporters and wounded other civilians, including two children, after mistakenly believing they had weapons. McCord was among ground troops who converged on the scene. He pulled two injured children from a van demolished by gunfire.

The drama of his successful effort to save the boy and girl was shared worldwide in 2010 when Wikileaks released cockpit video of the scene.

McCord's combat duties came to an abrupt end in November 2007 when the vehicle he was driving struck an improvised-explosive device. It splintered his spine and resulted in surgery to rebuild his lower back structure. He is able to walk with a cane by virtue of a web of metal inserted into his back.

He said Kansas political leaders should have the courage to make marijuana readily available to veterans and others in need of treatment for PTSD. In Kansas, there is no movement in the Republican-controlled legislative and executive branches to enact such reform.

"I can get by all day with the physical injuries," he said. "I think the injuries that effect us more are the mental, emotional injuries."