WASHINGTON — When U.S. Rep. Tom MacArthur walks onto the House floor to vote, he goes through the doors on the Democratic side of the chamber. That forces New Jersey's rookie Republican to shake hands with — and say hello to — members of the opposing party.

MacArthur came to a Washington famous for Democrats and Republicans clawing at each other's throats. When they're not calling each other names, they're voting in blocs: In 2013, House Republicans were unanimous a record 35 percent of the time in votes where they disagreed with most Democrats. For their part, Democrats unanimously voted the same way 22 percent of the time, the most since 2007.

But just three months on the job, he's learning a big lesson: You've got to break on through to the other side of the political aisle to succeed.

"People are serious in both parties," MacArthur said. "You have to work at relationships. You have to consciously work at being bipartisan."

Democrats may not agree. The party's fundraising arm, which will have an eye on MacArthur's seat next year, say he merely parrots the Republican majority's positions and could be a "one-term wonder."

While MacArthur does regularly join the majority in quashing motions and amendments from the minority, he continues to walk through those Democratic doors.

.

"It's a simple way of making sure I talk to Democrats and Republicans both," MacArthur said.

Though elected as part of the biggest House Republican majority since 1929, MacArthur said House Democrats can help him accomplish such goals as protecting Joint Base McGuire-Dix-Lakehurst from threatened federal budget cuts and making sure Hurricane Sandy victims are adequately compensated for their damages.

The first bill he introduced, the Disaster Assistance Fairness and Accountability Act of 2015. would stop the Federal Emergency Management Agency from telling disaster victims that they received too much money and had to repay the government, except in cases of fraud.

Three House Democrats have joined 11 GOP lawmakers in co-sponsoring the bill. Sen. Cory Gardner (R-Colo.) has introduced similar legislation in that chamber, and Colorado's Democratic senator, Michael Bennet, has signed on as a co-sponsor.

"Seeing Sandy victims treated fairly is not a Democratic or Republican issue," said MacArthur, whose 3rd Congressional District includes a wide swatch of the Jersey Shore. "It's a human issue. I went to people and asked for their support."

Some financial support for MacArthur's first race, in which he won the seat vacated by retiring Republican Jon Runyan, who did not seek re-election, came from the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, which spent $350,452 on his behalf, according to the Center for Responsive Politics, a Washington-based research group.

Jack Howard, senior vice president of congressional and public affairs for the Chamber, said the largest U.S. business lobby was pleased with MacArthur, saying he "is off to a fast start, proving himself to be a results-oriented legislator focused on issues important to his district and the country."



Organized labor, on the other hand, gave 10 times more money, $230,946, to MacArthur's Democratic opponent, Burlington County Freeholder Aimee Belgard, than the $29,000 he received, according to the Center for Responsive Politics.

That hasn't stopped MacArthur from meeting with labor officials and making common cause with them on issues such as protecting McGuire-Dix-Lakehurst, which is his district, from any future round of Pentagon base closings.

Keeping the base off the chopping block is a top priority. McGuire was slated to be scaled back in the 1993 round of base closings, but was saved when an independent base closing commission, headed by former New Jersey U.S. Rep. Jim Courter, overruled the Pentagon.

MacArthur also is aligned with organized labor in support of prevailing wage laws, which require government contractors to pay salaries similar to those in a particular region.

Charlie Wowkanech, president of the state AFL-CIO, said he hoped MacArthur would be as union-friendly as fellow New Jersey GOP Reps. Frank LoBiondo (R-2nd Dist.) and Chris Smith (R-4th Dist.).

"He has an open door policy," Wowkanech said. "We have a great relationship with some Republicans. There's an opportunity that Congressman MacArthur may become sort of more liberal like they are."

Not yet. While LoBiondo and Smith were two of only three House Republicans to buck their party and vote against efforts to make it easier for workers to organize, MacArthur voted with the rest of the conference to block the new rules.

On another issue, it was MacArthur who traveled a different route than most of his GOP colleagues. He was one of the first House Republicans to break with leadership and call for funding the Department of Homeland Security with no strings attached. MacArthur made his call after Senate Republicans failed to pass a spending bill rolling back President Obama's executive orders allowing millions of unauthorized immigrants to remain, and after a federal judge had declared the orders unconstitutional.

"The Congress has a constitutional responsibility to protect the homeland," MacArthur said. "I can't in good conscience vote for something that doesn't accomplish that."

On other issues, he has toed the party line. He voted for the original Homeland Security bill that rolled back the immigration orders; to repeal the Affordable Care Act that has provided health insurance to almost 12 million Americans, including more than 250,000 in New Jersey; and to authorize construction of the Keystone XL pipeline.

That voting record has the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, which spent $1.6 million to try to elect Belgard, featuring MacArthur as one of its 16 "one-term wonders," accusing him of "rubberstamping" the GOP agenda.

MacArthur's vote for Keystone, plus his support for an Obama administration proposal to allow offshore drilling off the Atlantic Coast in states like Virginia where local officials back it, drew complaints from a leading New Jersey environmental group.

"Tom MacArthur is in lock step with Republican leadership on issues that hurt the environment nationally like the Keystone pipeline and rolling back environmental regulations," said Jeff Tittel, president of the N.J. Sierra Club. "He does not want to realize drilling in Virginia will affect New Jersey's beaches."

MacArthur, who opposes drilling off the coast of New Jersey, said he handled damages from oil spills in his insurance business. The chance of oil from Virginia washing up on New Jersey's beaches is "remote," he said.

MORE POLITICS

Jonathan D. Salant may be reached at jsalant@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @JDSalant. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.