AUSTIN, Tex. — This year’s Republican story line may be the declining fortunes of the Tea Party, but conservatives in Texas do not seem to have received the memo.

Instead, after a strong showing in Republican primary elections in March, Tea Party-supported candidates appear poised for further gains in runoffs on Tuesday, including a good chance of ousting the state’s three-term lieutenant governor and pushing the Republican-dominated Legislature further to the right.

Lt. Gov. David Dewhurst, a Republican who lost a Senate bid to Ted Cruz two years ago, is struggling to keep the office he has held since 2003 after finishing 13 percentage points behind State Senator Dan Patrick, a Tea Party favorite from Houston, in the first round of voting on March 4.

The 12-week runoff race between the two candidates has produced a fierce outpouring of negative ads and personal attacks, currently overshadowing the general election race for governor between Greg Abbott, a Republican, and Wendy Davis, a Democrat.

In a state where any hint of support from Mr. Cruz, one of the nation’s Tea Party favorites, is considered golden to aspiring Republican candidates, Tea Party groups also have a strong shot at influencing nominations in three other statewide races and building on legislative victories from the 2012 election cycle.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Tea Party forces in Texas firmly repelled any notion of diminishing strength by defeating a half-dozen legislative incumbents — a state senator and five House members — in the March primaries.

The battle for lieutenant governor has been the hardest-fought race leading up to the runoff, but Tea Party groups are also rallying behind candidates for attorney general, agriculture commissioner, a spot on the energy-regulating Texas Railroad Commission and a number of legislative seats.

Photo

The lieutenant governor is one of the most powerful positions in Texas’ state government, part of a leadership triad that includes the governor and the House speaker. As president of the State Senate, the lieutenant governor appoints committee members and chairmen, controls the calendar and what legislation gets to the floor for a vote, and decides who is recognized and who is not during floor debate. Many of those who have business in the Legislature have already begun looking toward Mr. Patrick as the potential new Senate leader, since Republicans are favored to retain their hold over state government. And he seems to be looking forward to the job.

“We’re going to be the most conservative Senate by far in the history of Texas,” Mr. Patrick said.

Several other Tea Party candidates appear to have the edge in Tuesday’s runoffs, including Konni Burton, a Tea Party activist armed with a Cruz endorsement in her bid to win the Republican nomination for a Fort Worth-based State Senate seat being vacated by Ms. Davis, the Democratic candidate for governor.

The continuing Tea Party momentum in Texas runs counter to the theme that emerged from last Tuesday’s primary results in six other states, where Tea Party reversals spawned talk that the nearly five-year-old grass-roots movement may have run its course.

The most visible defeat of a Tea Party challenger was by Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the Republican leader in the Senate, who prevailed decisively over the businessman Matt Bevin.

Outcomes in earlier primaries and in several other states, including Georgia, Oregon and Idaho last Tuesday, also favored establishment-oriented candidates over opponents with more hard-line conservative credentials.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Analysts say Texas Tea Party groups are tightly organized and highly energetic, assisted by huge email lists and members who are far more likely than mainstream Republicans to engage in grass-roots efforts to target and get out voters.

“We provide boots on the ground,” said JoAnn Fleming of Tyler, executive director of Grassroots America We the People, one of the state’s largest Tea Party groups.

Photo

Cal Jillson, a political-science professor at Southern Methodist University in Dallas, said the Tea Party tends to thrive in Texas because Republican primaries traditionally have low turnout and Tea Party organizations have proved particularly adept at getting their people to the voting booth.

“The primary showed that the Tea Party is the majority of the Republican primary vote,” Mr. Jillson said, predicting that Tea Party candidates were likely to do well in Tuesday’s runoffs.

Only about 15 percent of the state’s 13.6 million registered voters cast ballots in the Democratic and Republican primaries in March, and turnout is expected to be even lower on Tuesday. Just over 2 percent of voters in the 15 largest counties were casting ballots in early voting that started last Monday, according to the secretary of state’s office.

After watching establishment incumbents — including several State House committee chairmen — fall to novice Tea Party candidates in previous elections, the state’s political class has become mindful that, in most cases, the key to victory is to out-conservative the opponent.

“The candidate who has done the best job wrapping themselves in the Tea Party flag has the best chance to win,” said Bill Miller, an Austin lobbyist and consultant. “You don’t counter them. You co-opt them. You can’t run against them and win in a Republican primary.”

Mr. Dewhurst, a wealthy Houston businessman who is seeking a fourth four-year term as lieutenant governor, first collided with Tea Party power in his 2012 Senate bid. He was heavily favored, but Mr. Cruz prevailed in a runoff and went on to become a Tea Party darling in the Senate and a prospective presidential candidate for 2016.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In a telephone interview, Mr. Dewhurst, 68, said he had learned “a lot of lessons” from the Senate defeat and had traveled the state to portray himself as a “liberty conservative” and to engage grass-roots voters. He has drawn endorsements from a number of Tea Party organizations, in one case winning the backing of a Houston area group that had been poised to support Mr. Patrick. Mr. Dewhurst has also been endorsed by Sean Hannity, the conservative talk show host, and by former Representative Ron Paul, the libertarian hero of many Tea Partyers.

But Mr. Patrick, 64, a former sportscaster elected to the State Senate in 2006, is the candidate most identified with the Tea Party and is heading into the runoff with the blessing of most major Tea Party organizations.

If he wins the runoff and prevails in the general election over State Senator Leticia Van de Putte, the Democratic nominee, from San Antonio, Mr. Patrick will replace Mr. Dewhurst as presiding officer of the 31-member State Senate, taking charge of a Republican-dominated upper chamber that has steadily shifted to the right in recent elections.