Progressives love unrestrained government power.

WASHINGTON, Nov. 26, 2015 – The 20th century progressive project sought to overthrow the restraints placed upon the power of the national government in Washington by the U.S. Constitution.

An early champion of progressivism (following in the footsteps of Republican Theodore Roosevelt) was Democrat Woodrow Wilson, who considered the Constitution’s “checks and balances” too “mechanical” to strap upon “a living thing” that should fall “under the theory of organic life. It is accountable to Darwin, not to Newton.”

Thankfully, many examples of “living,” governmental Darwinism rot on the ash-heap of history: Mussolini and Hitler’s National Socialism, Lenin and Stalin’s International Socialism, and Castro’s collectivist Latin variation, which he admitted “doesn’t even work for us anymore.”

Islamic fundamentalism, however, is a more ancient and virulent strain of progressivism that seeks the salvation of humankind through, well, submission.

I suspect this is why progressive Democrats now seeking their party’s nomination for president cannot bring themselves to say America is at war with an Islamic tyranny whose will to power they both admire and wish to emulate.

But Wilsonian progressivism brings ideological baggage far more offensive to college-age progressives — the delicate souls who faint on hearing the slightest “micro aggression.”

The offense is Woodrow Wilson’s overt racism.

Wilson, the 13th president of Princeton University and 28th president of these United States, famously said, “White men were roused by a mere instinct of self-preservation – until at last there had sprung into existence a great Ku Klux Klan, a veritable empire of the South, to protect the Southern country.”

As for the cloistered confines of Princeton University, President Wilson said, “The whole temper and tradition of the place are such that no Negro has ever applied for admission, and it seems unlikely that the question will ever assume practical form.”

So it comes as no surprise that Princeton University’s Black Justice League noticed that their institution of higher learning has a Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs that seeks to advance the university’s motto: “Princeton in the Nation’s Service and in the Service of All Nations.”

A globalist view of Wilsonian Darwinism.

In response, the Black Justice League demanded Princeton’s “administration publicly acknowledge the racist legacy of Woodrow Wilson and how he impacted campus policy and culture. We also demand that steps be made to rename Wilson residential college, the Woodrow Wilson School of Public Policy and International Affairs, and any other building named after him.”

Then, as if to prove Wilsonian Darwinism is just as strong among the so-called enemies of “anti-Blackness and xenophobia,” the students of the Black Justice League demanded “cultural competency training for all staff and faculty,” although “it was voted down on the grounds of trespassing freedom of speech.”

For progressives of all colors, the natural rights of others (freedom of speech) are of little consequence when they hamper the ultimate goal of Wilsonian Darwinism: survival of the thuggish.

“A great deal of nonsense has been talked about the inalienable rights of the individual, and a great deal that was mere vague sentiment and pleasing speculation has been put forward as fundamental principle,” wrote Wilson. “Such theories are never ‘law,’ no matter what the name or the formal authority of the document in which they are embodied. Only that is ‘law’ which can be executed, and the abstract rights of man are singularly difficult of execution.”

Every bit a Wilsonian, President Obama once said his problem with the Bill of Rights is that it “says what the states can’t do to you. Says what the federal government can’t do to you, but doesn’t say what the federal government or state government must do on your behalf.”

As victims of King George’s royal decrees, the nation’s founders were naturally obsessed with establishing a governing system protecting a free people from “arbitrary government” that enlarges “its boundaries so as to render it at once an example and fit instrument for introducing… absolute rule,” wrote Thomas Jefferson in the Declaration of Independence.

More than a century of Wilsonian Darwinism later, we have a federal government that acts contrary to public consent and in violation of individual liberty…“on your behalf,” of course.

The result is expensive, inferior and dictatorial Obamacare.

Progressives hate Wilson’s racism while loving his legacy of unrestrained government power that continues to inform the thinking of petty tyrants working “in the Nation’s Service and in the Service of All Nations.”