Player to embed in JSonline stories

By of the

Waukesha — Considering how the Classic 8 was this football season, there really was no finish more fitting than this.

The league was not only once again the area's best, but also one of the most balanced, with all the best teams taking turns knocking each other off. In fact, nearly every team entered the final week of the regular season with at least two Classic 8 losses.

The last domino to fall was Waukesha West, and there to tip over the Wolverines was Catholic Memorial. The Crusaders' 14-12 victory Friday at Waukesha North, plus Muskego's win over Mukwonago and Arrowhead's victory over Waukesha South, created a four-way tie for the championship among West, Memorial, Muskego and Arrowhead.

It is the Crusaders' first conference title since 2000

"There is great parity in our league," Memorial coach Bill Young said. "We've got some tremendous programs, a lot of history in this league, great kids, and tonight kind of typified the effort it takes to be successful in this league.... Our kids were really dialed in tonight."

West, ranked fourth in the area by the Journal Sentinel, and Memorial finished with 7-2 marks overall and 5-2 marks in the Classic 8. In the finale, the two squads put on a show of well-played, hard-hitting football that has been symbolic of the league.

The difference? Defense and special teams.

One week after giving up almost 400 yards rushing in a 35-28 loss to Mukwonago, Memorial held West to a season-low point total and 265 total yards.

Meanwhile West had a couple of costly special teams miscues.

A 6-yard punt in the second quarter led to what proved to be Memorial's winning drive. Also, an early missed extra point played into coach Steve Rux's decision to go for a first down late in the first half when the team was in field goal range. That left the team needing a two-point conversion to tie after junior quarterback Conor Blount's 43-yard run with 2 minutes left in the third quarter.

The Wolverines failed to covert that fourth-down opportunity in the final minute of the first half, and their try for a two-point conversion following Blount's touchdown failed.

"We got beat in the special-teams game," Rux said. "And part of that is practicing well and making sure that we're sound with that, so we just came up short."

Senior running back Tommy Garza finished with 20 carries for 103 yards for Memorial. He closed out the game with 37 yards on the team's final possession, helping the Crusaders grind out three first downs in the final 3 minutes 41 seconds to seal the victory.

The game had the makings of a shootout early.

Memorial opened the game with a six-play, 74-yard drive that ended with a 59-yard touchdown pass from junior Alex Bray to senior Robbie Goggin. Bray hit Goggin in stride on a 10- to 15-yard slant, and Goggin's speed did the rest with 9:53 left in the first quarter.

West responded with a long kickoff returns and an eight-play, 41-yard drive that ended with a 4-yard run by freshman Peter MacCudden. The extra point was off the mark, so West settled for a 7-6 deficit with 6:25 left in the opening quarter.

Two possessions later, West was pinned deep in Memorial territory and after going three and out, a 6-yard punt left the Crusaders just 15 yards away from the end zone. Sophomore Josh Karfonta scored on a 2-yard run with 9:11 left in the half.

Those were all the points Memorial would need, but it would need a number of defensive plays to keep its lead safe. The most notable was a blitz and sack by sophomore Jaylen Campbell on first down from the West 35 with about 6 minutes left.

The play dropped West for a 13-yard loss and sent Blount to the sideline with an ankle injury. Three plays later, Rux called a punt, hoping his team would get one more shot.

It didn't happen, and now Memorial enters the playoffs on a high note. Projected to land in Division 3, the Crusaders will be among the favorites in that field.

"It was a great effort offensively and defensively. Great coaching," Garza said. "I think our whole team played very well. Outstanding."

BOX SCORE

Waukesha West 6 0 6 0 — 12 Catholic Memorial 7 7 0 0 — 14

CM: Robbie Gogin 59 pass from Alex Bray (Eric Fridl kick). WW: Peter Maccudden 4 run (kick failed). CM: Josh Karfonta 2 run (Josh Karfonta kick). WW: Conor Blount 43 run (kick failed). Total yardage — WW 265, CM 209. Total pass yardage — WW 156, CM 94. Total rush yardage — WW 109, CM 115. First Downs — WW 16, CM 13. Passing — WW 15-32-0-0, CM 5-15-0-0. Penalties WW 4-35, CM 4-0. Top rushers — CM: Tommy Garza 20-103. Top passers — CM: Alex Bray 5-15-94-1. WW: Conor Blount 15-32-156-0.