Buy Photo A Bill Freeman campaign sign is displayed in front of the Lenore Garden Apartments rental office on Crutcher Street in East Nashville. Nashville mayoral candidate Bill Freeman's company holds several contracts with the Metro Development and Housing Agency, including one with Lenore Garden Apartments. (Photo: John Partipilo / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

The Metropolitan Development and Housing Agency paid Freeman Webb, the real estate company co-owned by mayoral candidate Bill Freeman, $300,661 last year, public records show.

The public agency hired Freeman Webb to manage seven affordable housing developments and has allocated to the company 23 Section 8 vouchers, which the government uses to pay apartment owners to subsidize rent for poor residents.

The MDHA contracts represent a potential conflict of interest for Freeman if he’s elected mayor. Nashville’s top elected official appoints members to the agency’s board of directors and oversees aspects of the MDHA annual budget.

The Tennessean reviewed public records with multiple Metro departments to examine how Freeman Webb, which owns and manages apartment buildings, interacts with local government and how Freeman would navigate those potential conflicts if elected mayor. Freeman would face far more potential for conflicts — and the appearance of conflict — than any of his six competitors because of his company’s extensive real estate holdings.

In addition to the MDHA deals, other areas of potential conflicts include, according to public records:

• Freeman Webb’s nearly three dozen apartments in the city are subject to regular public safety and property standards inspections by Metro Codes, Metro Water Services and the Nashville Fire Department.

• The company pays stormwater fees for its rental properties and is subject to stormwater regulations.

• Freeman Webb pursues eviction proceedings by way of the Davidson County Sheriff’s Office.

If elected mayor, Freeman would oversee or recommend budget allocations for each of those departments.

Freeman said he is not running for mayor to enrich himself or his company, which he built after leaving his position as MDHA’s director of development in the late 1970s. In an interview with The Tennessean’s editorial board, Freeman said he would continue to make disclosures regarding his real estate interests and business dealings. He said he would put those investments in a blind trust, though he said he doesn’t have the details for how that arrangement would work.

Freeman, who is regarded as the frontrunner in the mayor’s race based on a series of internal polls released by different campaigns, acknowledged his office would be the subject of scrutiny if he’s elected. Freeman Webb has $1.2 billion in assets and is the largest owner and manager of rental properties in Tennessee. Freeman’s financial disclosures included a $123 million statement of net worth.

“I’ve disclosed tax returns, I’ve disclosed financial information — I’m the only candidate to do that,” Freeman said.

He was the only candidate to release a total net worth statement for a recent story in The Tennessean.

“We would continue to do disclosures. I would not have any interest in Freeman Webb and what the company does,” he said. “We would put those assets in a trust — we haven’t figured all that out yet.”

Dick Williams, chairman for nonprofit government transparency watchdog group Common Cause Tennessee, said comprehensive disclosure is the critical component of tracking an elected official’s potential conflicts.

Williams said that in most elections, a candidate’s business often interacts with the government and that’s why disclosure is so critical. Metro requires its top officials to file business disclosures and the state requires candidates for local office to file similar reports.

Williams said he didn’t believe Freeman Webb’s MDHA contracts would be problematic for Freeman as mayor, as long as those dealings are disclosed and kept at arm’s length.

“I don’t know that it completely shields them from the possibility of malfeasance but it at least is a step to say, ‘Hey, I know this is a potential problem, but I don’t think I ought to divest myself of things I built up over my career,’” Williams said of politicians who utilize blind trusts. “So I think it’s an attempt to steer clear of conflicts.”

Company has array of interests

Freeman Webb has been selected as the best place to work by the Nashville Business Journal and been recognized as the property management company of the year by the National Association of Home Builders.

On its website, Freeman Webb lists 35 Nashville apartment complexes that it either owns and operates or manages on behalf of another owner.

“Now we’ve got a lot of assets scattered all over the county and everything the city does one way or the other will impact something that I might have an interest in,” Freeman said in the editorial board meeting. “I’m not doing this job or trying to get this job so I can somehow have our properties treated better than they are. We’re delighted with the communities we’re in, with how the economy is going, with how the city is doing.”

By comparison, Mayor Karl Dean worked as the city’s director of law and the elected public defender before he ran for office. Before that, Mayor Bill Purcell had worked as a private practice attorney and served in the state legislature. In the 1990s, Mayor Phil Bredesen had accumulated wealth through his private health care management company Health America, but his business did not have direct dealings with Metro government.

MDHA properties

Freeman Webb was one of six firms in 2012 to bid to manage seven MDHA affordable housing developments. Freeman Webb manages the properties by providing maintenance and collecting rent.

The company is paid a combined $176,180 per year to manage those properties, according to the most recent records. The manner in which the company is paid varies, either a flat per-unit management fee or a percentage of rent revenue.

Freeman Webb also received Section 8 vouchers — 20 at Lenore Gardens apartments in East Nashville and three at Georgia Courts located west of downtown near 37th Avenue North — totaling $124,481 in the last fiscal year.

“With respect to the MDHA contracts, Freeman Webb is an expert at managing affordable housing, and as a result, competed for and won several contracts with Metro government to manage affordable housing units,” Freeman said. “If having my Freeman Webb holdings and MDHA contracts in a blind trust is not sufficient to alleviate concerns about a conflict of interest, then I will find a way to remove those contracts from my portfolio or take other steps as required.”

Like any apartment complex owner, Freeman Webb relies on city services and is subject to city regulations, especially Metro Codes, the Fire Marshal’s Office, Water Services and stormwater. The Tennessean reviewed records and found the Freeman Webb properties to be in good standing with only rare codes complaints.

The company also utilizes the sheriff’s office to initiate eviction proceedings. According to sheriff’s office records, deputies have served 2,300 eviction-related warrants at Freeman Webb properties over a 10-year stretch.

Those warrants are served at various phases during eviction proceedings and, because many tenants and landlords settle unpaid rent disputes amicably, the records do not represent the actual number of tenants kicked out of their apartments for unpaid rent.

Freeman also said he expected scrutiny if the city proposes to fix a road near one his company’s properties.

“We’ll disclose everything — every interest I have in anything, which I’ve already done,” Freeman said. “You’ll be able to look at that, you’ll know what I’m doing. If we’re improving a road and I happen to own a property near that, it will be talked about and discussed. Frankly, it will probably be harder to get that road improved than if I don’t own a property.”

Corker and Haslam used blind trusts

Putting assets in a blind trust isn’t uncommon for elected officials across Tennessee and is often used to help alleviate concerns over conflicts.

U.S. Sen. Bob Corker, R-Tenn., put his extensive real estate holdings in a blind trust when he was mayor of Chattanooga. Gov. Bill Haslam put his investments other than his stake in the family owned Pilot Flying J truck stop chain in a blind trust. Haslam disclosed a list of stocks and other investments when he initially ran for governor in 2010, and then placed those investments in a blind trust, which is managed by a third party.

Freeman said Corker is his friend and his idea of “a great mayor.” Corker owned real estate, including offices, in Chattanooga.

Freeman isn’t the only mayoral candidate who will have to confront potential conflicts if elected.

Charles Robert Bone worked as the attorney for the city’s Convention Center Authority. When he began running for mayor, Bone stepped away from that work, but his firm has continued handling the contract. Bone said his firm would give up the convention center contract if he’s elected and would not do any city work while he is in office.

Deborah Fisher, executive director of the Tennessee Coalition for Open Government, said it is important to note that Freeman Webb landed its MDHA contracts before Freeman began running for office.

“From an open government standpoint, the disclosure is important for anybody really,” Fisher said. “You have disclosure requirements because we know these situations exist when people run for office. He has some direct contracts with the government, but he got those before. The question now is (if he wins), what happens after?”

Reach Nate Rau at 615-259-8094 and on Twitter @tnnaterau.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1MBATKI