Ryan White will assume his duties in April

Ryan White

Estes Park Medical Center has selected Ryan White as its new Chief Financial Officer. He will assume his role on April 20.

White received his bachelor of arts in economics from the University of Virginia. He began his career as a financial analyst for a large health system on the east coast. Since then, he has worked with providers around the country, ranging in size from rural health systems to large, national health systems. In his current position as a senior manager at Eide Bailly, he is frequently involved in strategic planning and financial analysis for clients on issues related to the Affordable Care Act.

White has also served in an advisory role on projects including innovative care delivery models, changing payment models, and organizational structuring toward aligning for population care management. Additional projects include: community paramedic programs, patient centered medical homes, bundled payments, accountable care organizations, developing physician leadership and compensation models to align incentives and improve care coordination, as well as mining data systems to provide meaningful information for accountable care. White has also provided consulting to clients on payer contracting and reimbursement for Medicare, Medicaid, and commercial payers.

White is a member of the Healthcare Financial Management Association and the American College of Healthcare Executives.

Advertisement

"Ryan brings a proven track record of strong financial management skills, "said Brian Herwig , Chief Executive Officer at Estes Park Medical Center. "His experience in hospital finance and operational management make him an excellent fit to oversee financial operations at Estes Park Medical Center and to help us strengthen the financial and operational objectives of our organization. "Lastly, we are grateful to Sandy Begley who stepped down from her role as a board member for the Park Hospital District to fill the role of interim Chief Financial Officer. She has been a valuable asset. "