Politics: Voters seem to be sick of professional politicians screwing things up, which may explain the buzz that economist Larry Kudlow may make a run for the U.S. Senate in his home state of Connecticut.

A regular contributor to these pages, Kudlow is one of the great communicators of our times on how to return America to prosperity. That Reaganite message is fitting because he worked for the Gipper during Reagan’s first term in the White House.

The Kudlow Creed, as he called it during his 11-year tenure hosting his TV show at CNBC, is: Free market capitalism is the best path to prosperity.

If any state could use a dose of free market capitalism, it’s Connecticut, which has been run into the ground by three decades of tax-and-spend progressivism. The liberals in Hartford raised taxes two years ago — the biggest hike in state history — and the budget is still drenched in red ink.

This is a deep-blue Democratic state, but polls show Nutmeg voters care most about jobs and taxes. Who better to be an apostle for lower taxes and more jobs than Kudlow?

The entrenched Democrat is Richard Blumenthal, but what a dreadful voting record he has. Blumenthal has voted straight left on nearly every issue of the day — aye on ObamaCare, aye on the near-trillion Obama stimulus, aye on investment tax hikes, and so on.

He also supported the Iran deal, which may be what shoves Kudlow into the race. “I’m an economist, first,” he says. “But this Iran deal is one of the greatest threats in modern times to America’s security. Anyone who supported it doesn’t belong in Congress.” We second the motion.

Voters may well be drawn to Kudlow’s personal struggles as he recovered from an addiction to drugs. He talks openly and heartwarmingly about his journey away from a destructive habit that left him in a pit of despair to a new life and renewed faith in God. He now leads AA meetings and helps others battle with their addictions. America loves the story of redemption.

It would be hard to think of anyone more suited for public service than Kudlow. He is the nation’s leading voice for lower taxes, sound money, less regulation and faster growth with a rising tide that lifts all boats.

He’s writing a book now about John F. Kennedy and the tax cuts that launched the prosperity of the 1960s. “Kennedy was the precursor to Reagan,” he says. “The Democrats have abandoned JFK’s growth message.” He’s right, but then so have many austerity-minded Republicans.

If Kudlow were to win in Connecticut, the party would have an unfailing voice for prosperity policies in Washington — a voice that’s been missing since the death of Jack Kemp. Our advice: Run Larry run.