Topics: Donald Trump, Elections 2016, Islam, Muslims, News

I was in Fez lecturing to university students when the news broke that Donald Trump had called for an immediate halt to Muslims entering the U.S.

In order to contextualize the Republican candidate’s strange ascendency in presidential politics, I started explaining how Trump had gotten to this position of prominence and his role in reality television. The students were way ahead of me. Most of them had seen “Celebrity Apprentice.”

With satellite technology and the Internet, the circulation of culture and news — particularly bad news — is accelerated exponentially. By telling ourselves that Trump’s comments are extreme and that their global impact can be countered by public disavowals, as many Americans believe, we are deluding ourselves.

To young Moroccans — whose country is 99 percent Muslim and long friendly to the United States — Trump’s anti-Muslim comments were the latest sign that American culture has become increasingly hateful toward them. The global effects of speech such as Mr. Trump’s are profound here and will be long-lasting.

I was in Morocco talking about my new book, “After the American Century,” which examines how American culture travels through the Middle East and North Africa in the digital age, and what it means to politics.

Fez is a sophisticated city: the home to the world’s oldest, continually operating university (the Qarawiyyin, which dates to the mid-9th century) and a city where many of the great philosophers and scholars of both the medieval and modern period were educated or born, including Ibn Khaldun (the historian considered the founding father of sociology), the Jewish philosopher Maimonides, and the great feminist thinker Fatima Mernissi, who died earlier this month.

“I have a question,” one female student asked me. “Why Islam? Why are Muslims considered the worst by Americans?” This is a question that matters here. The student wore a black hijab. Her face was open and friendly. She looked personally wounded.

Another student followed with a related point: “Most people in the U.S. have guns. Here in Morocco we don’t have guns. We are peaceful.” The students nodded and seemed distressed that they might be thought otherwise.

The exceptional reach and uncontrolled speed with which the worst of our cultural products spread means that the ideas by which America was attractive during the last century are no longer reflective of the present one.

In the past decade and a half, there has been a seismic change in the way people in Muslim majority countries of the Middle East and North Africa understand American culture. Perceptions of the U.S. as a fair political broker in the region have plummeted since the invasion of Iraq in 2003 and the long occupation punctuated by public relations disasters like Abu Ghraib and drone attacks gone wrong.

Add to that how such news is amplified in the digital age. The profound changes in the way people access information and popular culture has accelerated the movement of all forms of popular culture, and altered the context for what has been called America’s soft power.