It’s crossover week at the legislature – that time during the session that bills that don’t have an impact on spending must pass through one chamber or the other to remain alive for consideration this year. That means you can expect long hours and a flurry of activity this week on Jones Street.

Here are just a few of the stories we’ll be watching:

E nvironmental Policy Reform – The NC House is slated to vote tonight on House Bill 795 – State Environmental Policy Act Reform. This bill would severely undermine the state Environmental Policy Act (referred to as SEPA). As the Environmental Defense Fund notes under HB 795, “review would only be required for projects that cost at least $20 million in taxpayers’ dollars or that result in permanent changes to more than 20 acres of state-owned land. This would significantly limit the number of projects that require environmental review under state law, even if tens of millions in state tax dollars are being spent.”

(The House meets at 5:30pm this afternoon if you want to contact your representative about the bill.)

Got Milk? Powdered Alcohol? How about your flu shot? – — More than a dozen bills are on the agenda for the House Health Committee this afternoon. Among the more interesting:

* Got Natural Milk. (H309) – allowing the dispensing of raw milk and raw milk products

* Prohibit Powdered Alcohol. (H290) – making it unlawful for any person to manufacture, sell, transport, import, deliver, furnish, purchase, consume, or possess powdered alcohol

* Pilot Project/Used Needle Disposal. (H712) – directs the SBI to establish a used needle and hypodermic syringe disposal pilot program to reduce the spread of HIV, AIDS, and other bloodborne diseases

* Require Hospitals to Offer Influenza Vaccine.(H925) – requires each hospital prior to discharging a patient 65 years of age or older a flu shot

Members of the Senate Health Care Committee will consider legislation on Monday to prohibit children under the age of 18 from using tanning bed equipment. The Jim Fulghum Teen Skin Cancer Prevention Act (Senate Bill 125) is intended to honor the former Wake County state representative and neurosurgeon.

A similar bill passed the House in 2013 only to die in the state Senate.

Religious Freedom returns – House Speaker Tim Moore says the Religious Freedom bills are dead for the session but that’s not stopping church groups, Bible study groups, and other conservative organizations from converging on Raleigh Tuesday for the Religious Freedom Day of Action.

Members will start their day at 9:00 a.m. at the Office of Lt. Gov. Dan Forest, 310 N. Blount Street, Raleigh.

It’s worth noting as they’re voicing support for RFRA legislation, the nation’s highest court will hear oral arguments Tuesday over same-sex marriage. Specifically, the justices will be considering the constitutionality of state bans on same-sex marriage and state refusals to recognize existing same-sex marriage. A decision in this long-awaited challenge is not expected until June.

Curtailing Teachers’ Political Activities – Also on Tuesday, the Senate Judiciary I Committee will further discuss Senate Bill 480. This bill that passed the Senate Education Committee last week prohibits teachers from campaigning for a candidate during the school day and from using a school’s computers or telephones for campaigning.

Legislative staff may have more details on some of the questions they couldn’t fully answer last week.

Interested in going? The committee meets at 10:00 a.m. in Room 1027/1128 of the Legislative Building.

Big, bad bobcats – On the lighter side, legislators will discuss this afternoon whether the bobcat should officially be named the state cat. Bobcats, which can weigh up to 40 pounds, can be found throughout North Carolina, especially in the wooded habitats of the coastal plain and the mountains.

The House Wildlife Resources Committee will vote on House Bill 161 today at 5:00 p.m.

And perhaps fittingly, members will also discuss legislation (House Bill 460) requiring individuals to report incidents involving injuries inflicted on humans by domestic or wild animals. (Note to self: Don’t try to pet the official state cat.)