An expansive, broadly defined bill moving through the Colorado Senate that seems more manifesto than legislation should be killed.

The so-called Parent’s Bill of Rights, or Senate Bill 77, aims to clarify parental rights pertaining to the education, health care and mental health of their children.

The bill, sponsored by Sen. Tim Neville, R-Centennial, was approved on party lines in the Republican-majority Senate Education Committee but will face a challenge in the Democratic-controlled House, if it gets that far.

Legislation should be specific, tailored to address particular issues. This bill creates more problems than it addresses.

It prohibits any government agency from “infringing upon the fundamental rights of a parent” to direct the upbringing, education and care of the child without first demonstrating a compelling governmental interest. That sounds good, but the nuances of the legislation are alarming.

Colorado is one of 19 states to allow parents to opt out on vaccinations for their children on philosophical grounds. This legislation would eliminate the need to even seek those exemptions. It also would require public schools to provide information about courses, materials and their sources within 48 hours of a parent’s request.

The bill would allow parents to withdraw children from class activities they object to and permit students to opt out on data collection at the district level, perhaps ultimately triggering federal sanctions.

Child advocates also say the legislation could impact sex abuse intervention — preventing a child being abused by a parent from seeking counseling without prior approval from the perpetrator.

Parents already exercise control over the education and care of their kids. If there is a specific area where that control has frayed, legislation could address it. But SB 77 does nothing more than create problems where none now exist.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.