Success builds on each success Financial leaders say Albany area is upstate jewel for 2016 due to nanotech growth

















Image 1 of / 5 Caption Close Image 1 of 5 Buy photo Albany economist Hugh Johnson delivers his 26th anniversary economic forecast for the coming year during a a breakfast meeting hosted by the Albany-Colonie Regional Chamber of Commerce on Wednesday morning, Dec. 3, 2014, at the Desmond Hotel in Colonie, N.Y. (Skip Dickstein/Times Union archive) less Albany economist Hugh Johnson delivers his 26th anniversary economic forecast for the coming year during a a breakfast meeting hosted by the Albany-Colonie Regional Chamber of Commerce on Wednesday morning, ... more Buy this photo Image 2 of 5 A view of the offices of AngioDynamics on Tuesday, Jan. 31, 2012, in Latham, NY. (Paul Buckowski / Times Union archive) A view of the offices of AngioDynamics on Tuesday, Jan. 31, 2012, in Latham, NY. (Paul Buckowski / Times Union archive) Photo: Paul Buckowski Image 3 of 5 Buy photo Exterior of Regeneron Monday, Aug. 4, 2014, in East Greenbush, N.Y. (Will Waldron/Times Union archive) Exterior of Regeneron Monday, Aug. 4, 2014, in East Greenbush, N.Y. (Will Waldron/Times Union archive) Photo: WW Buy this photo Image 4 of 5 View of the expansion works underway at the Panama Canal new Gatun Locks, next to the Atlantic Ocean on October 5, 2015 in Colon, 100 km northwest of Panama City. (RODRIGO ARANGUA/AFP/Getty Images) View of the expansion works underway at the Panama Canal new Gatun Locks, next to the Atlantic Ocean on October 5, 2015 in Colon, 100 km northwest of Panama City. (RODRIGO ARANGUA/AFP/Getty Images) Photo: RODRIGO ARANGUA Image 5 of 5 View of the gate before installed in the Pacific Locks during a media tour organized by Salini Impregilo, sub-contractor of the canal expansion project, in Panama City, on March 24, 2015. The news locks are part of a group of sixteen gates to be used for the Panama Canal expansion. (RODRIGO ARANGUA/AFP/Getty Images) less View of the gate before installed in the Pacific Locks during a media tour organized by Salini Impregilo, sub-contractor of the canal expansion project, in Panama City, on March 24, 2015. The news locks are ... more Photo: RODRIGO ARANGUA Success builds on each success 1 / 5 Back to Gallery

The Capital Region will continue to be an economic bright spot among upstate metropolitan areas in 2016.

That's according to Hugh Johnson, the chairman and chief investment officer of Albany-based Hugh Johnson Advisors, and a long-time analyst of the local economy.

Johnson will present his annual economic forecast at a breakfast meeting of the Capital Region Chamber at 7:30 a.m. Jan. 15 at the Desmond Hotel and Conference Center in Colonie.

But Johnson added that the downstate economy, powered by the financial and arts and entertainment industries, among others, will continue to outperform upstate.

Still, the Capital Region has outperformed such other metros as Rochester and Syracuse.

The region has been "one of the fastest growing regions in upstate New York over the past five years," according to Gary Keith, vice president and regional economist at M&T Bank, in a recent report on the local economy.

Keith points out that the Albany metro "is one of the few regions in the country where manufacturing employment is well above the pre-recession peak." He attributes this to the growing nanotechnology sector.

But the Capital Region also has seen strong growth in pharmaceuticals and biotech.

Tarrytown-based Regeneron Pharmaceuticals has added hundreds of jobs over the past year to its manufacturing plant in East Greenbush. With its pipeline full of promising new drugs, that growth may continue.

The region's pharmaceutical and medical instruments manufacturers do face some uncertainties in this presidential election year, Johnson cautions.

"There will be a lot of discussion about pharmaceutical pricing," he predicted.

But a federal tax that medical instrument manufacturers found onerous — it was levied as part of the Affordable Care Act — was removed in the most recent congressional budget, said Mark Eagan, CEO of the Capital Region Chamber. That's expected to save companies such as Latham-based AngioDynamics millions of dollars.

Manufacturers who depend on export markets were relieved when Congress reauthorized the Export-Import Bank, which had been allowed to expire earlier in the spring. General Electric Co., which exports more than 80 percent of its Schenectady-produced power generation equipment, had warned that the loss of the bank would cost hundreds of local jobs.

But Eagan said businesses that had been encouraged by the Cuomo administration's plans to cut property taxes and business costs were dismayed by the increase in the state's minimum wage, which he said will raise their costs.

Eagan said that might lead to less hiring and a reduction in employee hours.

Another headwind manufacturers may face is the rise in interest rates. Not only might it make financing more expensive, it also has strengthened the dollar, putting domestic manufacturers at a disadvantage as their products rise in cost.

So far, rates have edged up only slightly, and Johnson doesn't yet see them hurting such rate-sensitive sectors as the housing market.

"I don't think rates will be a problem for the housing market or the economy in general," he said last week.

That said, he doesn't expect much change in what has been a lackluster market for home sales.

"Sales may be somewhat flat," he said. "It's not going to be a really strong year. It's positive but uninspiring."

Another critical sector of the local economy is higher education. Here, too, the outlook is mixed.

Enrollment is down at many area schools, Johnson said. "The pressure on colleges and universities is going to become more intense."

At least some of this is the result of demographics. The number of people reaching college age nationwide has been declining.

The financial squeeze has led to layoffs and the elimination of programs at several area schools, most recently the College of Saint Rose in Albany, where several less popular programs were dropped.

The transportation sector may see plenty of changes over the coming year, with new, larger locks at the Panama Canal set to open in April. This is expected to send more container traffic to East Coast ports, with the Port of Albany receiving some of the shipments.

Meanwhile, the Canadian Pacific Railway, which last year sold its tracks south of Albany to Norfolk Southern Railway, is in the midst of an effort to acquire Norfolk Southern. The Capital Region is one of only a few places nationwide where the two carriers intersect.

On the passenger rail side, several Capital Region projects are nearing completion, although Eagan said the business community would like to see shorter travel times to New York City, one of Amtrak's busiest routes.

"It hasn't become a priority of the state," he said.

The Capital District Transportation Authority will introduce its mobile ticketing technology sometime this year. It also plans two new bus rapid transit routes, one from Albany to Watervliet, Troy, Cohoes and Waterford, and the other from Albany to the University at Albany, SUNY Polytechnic Institute and Crossgates Mall.

Eagan lauded what he described as CDTA's focus on economic development.

At the airport, American Airlines plans to restore nonstop service to Chicago in March, a route it and its predecessors served for eight decades before American quit the route in 2008.

eanderson@timesunion.com • 518-454-5323