Topics: Antonin Scalia, Barack Obama, Bernie Sanders, Charleston, Dylann Storm Roof, Editor's Picks, Elections 2016, Hillary Clinton, Jeb Bush, John Boehner, Marriage equality, Race, TPP, Politics News

We are numbed by Charleston; by its irrefutable proof of our still virulent racism and violent, gun-crazed culture, by being made to stare once again into the face of evil. Yet when the families of the slain stood up in court to voice forgiveness of Dylann Roof, we were startled and suddenly it was harder to divide us. Our politics is small to begin with; next to such staggering grief, it seems smaller still.

Like everyone on Facebook, Roof told us his life story in pictures. Absent the shots of him sporting the insignia of the Confederacy, apartheid and Nazi Germany, it’s hard to conceive of the Confederate flag being banished from Wal-Mart, let alone the ground of his state Capitol. Some may fly it out of mere nostalgia, but its core messages, now as always, are racism and sedition. It’s the flag of those who loved slavery more than their country; who sent hundreds of thousands to die rather than let one slave go free. A hundred and fifty years after Appomattox it is at last coming down. Long indeed is the arc of the moral universe.

The victory is more than symbolic. Fifty years ago as part of their post-Civil Rights Act national membership drive, Republicans began beaming coded racial messages to white voters. That code just got easier to crack. Fifteen years ago they began to amp up voter suppression under cover of absurdly inflated claims of voter fraud. If challenged on their motives or their facts they hurl furious denials. They can hurl all they want now. Debate has shifted. We’ve seen the pictures.

The slaughter of the Emanuel innocents was the most savage in a line of white-on-black slayings that pricked the nation’s conscience. The list of martyrs is long: Trayvon Martin, Michael Brown, Freddie Gray, Eric Garner, Walter Scott and countless others, known and unknown. Their deaths, though tragic, were not in vain. America is at last sifting through the evidence. A decade ago, most whites rejected every claim of racial disparity in our law enforcement and criminal justice systems. Now sentencing reform and cameras on cops are popular policies amongst all voters. We’ve a long ways to go, but there’s less doubt about where we’re headed.

President Obama has spoken eloquently of the millions of young black men in crisis in America. The chilling saga of Dylann Roof reminds us that millions of young white men are also in crisis. We can’t pretend to know its full nature or all its complex causes. We do know that, like young black men, young white men need better education and better jobs, better mental health services and better parenting. It’s probably time for someone to talk to them and their families as Obama spoke of and to young black men. For sure, it’s time we stop talking to them the way we do.

The right has long charged liberalism with fostering alienation, dependency, isolation and addiction among the poor — and leading minorities to reject traditional values and to see themselves as victims and whites as culprits. Now consider Dylann Roof: a jobless, stoned, opiate-abusing high school dropout who rejects such traditional values as law, order, hard work, sobriety and tolerance to vent his rage and blames his problems on a racially denominated ‘other.’

The right blames all social pathologies on the left but would howl were anyone to imply that it helped spawn Dylann Roof — or that its anti-intellectualism led any young man to forgo college or that its economic policies left anyone without the chance for a decent job at decent pay. How does a young man so ensnared rationalize his fate? Roof got many of his theories from the website of the Concerned Citizens Council—“We oppose all efforts to mix the races”—headed by the lovely and vivacious Earl P. Holt III (“Black people are the laziest, stupidest, most criminally inclined race in the history of the world”). He was a donor to at least five current or former GOP presidential candidates. But the problem isn’t confined to the dark demimonde of far right hate groups.

Young white males are dropping out of college, high school and the workforce in droves. In the reddest of states many turn to crime and drugs. They deserve better than a steady diet of racially coded conspiracy theories; better than Rick Santorum calling college a liberal trap or Mike Huckabee calling their centrist black president a “tyrant”; better than being taught each day to despise those who think different thoughts or blame those who don’t look enough like them. The toxicity of right-wing politics seeps steadily into the larger culture. It runs on infantile rage and so must infantilize white men. We must find a way to reach even the ones who seem a danger only to themselves.

Some Republicans must feel shame, or at least sense risk. Late last month was full of historic happenings and at every one Republicans seemed out of sync or ill at ease. On Wednesday the Senate sent Obama the bill authorizing fast track approval for the Trans Pacific Partnership. It was a big win for them and a bigger one for him. Passage pleased both parties’ big donors, who are after all the same people, more or less.

Some say the fight left Obama with wounds to heal but many of the wounded were Democrats in Congress, a group whose health he seldom asks after. Labor was mad but no one recalls the last time a union went off the reservation. Democratic voters tend to dislike trade deals, but if Obama’s happy they’re happy.

GOP voters really hate fast track, so House Republicans didn’t take any victory laps. Passing the bill meant breaking their sacred vow not to let Obama do anything. His continued low standing would help them in 2016. But business wanted the bill and they figured Obama’s last months in office would offer him few chances to gild his resume.

Wouldn’t you know a big one got dropped in his lap the very next day? By a 6-3 vote the Supreme Court again upheld the Affordable Care Act. The TPP was a big win for Obama but this was huge. When the case was filed, few took it seriously. When the Court took it up, opinion shifted. Why would it go to the trouble of yet another review if five justices weren’t at least thinking of voting for the plaintiffs?

The case came down to four words. Under the law the federal government may subsidize consumers buying insurance through exchanges “established by the states.” But only 13 states set up exchanges. The rest use the federal exchange. The IRS ruled that Congress meant to provide subsidies to those purchasing via the federal exchange. The Court ruled that the IRS ruled correctly.

In a rude dissent, Justice Scalia called Justice Roberts’ majority opinion “quite absurd… interpretive jiggery-pokery” that undermined the Court’s reputation for “honest jurisprudence.” The right exploded. Among GOP presidential candidates, Mike Huckabee outdid even Scalia, calling Roberts’ ruling, you guessed it, “an act of judicial tyranny.”

Only men as frivolous as Alito, Thomas and Scalia could fail to see it truly was a frivolous case. As loud as Scalia screamed that those four words could mean just one thing, Roberts was right to rule that the act’s 381,113 other words meant just the opposite. Courts give agencies wide berths to interpret statutes but as Roberts took care to emphasize, here it didn’t need to. Congress’ intent was clear.

John Boehner vowed another repeal vote—it would be the 57th— but voters want to fix the law, not kill it. Republicans keep promising an alternative plan, but in the narrow confines of their ideology there is none. Obamacare, nee Romneycare, started at the Heritage Foundation. Heritage now denies paternity but when Romneycare was signed into law, its president attended the christening. GOP dead-enders are alone now on health care. In the TPP fight their donors stood at their side, but here the insurers, hospitals and docs are all with Obama.

On Friday the Court dropped the other shoe, voting 5-4 to recognize the right of all same sex couples to marry. The Republican response to Justice Kennedy’s heartfelt opinion was predictable enough. Scott Walker said he’d amend the Constitution. Huckabee called it tyranny. Ted Cruz, sounding increasingly unhinged, preached nullification, if not outright sedition. But Jeb Bush and even Ben Carson said it was time to move on. They knew they were on the wrong side of not just history but demography, a bad place to be with an election coming on.

Watching Friday’s joyous celebration in front of the Court, it was hard to imagine anyone not wanting to join in. For decades Republicans fought same-sex marriage on religious grounds. Watching those revelers I felt as I did hearing the families who forgave Dylann Roof — glad to bear witness to such a powerful expression of love. I wanted to be there and wondered if any Republicans wished they were, too.

Later that day Obama flew to South Carolina to deliver a eulogy for the Rev. Clementa Pinckney of Charleston’s AME church. For six years even some of his staunch supporters had wanted him to address issues of race more forcefully and directly. On Friday he did all they’d asked and more. That he did it in Pinckney’s honor — and in his church — made his words more powerful still. Early on, he evoked the history of all black churches,

…‘hush harbors’ where slaves could worship in safety… rest stops for the weary on the Underground Railroad; bunkers for the foot soldiers of the Civil Rights Movement.

He then called the shootings what they were, “not random, but … a means of control, a way to terrorize and oppress.” He cited a policy or two — gun safety, voting rights — but mostly he preached about prejudice, duty, grace, forgiveness and love. The camera often cut to Boehner. who couldn’t help looking out of place. Asked once on “Meet the Press” if he believed Obama was a Christian, Boehner replied tartly, “I take him at his word.” Meaning, of course, that he didn’t. Hearing Obama preach the word, I wondered what Boehner had to say now.

It was a historic week, though to pilfer a thought from Justice Kennedy, perhaps in ways we don’t yet see. Kennedy’s and Roberts’ opinions will mean more or less depending on who our next president is. The Charleston tragedy changed us all, but in ways that will be hard to measure and impossible to prove. What seems most certain is that our politics is changing, perhaps even in a fundamental way.