Guinea’s Pesident Alpha Condé at the White House during the US-Africa Leaders Summit in August. Agence France-Presse/Getty Images

Guinea has been more successful in containing the Ebola epidemic than its immediate neighbors in West Africa, but the loss of revenue caused by the crisis has left the country in dire financial straits, President Alpha Condé said after concluding a round of meetings at the United Nations General Assembly.

Mr. Condé said Guinea would need about $100 million until December to cover its budget gap, which will grow if Ebola is not tackled by the end of the year.

“The slowing down of our economies due to Ebola requires that most of our countries get some budgetary support … it’s going to be crucial that we get that support so our economies don’t completely collapse,” he said.

Mr. Condé’s statements followed an announcement by the International Monetary Fund that it had approved a $130 million expansion of zero-interest loans that would be divided among Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia, the West African nations hit hardest by the Ebola crisis.

According to the World Health Organization, Guinea is faring slightly better than its neighbors. The organization has said that the country has seemingly been able to stabilize the rate of the infection.

Last week, the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said that in a worst-case-scenario as many as half a million to 1.4 million people could be infected by mid-January in Liberia and Sierra Leone.

Mr. Condé said the deteriorating situation in the neighboring countries must be viewed in context of the civil wars that left the health infrastructure of both Sierra Leone and Liberia in tatters.

“They are not to blame,” said Mr. Condé.

Despite the inroads made in stabilizing the Ebola epidemic, Guinea’s economy has been affected.

According to the World Bank, the country’s GDP was $ 6.2 billion last year and its economy was projected to grow 4.6 % percent this year.

Mr. Condé said that the outbreak has already shaved off 2.5 percentage points from its expected GDP growth since March of this year as the tourism industry and $30 billion worth of mining and infrastructure construction has ground to a halt.

The various projects were scheduled to begin this year and be concluded by 2018.

In May Guinea approved the $20 billion Simandou South project—touted as the largest mining and infrastructure project in Africa, involving Rio Tinto, Chinalco and the IFC. Construction on a new railway and port have now been delayed because of the epidemic.

Guinea is home to one of the world’s largest deposits of bauxite, which is used to produce aluminum. It is also has gold, diamonds and iron-ore deposits.

At the UN Mr. Condé urged world leaders to deploy a speedy relief effort and received reassurances of support from the World Bank President Jim Yong Kim—an American physician with experience in dealing with infectious diseases.

“I am on a very personal level with him. We are going to find the resources that we need, “ said Mr. Kim following a meeting with Mr. Condé.

Mr. Condé remained optimistic that if everything that was decided at the UN were to be implemented in the next two weeks Ebola in West Africa could be defeated.

“The world has known many epidemics … that have affected the west and yet Europe is still around, so Africa too will beat this. But we need to act now,” he said.

Write to Neanda Salvaterra at neanda.salvaterra@wsj.com.