The $566K grant to create a health center at the Wilbur Peck apartment complex in Greenwich to serve Greenwich Housing Authority residents.

Updated: 1:15 p.m.

Family Centers announced Wednesday that the health clinic for which a federal grant was awarded this week by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) will open this fall.

The $566,667 “New Access Points” grant – which was made possible through the Affordable Care Act – will provide the initial construction and operational funds needed to open a full-service primary health clinic located within the Wilbur Peck public housing complex in Greenwich. The clinic will be operated and staffed by Family Centers, and will serve Section 8 residents, those living in Greenwich Housing Authority complexes and the surrounding neighborhoods.

“We are beyond thrilled to be able to open this new health clinic for Greenwich residents,” said Bob Arnold, Family Centers’ President & CEO. “More often than not, access to quality healthcare services is a barrier that can hinder a person’s level of self-sufficiency, independence and overall well-being. Having this clinic located in central Greenwich right on site at Wilbur Peck will be a benefit to all residents of Greenwich Public Housing.”

Executive Director of the Greenwich Housing Authority Anthony Johnson said, “This new Community Health Center will change and save lives, increase the lifespan and improve the overall health of our residents.” He added, “We look forward to the day that the clinic opens and begins offering services.”

Work on Family Centers’ new health center will begin within the next few weeks. An opening is anticipated in late fall or early winter.

Original story: 9 a.m.

Family Centers of Greenwich is poised to receive more than $500,000 from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) to establish a new health center at the Wilbur Peck Court public housing complex.

The $566,667 grant to Family Centers is one of six announced Tuesday by HHS for Connecticut programs that will receive a total of $3,673,286 to fund new services at new and existing community health centers across the state. The grants will help increase access to health care services for more than 42,500 residents across the state.

U.S. Rep. Jim Himes said, “Today, we see the ACA continuing to support programs that serve the Southwest Connecticut residents that need access to healthcare most.”

Himes added, “Family Centers, Inc., based out of Greenwich, and recipient of a $566,667 grant to create a new health center at the Wilbur Peck Court housing development, is a vital member of the community and leading example of how access to healthcare can make a dramatic difference in people‘s lives.”

Wilbur Peck is a 110-unit apartment complex on Davis Avenue that is operated by the Housing Authority of Greenwich.

U.S. Sen. Richard Blumenthal (D-Greenwich) said in a statement, “This funding is a powerful recognition of the quality of care provided at these centers, and I applaud HHS for this important investment. Community health centers are on the front lines of public health, providing vital, primary care to families across Connecticut.”