Please enable Javascript to watch this video

Buried in the government shutdown and even the launch of Obamacare, is an increase in some flood insurance rates. It is part of the Biggert-Waters Flood Insurance Reform Act of 2012, but many of the changes occurred on October 1, 2013.

In recent years, FEMA has been giving out more money in helping with natural disasters than they have been taking in. Because of that FEMA is making some changes, meaning some people’s insurance rates will go up, while others may go down.

Life on the river can be peaceful, even serene. Don Hudson knows, he’s lived on the Rock River for 35 years.

“It's a great place to live,” said Hudson.

But there’s also a dark side to the river life,

“You're gambling,” said Hudson.

That dark side is flooding.

“Last couple of years, we didn't get any water and we thought aw heck, we don't need it, and then all of a sudden…it hit us,” he added.

Hi them with $7,000 in damage because the Hudson’s didn’t have flood insurance. They’re now getting insurance, but because they weren’t insured when the Biggert-Waters Act went into effect, they’ll be paying a lot more.

“Oh yes, ya, an awful lot more,” said Hudson.

Starting October 1, 2013, businesses, owners of homes with severe repetitive loss, those not insured, and those who have a lapse in their policy will have to pay a 25% increase in premium rates each year until they meet the full rates.

"It could definitely be hundreds, I don't know that I've seen anything go up thousands yet. Could it? Possibly," said Lynn Fox of Molyneaux Insurance.

They'll also have to fill out an elevation certificate, which will determine how much flood insurance could cost.

"They might have lower or they might have higher flood insurance," said Fox.

But for Don, the $400 cost of the certificate, plus an initial estimate of $2,700 a year for insurance,

“It means bankruptcy, cause we're, we're both retired and we only got so much, and by the time you pay all this insurance you gotta pay, it's gonna kill us,” said Hudson.

One realtor News Eight talked with said some homeowners who live near Duck Creek could see their rates jump from $1,000 a year to $6,000.