Which candidate would be most effective in improving the health care system? Tell us in the comments.

Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders has energized Democratic voters with a proposal for a $1.38 trillion single-payer health care system that he says would provide universal coverage and make medical care more efficient.

By contrast, his opponent in the Democratic primary, Hillary Clinton, is promising to defend the Affordable Care Act and make reforms to help lower deductibles and other out-of-pocket costs.

In other words, Sanders wants revolution; Clinton wants to build on what President Obama started.

If elected, each candidate could potentially have a significant impact on the nation's health care policies and the choices and costs facing consumers. Here's a guide to their proposals and how it could affect you:

Hillary Clinton

Throughout her campaign, Clinton has promised to take Obamacare a step further by lowering costs that still prevent many consumers from accessing health care.

Clinton is proposing new requirements on insurers and employers to provide up to three sick visits to a doctor per year without needing to meet your plan's deductible.

In addition, Clinton says she will institute a tax credit of up to $2,500 for an individual -- $5,000 for a family – to help pay for health costs that exceed five percent of household income.

Her proposals could make accessing health care cheaper, particularly for the middle class. But the question facing Clinton is whether she could actually get any of those proposals through a Republican-controlled Congress that is still focused on repealing Obamacare, not expanding it.

During the primary battle, Clinton is also fending off criticism from the left, with Sanders and his supporters arguing that her proposals do not go far enough to help consumers. Sanders' plan for a "Medicare-for-all" system would eliminate deductibles and co-pays entirely.

[Watch Clinton and Sanders spar on health care policy in a recent debate.]

Clinton's other main health care proposal is to prevent what she calls "excessive profiteering" by pharmaceutical companies. She has proposed to rein in those companies by requiring that they invest in research and development – instead of marketing – to qualify for tax credits.

Clinton would also impose a cap on out-of-pocket drug costs and invest more federal resources into the quicker approval of generic drugs.

In a recent fund-raising pitch, however, Sanders accused Clinton of being too cozy with the pharmaceutical industry, pointing out that Clinton has taken more in donations from drug companies than any candidate in the 2016 campaign.

Through Jan. 31, Clinton had received more than $336,000 from the pharmaceutical and health products companies, according to opensecrets.org, while Sanders has received about $44,000. In responding to Sanders' criticism in a recent debate, Clinton said, "You will not find that I ever changed a view or a vote because of any donation that I received."

Bernie Sanders

Sanders has courted Democratic primary voters with a promise of a European-style single-payer system that allow Americans to get care from any doctor without paying out-of-pocket expenses.

The $1.38 trillion-a-year plan would raise taxes on individuals and employers to make the government the sole payer for health care services. It would provide Americans with a health insurance card they could use to get all medical services.

Sanders argues that his plan would reduce health care spending by $6 trillion over the next decade and save over $5,000 a year for a typical middle class family. On his web site, he says a family of four with a household income of $50,000 would pay just $466 a year for single-payer health care, a savings of $5,800 from the average premium and deductible costs paid by middle class families.

He also says his plan would give the government greater leverage to negotiate fair drug prices for consumers.

For every day citizens, Sanders' would certainly simplify the health care system and make it easier to access medical services. But it would also put more control in the hands of government and create a costly bureaucracy.

For primary voters, the question is whether Sanders' could advance his proposal in Washington. To an even greater extent than Clinton's, Sanders' plan would create an all-out war with conservatives in Congress, and he would certainly need to get Democratic control in order to pass his proposal.

[Watch video of Bill Clinton attacking Bernie Sanders on health care]

Clinton has seized on that point in recent weeks, arguing that Sanders' plan would plunge America back into a never-ending debate over health care policy. Her husband, former President Bill Clinton, recently launched a broadside against the proposal in New Hampshire, criticizing it as unrealistic and bad for America.

Sanders has denied that his proposal would bring about broader upheaval. In a recent debate, he said he would preserve the gains made under the Affordable Care Act while "rallying the American people" to support his plan for universal coverage.