Craig Hanson, general partner at Next World Capital

Venture capital exploded in 2014, with bigger deals and more eye-popping valuations than anytime since the dot-com boom. So what happens next, and which opportunities will define 2015?

We asked several venture capital investors to reflect on the past year and give us their outlook for the next 12 months. Next in our series is Craig Hanson, general partner at Next World Capital. Mr. Hanson talks about what happens to successful enterprise software companies, companies over-fundraising and seasoned leaders of startups.

What surprised you the most about 2014?

The evolution of what happens to successful enterprise software companies has been particularly striking. It used to be that innovative enterprise software companies eventually got pulled into the orbit of the big platform companies like IBM, H-P, CA, MSFT and BMC and were acquired by them. But the huge wave toward software-as-a-service (SaaS) and cloud infrastructure companies has shifted this universe. Often, their innovative model and value to customers is so disruptive to the traditional on-premise platforms that these cloud companies are staying standalone and becoming their own center of gravity. Companies like Salesforce, Workday and Splunk have become new platforms, and newer companies like Hubspot and Zendesk are going public on their own. The enterprise technology universe is shifting, with new solar systems being created.

What do you think will be the biggest challenge in 2015?

Today’s public and private markets are rewarding high-growth cloud and analytics companies with plenty of capital to scale their businesses. When capital is less of a constraint, it takes more discipline to build a lean, efficient and high-performance company. It’s not just about growth. It’s the productivity and efficiency of that growth which makes it sustainable. Companies shouldn’t over-raise (and subsequently overspend) just because they can.

What is the biggest misconception about the venture industry, and how can VCs change that in 2015?

There’s a misconception that Silicon Valley just favors very young but passionate entrepreneurs. Certainly there are many successful young CEOs and founders. In addition, though, there’s something to be said for seasoned leaders who have gained the fortitude and depth of experience to handle good markets and bad. For first-time CEOs and repeat CEOs, a little scar tissue and the accompanying lessons learned are valuable assets.

Write to Timothy Hay at timothy.hay@wsj.com. Follow him on Twitter at @timwhay