"As head of the BPHC, Tonya Bowers manages a $5 billion federal budget that supports the health care safety net for underserved people across the country," said Health Center Partners CEO, Henry Tuttle. "We are honored to host such an influential and valuable authority on community at this year's symposium, and encourage the regional health center leadership in attendance to take advantage of the many federal funding and partnership opportunities Tonya discussed. As many grants are contingent on performance, Health Center Partners is committed to continuing to assist its members in improving quality, patient-centered care and fiscal efficiency."

Grant opportunities for Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs) in the 2016 Fiscal Year include:

$265 Million – Health Infrastructure Investment Program

– Health Infrastructure Investment Program $100 Million – Quality Improvement Awards

– Quality Improvement Awards $150 Million – Oral Health Service Expansion

– Oral Health Service Expansion $33 Million – Health Center Controlled Networks

"Community health centers that are part of a network typically perform better than their counterparts due to the invaluable resources, collaboration and information exchange offered by such consortia," said Bowers. "As we continue to shift to value-based care, health centers that demonstrate improved patient outcomes, community engagement and operational efficiency will be better positioned to receive federal funding. I applaud the regional consortia in Southern California for hosting this educational event and for continuing to connect member centers with the support structure needed for success."

Community health centers provide high quality preventive and primary health care, including dental and behavioral health services, to predominantly low income and underserved patients. Approximately one in every 14 Americans relies on HHS-funded health centers for medical care. In Southern California, Health Center Partners has 17 member health centers, Community Clinic Association of Los Angeles County has 58 members and The Coalition of Orange County Community Health Centers has 26 members. Together the three consortia serve more than 2.4 million patients each year.

For more information on Health Center Partners, please visit www.hcpsocal.org.

About Health Center Partners

Health Center Partners (formerly Council of Community Clinics) and its subsidiaries serve as the nexus for its members and partners to transform primary care through the power of innovation and collaboration. Our health policy, public affairs and advocacy efforts enhance the development of and recognition for our members who enrich the patient experience and improve the human condition through access to quality health care and related services for their diverse communities, with an emphasis on low-income and uninsured populations. For more information, visit www.hcpsocal.org.

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20160319/345991LOGO

To view the original version on PR Newswire, visit:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/health-center-partners-details-important-issues-discussed-at-15th-annual-health-care-symposium-regarding-the-affordable-care-act-and-the-future-of-community-health-centers-300244969.html

SOURCE Health Center Partners

Related Links

http://www.hcpsocal.org