The mountains have already gotten a large snow; and even families that urgently need to re-orient their way of life around a new home and neighborhood are getting sidetracked by holiday events coming up soon. But Meritage Homes – pioneers in creating attainably priced Colorado homes that are MUCH snugger and energy efficient — wants to keep your attention focused a bit longer; and has homes in a few of its fastest-selling neighborhoods that you can wrap up for Christmas.

Meritage wants families in those homes before winter – and has prices marked down as much as $30,000 to make the point. That includes at one of the most popular new areas of the year — Leyden Rock in west Arvada, where Meritage’s homes are set against a dramatic backdrop of ridges along the foothills, and where Jefferson County Schools post some of the highest rankings in the state.

Right now, at just $467,223, you can tour a Frisco 3-bedroom, 3-bath family sized home that Meritage has ready for move-in this month – 2,430 square feet plus a 3-car garage. Also, a Crestone 4-bedroom 3-bath design, over 3,200 square feet plus 3-car garage, at $549,260. Like all of Meritage’s homes in Leyden Rock, they’re close to a park with clubhouse and pool that you can see right now – with miles of trails and more parks set to arrive in coming years.

Or, you could choose to spend the holidays in your new place at Flatiron Meadows – in the Boulder County section of Erie, listed as one of the best places to live in the nation this year by Money Magazine, and served by Boulder Valley Schools.

That could be in a Salida 3-bedroom plan, 2,257 square feet plus 3-car garage, at just $459,312 – a marked contrast to prices of much older homes a few miles west in Boulder (it’ll be ready next month). Or, you can pick a Cascade ranch – three bedrooms plus a 2-½ car garage – just $429,528, ready right now.

In either neighborhood, you’ll tour an Energy Information Center that shows how much Meritage does to make all each home more energy efficient, through its state-of-the-art insulation, lighting, glazing and other components.

That’s also true on homes either ready or soon-to-be-completed in other communities up and down the Front Range – including at West Grange and at Renaissance, both in Longmont west of Airport Road on Clover Basin, close to the Diagonal and good schools ($525,514 and $562,114); and at Rigden Farm near Fort Collins’ historic downtown (just $375,500).

You can visit other communities with Meritage’s great value on energy efficient design at Fallbrook Farms in Thornton; and at Sierra Ridge and at Rocking Horse at Inspiration in Parker. In Northern Colorado, look for Meritage at Fort Collins’ Kechter Crossing and Mail Creek; at Timnath Ranch east of Fort Collins on Harmony; and at Water Valley in Windsor. Or visit MeritageHomes.com.

FSuper-energy efficient Meritage Homes ready to move in by the holidays in communities all along the Front Range, including in Arvada, Erie (Boulder County), Fort Collins, Longmont. Save as much as $30,000 if you buy now. Energy Learning Centers in all communities; Home Energy Rating System scores average below 60.

From $300s to $600s; move in soon from $375,500

Today, 11 a.m. to 5 p.m.

877-318-3310

Mark Samuelson writes on real estate and business; you can email him atmark@samuelsonassoc.com. You can see all of Mark Samuelson’s columns online at DenverPostHomes.com.Follow Mark Samuelson on Twitter:@marksamuelson