Become a fan of the Political Gabfest on Facebook. We post to the Facebook page throughout the week, so keep the conversation going by joining us there. Or follow us @SlateGabfest!

To listen to the discussion, use the player below:

Advertisement



For this week’s Slate Plus bonus segment, David, Annie, and Jamelle discuss pot reparations. Slate Plus members get an ad-free version of this podcast with bonus segments. Visit slate.com/gabfestplus and try it free for two weeks.

On this week’s Slate Political Gabfest, David Plotz, Annie Lowrey, and Jamelle Bouie discuss the war in Gaza, impeachment mania and the depths of congressional dysfunction, and the federal appeals court ruling that saved Mississippi’s last abortion clinic.

Here are some of the links and references mentioned during this week’s show:

The war in Gaza is incredibly popular among Israelis.

U.S. support for Israel is still strong, but young people tend to have a less favorable view of Israel’s use of force.

The World Bank estimates that Israel’s control of the West Bank costs the Palestinian economy $3.4 billion every year.

Although Hamas is not technically forcing Palestinian civilians to serve as human shields, many journalists have noted that the group’s disregard for civilian safety is either ignorant or manipulative.

The U.S. has provided $118 billion in economic aid to Israel since 1948.

Members of the far right like Sarah Palin and several House Republicans have called for Obama’s impeachment.

The Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee raised $2.1 million last weekend alone with email blasts about impeachment fervor.

Ironically, when the GOP House leadership failed to pass its emergency border security bill funding, they called for Obama to address the crisis through executive actions. House Republicans are currently suing President Obama over perceived executive overreach in his implementation of the Affordable Care Act.

Jonathan Bernstein argues that the GOP is now a “post-policy” party, favoring ideological purity over policy innovation.

The GOP has a serious shot at retaking the Senate this year.

A federal appeals court ruled that Mississippi’s sole remaining abortion clinic must be allowed to remain open, lest its abortion burden be placed on other states.

The Mississippi law is part of a larger push on the pro-life right to restrict abortions through health and insurance regulations such as Virginia’s abortion clinic construction standards.

Since Texas’ law restricting abortions under certain circumstances went into effect last year, abortions have dropped 13 percent statewide.

Most Americans believe that abortion should be legal during the first trimester.

Some one-party controlled states such as Kansas have attempted “real-live experiments” in conservative governing through massive tax breaks and spending cuts.

Advertisement



Jamelle chatters about A Canticle for Leibowitz by Walter M. Miller Jr.

Annie chatters about the effects of the current crisis in Ukraine on Russia’s status as a high-income economy.

David chatters about the death of the Enola Gay navigator, Theodore “Dutch” Van Kirk.

Topic ideas for next week? You can tweet suggestions, links, and questions to @SlateGabfest.

The email address for the Political Gabfest is gabfest@slate.com. (Email may be quoted by name unless the writer stipulates otherwise.)