Climate New Desert Plan Proposes Clean Energy-Conservation Balance For One-Quarter Of California CREDIT: flickr/ Chris Goldberg Wind Farm Outside of Palm Springs, California, 2014.

East of Los Angeles, Southern California stretches into a vast, mountainous, arid region that is largely unadulterated and also prime for the siting of renewable energy sources such as wind and solar power. Already home to the world’s largest solar thermal electric plant, Ivanpah, the complex dynamic between three environmental issues — land use, conservation, and global climate change — has been playing out in the desert region for several years. A new draft report released by the U.S. Department of the Interior (DOI) on Tuesday thrusts that conversation into the future.

The long-awaited 8,000-page Desert Renewable Energy Conservation Plan (DRECP), released by the DOI and the California Department of Natural Resources, lays out a landscape-level plan for more than 22 million acres in California, nearly a quarter of the state. It is the result of five years of federal and state efforts to chart a course for large-scale solar, wind, and geothermal development in the desert and inland valleys while identifying important ecological areas that are off-limits to energy development. The public will have until January 2015 to provide additional comments on the draft plan, which includes lands in Imperial, Inyo, Kern, Los Angeles, Riverside, San Bernardino and San Diego counties.

Standing in front the evidence of recent changes to the region — large wind turbines — U.S. Interior Secretary Sally Jewell announced the proposal on Tuesday, saying that areas that “shouldn’t be developed will be set aside” and “areas that should be developed will have a streamlined process.”

“This is a strong and innovative blueprint that shows how federal and state agencies can collaborate to meet conservation and energy objectives on a landscape-scale while providing certainty to developers,” Jewell said in a statement.

The plan — which would be in place for the next quarter century and is composed of about 20 percent federal lands — would designate about two million acres, some three-fourths of which is non-federal, for developing 20 gigawatts of renewable energy projects. That is a massive number and about 20 percent more than predicted by renewable energy calculator scenarios for the region, according to the draft. At the end of 2013, the entire U.S. had about 13,000 megawatts of operating solar power. Total installed wind capacity in the U.S. through first quarter of 2014 was around 61,327 megawatts.

The plan also designates more than 6.1 million acres as federal conservation lands, on top of the more than 7.6 million acres of preexisting conservation lands within the study area. While environmental groups reacted with hopeful optimism, some were prepared to express disappointment.

California Wind Energy Association Executive Director Nancy Rader said that “unfortunately, the draft plan fails to properly evaluate the limited habitat impacts of wind energy … for landscape-level planning to succeed, wind energy’s compatibility with species, habitat and the environment will need to be more properly studied and understood.”

A recent analysis by U.S. News and World Report found that wind power is responsible for between 140,000 and 328,000 bird deaths per year, far less than oil, gas, or coal.

Others expressed the opposite concern — that the plan left too much room for development in environmentally sensitive areas.

“We are ready for an end to the way projects have been approved for siting,” Barbara Boyle of the Sierra Club told the Los Angeles Times. “If the goal is reducing conflict, they are going to see a lot of agitation in the desert.”

Aside from bird deaths, which have also been shown to be a major concern for solar thermal power plants like Ivanpah, there are a number of other environmental factors at stake. These include desert tortoises, other reptiles, certain fish, plant life, tribal lands, cultural resources and recreation sites.

“I treasure the desert, and we know the beauty … that all needs protection as we move toward alternative energy,” said California Senator Barbara Boxer at Tuesday’s event. “We do know development should not be allowed in certain parts of the desert, where it doesn’t make sense, but we’re going to allow it where it does make sense. And that’s the beauty of this plan.”

California has a Renewable Portfolio Standard requiring that at least 33 percent of electricity retail sales come from renewable sources by 2020. It also recently launched its cap-and-trade program to help bring down greenhouse gas emissions statewide.

Meanwhile, the state is gripped by a record-setting drought that could foreshadow a hotter, drier future due to the impacts of climate change. The Mojave desert region that is covered under the DRECP is suffering, and even the area’s iconic Joshua trees are starting to die off due to the heat and drought. According to the Desert Sun, a local newspaper, certain estimates found that if global temperatures continue to rise as predicted due to global warming, Joshua trees could vanish from up to 90 percent of their range in Joshua Tree National Park by the end of the century.