Video: Used Cars: Watch This Before Getting One for Your Teen

Attention parents: looking to buy a car for your newly-licensed teen? Auto-safety experts say think new, think big and look for electronic stability control.

In a recent article, The Wall Street Journal reported that the number of deaths in brand-new vehicles has dropped by about two-thirds in the last decade, finding that cars are getting safer with each new model year. The trend is being driven in part by new-crash avoidance technology and the greater adoption of auto-safety features as standard equipment.

And yet teenagers, the least experience drivers, often don’t get the newest of the newest. Rather, they’re often stuck with old beat-up hand-me downs. Often, the thinking goes: why buy a new car for my teen when they may end up crashing it.

But auto-safety experts say that’s exactly why they should consider purchasing new – or newer, at least.

“Parents tell us the most important factor to them is safety,” said Anne McCartt, a senior vice president of research at the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety. “But I don’t think they’re always sufficiently knowledgeable about what makes a vehicle safe.”

In many cases, parents buy the opposite: mostly cheap, small cars with high mileage and fewer standard safety features. Of course, budget is a consideration but parents also can make wiser choices with a little education, she said.

For instance, a 2014 survey by the Insurance Institute found that when asked about safety features, most parents cite air bags and seat belts as most important. Few mention electronic stability control–a technology that Ms. McCartt says can be incredibly effective in reducing the types of crashes involving teens.

Often young drivers have trouble judging turns or go too fast around curves, which can cause them to lose control. Electronic stability control counteracts this, helping the driver keep control of the vehicle in a skid. This has been critical to preventing many rollover crashes.

Most parents cite air bags and seat belts as most important in the cars for their teens, but few mention electronic stability control, a technology that experts say can be incredibly effective in reducing the types of crashes involving teens. Reuters

While mandated on all new cars today, it wasn’t required as standard equipment until model year 2012, making it particularly important for parents to check if it’s available when buying a used car, Ms. McCartt added.

The insurance institute also advises parents to look for bigger, heavier vehicles, such as sport-utility vehicles. Although SUVs tend to have a higher rollover risk–thanks to their taller center of gravity–the advent of stability control has made them much safer to drive. When equipped with this technology, they can be a safe choice for teens, the institute says.

Auto-safety experts also suggest parents avoid horsepower–too tempting for teens to test the limits–and consider crash-test ratings whether buying new or used.

Typically, newer models will have more standard safety features, making them a better bet. Of the insurance institute’s top used-car picks for teens, most are model year 2009 or later.

Steve Robinson, who has two daughters–one 17; the other 20–said he specifically looked for slightly used models with low-mileage and a range of safety features.

“I didn’t want them driving a junker with crappy tires, sliding off the road and into a ravine,” said Mr. Robinson of Canton, Ohio. “I wanted them to have all the newer technology, the side air bags and what not.”

He ended up giving his elder daughter his 2012 Chevrolet Impala, formerly used as a company car, and buying a 2011 Jeep Liberty for his younger daughter.

Mr. Robinson admits he wasn’t aware of the effectiveness of electronic stability control, adding that “it’s not something I actively looked for.”

However, he was quick to point out that both his daughters’ cars have it. He did at least check.

Darlene Fanizzi, who recently bought a new Honda Accord for her 18-year-old son, said the safety features were critical to her decision, particularly the air bags and the car’s performance in crash tests.

“My husband said [their son] will be happy with whatever car we get him, but me, the mom, would like a Hummer or tank around him,” she said. After considering several used models and a subcompact Honda Fit, they settled on the new Accord, which she felt “put a little more car around him.”

“You have these little postage-size cars that seem like little death traps,” Ms. Fanizzi said. However, she hadn’t considered electronic stability control and was surprised to learn of its effectiveness, adding “you’d think air bags trump all.”