ALBUQUERQUE (KRQE) – Skip school and lose your license? For teen drivers it could happen.

A state senator is pushing for just that, hoping to hold students more accountable. He says it’s a ‘simplified version’ of a bill that he’s looked at before, adding there’s less controversy around it now.

Playing hooky in the classroom could soon cost New Mexico teen drivers.

“Ten or more unexcused absences makes you habitually truant,” Senator Craig Brandt said.

Brandt, a Republican out of Rio Rancho, is behind a bill looking to crack down on those skipping school.

“Teachers can’t teach if the student isn’t in the classroom,” he said.

Under his bill, if a student becomes habitually truant, a letter goes home to the parents.

“It gives them two weeks to contact the district to appeal the unexcused absences.”

If 30 days go by, a letter then automatically gets sent to the MVD. If a student has their driver’s license or is close to getting it, it could be revoked or not given to them at all.

Brandt’s tried this before. The last two years he introduced a longer version of the same bill, but couldn’t get it out of committee. He’s hoping this year’s different.

Not everyone is a fan of his idea, however. Teens aren’t. “I honestly don’t think that’s fair,” Jessica Dragon, a junior at West Mesa High School said.

That was a common response KRQE News 13 heard from many high school students.

“I think taking their license away isn’t going to do anything,” Dragon said. “It’s just another way they can’t get to school.”

Parents, though, seem to be on board.

“I think it really is a good idea,” Marlene Lizer said. “The kids do need to stay in school and if they are missing school they need to take their license away.”

With this bill, the juvenile probation office would also be notified if those absences rack up. That way, they can look into whether or not a child may be being neglected.

Brandt says truancy affects boys more than it does girls. He hopes this bill would put a dent in the dropout rate and increase graduation.