Longmont city council on Tuesday will discuss how many people to hire to start the oft-discussed but never-implemented sustainability plan.

The plan, with seven focus areas, sets goals for the city to consider economic, environmental and social factors when planning for the future. This way of thinking is known as the Triple Bottom Line model, referring to the effects on the community beyond traditional profit and loss.

In 2010, city staff presented a draft plan to council after two years of working with a consultant and soliciting feedback from a wide range of community members and organizations.

The council discussed the plan extensively, some council members singling out a draft objective to ensure all members of the community are able to meet their basic needs as not the role of a municipal government.

The City Council shelved the plan indefinitely in 2011 until a council with mostly new members resurrected it in May, directing staff to bring it back with a timeline and measurable goals.

Now the plan must be further updated from its 2011-stage, complete with new rounds of public involvement which would piggyback on to the Envision Longmont planning already underway.

The problem: Longmont public works and natural resources staff are already busy with flood recovery work, and no one has time to also serve as sustainability coordinator to implement the plan, public works manager Dale Rademacher wrote in a council memo.

Advertisement

To start implementing the plan, the council has the options of hiring both a consultant and a new sustainability coordinator this year, hire a consultant this year and the coordinator in 2016 or to hire a consultant and a temporary sustainability staff member this year and evaluate the temporary position when the plan is done.

Staff are estimating that the consultant would cost anywhere from $20,000 to $30,000 that can be offset with a $10,000 grant from Boulder County. A draft scope of work for the position specifies that the prospective consultant should come up with concrete goals that "acknowledge community values and input" and are "realistic and achievable."

Additionally the consultant would be expected to meet with each of the city's five advisory boards as well as with staff in the public works and natural resources, power and communications, community services and planning departments.

If the sustainability coordinator is hired, that position will be funded from water, stormwater, power and communications, sanitation, wastewater and street revenues.

Karen Antonacci: 303-684-5226, antonaccik@times-call.com or twitter.com/ktonacci