LOS ANGELES — Rockies relief pitcher John Axford will continue his leave from the team so he can care for his 2-year-old son after a rattlesnake bite.

The Rockies on Sunday placed Axford on the restricted list, a roster move that allows them to bring the right-hander back on a day’s notice. Axford had been on the family medical emergency list, but that move expired Sunday.

“It gives us a little bit more time is all,” Rockies manager Walt Weiss said. “It’s a day-to-day situation.”

Axford remains in Denver where his son, Jameson, underwent surgery last week to fight an infection in his right foot. Jameson was bit twice by a rattlesnake last month in the backyard of a rental house near Scottsdale, Ariz.

He was moved to Denver from a Phoenix-area hospital by medical emergency flight to be closer to a plastic surgery specialist. And Jameson on Friday left the intensive care unit for the first time.

Axford, who pitched in the Rockies’ season-opening series at Milwaukee before leaving the team, has been keeping game-ready while in Denver, Weiss said.

“He’s been staying in shape and throwing, keeping his arm in shape,” Weiss said.

Scott Oberg was called up from Triple-A Albuquerque to replace Axford in the Rockies’ bullpen. He made his major-league debut last week at San Francisco.

Roster move coming. The Rockies will need to make room on their 25-man roster for Jorge De La Rosa’s return to the rotation Monday. That likely means Christian Bergman will be optioned.

Bergman, who was on the opening-day roster for the first time, started a game in San Francisco last week and was available in the bullpen Saturday and Sunday in L.A.

Weiss said he has not yet decided on the roster move. “We’ll wait as long as we need to on that one,” he said.

Anderson in a good place in L.A. Dodgers starter Brett Anderson, who left Colorado after last season after the Rockies declined his contract option, said he’s doing much better with his new team. He’s healthy and, after Hyun-jin Ryu went down with a shoulder injury, Anderson moved into the No. 4 spot in the Dodgers’ rotation.

“Even if you pitch bad, it’s still better than being on the side,” Anderson said. He pitched just eight games for the Rockies in 2014 after a broken finger and a bulging disc in his back sidelined him.

“It was tough, but you can’t feel sorry for yourself,” Anderson said. “I still get to come to the field. I’m a baseball rat.”

Anderson is 1-0 with a 3.27 ERA in two starts for L.A. He’ll pitch Monday at San Francisco.

Nick Groke: ngroke@denverpost.com or twitter.com/nickgroke