Kristy Slaughenhaupt, executive director of the Cañon City Pregnancy Center, second from right, is presented with a check for $6,429 from Cañon Signature Mortgage owners and operators Dave and Lynda Lambert, front row from left, Marc Baluch, general manager for KRLN/Star Country Radio; Ginny Hadley of Hadley Western Wear and Lilly; second row from left John Marietta of Coldwell Banker Fremont Realty and Kari Jacobs of KRLN/Star Country Radio; Pam Marietta of Coldwell Banker Fremont Realty; and in the back row, Lobo Loggins of KRLN/Star Country Radio and Fremont County Commissioner Tim Payne. ( Carie Canterbury / Daily Record )

Fremont County families struggling to meet the needs of their young children and babies can rest a little easier knowing the Cañon City Pregnancy Center is there to help in tough times.

Recently, the center was surprised to learn that the community would ban together to help raise more than $6,400 in 30 days so staff and volunteers could continue to provide essentials for expectant moms, young families, single dads and even grandparents trying to feed and clothe their little ones.

Dave and Lynda Lambert of Cañon Signature Mortgage and KRLN/Star Country Radio partnered to have a 30-day fundraising campaign to benefit the center.

"I was absolutely blown away," said Kristy Slaughenhaupt, executive director of the Cañon City Pregnancy Center. "Typically when we have a fundraiser, it is something we work weeks and weeks and weeks to put together, then we work all weekend to do a fundraiser and then my staff and volunteers are exhausted, and then we come back on Monday and do it all over again.

"This was one of those things that just poured into us as staff and volunteers."

The kickoff of the campaign was the Lamberts' commitment to match the first $1,000 contributed by the community. They had no idea how successful the project would be.

"When we agreed to match up to the first $1,000, we were a little scared the first week," Lynda said. "But everyone just really came together — we were very lucky."

Advertisement

Dave said he is pleased that because of the campaign, so many more community members are more aware of the center and how it helps local residents.

"One of the coolest things that happened at the radio station was when a lady came in and dropped off an envelope of $300 cash," said Marc Baluch, general manager for KRLN/Star Country Radio. "She just wanted to be part of it, and I thought that was really neat."

Baluch said it was important to be part of the fundraising blitz because the station has committed to support children and veterans in the community.

"The community outpour to us has been absolutely a blessing to us," Slaughenhaupt said. "It's been amazing."

The radio station and Cañon Signature Mortgage also hosted a breakfast fundraiser and left donation envelopes at local businesses that still may be turned into the pregnancy center at 508 Greenwood Ave.

"This will go toward the needs of our clients," Slaughenhaupt said, "car seats, formula, diapers, education — all the different programs that we do."

The center served more than 2,300 people in 2012, ages 14 to 76. For more information, visit http://canoncitypregnancycenter.com/cms2/" title="canoncitypregnancycenter.com">canoncitypregnancycenter.com.