Metz Culinary Management

Alexis Kropp-Kwon has been hired as a marketing and communication specialist. Kropp-Kwon received a Bachelor of Arts degree from Rosemont College.

Janet Weis Children’s Hospital

Muhammad Qureshi, M.D., and Yuliya Zinger, M.D., have joined the hospital as pediatric neurologists. Qureshi completed his medical degree at Dow Medical College, Karachi, Pakistan. Zinger completed her medical degree at Ross University School of Medicine in West Indies, Dominica.

Eye Care Specialists

Dr. Daniel J. Lutz recently joined Glaucoma Center. Lutz received his Bachelor of Science degree in chemistry from The College of New Jersey, Ewing, New Jersey. He received his medical degree from Rutgers – Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick, New Jersey.

King’s College

• Margaret Kowalsky has been named director of study abroad. She earned a master’s degree in theological studies from Harvard Divinity School and a Bachelor’s Degree in history of religion from Wellesley College.

• Father Patrick Ryan, S.J., the Laurence J. McGinley Professor of Religion and Society at Fordham University, will deliver the 2015 Feast of St. Francis lecture at 7 p.m. Oct. 27 in the Burke Auditorium.

Dimeco Inc.

David D. Reynolds, M.D., has joined the board of directors, serving as the 10th board member. Dr. Reynolds graduated magna cum laude with a Bachelor of Science from Wilkes University and then went on to Drexel Hahnemann University to complete his Doctor of Medicine.

Wilkes University

Ken Klemow, professor of biology and geoenvironmental science, has co-authored a new study, “Stream Vulnerability to Widespread and Emergent Stressors: A Focus on Unconventional Oil and Gas,” published in the peer-reviewed journal, The Public Library of Science, about streams in the Marcellus shale region of Pennsylvania, New York and West Virginia that are at an intermediate risk due to unconventional oil and gas (UOG) development.

Misericordia University

Jennifer M. Black, Ph.D., assistant professor of history and government at Misericordia University, recently presented on business history and public history at national and international conferences. Black presented “Unlikely Partners: Admen and Reformers in the Progressive Era,” at the 2015 joint meeting of the European Business History Association and the Business History Conference held in Miami, Florida, presented “Teaching Otherness through Images” at the 2015 annual meeting of the National Council on Public History (NCPH), in Nashville, Tennessee and presented “Image or Object? Autograph Albums and the Materiality of Advertisements,” at the Visual Studies Research Institute at the University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California.

Better Homes and Gardens Real Estate

Dennis Farrelly has been promoted from Realtor to general manager of the Carl Maurer team. Before joining the team, he was the sole propietor of Sneakers Unlimted.

Greater Scranton Chamber of Commerce

• Mari Potis, of Clarks Summit, was promoted to the position of director of membership and events. Working directly with Potis will be Tina Bechaver, of Covington Township. Bechaver has been promoted to the position of membership and events assistant.

• Dr. Emil Dilorio, chief executive officer of Coordinated Health, will be the keynote speaker at an event held by the Greater Scranton Chamber of Commerce, along with the Greater Wilkes-Barre and Hazleton Chambers of Commerce, the Scranton/Wilkes-Barre Railriders and Coordinated Health. Dilorio will present “The Affordable Care Act and the Empowered Employer: How Organizations Can Retake Control of their Healthcare Costs White Improving the Quality of Care and Health of their Employees,” at 4:30 p.m. Oct. 22 at PNC Field.

Wilkes-Barre General Hospital

• Commonwealth Health has announced the addition of Victor Corpuz, M.D., to the hospitalist program. He earned a Bachelor of Biological Science degree from the University of California, Irvine, California, and a Doctor of Medicine degree from Ross University School of Medicine, Dominica, West Indies.

• Dr. Kalyani Meduri, M.D., has joined the medical staff specializing in gastroenterology. She is a graduate of Osmania Medical College, India.

Pocono Medical Center

Dr. Lan Su has been welcomed to the comprehensive and compassionate team of providers and physicians as part of the Pocono Internal Medicine Specialist practice. She conducted research in endocrinology at Johns Hopkins University gaining exposure and experience with chronic medical problems such as diabetes, hypertension and obesity.