Over the weekend, TheBlaze received a few tips from readers that the White House and President Barack Obama’s Twitter accounts completely skipped any mention of the 72nd anniversary of Japan’s deadly attack on the U.S. at Pearl Harbor.

With those tips in mind, we went to investigate.

First we looked to see just how many tweets were posted by the White House and Obama on Dec. 7. The president’s official account – run by Organizing for America – had four tweets: two were encouraging people to sign up for Obamacare over Christmas and New Year’s, and two tweets were promoting Obama’s weekly address – and not one mention of Pearl Harbor.

There were also no references to Pearl Harbor on the White House’s official Twitter account Saturday; all of those posts were focused on the message from the president’s weekly address.

In contrast, and as one tipster pointed out, following the death of former South African leader Nelson Mandela on Thursday, the president’s individual account featured a few quotes from Obama’s address on Mandela, sandwiched between more plugs for Obamacare enrollment.

Now, it’s obvious that the death of a world leader deserves mention. But when such mentions outweigh mentions of a historic anniversary, some of you were wondering if that’s just a little odd.

The White House Twitter account posted multiple tweets about Mandela’s death and Obama’s statement about his passing, as well as a tweet from the first lady. Here’s a sample of a few:

Between the White House’s, the president’s and the first lady’s accounts on Dec. 5, there were 20 mentions of Nelson Mandela’s death posted on social media by the administration.

While the president and the White House did not use Twitter to address the anniversary of the attack on Pearl Harbor, the White House on Thursday did issue a presidential proclamation marking Saturday, “National Pearl Harbor Remembrance Day.”

The White House did not comment to TheBlaze about the decision to leave Pearl Harbor off its Twitter account Saturday.

–

Follow Mike Opelka on Twitter – @stuntbrain