By of the

One of Wisconsin's newest public companies sees an opportunity in the changes coming in health care.

Milwaukee-based Physicians Realty Trust, which trades under the stock symbol DOC, netted $123.8 million in a recent initial public offering. The company buys buildings such as physician clinics and medical labs and rents them out to health care providers.

With an aging population of baby boomers needing care, and with further consolidation of providers likely under the Affordable Care Act, Physicians Realty expects to gain a profitable slice of the $3.5 trillion U.S. health care business, said John Thomas, president and chief executive.

"Any projection you look at, it's growing to a $4 trillion business by 2020," Thomas said. "Then you have the influence of the Affordable Care Act on health care policy in a big way. We're agnostic to that policy as policy, but it is a driver of the near-term opportunity, which in particular is hospitals."

Thomas said the new law, which requires Americans to have health care insurance coverage, is leading hospitals to join together and create bigger organizations. At the same time, doctors are joining with other doctors, and more are becoming employees of hospitals. That affects the medical real estate market, he said.

"It gives us the opportunity to participate in that dynamic by being there and ready to buy," Thomas said.

Physicians Realty has 20 properties, including one in West Allis and another in Shawano. Both Wisconsin buildings are leased by Aurora Health Care.

Physicians Realty Trust, a real estate investment trust, or REIT, grew out of two funds run by B.C. Ziegler & Co., an investment firm formerly based in Milwaukee but now headquartered in Chicago.

"They raised money from private investors and went and invested that in medical office buildings," Thomas said. "Those funds had a 10-year life to them, so they either had to liquidate the assets and distribute cash, or one of the options was to essentially convert those assets into a public company and deliver stock back to the original investors."

Two of the Milwaukee company's four top executives — Physicians Realty Trust has five employees total — come from Ziegler, where they managed the health care real estate funds. They are chief investment officer John Sweet and Mark Theine, senior vice president of asset and investment management. The other executive is John Lucey, who is senior vice president for principal accounting and reporting officer. Lucey previously was director of financial reporting with Assisted Living Concepts Inc.

Thomas joined Physicians Realty Trust after working as an executive vice president at Toledo, Ohio-based Health Care REIT Inc., where he was responsible for managing more than $5billion in medical facilities and overseeing acquisition and development of medical properties.

Thomas also had been general counsel for Baylor Healthcare System in Dallas, a multibillion-dollar health care system. That's where he met the man who would become Physicians Realty Trust's chairman — former Wisconsin Gov. Tommy Thompson. Thompson was secretary of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services at the time.

"I was working with HHS on a number of policy initiatives and just met Tommy through that process and struck it off personally. Since he left government, he and I have worked together on a number of business things," Thomas said.

Physicians Realty Trust has about $200 million in assets at present. The firm's goal is to become one of the nation's largest health care REITs, Thomas said.

"We believe in the next three to five years we can grow to become a multibillion-dollar REIT," Thomas said. "It's not our intention or plan to build a portfolio and then sell our company to somebody else. We're trying to build a sustainable REIT."