MANCHESTER, N.H. — Gov. Christie derided House Republicans on Thursday, comparing their infighting to “Game of Thrones,” an HBO fantasy show rife with palace intrigue, Machiavellian plots and assassinations.

AP FILE PHOTO Gov. Chris Christie

Christie, a candidate for the Republican presidential nomination, said the American people were tired of the “ugly” drama in Congress that led Rep. Kevin McCarthy, R-Calif., to withdraw unexpectedly from the race for speaker Thursday.

McCarthy’s abrupt exit set off a scramble for the top job in the House. He had been expected to succeed Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, who was planning to retire in the coming weeks after years of struggling to unify the GOP caucus.

Republicans control both chambers of Congress, but the House contingent has become increasingly splintered between moderate lawmakers open to compromise with President Obama and conservatives who would prefer to buck the president on major issues. In the end, not even McCarthy, the GOP’s current majority leader, could muster the 218 votes needed to become speaker.

For Christie, McCarthy’s exit was the latest example of the egotistical “dysfunction” in Congress. He reacted to the news with weary indifference — but he also seized on it to reinforce his own anti-Washington campaign message.

“Nobody in America cares,” Christie told reporters after an event at a manufacturing plant.

“This is ‘Game of Thrones,’” Christie said, referring to the bloody HBO drama. “Who’s going to get the title, and who’s going to sit in the special big chair, and who’s going to get the great table at the restaurant in Washington. What the American people want is a Congress that actually does something.”

Christie had not endorsed McCarthy and declined to say who should succeed Boehner. Instead, he called for a “strong” leader and urged Republicans to pass legislation that would repeal Obama’s signature health-care legislation — the Affordable Care Act — as well as measures to restructure the federal tax code and defund Planned Parenthood.

“I just hope that whoever they ultimately settle on will be somebody who will have support inside the caucus and be strong enough to actually do something,” Christie said. “This president should be forced to veto tax reform if that’s what he wants to do, he should be forced to veto a repeal and replacement of Obamacare. He should be forced to veto these things so the American people know who the obstructionist is in Washington, D.C. Right now, they can only conclude it’s the Congress.”

Some of the most conservative House Republicans agree with Christie on the need to defund Planned Parenthood. But like Boehner and McCarthy, Christie said he did not support efforts to defund Planned Parenthood by shutting down the federal government. That puts the governor at odds with 151 Republicans who voted last week against a bill to keep the government running because it included money for Planned Parenthood.

“It is a fundamental failure of the people who run the government to have the federal government shut down,” Christie said. “What the hell are you doing?”

The remarks came in Christie’s 27th town hall-style event this year in New Hampshire. Strategists say the state, which holds the first presidential primary, is crucial to his chances of winning the GOP presidential nomination.

Despite his frequent travels to New Hampshire — Christie is holding six town halls in the state over three days this week — he has struggled to make inroads. A poll by NBC, The Wall Street Journal and Marist University released Monday showed Christie had the support of 7 percent of New Hampshire’s likely GOP voters, virtually unchanged since he declared his candidacy in July, when he had 6 percent.

The poll showed Christie in sixth place among GOP candidates. Businessman Donald Trump led the field at 21 percent, the poll showed, followed by former Hewlett-Packard chief executive Carly Fiorina at 16 percent.

Email: rizzo@northjersey.com