Reprinted from MEDICARE ADVANTAGE NEWS , biweekly news and business strategies about Medicare Advantage plans, product design, marketing, enrollment, market expansions, CMS audits, and countless federal initiatives in MA and Medicaid managed care. Sign up for an $87 two-month trial subscription today .

Pharmaceutical costs in Medicaid managed care programs that “carve in” pharmacy benefit management and thus let insurers handle it are 14.6% lower in terms of average net cost per prescription than in “carve-out” Medicaid states, according to a new study done for trade group America’s Health Insurance Plans (AHIP) by consulting firm The Menges Group. The study comes at a time when, as AHIP notes, some additional states are considering carving out their pharmacy benefit oversight as a way to lower costs via benefiting from the clout of large pharmacy benefit manager (PBM) firms.

The overall conclusion in the 12-page study report released by AHIP April 1 is that the differential in cost per prescription in the 28 Medicaid managed care organization (MCO) states using carve-ins versus the seven carve-out states meant $2.06 billion net savings in state and federal expenditures in federal fiscal year 2014. Menges found that the seven carve-out states had a 20% hike in net costs per prescription from fiscal 2011 through fiscal 2014, while there was just a 1% increase for the six states that recently switched from a carve-out to a carve-in model. The seven carve-out states thus missed a total of $307 million in fiscal 2014 savings that they could have had with a carve-in model, according to the report.

But the Menges study also notes that because the pharmaceutical carve-outs typically utilize a fee-for-service framework that “uses brand drugs (where very large rebates occur) more extensively” than in managed care, overall rebates per Medicaid prescription were $7.46 higher in those FFS states than in the carve-in states. This rebate differential, though, “does not come close to offsetting the initial unit cost differential” resulting from greater use of generic drugs in the carve-in setting, the report asserts.

Rebates Have Drawn States to Carve-ins

Menges acknowledges that “Medicaid rebates have played a significant role in the decision-making of the states that have opted for the carve-out model.” The Affordable Care Act (ACA), however, the study notes, extended the federal Medicaid rebates on prescription drugs “to medications paid by MCOs” from the previous requirement for such rebates just in the FFS setting and thus “essentially eliminated the rebate-related financial advantages of the carve-out model.”

The report also points out “some stakeholders contend” that a pharmacy carve-out is more “user-friendly for physicians and pharmacies” because there then is a single Medicaid formulary and set of prior-authorization policies. However, growing IT sophistication among payers and providers makes the administration of multiple payer policies “much more automated and less burdensome than was previously the case,” the report says. And a carve-in approach yields many administrative efficiencies in such aspects as accessing pharmacy data and integrating the data into an MCO’s “overall coordinated care program.”

On the other hand, the ACA’s health insurer fee also applies to the pharmacy benefit portion of for-profit Medicaid plans’ pay, so states generally are having to reimburse that to make insurers whole, the study acknowledges. No such insurer fee — and state reimbursement for it — applies in pharmacy carve-outs, Menges notes.

If this is a minus for carve-in pharmacy arrangements, it is more than made up for in the advantages of carve-ins, the report suggests. Point-of-sale payments in carve-in states amount to far less in terms of cost per prescription, according to Menges’ research, even after the impact of rebates is figured in.

And Menges’ analysis of six states that switched from carve-outs to carve-ins between the end of fiscal 2011 and the beginning of fiscal 2014 found their overall Medicaid costs per prescription fell by 6% on a pre-rebate basis during the period.

The Pharmaceutical Care Management Association (PCMA) trade group, which represents PBMs, says Menges in an earlier study had suggested the main problem is states underutilizing the tools already available from PBMs and elsewhere. That study, PCMA tells MAN, “found that modernizing Medicaid pharmacy benefits could save $74.4 billion without cutting either benefits or enrollees. Proven savings tools — including negotiating competitive pharmacy dispensing fees, encouraging even greater use of generics and preferred brands, reducing waste, and implementing pharmacy networks — have long been used by many private-sector employers, union plans, Part D, and Medicaid managed care plans, but are still underutilized by many state Medicaid programs.”

View the AHIP study by visiting the April 9 From the Editor entry at MAN's subscriber-only Web page: www.aishealth.com/newsletters/medicareadvantagenews.

© 2015 by Atlantic Information Services, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Get more hard-hitting news for health plans, PBMs, pharma companies and employers in AIS's Drug Benefit News. Sign up for an $86 two-month trial subscription today!