<p>Tracy Foster of Clinton, left, named Mother of the Year by the Tennessee Justice Center, strikes a pose with her 19-year-old daughter, Samantha. (TENNESSEE JUSTICE CENTER/SPECIAL TO THE NEWS SENTINEL)</p>

By Bob Fowler

A Clinton woman who became the face of a defeated Insure Tennessee effort ? shown weeping in another woman's arms in a front-page Nashville Tennessean photo ? has been named a "Mother of the Year" by the Tennessee Justice Center.

Tracy Foster, 40, afflicted with a long list of health care woes, was recently honored by the small, nonprofit law and advocacy firm, based in Nashville.

The Tennessee Justice Center in a news release said Foster won the award for her "courage and tireless dedication to advocating for desperately needed health care for herself and all Tennesseans."

The organization on its website says its current focus is "making sure that Tennessee families have access to the health care they need."

Foster, born with a hereditary heart disease, was diagnosed with bladder cancer three years ago and lost TennCare coverage during her treatment.

Foster became interested in the Insure Tennessee plan announced by Gov. Bill Haslam in December after months of negotiations with federal officials.

A senate committee vote in February killed the plan, and a last-ditch effort to resurrect it failed.

The plan was to offer federally-funded health insurance to 280,000 residents in the "coverage gap" ? they didn't qualify for TennCare but didn't make enough money to get subsidies through the Affordable Care Act, also called Obamacare.

Foster said she sought assistance from the Justice Center.

"Too many people are suffering without insurance," she said Thursday.

The center sought TennCare coverage but learned bladder cancer didn't qualify, according to its news release.

Although she was in pain from her illnesses, Foster traveled to Nashville when the state senate committee was voting on Insure Tennessee.

"When legislators voted no, Tracy wept," the news release said. "Her grief-stricken face soon became the iconic image on the front page of the Tennessean."

After Insure Tennessee's defeat, Foster said she continues to hand out fliers and pamphlets endorsing the program, but her health prevents her from attending rallies. She said she feels there is still some way that Gov. Bill Haslam can still push the program forward.

"There are just too many people suffering without health insurance," she said.