Rapid City, SD

In less than one month, the public in Rapid City will vote on a proposed $180-million expansion of the Rushmore Plaza Civic Center. As the campaign heats up, opponents have enlisted support from well-known former city leaders.

So if it's a contest between the current Rapid City mayor and former mayors, opponents of the Rushmore Plaza Civic Center expansion have the lead, five to one.

Mayor Sam Kooiker supports the planned expansion and upgrade in existing facilities to meet Americans with Disabilities Act requirements. But former mayors Alan Hanks, Jim Shaw, Ed McLaughlin, Keith Carlyle and Jerry Munson are against it. Munson says the project would be an unwise risk of city tax dollars.

"We have three issues or three talking points that are our main concerns," Munson says. "it's too big. It's too costly. And it's too risky."

With projected interest rates on bonds over 30 years, the project will cost more than $300 million to pay off. Munson says if rates exceed projections it could be $400 million. He says that's a heavy burden on sales-tax revenues in the city that could take away form other needs, while focusing payments on a 19,000-seat complex unlikely to be filled.

Meanwhile, Munson says, the existing civic center, which originally had a 10,000 seat capacity that has been reduced to about 8,500 as concerts demanded larger stages and more related show space, is rarely filled.

"When's the last time we filled this one," he says. "And even if we did, is it often enough to warrant jumping to a 19,000-seat facility?"

Munson says the plan is flawed deeply enough to unite five former mayors who have disagreed on other issues in the past.

"You have five mayors still living in Rapid City who come together on a single issue," Munson says. "And that's historic."

Munson says they want to defeat the $180 million plan in the public vote and begin shaping one the city can afford and fully use.

Proponents of the expansion plan continue to argue, however, that it fits for Rapid City and its future. Civic Center Board Chairman Jeffrey Bailie says the current civic center was considered an oversized risk 40 years ago.

"You know, back in '72, the thought of a 10,000-seat arena really was unsettling to our small community at the time," Bailie says. "But over the years I think we've proven that it can be utilized."

The civic center was a hit and was paid off in 1992, eight years early. Bailie expects similar success from this unsettling project, which he argues moves the city forward in positive and essential ways.

It's a mistake to focus on filling the 19,000-seat capacity, he said.

"When they say 19,000 seats, we need to keep in mind that that would be a very rare event. Most of our shows will not be 19,000 . We recognize that. What's more important is the versatility of the facility."

The ability to house larger events and conventions, an expanded stock show or Lakota Nation Invitational tournament, or house multiple events at once, with upgraded infrastructure that meets today's needs is the key, Bailie says.

He'll make that argument leading up to the March 10 city election, with five former mayors lined up to debate.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.