Two metro siblings who support each other through their developmental disabilities are getting a helping hand.

Central Oklahoma Habitat for Humanity is known for building new homes, but they also fix existing homes in disrepair.

The siblings' story lead to a massive home renovation.

Josh and Rosalyn Tran's parents both died in 2008 and Josh said he would work hard alongside any volunteers who offered to help him and his sister.

“Pretty awesome,” Tran exclaimed.

The sound of repairs to his dilapidated house has Josh Tran more excited than he has been in a long time.

“He is a good kid and he's always smiling, he is never down,” said family friend Vicki Stewart.

Josh and his sister, Rosalyn, live in the home. The siblings are disabled and have not been able to pay for repairs since their parents both died within seven months of each other in 2008. To make matters worse, the parents’ hospice worker stole the family's life savings.

“I mean literally every dime that these people had, so what Josh and Rosalyn have is what Josh makes at work,” Stewart said.

“We do as much as we can, do what we can,” Tran told News 9.

The front door they had on the home was too small.

“It was like a bedroom door on the front door and it had a gap probably that big underneath it where wind and snow and everything blew in it,” Stewart explained.

Then someone broke in and stole their TVs.

So when so much has been taken from the Trans, the Central Oklahoma Habitat for Humanity's Critical Repair Program is happy to be giving them a safer home.

The Critical Repair Program helps low-income homeowners who have limitations and can’t maintain their homes.

“There are many houses in disrepair like this and what happens to these people is then they can't meet city codes or they're cited for things and then fined and then they don't have the money to pay the fines,” said Ann Felton Gilliland, the Central Oklahoma Habitat CEO and Chairman.

The siblings now have heat and repairs are underway to the roof, exterior doors, flooring, plumbing and painting.

“He and his sister will have a nice home to live in and a safe home,” Stewart beamed. “I just want the best for these two kids,” she added.

“They're doing a great job, keep it up and thank you,” Tran said.

On Saturday, dozens of volunteers are finishing the Tran’s renovation. However, the siblings still need a lot of help not covered by the project. All monetary donations made to the Critical Home Repair program go directly to the cost of materials and any contract labor necessary to repair and revitalize eligible homes.

To make a donation, go to cohfh.org, and note “Critical Home Repair” in the comments section of the donation form.