Jack and Lisa Osbourne are trying to stay optimistic after losing their unborn child to a second trimester abortion.

Jack and Lisa Osbourne are trying to stay optimistic after losing their unborn child to a second trimester abortion. RaddestMom.com

Just one month after announcing their second pregnancy, Jack Osbourne and wife Lisa announced a tragic miscarriage that the pair is still coming to terms with, according to Lisa’s blog RaddestMom.com. The post was made on Thursday; however, the couple received the devastating news last week.

“I have been dreading this announcement,” the couple wrote on the blog. “I needed some time before being able to say it. Jack and I lost our baby boy last week. Having a late term miscarriage is by far the hardest thing either of us have ever had to go through.”

Lisa, who married the son of rock and roll legend Ozzy Osbourne last October, said that she was in her second trimester. Soon after their destination wedding in Hawaii, Lisa gave birth to their first child, now 16-month-old Pearl, the Daily Mail reported.

"We appreciate all of your prayers and ask for privacy and respect during this time,” the blog post continues. “It’s important to stay hopeful and optimistic through life’s toughest moments. We never know why things like this happen. All we can do is trust in God and know he has a plan for our lives.”

Miscarriages, or the loss of a pregnancy within the first 20 weeks, happen in around 10 to 20 percent of documented pregnancies. Over half of first trimester miscarriages are supposedly caused by chromosomal abnormalities in the fertilized egg.

According to the American Academy of Family Physicians, “Second trimester pregnancy loss is uncommon, but it should be regarded as an important event in a woman's obstetric history.”

“Fetal abnormalities, including chromosomal problems, and maternal anatomic factors, immunologic factors, infection, and thrombophilia should be considered; however, a cause-and-effect relationship may be difficult to establish.”