Boise State will no longer be offering its student health insurance plan as of the Fall 2015 semester.

After a State Board of Education meeting on Feb. 19, it was decided that the original policy requiring universities to offer a student health insurance plan would be amended.

While full-time students are still required to provide proof of health insurance, they must now seek and purchase it on their own.

Universities can still provide a health insurance plan to students, but Boise State has opted out of providing this service.

“There was a consortium that Boise State was part of, and there was kind of an overwhelming vote to say, ‘We don’t want to continue with this contract as far as offering this plan,’ and so therefore that plan dissolved,” said Tara Brooks, assistant director of Patient and Business Services.

According to Brooks, there has been a notable trend in the rising cost of SHIP—more students waived out of SHIP. With students not paying into SHIP remaining students end up paying more.

There are currently about 2,500 students enrolled in SHIP that will need to find a new health insurance plan for the fall.

“I think it’s a mere business decision on Boise State’s half,” said Dominick Carlyle, a sophomore sociology major. “Essentially what the Affordable Care Act does is make it so that they can’t skimp out on certain requirements being met for health insurance, so it’s going to cost the university a lot more money.”

According to Brooks, Health Services will be working with Your Health Idaho and local health insurance brokers to assist students in finding health insurance.

While students no longer have to worry about the countless emails at the beginning of the semester reminding them to waive out of SHIP, all full-time students must provide proof of health insurance coverage in compliance with Affordable Care Act compliant policy.

According to the SBOE meeting’s archives, students who are found not having insurance while enrolled at an institution will be ineligible for full-time enrollment in future terms until insurance is obtained and proof of that insurance is provided.

“We certainly had students that were unhappy that the university required them to be enrolled in the SHIP, and I’m sure that there will be students who are going to be unhappy now that it’s removed,” Brooks said. “I think that the balance is just trying to make sure that everybody has resources available to them.”

Brooks said that Health Services will invite students to campus and ask questions. They can get information on and have assistance in finding insurance coverage that’s best for their individual situations.

“The university should provide health insurance, especially when they’re requiring it,” said Faris Aldosary, a senior finance major. “But when I look at the price tag I say, ‘You know, it’s not that worth it.’ I don’t think it’s suitable for students at all since it’s a state college.”

http://www.boardofed.idaho.gov/meetings/board/archive/2015/02_18-19_15/08_IRSA.pdf