If revenge is a dish best served cold, then the UNC Wilmington baseball team has been keeping this one at sub-zero temperatures for a while.

Seahawks first baseman Corey Dick had three hits, including the game-winning RBI double in the seventh inning, to lead UNC Wilmington past the College of Charleston, 7-6, and capture the Colonial Athletic Association Tournament on Saturday afternoon at Patriots Point.

It was the fourth CAA title under head coach Mark Scalf and the first since 2012.

The Seahawks (39-16) earned the league’s automatic NCAA Tournament bid, which will be announced Monday afternoon. The Cougars (43-13) have put together an impressive resume of their own and are a lock to receive an NCAA at-large bid and could possibly host an NCAA Regional despite the loss.

It was the second consecutive one-run victory for the Seahawks over the Cougars in as many days. UNCW beat the Cougars, 4-3, on Friday to advance to Saturday’s championship round.

A year ago, it was the Cougars who beat William & Mary in the championship game and captured the CAA tournament, celebrating the victory at Brooks Field, home of the Seahawks.

This year, the Seahawks returned the favor.

Not only was the image still on the minds of the UNC Wilmington players, but the Cougars swept the Seahawks in three games at Patriots Point two weeks ago.

“Last year they did the same thing to us,” Scalf said. “When we came down here two weeks ago, we didn’t play our best baseball. But we knew if we could come in here and stay focused we’d have an opportunity to win. I’m so proud of the players. They did a great job all week and especially the last couple of days against one of the best baseball clubs in the country.”

The Seahawks pounded the Cougars pitching for 26 hits in the two games this weekend. Dick led the way with five hits and drove in three runs in the two games. Every single starting position player got a hit against the Cougars on Saturday.

“They’ve got a tremendous ball club and we knew that coming in,” said College of Charleston coach Monte Lee. “They really swung the bats well the last two games. You’ve got to give them credit for the way they hit ball. They compete and play the game the right way. It was two really good college baseball games and we came up a little short both times. It’s going to happen, but let’s give Wilmington credit. They played great all tournament.”

The Cougars advanced to the championship round with a 4-1 victory over Delaware. Redshirt freshman Hayden McCutcheon threw a complete game, giving up just six hits, and needed only 94 pitches.

“Hayden came in and did exactly what we needed him to do,” Lee said. “He pitched an outstanding game.”

The only question for the Cougars that remains isn’t if they’ll make the field of 64 in the NCAA Tournament, it’s if Saturday’s loss hurt their chances of hosting a regional. The Cougars’ RPI has been among the top-20 for the last two weeks.

“I don’t know if we’ll know until Sunday if this hurt us, I know it didn’t help our case to host a regional,” Lee said. “We’ll just have to wait and see.”

UNCW came out swinging early as outfielders Steven Linkous and Casey Golden started the bottom of the first with back-to-back singles. Dick lined an RBI double to the gap in right-center and Luke Dunlap followed with a sacrifice fly to put the Seahawks ahead 2-0.

The Cougars cut the deficit in half in the second. Blake Butler drew a leadoff walk, stole second and scored on an RBI single to left by Erven Roper. In the top of the third, Brown doubled to left and a single by Alex Pastorius put runners on the corners. A Wise sacrifice fly plated Brown and Butler’s single brought in Pastorius to give the Cougars a 3-2 advantage.

The Seahawks answered back in the bottom of the third. Stupienski was hit by a pitch, moved to second on a wild pitch, and scored when Zack Canada smashed a double off the wall in left. UNCW moved on top 4-3 as Canada came in from third on a grounder to second.

The Cougars drew even in the top of fourth when sophomore first baseman Nick Pappas opened the frame with his ninth homer of the season over the wall in right.

UNCW regained the lead in the fifth. Terence Connelly drew a leadoff walk and Zach Shields reached on a bunt single. Kennard McDowell then faked a bunt and slapped the ball up the middle to bring in Connelly. A sacrifice fly by Linkous scored Shields for a 6-4 Seahawks advantage.

Both teams picked up a run in the seventh. For the Cougars, Champ Rowland led off with a single, advanced to third following a walk and a sacrifice, and scored on Wise’s ground out. The Seahawks pushed their margin back to two when Dick’s two-out double to the left-center gap plated Linkous.

In the eighth, back-to-back Seahawks fielding errors gave CofC runners on the corners with one out. The Cougars pulled within 7-6 when Bradley Jones scored on Devon Reed’s fielder’s choice, but Seahawks reliever Jared Gesell came on to limit any other damage.

“It was a back-and-forth game all day,” Lee said. “They’d score and we’d answer and we’d score and they’d come right back. It’s what you’d expect from two teams competing for a conference tournament championship.”

CofC threatened again in the ninth. Brown singled to right and moved into scoring position following a one-out wild pitch. But Gesell, who picked up the win, was able to induce a fly out and an infield pop-up to secure the title.

“This hurts right now, but we’ve got to forget about it because there are bigger goals out there,” Wise said. “We can’t let this bother us. As soon as we leave here we’ve got to put this behind us and move on because we’ve got a chance to play in a regional and make a run to Omaha.”