The exchange even released the exact number of people who "have visited the new kynect store at Fayette Mall in Lexington" and how many completed applications for new coverage there—1,197 and 173, respectively.

Kynect spokeswoman Jill Midkiff said the exchange's system "was programmed to produce on-demand reports that make enrollment statistics relatively easy to compile."

"All these metrics help us identify when we may need to make adjustments to our system or processes, such as expanding outreach in a particular area of the state, increasing server capacity or adding phone lines at the contact center," Midkiff said.

On Friday, Connecticut's exchange released tallies of how many new Obamacare and Medicaid sign-ups have been handled, as Minnesota's which promised weekly updates from now on. And Vermont exchange officials disclosed Wednesday that 600 new applications had been made on the site, which also had processed more than 3,000 renewals. Colorado's exchange has said it will release enrollment day bi-weekly, and Connecticut is considering doing the same.

As of Friday, however, HealthCare.gov had released no such metrics.

A spokesman for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, which operates HealthCare.gov, had no immediate comment when asked if CMS will immediately release ongoing open-enrollment statistics as a number of states have done, and why that information has not been released so far.

The spokesman said CMS will be releasing enrollment information on a monthly basis, as it did during the first open enrollment season.

However, even if it does such updates, it's not clear that CMS will be as forthcoming with other information the media has sought about Obamacare data. CMS did not do detailed enrollment updates between April and November—the so-called special enrollment period when people with qualifying life events such as marriages, divorces, job losses, moves out of state, and the births of children are allowed to enroll in insurance plans.

Last week, CNBC and the Wall Street Journal separately asked CMS how many people had enrolled in Obamacare plans during the special enrollment period. CMS told both outlets it would get back to them on that question, but has yet to give an answer. In August, CNBC reported that at least 11 state-run exchanges either released special enrollment tallies on their own or would share that data when asked.

CMS also has failed to release a breakdown of how many people were enrolled in plans sold by each insurer on the exchanges, which could reveal those companies' individual market share.

Charles Gaba, a Michigan-based website developer, last fall launched ACASignups.net, a site that tracks and projects Obamacare enrollments because CMS was not releasing data as often as some states were doing. Gaba's site since has been closely watched by health-care reporters, particularly since his projections have closely mirrored officially released numbers.

Read MoreSicker seniors: US elder health lags other nations



Gaba said CMS should do more frequent updates because of the significance of Obamacare, both politically and in terms of giving uninsured people health coverage.

"It's an important law that impacts a lot of people, and as a supporter I feel it's important to track the first few years," he said.

Gaba said that with nearly a week gone by in this open enrollment season, CMS "should be able . . . to give a number from at least the opening weekend" of how many people selected insurance plans. He also said HealthCare.gov should be releasing a summary of enrollment data each week.

Gaba said that CMS did so, "It would actually put me out of business."