Please enable Javascript to watch this video

MILWAUKEE (WITI) -- Proposals in Governor Scott Walker's state budget have local leaders and public school system advocates up in arms.

The underlying theme was our schools, our solution.

"We're the ones who should decide how to fix the public schools," said Kim Schroeder, with Milwaukee Teachers' Education Association.

Hundreds of parents, educators, students and community members gather in the auditorium at MATC in support of public schools.

"Public schools are under attack," said Schroeder.

Some of the backlash comes from Governor Scott Walker's speech Tuesday night as he detailed proposed laws in the Wisconsin state budget.

"Today, I am excited to announce our plans to lift the cap on vouchers. Every child deserves the chance to succeed," said Governor Scott Walker.

But these folks feel the majority of children now won't succeed. While Walker plans to expand the school voucher program, op opposers see that as an attack on public schools, which will lose funding when students go to voucher schools.

"The governor proposal to lift the cap on vouchers will prove detrimental, not only public schools in Milwaukee, but public schools across the entire state. It totally divorces the students, it was meant to help which is low income students to help provide an alternative to them," said Democratic State Representative, Mandela Barnes.

Less money will impact the students in many ways.

"Classroom sizes will grow once again. Resources are being taken away, we're fighting to improve public school with parents and students -- we want to offer bilingual education," Schroeder.

Saturday, State Representative Mandela Barnes announced he's currently drafting a community schools bill.

"A community school is a school that addresses the needs of students individually who are facing the most severe issues students that need assistance with mental health, physical health, poverty support, parental leadership supports," said Barnes.

The goal is to empower parents and students and provide a well-rounded education that extends beyond the bell.

"We're going to fight this and we're going to fight it hard," said Schroeder.

Several advocacy workshops were held during today's session.

Barnes says he hopes to introduce the bill soon, and with republican support.