Donald Trump, leading Republican candidate for the White House, said in the latest edition of Rolling Stone he was proud of his daughter and her beauty – so proud in fact, that he’d consider dating her if he weren’t her father.

Rolling Stone reported it this way: “At 69, he can still carry on like the teen who was yanked out of prep school and delivered to Col. Dobias, the take-no-s–t instructor at the military academy.”

Rolling Stone’s writer then said he met Ivanka Trump, the presidential contender’s daughter, Mediaite reported. And Trump’s response?

“Yeah, she’s really something and what a beauty, that one,” Trump said, Rolling Stone reported. “If I weren’t happily married and, ya know, her father …”

Get the hottest, most important news stories on the Internet – delivered FREE to your inbox as soon as they break! Take just 30 seconds and sign up for WND’s Email News Alerts!

In 2006 on “The View,” Trump also joked about dating his daughter. Then, he was asked about his thoughts on her posing for Playboy.

He told the women of “The View”: “It would be really disappointing – not really – but it would depend on what’s inside the magazine. I don’t think Ivanka would do that, although she does have a very nice figure. I’ve said if Ivanka weren’t my daughter, perhaps I’d be dating her.”

Who do you love? Get your favorite presidential bumper sticker here! Check out WND Superstore’s mind-blowing and hilarious selection

And in 2003, Trump also made comments about his daughter and her body, on the “Howard Stern Show,” Mediaite reported.

During that show, he said: “You know who’s one of the great beauties of the world, according to everybody? And I helped create her. Ivanka. My daughter, Ivanka. She’s six feet tall, she’s got the best body. She made a lot of money as a model – a tremendous amount.”

Meanwhile, Trump just called into “The View” this week and told the hosts he does indeed support women.

“I want to say that I will cherish women and I will protect women and I will take care of women and I have great respect for women.”