The decorations started appearing even before Labor Day, though Halloween had its day in the sun too. By Nov. 1, the drum beat quickened with the chain stores touting how early and late their stores would be open on Black Friday, purple Saturday, chartreuse Sunday and various other crayon-box colors for each of the endless sales-days in the holiday parade of consumerism.

But for the turkey, Football (with a capital F) and some stories about Pilgrims, Thanksgiving might be just another color-coded shopping day.

How fortuitous that November has become National Philanthropy Month.

Enid Ablowitz For the Camera

It started as a way to focus on recognizing and honoring volunteers, board members and donors. It is also a prime fundraising month with gala events with a purpose, direct mail appeals, annual giving phonathons, invitations and visits from major gift fundraisers who are reaching out for year-end gifts, special giving days for single purpose appeals and consolidated mini-campaigns.

Yet National Philanthropy Month has the potential to evolve into so much more.

As a celebration of philanthropy, imagine if National Philanthropy Month could focus on changing the culture of charitable giving? What if there could be a true paradigm shift in the way we view "the holidays"?

What if we could get just as excited about charitable giving as we do about costumes, wrapping paper and the latest and greatest trinket?

What if we created giving lists to go along with shopping lists, each with its generous budget?

What if we looked forward to what gifts we would GIVE this year, not just those we would get?

What if instead of spending hours looking through catalogues, we learned more ways to give meaningfully, effectively and even more generously?

What a wonderful complement to the spirit of Thanksgiving, and counterbalance to the pervasive consumerism of the season.

Let's make it happen.

Let's start right here, right now.

Let's embrace culture change by being a part of it. For ourselves. For our loved ones. For our community. For the common good.

Here are five ways to begin:

1. FIND YOUR PASSION: What do you really care about? Societal needs? Creating opportunity? What do you want to make sure is there for others in the future? What has made a difference in your life? Virtually every enterprise requires people and resources to sustain it. How can you share your passion through charitable giving?

2.LEARN NEW GIVING STRATEGIES: Don't let giving be perfunctory, like paying bills. Take it seriously and maximize your impact. Don't let taxes drive your giving, but learn how financial and tax considerations can unlock your giving potential. What giving strategies do you want to learn more about?

3.CHOOSE A NON-PROFIT PARTNER: Focus on the charitable organization that best matches your passion and get involved. How can you help it be more effective and more accountable?

4.TEACH OTHERS TO GIVE: Create teachable moments to engage children, grandchildren, siblings, even spouses or partners in the joy of giving. Specifically, how will you approach exchanging gifts this holiday season? Are there lessons to be learned in the choices you make?

5.SHOW YOUR LOVE, RESPECT OR GRATITUDE THROUGH GIVING: Give in someone else's name ... for a purpose aligned with their passion. Who will you honor and how?

Choose one way to give differently this holiday season to make it more meaningful. And share the idea with someone else.

Here are some culture-changing ideas others have chosen:

•A community foundation on the west coast has set up a program allowing donors to "buy" gift cards to give to family and friends as holiday gifts. The person receiving the "charitable gift card" spends the card on a program of the foundation they choose.

•A financial adviser gives her clients the gift of knowledge. She provides a holiday newsletter on charitable giving, starting with the psychological and physical benefits of generosity. Sure, she includes the fact that charitable deductions might offset bull market gains, but she goes beyond the obvious. She talks about legacy, about social capital. She addresses not just wealth accumulation, but wealth distribution — to family and beyond.

•As part of cash bonuses provided at the end of a successful year, one successful business gives chits of an additional 10 percent of the bonus. The chits are for each employee to designate a gift from the company to his or her favorite non-profit charitable organization.

Do you have a creative charitable gift giving idea? Send it to: enidablowitz@hotmail.com and you might see it in a future column.

ps: A salute to The Community Foundation Serving Boulder County's "The Culture of Giving" campaign. Let's keep the ball rolling.

Enid Ablowitz, CFRE, CSPG is an advocate for generous and strategic charitable giving and has been a non-profit leader for over twenty five years. She serves as Associate Director for Administration at the Coleman Institute for Cognitive Disabilities in the Office of the President, University of Colorado.