CLEVELAND, Ohio — Some Black elected officials and clergy held a news conference Sunday to announce they are endorsing Democrat Hillary Clinton for president.

U.S. Rep. Marcia Fudge, State Sen. Sandra Williams, and State Reps. Stephanie Howse and Janine Boyd, all Democrats, were among more than 40 people who attended the event at the Harvard Community Services Center in Cleveland.

"It's important to bring a distinguished group of leaders like this together to show their support for her in this state," Fudge said. "It's important to know enough about all of the candidates to make an informed choice and our candidate is Hillary Clinton."

African-American elected officials, Cuyahoga County community leaders, clergy to endorse Hillary Clinton

Here are five reasons why supporters said Clinton is the right choice for America:

— Hillary Clinton has a record of working for the under-served, the poor, for children, for the hungry, much more significantly than Bernie [Sanders]," Fudge said.

— "I have valued Hillary Clinton's work on early child-care and education, especially Head Start," Boyd said. "It's about investing in quality education early, so that we are not investing later in creating prisons if they don't have opportunities."

— The biggest issues facing Cuyahoga County include racial injustice, criminal justice reform, failing schools, and sexism, and Clinton can get somethings done, Fudge said.

— Clinton is the best candidate because she deals with issues that are important, like education, and Clinton will make sure the Affordable Health Care Act stays in place, Bishop Eugene Ward, pastor of Greater Love Baptist Church, said.

— Clinton is more focused on issues that are affecting Cuyahoga County right now, Fudge said. "We have a community where almost 50 percent of the people in the city of Cleveland alone have some type of record. I represent one of the poorest districts in America — out of 435; I'm 422."

Clinton faces a presidential primary challenge from Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders, who appeared in Cleveland on Saturday and also met with some of the region's black leaders.

Bernie Sanders, during Cleveland campaign stops, speaks at East Side church, accepts labor endorsement

Like Chanda Neely on Facebook.

Follow me on Twitter: Follow @ChandaNeely