Many workers in the Dallas area do not make enough money to support themselves or their families in a “secure yet modest standard of living,” according to the liberal Economic Policy Institute.

It costs $27,617 for a single person with no children to meet his or her basic needs in the Dallas area, based on an updated Family Budget Calculator released today by EPI. That’s much higher than what a minimum-wage worker earns a year.

The calculator shows how much money a family needs for a “modest” living in 618 cities across the country. It also lets you compare your city to others or see what the costs are in a place you’d like to live.

EPI says that even after adjusting for higher state and city minimum wages, there is nowhere in the country where any minimum-wage worker earns enough to meet their needs.

In the Dallas area, EPI’s calculator shows that a two-parent, two-child family must earn $61,152 a year, or $29.40 an hour for a person working 40-hours a week. Nationally, the median amount for is $63,744.



“Wage growth has been stagnant for most workers for decades and, as a result, there is a mismatch between what workers are paid and what it takes to live and support a family,” said EPI senior economist Elise Gould. “We need a variety of policies to boost wage growth, which includes a higher minimum wage, stronger overtime rules, collective bargaining rights, and enforcement of labor standards as well as the pursuit of a full-employment economy.”

Texas follows the federal minimum wage of $7.25 an hour, which translates to just over $15,000 a year for employees working 40 hours a week.

Last year, 361,000 Texas workers earned minimum wage or less, representing 5.7 percent of the nearly 6.4 million hourly workers in Texas, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Nationwide, that figure was 3.9 percent in 2014.

While Texas’ share of workers earning minimum wage or less declined from 2010 through 2014, it still ranks No. 6 after Tennessee, Arkansas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Indiana and West Virginia.

For Dallas-area families, housing is the largest largest expense, accounting for about 18 percent of total family costs, according to EPI. Housing costs range from $602 for a single person with no children to $1,218 for a two-parent family with three children.

Child care costs also take up a big chunk of a family’s monthly budget, with costs ranging from $565 for a family with one child to $879 for a family with three kids, EPI said.

The Family Budget Calculator takes into account the cost of housing, food, transportation, child care, health care and other basic necessities such as clothing and household supplies. Among the changes in the updated version are: adding budgets for four new family types, including adults without children for the first time; factoring in geographic differences in cost of living and a broader range of expenses into federal poverty thresholds; and adding health care premiums available in the health insurance exchanges established by the Affordable Care Act to health cost calculations.