Why do we continue to spend billions of dollars for brand-name drugs that are available in cheaper generic forms in the developing world -- billions that end up as profits for pharmaceutical industry?

In a 2013 article in the Annals of Internal Medicine, Rochelle Walensky estimated that savings of close to one billion dollars a year could be achieved if all people with HIV in the U.S. took generic antiretrovirals (ARVs). Replacing Atripla with a generic three-pill alternative was projected to lead to an average lifetime savings of $42,500 for each patient. (It should be noted, however that the money saved is somewhat offset by possible lower adherence to a three-drug regimen.)

Why do we continue to spend billions of dollars for brand-name drugs that are available in cheaper generic forms in the developing world -- billions that end up as profits for pharmaceutical industry? A generic drug has the same active ingredients as the original, brand-name drug and is comparable to the branded drug in dosage, form, strength, and quality. The FDA requires that generic drugs be identical or fall within an acceptable range of their brand-name counterparts.

Generic drugs usually become available when the patent protections given to the original drug makers expire. In most countries, patents give branded drugs 20 years of protection. When generic products become available, market competition often leads to substantially lower prices for both the original branded drug and its generic versions.





A Conference on HIV Generics

To discuss the issue of generic ARVs and their place in HIV care, the Forum for HIV Collaborative Research and its partners, HIVMA and ACRIA, recently held a one-day conference in Washington D.C., "Use of Generic Antiretrovirals for Treatment of HIV in the United States." In attendance were policy makers, government regulators, physicians, and scientists.

Trip Gulick, M.D., Chief of Infectious Diseases at Cornell, reported that, unlike in other countries, HIV treatment guidelines in the U.S. do not consider cost. Until recently, physicians prescribed and health insurers paid, without regard to cost. For-profit health insurance and drug companies lobbied for policies such as non-negotiable drug prices for Medicare and no universal payer in the Affordable Care Act. At the conference, considerable discussion followed on the need for all of us to take drug prices into account, especially in light of the exaggerated costs of the new hepatitis C drugs and the increasing costs borne by patients. Participants expressed fear that if costs were not considered in HIV treatment guidelines, payers could impose requirements for the use of generics that would not be favorable to all patients.





Advertisement

Other Countries

France is an example of a country that does consider cost in its HIV treatment guidelines. The generic raltegravir is listed as an alternative for Isentress in the French guidelines. These guidelines recommend that Atripla be replaced by generic efavirenz and lamivudine, along with brand-name Viread. And they also suggest replacing branded protease inhibitors with generic efavirenz or nevirapine in virally suppressed patients.

In the developing world the use of generic ARVs is key to reaching the goal of an AIDS-free generation. PEPFAR, the President's Emergency Plan For AIDS Relief, has helped save the lives of millions of people with HIV the world over. Under this program, the FDA approves generic ARVs for distribution in other countries, even if they are still under patent in the U.S. These drugs cannot, however, be re-imported or marketed in the U.S. The FDA's Office of Generic Drugs maintains the same standards for generic ARVs as it does for branded drugs in the U.S. PEPFAR generic drugs meet all of the FDA's manufacturing, quality, safety, and efficacy requirements.

After approval, the FDA monitors the drugs by reviewing adverse event reports to ensure continued drug safety after products enter the market. The FDA also reviews any changes made to the approved drugs so that they continue to be safe, effective, and of acceptable quality. To date, 104 generic ARVs are approved for distribution in PEPFAR countries.





Savings

The widespread use of generic ARVs would benefit patients, insurance companies, and government programs like Medicaid. Doctors and patients would be more strongly motivated to use generics if the savings were reinvested in programs that benefit patients. In addition, the HIV community would need to be assured that the quality of the generics was equal to brand-name drugs.

While the FDA is supposed to inspect generic manufacturers, budgetary constraints in the recent past have limited its ability to do so. The FDA has, however, made greater investments in such efforts recently, most notably in India where many generics and brand name drugs used in the U.S. are manufactured. The way drugs are priced in this country also needs to be more transparent. Current practices do not ensure that the savings from the use of generics get passed along to the consumer.





Generics and Adherence

Forum participants discussed whether increasing the number of pills people with HIV must take might lead to lower adherence. Dr. Gulick reviewed a meta-analysis of 19 studies that showed that multiple-pill regimens taken twice daily led to lower adherence than single-pill regimens. This was not, however, shown to be the case for once-daily regimens. Interestingly, a higher number of pills lowered the chance of maintaining viral suppression for both once- and twice-daily regimens, something that seems to contradict the first finding. Also confusing was the finding that adherence was better for once-daily regimens (regardless of the number of pills taken), but there was no difference in virologic failure between once-daily and twice-daily regimens. Obviously, more research needs to be done.

Also discussed at the conference was the added expense of supporting adherence in some patient populations. Even in populations with high numbers of virally suppressed patients, over 25% of people with HIV are still not controlling their virus. For them, it takes more than just a pill to control HIV. The slogan "It's not just a pill" refers to the various adherence strategies that are needed to achieve maximum rates of viral suppression. Using the money saved by switching to generics may be one way to fund these efforts.





Hepatitis C

The recent unveiling of the $1,000-a-day hepatitis C drug Sovaldi weighed heavily on the discussions at the conference. Drug pricing is largely determined by whatever the maker believes the market will bear, and appears not to be tied to actual drug development costs. This realization seems to have tempered physician enthusiasm for prescribing expensive drugs with no demonstrated clinical advantage. Recent refusals of oncologists to prescribe "me-too" chemotherapy drugs (new versions of older drugs) have led to some price reductions. Hepatitis C drug prescribing appears to be slower than predicted, although this may be changing.





Conclusion

The ever-increasing costs of drugs may be brought under more control with the delivery of reliable, effective, and cheaper generics. Where the savings will go if this does occur needs to be addressed now. The support of the HIV community for generic drug use would certainly be strengthened if they were assured that the savings would be reinvested into programs seen as beneficial to the community. n

Search hivforum.org for "generics" to download the presentations given at the conference.

Jerome Ernst is the medical director of ACRIA and Amida Care.