TRENTON — There is a shortage of primary care doctors across the country, but Deborah Briggs, president and CEO of the New Jersey Council of Teaching Hospitals, said that shortage is especially acute in New Jersey, where out of 22,400 active physicians, only 3,500 work as primary care doctors serving adults. The council annually surveys medical residents to find out why more don't pursue primary care.

Q: Why aren't there more primary care doctors?

A: "Nationally, only 30 percent (of internal medicine graduates) stay in primary care. ... The majority of physician are moving into subspecialty and speciality positions immediately.

Q: Why is the shortage in New Jersey so bad?

A: "Cost of living, low salaries compared to other states. If they want to go on -- say they finish internal medicine and want to become a sub-specialist say in hematology and oncology, or cardiology, that's the path they have to take and we don't have many of those fellowship positions -- the next training positions -- so they have to go out of state."

Q: Why?

A: "UMDNJ (which was dissolved and split up between Rutgers and Rowan universities this year) is considered a relatively young medical school. If you look at and compare it with the University of Michigan or the University of Pennsylvania and the other mega-medical schools, they have been around for a century. When a medical school starts, they primarily start in very basic (resident) positions and grow the slots. Most of them start in the basics of general surgery and internal medicine, and they grow into sub-specialties. In 1996, the government through the Balanced Budget Act froze all the positions they funded. We were still in that growth process with a lot of the basic positions when the funding stopped."

Q: What are their perceptions of New Jersey?

A: "It's an unfriendly environment to physicians -- that has been a consistent (response) for multiple years. The high taxes, just the overall cost of living. This year I saw more comments on medical malpractice rates than I have before.

"Clearly we are way behind what we are offering for salaries. One individual wrote she is from New Jersey and she was able to take a position in Atlanta with a lower cost of living and better benefits with $50,000 more in salary.

Q: That's surprising, considering this is generally a very wealthy state.

A: "Unfortunately I have to link that back to the state of New Jersey's very low Medicaid (reimbursement) rates, the very low HMO rates. It has an impact. It directly correlates to the salaries being offered."

Q: How concerned are you about the lack of primary physicians? What do you think will happen?

A: "For those who have a little bit of savvy who can't find a primary care physician, they will just go to a sub-specialist that will address whatever particular need. ... Or they will continue accessing the emergency department. That's what they have been doing, that's what they know, it's convenient, it's open 24/7."