Let’s put the current controversy over state Religious Freedom Restoration Acts (RFRAs) in its historical perspective.

The first clause of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution (preceding even the Free Speech Clause) provides that “Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof.” Many (and perhaps all) of our state constitutions contain similar provisions.

The Founders viewed religious freedom as precious, indeed essential, not only because they believed in freedom of conscience but also because they were deeply steeped in a recent historical background of bitter and disruptive religious warfare in Europe. They well understood that respecting and protecting — and not merely “tolerating” — the religious freedom of every individual would be necessary to the long-term stability of the civil society that they were forming.

Traditionally, if either the purpose or the effect of a law was to impede the observance of religion, enforcement of that law against a religious observer was permitted by the First Amendment only if such enforcement was necessary to serve some “compelling state interest.” (See Sherbert v. Verner, 374 U.S. 398 in 1963). And the U.S. Supreme Court held repeatedly “that no showing merely of a rational relationship to some colorable state interest would suffice; in this highly sensitive constitutional area, only the gravest abuses, endangering paramount interest, give occasion for permissible limitation.”

(The issue in Sherbert was whether South Carolina could refuse unemployment compensation benefits to an individual who lost her job because her religious beliefs prevented her from working on Saturday. The South Carolina Supreme Court held that denying benefits placed no restriction on the worker’s freedom of religion. The U.S. Supreme Court reversed, holding that the “indirect burden” on the worker’s religious freedom was not required by any compelling state interest.)

***

That was the law until 1990, when the Supreme Court decided Employment Division v. Smith, 494 U.S. 872. The issue in Smith was whether Oregon could deny unemployment compensation to workers who lost their jobs for sacramental use of peyote, a hallucinogenic drug, at a ceremony of their Native American Church.

In an opinion by Justice Antonin Scalia, reflecting the conservative philosophy that “whatever the government wants to do is OK with me” (an approach closely associated with then-Chief Justice William Rehnquist), a 5-4 court simply tossed the longstanding “compelling state interest” test aside.

It held instead that an infringement of religious freedom is acceptable if it is “merely the incidental effect” of a “neutral law of general applicability.” Under that test, denial of unemployment benefits to the Native American workers did not offend the First Amendment — and under that test, of course, the result in Sherbert would have been the same. (Justice Sandra Day O’Connor would have reached the same result as the majority in Smith by application of the compelling state interest test. The court’s “liberal” bloc — Justices Blackmun, Brennan, and Marshall — dissented.)

The widespread reaction to the Smith decision was outrage and dismay. The U.S. Congress responded by enacting the Religious Freedom Restoration Act of 1993, which was introduced by Sen. Ted Kennedy and then-Rep. Charles Schumer, by nearly unanimous votes. President Clinton promptly signed it into law. Enactment of the RFRA restored the compelling governmental interest test of Sherbert and provided specifically that the “government shall not substantially burden a person’s exercise of religion even if the burden results from a rule of general applicability.”

Why, then, are state legislatures enacting their own RFRAs? Because the Supreme Court held in City of Boerne v. Flores, 521 U.S. 507 (1997), that the federal RFRA is unconstitutional as applied to the states. It continues to be applied to the federal government, but state enactments are necessary to preserve the traditional status of religious freedom against potential encroachment by state or local governments. Without such enactments, only the limited protections provided by the First Amendment, as interpreted in the Smith decision, apply.

Is this an argument for discrimination? Indeed not. It is simply an argument for restoration of the same level of protection of religious freedom that was well-established and almost universally supported (at least legislatively) until at least as recently as the mid-1990s.

Whether a baker or a wedding photographer may choose his or her clientele, if the choice is driven by deeply held religious beliefs, should depend solely on whether the government has a compelling interest in overriding that choice — as the government undeniably had a compelling interest in enforcing the public accommodations provisions of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, for example. Application of the compelling state interest test necessarily will depend on the facts of particular cases. On that issue, therefore, I offer no opinion.