Group wants visits to qualify as having insurance

The 3 Star Healthy Project, the task force created by House Speaker Beth Harwell to come up with a conservative alternative to Insure Tennessee, met in Memphis on Monday. As the Commercial Appeal reports, the group is considering novel ideas to expand the definition of insurance:

Summing up his takeaways from the meeting, [state Rep. Cameron] Sexton said the task force — which includes Rep. Karen Camper, D-Memphis — could try to ease restrictions on faith-based health care organizations like the Church Health Center, which connects patients with volunteer doctors for a flat $35 fee.

Dr. Scott Morris, CEO of Church Health Center, told the task force that state law should be changed to allow citizens to claim health care coverage to satisfy the requirements of the Affordable Care Act and avoid costly fines for being uninsured. ...

Sexton said the task force will also take a closer look at the possibility of "direct to provider" health care, where businesses could pay clinics for their employees' health care visits instead of routing payments through health insurance companies.



In a subsequent interview with the Post, Sexton expounded on why he thinks expanding access to charity clinics is one of the top ideas at which the task force is looking.

"Frankly, I think we're considering anything," Sexton said. "Right now, you have this situation where the majority of emergency room visits are not acute-care issues, and one of the ways to help with that is to get people used to going to a primary care clinic."

Instead of providing regular insurance, in which a person is assigned to a particular primary care physician, the charity clinics model would give the uninsured regular access to a low-cost clinic such as the Church Health Center, which treats chronic conditions for a flat fee. In areas of the state where similar clinics do not exist, Sexton suggests using county health departments to expand care.

When asked about costs for acute situations or health issues that arise after hours or on weekends — the Church Health Center closes at 6 p.m. most days, and most health departments close even earlier — Sexton implied that's just how the world works.

"There are certain circumstances you can have, you know, where even your insurance, your BlueCross BlueShield, isn't going to pay for everything, either," Sexton said.

Sexton repeatedly mentioned how one of the top goals of the task force is "improving access" to health care for the uninsured. Asked if Insure Tennessee or the original plans for Medicare expansion wouldn't do just that, Sexton said that insuring that many more people would actually decrease access.

"Do we have a network that could handle 300,000 more people? You just don't have the providers there," Sexton said.

Upon having it pointed out that some hospitals in rural parts of the state have been forced to close — thus also decreasing access to health care — Sexton replied that, were TennCare expanded, "The only difference [insofar as increased access to health care] is that hospitals might get paid a little something."

Sexton added that the true challenge is increasing the number of doctors who will see TennCare patients, and he hopes the task force will be able to provide that encouragement. But he remains firm that there will be no expansion of TennCare.

"We just don't think that putting 300,000 people on insurance is doing anything," Sexton said.

The task force hopes to present its recommendations to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services in June.