In an article the other day headlined "Republican Party Unravels Over Donald Trump's Takeover," the New York Times had this to say about how Republican Party leaders are reacting to the Donald's views on foreign policy:

"They fear their party is on the cusp of an epochal split -- a historic cleaving between the familiar form of conservatism forged in the 1960s and popularized in the 1980s and a rekindled, atavistic nationalism, with roots as old as the republic, that has not flared up so intensely since the original America First movement before Pearl Harbor."

"Atavistic," the dictionary tells us, is a term that describes "reversion to a former or more primitive type." Synonyms are "simian" and "apelike."

The casual reader might assume that Trump wants the party to revert to a former era in which its members were baying for war.

Alas, the opposite is true. The America First movement, the name of which Trump has adopted for his foreign policy, was a movement that had one goal: to keeping the United States out of Europe's wars.

The reason was simple. In the 1930s, World War I was seen by many Americans as the second Iraq War is now seen - as an exercise that cost America a fortune in both lives and resources while creating an even bigger mess.

As for the America-First movement, it had some conservative Republican members. But its leadership also included Democrats such as West Virginia senator Rush Holt, the father of the former congressman from Princeton of the same name.

Holt, who was elected to the Senate in 1934, worked against proposed U.S. interventions in the Spanish Civil War and in Finland, among other places where wars broke out in the run-up to World War II.

He advocated staying out of the war right up until the day of Pearl Harbor, at which point the group disbanded for the obvious reason that the U.S. had been attacked.

But that didn't stop Holt from offering the following amazingly prescient statement in 1942:

"We must stand guard to see that the internationalists are not allowed to determine the future of our great country. They would commit us to everlasting wars everywhere."

He got that right. America's success in World War II led the Washington crowd to believe they could succeed wherever they intervened. That's been the accepted wisdom among internationalists of both parties, whether they call themselves "neo" conservatives or Wilsonians.

That's the fight now occurring on the Republican side of the aisle. Though liberals see Trump oxymoronically as both a warmonger and an isolationist, the GOP elite concerns itself only with the latter charge.

Trump has challenged the accepted wisdom among the GOP establishment is that the United States is "an exceptional nation" that can straighten out pretty much any problem by military intervention.

If the events of past couple decades have taught us anything, they have taught us the opposite. Our leaders – be they Republican or Democratic – have had their pockets picked in virtually every encounter with foreigners they attempted.

Nonetheless the Grand Old Party elite was aghast when, in a debate with the man who they had anointed as the third President Bush, Trump pointed out that the second President Bush had screwed up everything he touched in Iraq and environs.

The party's base, meanwhile, had long ago reconciled itself to that sad state of affairs. They were happy to accept Trump's promise that he would crush ISIS and then draw back not just from the Mideast but from other parts of the globe as well.

That's not all that different from the position taken by Bernie Sanders on the Democratic side.

Sanders' critique of Hillary Clinton on Iraq mirrors Trump's attacks on Bush. Meanwhile his views on further meddling in the Mideast mess vary little, minus of course Trump's fiery rhetoric.

If Sanders were somehow to win the Democratic nomination, we would see a historic moment: the first-ever race in modern history in which both candidates rejected the view that the United States is the policeman of the world and should knock heads accordingly.

Alas, the numbers say that is not to be. The Democrats seem ready to go into this election behind a proud internationalist, one who has yet to find an intervention she didn't like.

A number of prominent Republican neocons have gone over to Hillary Clinton for that precise reason. Others say they would like to see a Republican run a third-party candidacy - an even surer means of guaranteeing a Clinton victory.

I suspect neither approach will succeed and we will see a Trump-Clinton race in November as expected

Let the best atavist win.

PLUS - KRISTOL PUSHING ROMNEY? NOW, THAT'S NUTS:

As you can see from this article, neocon nabob Bill Kristol has actually deluded himself into thinking that Mitt Romney should run as a third-party candidate.

This is conclusive proof that the never-Trump movement's obsession is Trump's abandonment of the failed neocon foreign policy in the Mideast.

When it comes to domestic policy, of course, Romney is a certified liberal who actually invented the Obamacare approach when he was governor of Massachusetts. The architect was MIT's Jon Gruber, who also worked on Obamacare and was quoted as saying, "It's the same F-ing bill!.""

But Romney can be trusted to be a reliable puppet for the neocons. That's the sole reason someone like Kristol would try and get him to run against trump - well, that and the fact that such a move would lead to the election of Hillary, whom the neocons clearly prefer anyway.

ALSO: Can anyone think of something that would win Trump more voters than having Bruce Springsteen attack him publicly?

I can't.

AND then there's this poll showing Trump neck-and-neck with Hillary in three swing states.