No other community shows the direction of Denver’s home market this year more pointedly than Stapleton, the master plan created from Denver’s former airport site. With prices surging all over town, first-time buyers have a challenging time getting into home ownership – but opportunity knocks at Stapleton today, where two new models by KB Home offer uncommon affordability in terms of size and features.

In Stapleton’s new Willow Park East neighborhood, north of The Shops at Northfield Stapleton, you can tour two new Paired Homes by KB Home – duplex-styled plans that are more open and alluring than any duplex or townhome you’ve seen elsewhere. They have wide-open entertaining spaces and appealing kitchens, options for expanding the bedroom levels to three-plus-a-loft, and masters that look and feel like luxury single-family suites with extra-large walk-in closets. Two-car garages and fenced side yards for a garden or pet are included, and you get the option of adding finished basement space up front.

All KB Homes are Energy Star certified; yet these are priced from just over $300,000. “We’re seeing buyers coming out of apartments, but also older Denver neighborhoods like Washington Park and Mayfair, where they’re living in homes nowhere near this size, not even counting the basement finish option,” says Randy Carpenter, Vice President of Sales and Marketing at KB Home Colorado. With FHA 3%-down loans available again, KB Home is making many of those buyers happy – but Stapleton’s rapid sales means that few homes are ready for quick move-in.

KB Home’s Todd Middendorp and Patrick Sleeper can show you two exceptions – including a ‘Cedar’ with 1,700 square feet in a 3-bedroom, 2-1/2 bath plan, plus full basement, at $360,000 – well below the price of an average home in Denver County this year. It’s close to three planned pocket parks, and a new high school that Denver Public Schools will open this fall. Stapleton’s schools are rapidly achieving high marks in statewide rankings, Carpenter adds. “People who come in rarely realize just how good they are.”

Carpenter notes another affordable advantage of these Paired Designs – no expensive HOA (the master HOA fee is only $40 a month). Of course, there’s the added advantage of Stapleton’s commuter rail location – accessible to downtown, but also to DIA. Stapleton’s popular Town Center shopping area on Quebec Street is now paralleled by The Shops at Northfield Stapleton, with a main street-styled restaurant row, plus theaters, Macy’s and more.

To reach KB Home and other builders in Stapleton’s Willow Park East and Conservatory Green neighborhoods, take MLK Blvd east to Central Park Blvd, turn north across I-70 to Northfield Blvd, turn left on Northfield 0.3 mi. to Uinta, and turn right, head north.

KB Home Paired Homes in Stapleton’s Willow Park East; 2 furnished models, options for larger bedroom level; close to new parks, to high school opening this fall, The Shops at Northfield Stapleton; some homes for quick delivery. 8187 E. 53rd Dr., Denver; from central Stapleton take MLK Blvd east to Central Park Blvd, turn north 1.9 mi. (across I-70) to Northfield Blvd, left on Northfield 0.3 mi. to Uinta, turn right, north 7 blks

From $312,995

Today, 10 a.m. until 6 p.m.

303-333-1007

Mark Samuelson writes on real estate and business; you can email him atmark@samuelsonassoc.com. You can see all of Mark Samuelson’s columns online at DenverPostHomes.com