In 2011, demonstrators picketed the New Brunswick tree-lighting ceremony following a police shooting that year. (Photo: ~File photo)

They made the city cancel its Christmas tree-lighting ceremony. They made downtown rush-hour traffic crawl slower than usual. But whether they made their point remains to be seen.

Dozens and dozens of demonstrators, mostly Rutgers University students along with citizen activists, marched across the city Friday evening, stopping in front of police headquarters before congregating at Hamilton Square.

Shouting what has become the rallying cry of protesters upset with the handling of the Ferguson, Missouri, police shooting of an unarmed black 18-year-old — "Hands up, don't shoot! — and of the death of a black man at the hands of New York City police officer who placed him in a chokehold — "I can't breathe!" — the New Brunswick demonstrators temporarily blocked traffic on Route 18 and Easton Avenue.

Downtown traffic had returned to regular rush-hour congestion by 7 p.m.

RELATED: N.J. police diversity, race relations in focus after Brown, Garner cases

The tree-lighting ceremony had been planned for 5 p.m. at Monument Square. But demonstrators from Rutgers University and The People's Coalition Against Police Brutality planned to converge at the same location.

Protests have spread nationally this week after a New York grand jury declined to indict a white New York City police officer who used a chokehold on Eric Garner, a black man who died as a result of incident, which was caught on tape. Last week, a Missouri grand jury declined to indict a white officer in the shooting death of Michael Brown in Ferguson.

New Brunswick has had three fatal police shootings in the past 25 years.

In 2011, Police Officer Brad Berdel shot and killed Barry Deloatch. Police said Deloatch, a black man with a drug record, struck an officer with a wooden stick.

Berdel resigned from the department and was not charged, but the Middlesex County Prosecutor's Office required the department to report all allegations of excessive use of force to the county within 24 hours.

That year, demonstrators picketed the city's tree-lighting ceremony, which was not canceled.

RELATED: Police departments in N.J. uphold just 1% of excessive force complaints

But Friday, city officials made the decision to indefinitely postpone the annual holiday ceremony in front of the Heldrich Hotel.

"Given the threat of inclement weather further complicating tonight's scheduled events and the logistical problems of large numbers of people attempting to occupy the same space but for different purposes, the tree lighting ceremony has been canceled," city spokeswoman Jennifer Bradshaw said Friday afternoon in a prepared statement.

"This will better enable the Police Department to assist the exercise of First Amendment rights of the protesters to assemble and march peacefully and to ensure the safety of those in and about the area."

It was not clear Friday evening if there had been any arrests.

Staff Writer Sergio Bichao: 908-243-6615; sbichao@mycentraljersey.com

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1CNMa9J