Anthony Weiner joins crisis PR firm

A crisis communications firm has enlisted the services of none other than Anthony Weiner, the former Democratic lawmaker whose well-documented sexting scandals sank his once-promising political career.

Weiner will serve on the advisory board at the New York-based PR firm MWW, the firm’s D.C. managing director, Paul Tencher, confirmed to POLITICO on Thursday. Contrary to the New York Post’s initial report, Tencher said, Weiner will not advise clients but will serve on its advisory board.

Story Continued Below

“Anthony Weiner’s primary role at MWW will be as a part time consultant primarily focused on policy and new business development. He will not be serving clients directly, but rather serving as an advisor to our leadership team,” Tencher wrote in an email to POLITICO.

Michael Kempner, the founder and leader of the company, is one of Hillary Clinton’s so-called Hillblazers, or top campaign bundlers, raising more than $100,000 for her presidential campaign since her April announcement. He was also one of Clinton’s top 2008 bundlers.

Weiner’s wife, Huma Abedin, is a longtime Clinton confidante who served as a top adviser to the secretary of state during her time at Foggy Bottom and continues to play a prominent role in her latest campaign.

MWW told the Post that it is “pleased to welcome” Weiner to its “board of advisers,” where he will advise on issues related to Congress and New York politics.

“He is a brilliant strategist [with] expertise on many issues,” the company told the Post.

Weiner resigned from Congress in 2011 after tweeting a photo of his penis from his public Twitter account, ostensibly meant to be a direct message to a female college student. He admitted to exchanging “messages and photos of an explicit nature over the last three years” over the phone, email and social media with “about six women over the last three years.”

Two years later, Weiner became embroiled in a separate scandal when he ran for mayor of New York City. Gossip website The Dirty published more pictures and sexts, allegedly from Weiner under the alias “Carlos Danger” to a 22-year-old woman later reported to be Sydney Leathers. He finished with just 4.9 percent of the vote in the Democratic primary.

This article has been corrected to reflect that MWW is based in New York.

CORRECTION: Corrected by: Kat Borgerding @ 07/23/2015 11:11 AM CORRECTION: This article has been corrected to reflect that MWW is based in New York.