View scenes of significant flooding across the Grand Strand and Pee Dee as heavy rains continue to sweep across the area.

View scenes of significant flooding across the Grand Strand and Pee Dee as heavy rains continue to sweep across the area.

SLIDESHOW: Scenes of flooding around Grand Strand and Pee Dee

SLIDESHOW: Scenes of flooding around Grand Strand and Pee Dee

Significant flooding is expected across the Lowcountry as tropical moisture combines with a stalled low pressure system.

Significant flooding is expected across the Lowcountry as tropical moisture combines with a stalled low pressure system.

The Congaree Riverkeeper says the Columbia Canal has breached the levee just above the powerhouse in Columbia. The Riverkeeper says "The canal is the drinking supply for a large portion of the city, so this is critical."

Members of the South Carolina National Guard are filling the breach with sandbags.

The Congaree River has surpassed flood stage in the Columbia area and reached the highest level in decades.

After heavy rains fell on the Midlands overnight Saturday into Sunday, the flood warning was extended for the Congaree River in Columbia through Tuesday evening.

Monday morning the river level was at 31.81 feet. The record for the Congaree River is 39.8 feet.

The river is at its highest recorded level since 1936.

Just before 7a.m. Sunday, City of Cayce spokesperson Ashley Hunter told WIS the Congaree River reached 20 feet in Cayce. Flood stage is 19 feet.

The National Weather Service says river gauges on Gills Creek and Pen Branch have been swept away.

With the river level predictions, Cayce officials urge people to stay away from the Riverwalk. It is closed and electrical boxes and emergency call boxes have been removed.

Cayce city officials expected the river to rise quickly and the city was prepared with sandbags. City leaders are also working with the SC Department of Transportation to get ahead of problematic road drainage areas before conditions get worse.

Downstream from Cayce, the National Weather Service issued a Flood Warning for the Congaree River at Carolina Eastman in southern Richland County. At 3 a.m. Sunday the stage was 119.6 feet, surpassing flood stage at 115 feet.

"The river will continue rising to near 123.3 feet by Sunday night," said the advisory.

Once the river reaches 119 feet, the advisory said, "Extensive flooding occurs in the Congaree National Park along with farmland downstream from Columbia. The flooding will flood portions of the boardwalk in the Congaree National Park."

Copyright WIS. All rights reserved.