High-performing advisers at the J.P. Morgan DC Summit in New York widely hope the government will make retirement savings mandatory for at least some segments of the working population.

Retirement plan advisers, like professionals in any other field, cover the political spectrum and often disagree on basic points of public policy—from the impact of the Affordable Care Act to the proper role of Washington in regulating Wall Street risk-taking.

Still, there are other areas where advisers show a real ability to embrace bipartisanship—a fact made clear by flash polling conducted at this year’s J.P. Morgan Asset Management DC Adviser Summit. The annual meeting brings together about 150 of the most experienced defined contribution (DC) plan advisers serving employers all across the United States, and this year PLANADVISER got to sit in.

One area of policy agreement among many advisers as made clear by the question: “Should the United States government require mandatory auto-enrollment and/or auto-escalation into defined contribution retirement plans in the workplace?” A clear majority (59%) said yes, although a sizable minority (38%) said no, and 4% were unsure.

Responding to this result, John Galateria, head of the North America institutional business for J.P. Morgan Asset Management, asked advisers about what type of plans they feel individuals should be automatically enrolled in—and again clear divisions emerged. Some advisers warned that plans run by the government will likely not be aggressive enough to actually help people reach retirement security, for example by only requiring a 2% or 3% salary deferral not tied to auto-escalation—while others argued many individuals would in fact be helped by mandatory-but-modest government-run plans because they can’t afford to spare much in the first place and a little savings is better than none.

Another group of advisers clearly feels the government should back off entirely from legislating the way people save and invest for retirement and focus instead on promoting stability in the wider economy, with the idea being that a rising tide lifts all boats. No surprise, all advisers generally agreed that privately run, employer-sponsored DC plans backed by expert advisory resources are the best option for actually promoting retirement readiness for individual workers. However, advisers cited the ongoing unwillingness/inability of many employers to shoulder the costs and liability involved with first starting and then maintaining a DC plan.

NEXT: Other areas of adviser agreement