Most outlooks predict improved economic performance for both the U.S. and Michigan in 2014.

The state’s economy continues to rebound well from the Great Recession, driven largely by the surging U.S. auto industry, and outlooks generally predict higher gross domestic product next year. For some insight into what’s ahead, MiBiz spoke with economists Mitch Stapley, chief investment officer at Fifth Third Asset Management, and John Augustine, Fifth Third’s chief market strategist.

What do you see happening with the U.S. economy in 2014?

Mitch Stapley: We’re growing this year at about 1.7 percent (GDP). Next year, we kick it up to more like a 2.3. It’s not explosive and it’s still below trend, but it’s still better.

What do you see happening with Michigan’s economy? Will it continue to exceed the national growth?

Stapley: I think we could potentially moderate a little bit. We’ve had a real strong last couple of years. We expect auto sales to stay relatively strong. Interest rates are still low, balance sheets are healing up, and people are feeling better and are willing to buy a new car. If gas prices stay down, tourism should stay good, and obviously in agriculture the weather is always a variable. If we can have another long, normal year for weather, and the agriculture sector stays strong, we’ll probably stay a little bit ahead of the national average.

For two key industries in West Michigan — auto suppliers and office furniture — how are things aligning?

John Augustine: We don’t expect the cycle is going to slow down for the auto suppliers. … We don’t expect that trend to stop because the fleet of cars out there keeps aging.

Stapley: For the furniture makers, it’s been OK. We probably want to see it really turn up here in hiring (nationally). To get the industry to the next leg up, we have to get (companies) not just hiring one or two people. We need to see more of a ramp there where, ‘I’m expanding a department,’ or ‘I’m leasing new floor space,’ or ‘I’m bringing in new people.’

Europe’s steady for them, and maybe they’ll continue to see some decent stuff going on in the Pacific Rim. Here in the U.S., I’m more optimistic about them in 2015 than in 2014.

What are the potential storm clouds out there that could put a damper on the economy in 2014?

Augustine: If the Fed changes policy before the market expects, another government shutdown, the Affordable Care Act spins out of control and really affects the economy and hampers investment and employment, and central banks lose control of the bond market. Those are the known risks for us right now.

One a scale of 1 to 10 — 1 being completely pessimistic and 10 as completely optimistic — what rating would you each give the U.S. and Michigan economies for 2014?

Augustine: I would do a 7 for both. I would say from a national perspective, there’s a potential for an increase in capital spending, my exports are still holding, and I have a chance for a better consumer next year. I see the fundamental economy in an up phase, not slowing down. I’m only at a 7 because I still have three potential headwinds out there: fiscal policy debates, change in monetary policy, and implementation of a new health care policy.

Stapley: I would probably go 6 for the nation and 7 for the state. We were down so far in the state and we seem to have some of the winds at our back. There is still some real estate hangover on the coasts and some issues. The stuff that really hits us, the auto sector, that’s a good story and really works better for us than the economy as a whole.

Do you see West Michigan continuing to do better than the rest of the state?

Stapley: Absolutely. We’ve got a tremendously competitive manufacturing base that’s even more diversified than Detroit, and I think we’re able to be more nimble here. We have more opportunities on the tourism side, and we’re just more diversified and with less baggage.

Interview conducted and condensed by Mark Sanchez