As February 14 approaches, more and more people will scramble to sign up for the right healthcare program in accordance to ObamaCare. The Inquisitr has kept up with the latest news pertaining to the Affordable Healthcare Act in general, not just for this year’s enrollment. Reportedly, it would be best for people to seek assistance in filing taxes this year because the ObamaCare tax code comes off as very confusing. On a lighter note, pet owners may get some love as ObamaCare might eventually cover animals.

Love it or hate it, ObamaCare is here for now, and people are doing their best to deal with it. However, there are reports that it could have been far worse than what is established, especially for those who are overweight or obese. Apparently, Jonathan Gruber, a former ObamaCare adviser, wanted to incorporate a tax specifically for fat people.

According to an article by the Daily Caller via Fox News, Jonathan Gruber once discussed the necessity of taxing fat people by body weight in order to fight obesity. The controversial idea was presented in an essay for the National Institute for Health Care Management back in 2010. This essay was published just months after Gruber assisted President Barack Obama in designing ObamaCare in the Oval Office, during the period of his contract as an Obama administration consultant.

“Ultimately, what may be needed to address the obesity problem are direct taxes on body weight. While it is hard to conceive of this approach being a common public policy tool in the near term, such taxation may be happening indirectly through health insurance surcharges. Currently, employers may charge up to 20 percent higher health insurance premiums for employees who fail to meet certain health-related standards, such as attaining a healthy BMI.”

Frontpage Mag followed-up on the article, calling foul on the tax. They first stated the possibility of people partaking in crash diets just before tax season. They also brought up that minority groups might possibly be exempt, citing a professor at a New Jersey public university on the matter. The article by National Review details a study by Rutgers University professor, Luis Rivera, who proclaims minorities are obese due to racism. This concept is reportedly known as microaggressions, which cause people to eat fast food and avoid exercise.

It should be noted that the condition to “tax fat people by body weight” was not incorporated into ObamaCare. However, now that you know that such was a possibility, what are your views? Just from reading both the pros and cons, do you consider a tax on obesity fair or unconstitutional?

[Image via Bing]