Part of comp plan update, land use designation changes can set stage for future development

Related Stories Boulder survey: Housing is top concern

Updates to the Boulder Valley Comprehensive Plan are the only time the property owners and community members can request changes to the land use designations that describe the city's vision for the best use of a property.

Land use designations are different than zoning. Zoning determines the legal uses of a property and might not match the land use designation, which reflects the preferred uses of the property in the comprehensive plan.

Hence, to rezone a property, the new, requested zoning must match the land use designation.

Requesting a change to the land use designation can set the stage for a property to be redeveloped or be a way for community members to restrict future redevelopment of a property.

The city and county have received 30 requests as part of this update, and on Tuesday, the City Council will hold a joint meeting with the Planning Board to discuss those requests that lie inside the city or in unincorporated enclaves within city limits.

Requests on property outside city limits, such as the site of a proposed affordable housing project near Twin Lakes in Gunbarrel, will be discussed at a meeting in February.

Unlike other planning decisions, where the City Council or the Boulder County Commissioners have the final say, land use change requests must be approved by both those bodies, the Boulder Planning Board and the Boulder County Planning Commission, regardless of where the property is located. If any one of those four bodies turn it down, the request is denied.

Advertisement

Boulder planners have recommended six requests within the city move forward for more analysis and discussion.

Naropa University has asked for changes to two properties, one at 2130 Arapahoe Ave. on the main campus from high-density residential to public, and one at 6287 Arapahoe Ave. on the east campus from community industrial to community business. Naropa is seeking the changes as it develops a master plan for its main and east campuses.

Neighbors have asked to reverse a land use designation change at 385 Broadway from the last comprehensive plan update. There is a medical office building on the site, despite its residential zoning, and in 2008, a previous owner successfully changed the designation to transitional business. However, the City Council turned down a rezoning request earlier this month that would have allowed townhomes to be built there, and several members said they support returning to the previous land use designation to prevent higher density development on the site.

The former Mental Health Partners building at 3303 Broadway has a designation of public, but the organization hopes to sell the site to Fulton Hill Properties for a three-story, 94-unit apartment building. The developer has requested a change from public to medium- or high-density residential on the site.

Boulder Community Health wants to change the designation for properties at 4801, 4855, 4865, 4885, and 4895 Riverbend Road from transitional business to public. The hospital bought the properties near its Foothills campus as part of its redevelopment plans, and the city recently allowed medical uses in office spaces in the area.

The owners of the Table Mesa Shopping Center have requested that portions of 693 and 695 S. Broadway be changed from medium-density residential to community business. The properties are on the southern edge of the shopping center and contain portions of existing commercial buildings and parking lots. City planners said further analysis is needed to see if the change is consistent with neighborhood needs, as well as the desire of the owner to change uses of certain buildings within the shopping center over time.

Mt. Calvary Lutheran Church, 3485 Stanford Court, wants to change the designation from low-density to medium-density residential. The church may sell the property to move to a smaller building and wants to use the site for possible senior or other multi-family housing. Planners said the change would address a need for more housing but needs to be analyzed for compatibility with the surrounding areas.

Requests that move forward will be discussed again by the Planning Board on Thursday and by the City Council on Jan. 5 before being considered by the county.

Erica Meltzer: 303-473-1355, meltzere@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/meltzere