The four insurers on the federally run exchange in Tennessee previewed the 2016 plans at a forum hosted by a state agency. Speakers underscored the importance of research as insurers tweak networks.

Tennesseans who buy health insurance on the federally run exchange could see a jump in prices in 2016. (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto) Story Highlights Open enrollment for health insurance starts Nov. 1.

Up to 600,000 Tennesseans could be eligible to buy insurance on the federally run exchange.

Shoppers will need to pay attention to the networks offered.

Open enrollment for 2016 health insurance on the federally run exchange is right around the corner, and even the insurers say the key to understanding your plan is researching and understanding the network of providers you're getting.

Representatives from BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee, Cigna, Humana and UnitedHealthcare presented overviews of their plans at a forum hosted by the Tennessee Department of Commerce and Insurance designed to give those who help people enroll in plans a preview of the offerings. TDCI has hosted the forum each year the exchange has been in place under the Affordable Care Act.

At the end of September, there were 191,311 covered lives on the federally run exchange, according to the TDCI.

The presenters from each insurer underscored how important it is for shoppers to be diligent about the details of the plans and give some thought to what is important. Premiums on some plans could be higher than in 2015, so some people may be looking at different networks as a way to cut costs.

Shoppers are often more concerned with price than network, said Jackie Shrago, a volunteer with Get Covered Tennessee who helps people navigate healthcare.gov.

Many of the plans are going to have narrow networks, or a limited number of doctors and facilities that take the insurance, as a way to keep costs down for the shopper.

The presentations, which focused on costs and how networks are designed to be cost-effective, indicated to Shrago that insurers are "getting the message" that cost is often atop people's minds.

People are willing to pay a slightly higher premium each month for a lower deductible, she said. And people are often willing to change doctors if it means a lower monthly premium.

2016 Open Enrollment key dates Open enrollment Nov. 1-Jan. 31. The earliest an insurance plan can start is Jan. 1. The enrollment deadline for a Jan. 1 start is Dec. 15. Email Holly Fletcher your questions about open enrollment at hfletcher@tennessean.com with the subject line "2016."

Consumers will need to be aware about which providers and facilities are covered under the network.

For people buying Cigna plans, there will be no out-of-network benefits except for emergency care. The company is moving to exclusive provider organizations in its three markets in the state.

Cigna's plans in Nashville and the Tri-Cities area will operate as an individual network, so, for example, someone with a Tri-Cities plan would be out of network in the Nashville area.

Around Nashville, Saint Thomas Health and Vanderbilt University Medical Center will not be covered under Humana's network — only TriStar hospitals are covered. Humana will sell plans in Knoxville, Memphis and Nashville.

Across all the plans, Tennesseans who live in counties around Memphis, Nashville and northeast parts of the state will have the most choices.

The field of choices is smaller this year because Community Health Alliance, which offered plans the past two years, will not sell plans for 2016 after it voluntarily agreed to wind down its operations at the request of the TDCI.

The Knoxville-based co-op offered plans across the state last year but hit rocky financial footing, as have several other co-ops created under the Affordable Care Act.

People who live in more rural counties, such as Henderson, Dickson, Maury and Cumberland, will be choosing from BCBST and UnitedHealthcare, which is new on the exchange this year.

Michael Eiselstein, director of individual products at BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee, said its Network E is "all about education, education, education." The E network is built around Erlanger hospitals in Chattanooga; University of Tennessee Medical Center in the Knoxville area; Methodist hospital system in Memphis; and Mission Point Health Partners, an affiliate of Saint Thomas Health, in the greater Nashville area.

BCBST, which sells plans in all parts of the state, also offers more inclusive networks P and S.

UnitedHealthcare began to build its network by finding hospitals that wanted to be included and building its doctor network from there, Bryan Krutzmeier, an account executive for UnitedHealthcare, told the audience.

The network, which covers the entire state, is a "relatively narrow network," so people will need to check which doctors and hospitals are covered.

There could be about 600,000 people across the state eligible to buy insurance on the exchange.

More than 231,000 enrolled for 2015, while Get Covered Tennessee estimates more than 400,000 could be eligible but not enrolled. BCBST's decision to end grandfathered and grandmothered plans means tens of thousands with individual insurance plans will be shopping for new plans.

Sandy Hayes, executive director of the Rural Health Association of Tennessee, is concerned about whether Tennesseans in more rural areas will get the information about enrollment season.

Many, including some in her own family, are unaware that they can enroll and that subsidies exist, while others may not know that the penalties for being uninsured are rising significantly in the coming two years.

Hayes is also one of the 27,000 Tennesseans covered by CHA who will be re-evaluating their options this season since the co-op is no longer on the marketplace.

"My biggest concern is we still have many rural places that still have not heard this message," Hayes said.

Reach Holly Fletcher at 615-259-8287 or on Twitter @hollyfletcher.

TAKEAWAYS ABOUT 2016 OPEN ENROLLMENT IN TENNESSEE

BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee, Cigna, Humana and UnitedHealthcare previewed their offerings for the 2016 federally run exchange to a group, mostly comprised of navigators and volunteers who help people enroll in plans. Here are some takeaways from the meeting from health care reporter Holly Fletcher.

Study

People shopping for health insurance should research which providers and facilities are covered in the insurance plan.

Many of the networks, from all insurers, are going to be narrow as insurance companies try to manage costs to members.

Think about what's important to you, such as monthly cost, total out-of-pocket costs, keeping a certain doctor, certain services or prescription coverage, so you can look for plans that best fit your needs.

Urban vs. Rural Options

BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee and UnitedHealthcare are the only two insurers selling plans in all parts of the state.

Cigna is offering plans in the regions around Memphis, Nashville and the Tri-Cities.

Humana is offering plans in the regions around Knoxville, Memphis and Nashville.

Make sure you check which facilities and providers are covered in your area. Narrow networks, whether by design to control cost or because of provider participation, work best when you are aware of what's in your area.

Prescription Coverage

Don't forget to check what prescriptions and pharmacies are covered by the plans. Different plans offer different levels of drug coverage.

For example Humana offers prescription coverage at CVS, Wal-Mart, Sam's Club, Humana Pharmacy and Publix pharmacies.

Digital Perks

There could be less variance in pricing on premiums this year than in past years, so insurers talked about what they offer that might be attractive.

The insurers all have multiple online portals and apps geared to helping people find doctors and facilities, as well as other features.

If you like to use a fitness tracker such as a FitBit or Jawbone, look for how they are incorporating those into portals.

Sandy Hayes, executive director of Rural Health Association of Tennessee, said the insurers have done a good job of making sure there are apps for smartphones, which are often more prevalent in rural areas than Internet access.

Confusion persists

The open enrollment season could be confusing — again — for shoppers.

In the past, discovering whether your doctor was covered in certain networks could take several visits to websites. There are supposed to be tools this year to help streamline that process.

However, there could be some issues for people who are eligible for tax credits but did not file their taxes, or were delayed in doing so.

Michael Eiselstein, director of individual products for BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee, said the insurer expects this to be a hectic year as well, particularly for those who are re-enrolling.

In the past, some enrollees would immediately call an insurer to confirm their application, but given the federal system has to process the information first, people should wait 48 hours before checking with an insurer.

Jackie Shrago, with Get Covered Tennessee, urges people to work with a navigator or other volunteer to help navigate enrollment, particularly if your plan has gone up in price, is no longer available or you want to find a better option.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1LJtwTz