The Edison Mall is located along U.S. 41 in Fort Myers, just north of Colonial Boulevard. (Photo: news-press.com file photo)

In Brief

rue21 expands at Edison Mall

rue21 in Edison Mall will move into an expanded space in late April. In addition to the current retail selection, the new space will house the rue+ line.

Offering an assortment of apparel and accessories for men and women, rue21 is slated to open its expanded, 7,000 square-foot store in April. The store will be located next to their current space.

In addition to the current retail selection of graphic tees, hoodies, dresses, jackets, jeans and the store's own line of shoes, bags and accessories named "etc!" the expanded store will carry rue+, rue21's collection of plus-size clothing that features tops, bottoms and outerwear.

CEO Law Forum to be held Saturday

The CEO Law Forum will be held on Saturday from 8 a.m. to 1 p.m. at the FGCU Cohen Center. The forum cost is $99 per person, and advance registration is required because seating is limited. A light breakfast and lunch will be provided. Attendees will have the opportunity to meet one-on-one with presenting business attorneys. Register online at fsbdcswfl.org.

Forum sessions will include: misunderstood and misapplied employment law provisions, trademarks, estate planning, commercial litigation, divorce and how it affects your business, and accounts receivable collections. The CEO Law Forum is for established businesses and ideal for business owners or key managers.

For information, call 745-3706.

Local CPA firm launches website

Gordon H. Zink CPA, a certified public accounting and tax filing professional firm with headquarters in Fort Myers, launched an interactive website at zinkcpa.com. The new website centers on expedient functionality and accentuates an ease of navigation including customized question-and-answer links to critical tax queries and financial structure services.

The home page delivers a user-friendly dashboard, easy access to Zink CPA products and services including links to downloadable IRS tax forms, tax alerts and up-to-date tax refund information.

The website provides resources and opportunities for new visitors to explore the range of services offered by the team of tax and accounting professionals to stay directly connected to an elevated range of information for current changes in the marketplace.

Extra enrollment period for Obamacare

Obamacare will have an extra enrollment period that will take place through April 30. This enrollment period is for people who owe the ACA tax penalty for 2014 and those who were confused about the 2015 enrollment period. This period will allow an extra enrollment opportunity to avoid the fee for the rest of 2015.

The extra enrollment period is meant to give those without any coverage an opportunity to avoid the rest of the fees for 2015. Please note that those who do not have a health care plan for 2015 will still owe the fee for the months they didn't obtain coverage, or an exemption.

You may qualify for the extra enrollment period if you paid the fee with your 2014 federal income tax return for not having health coverage in 2014 and/or you were confused and didn't know about open enrollment dates for 2015 coverage; and need another opportunity to enroll in coverage for the remainder of 2015. Coverage is only offered through the marketplace during this enrollment period.

Newsmakers

Stephanie Schlegel honored at Design Center

Interior designer Stephanie Schlegel has been recognized as Miromar Design Center's March 2015 Designer of Distinction. She is the owner of Fort Myers-based Schlegel Design Group. With 14 years of experience in commercial, retail and residential interior design, Schlegel is a registered interior designer and has worked on projects in Columbus, Ohio, and throughout Southwest Florida.

Each month Miromar Design Center recognizes the talents, loyalty and support of interior design professionals based upon nominations from the center's 45 store managers. Designers are honored in this year-round appreciation program for their professionalism, creativity and commitment.

Greg Weisburgh promoted at B&I

Greg Weisburgh has been promoted to electrical department manager at B&I. Previously in the role of project manager since 2013, Weisburgh works with the B&I operations team to oversee the day-to-day operations on projects throughout the Southeastern United States and the Caribbean.

Weisburgh has more than 19 years of experience in the construction industry.

Prior to joining B&I, he was a director of construction, and worked on such projects as the General Electric Global Research Facility in New York, Coconut Point mall, and numerous Lee and Collier county schools.

Maureen Gerrity earns credential

Maureen T. Gerrity of the David Lawrence Center in Naples recently earned a specialty credential called a certificate of added qualifications from the National Commission on Certification of Physician Assistants.

Gerrity was awarded a CAQ in psychiatry, a distinction earned by meeting licensure, education and experience requirements and then passing an exam in the specialty. She is one of only 36 certified PAs in Florida .

Read or Share this story: http://newspr.es/1MKxbio