Bless the hearts of TV weather forecasters who use the word "severe" in every report, even if only to report that no "severe" weather is expected. At our house, we place bets on how many seconds into the forecast the word will be used. Y'all take yourselves WAY too seriously. To the meteorologists who don't indulge in this panic-mongering, a sincere thank you for keeping it real.

BYH to N.C. Rep. Susan Martin and Greenville City Councilman P.J. Connelly for standing up for common sense moral values. I am so glad I voted for both of you.

I am a mother and I like to say thanks to all the businesses that allow young people off in time to go to prom. It is a special event for them and their parents. There is one grocery store in my hometown that I will never ever shop at again and I am doing all I can to hold my tongue.

With red light cameras people fail to meet their accuser, cameras have been used extensively as a revenue generator, and studies have shown they create more rear-end collisions. Can you imagine how it would slow traffic to stop a red light violator on Memorial Drive and take 10 minutes to write a ticket? The school board doesn't need to be in the red light business nor should it contract away one dime of its money. Greenville has the red light problem, not the school board.

I love how people don't follow the rules. You were clearly told not to discuss it with anybody and you're out in the back hallway talking to someone!

Bless the hearts of those who fly through large airports. I hear the TSA check-in lines are around the building. Will the same government employees running the TSA also be handling Obamacare?

Where is the talk about Greenville getting a minor league baseball team? We got a parking deck and I would think the next logical step would be a minor league baseball team or to annex Farmville.

If I had Trump's money I would probably have a trophy wife as lovely as Melania. Of course at my age I would probably be sensible and get a flat-bottomed boat and count on winning a trophy at bass fishing tournaments.

BYH to those drivers who can't put down their cell phones and focus their attention on driving. It's a shame that you think your call/text is more important than the safety of others around you.

Bless your heart to our youth. I work in the food service industry, and I've never had a young adult become disrespectful and rude to employees when their food isn't coming out fast enough, their order was wrong, etc. Now, full grown adults on the other hand — not so much. We could all learn a little something from our youth.

Bless your heart to Donald Trump on calling President Obama "ignorant" during a recent interview. How could he call the president, who is the most powerful man on the planet, ignorant?

Send contributions using the Bless Your Heart box at Reflector.com, by emailing to blessyourheart@reflector.com or by calling 252-329-9564.