The spot at Central Park where the bear was found. Sonja Sharp for The Wall Street Journal

A black bear cub was found dead Monday in Central Park, officials said.

A Central Park Conservancy worker found the deceased cub under a bush near W. 69th St. and West Drive Monday morning, a New York City Police Department spokeswoman said.

The employee called 911, and officers from the 22nd precinct responded, she said. The NYPD’s Animal Cruelty Squad is now investigating the matter, she added.

The Central Park Conservancy, which confirmed the discovery, said it was extremely unusual.

“We’re always alarmed and distraught when any wildlife is injured,” spokeswoman Elizabeth Kaledin said. “We don’t know if it was injured in Central Park.”

She described the discovery site as a crime scene and referred further inquiries to the NYPD.

The bear cub was about 3 feet long and apparently not from the zoo, since no bears are missing, a law-enforcement official said. The creature suffered some trauma and has lacerations on its side. While authorities initially said the Bronx Zoo would conduct a necropsy, the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation is taking possession of the animal, officials said. The creature will be taken to Albany to a wildlife pathology unit for the necropsy.

Marianne Sponholz, 63, a volunteer with the Central Park Conservancy, was on her way home through the park when she noticed the cordoned off area. When she heard about the bear, she was “shocked.”

“I work in this zone and we’ve never found a bear cub,” she said. “They do find rats, occasionally a cat, but a bear cub, no.”

Dog walker John McKinley, 59, was also taken aback. “It makes me think there’s a sick person who could dump a bear cub in the park,” he said. “Dogs are off leash before 9 a.m. — they could come up to it and it might be diseased.”

Lucas Altman, 43, who lives across the street, said he was walking his black Labradors around 11 p.m. Sunday night when they both ran over to the bush where the bear was later found. One of them, Sam, eventually walked away, but another, named Nash, stuck around the bush.

“They smelled something in the bushes around 11 o’clock,” Mr. Altman said. “[The detective] said it was very helpful because they’re trying to figure out a timeline.”

Pervaiz Shallwani contributed to this article

Corrections & amplifications: In an earlier version of this article, Marianne Sponholz’s name was misspelled.

A photo of the bear under a bush in Central Park. Sonja Sharp for The Wall Street Journal

Florence Slatkin, with her dog Paco, points to the spot where she and a friend discovered a dead bear cub Monday in New York’s Central Park. Associated Press