Chase Elliott (9) and Elliott Sadler (11) moves through a turn during the Gardner Denver 200. Credit: Getty Images

By ,

Elkhart Lake — Despite a fourth-place effort in his first NASCAR Nationwide Series road-course event, Chase Elliott struggled to accentuate the positive.

The rookie ran off the track with 15 laps to go, got a grill full of dirt and grass, and that experience forced Elliott to take a conservative tack in the waning laps at Road America.

"We had been off the track once today and we had dodged a couple bullets," Elliott said. "At that point, I didn't feel like it was worth me getting in there and start to wheel hop or anything. So I kind of took the conservative route, which I probably shouldn't have, but I did."

One competitor Elliott wasn't able to dodge was Alex Tagliani, who roared to a second-place finish on a restart with two laps to go. Tagliani was 23rd on the restart and passed Elliott and Kevin O'Connell in the 12th and 13th of 14 turns.

Elliott was running wet tires and Tagliani had slicks, or dry tires. Elliott said he had a feeling Tagliani would be aggressive down the stretch.

"I figured he was going to dive bomb me, I just didn't know when or where," Elliott said. "It's just frustrating.

"I understand he was on slicks and I understand the situation, but that could have easily taken us both out right there. That's just not worth it....The guy wasn't going to win the race, we had two corners to go and (leader) Brendan (Gaughan) was like 15 car lengths ahead of us. It's just not going to happen."

Tagliani said the pass was worth taking and that Elliott should have known he was going to attempt to make a pass, considering he was running slicks.

"As soon as he saw we were on slicks, he understood that at some point I'm going to make a pass and cross into the wet," Tagliani said. "We were door-to-door, so, if I'm on the inside of someone, I try to take the line away.

"He still finished right behind me. There's a fine line between taking someone out and passing him, and allowing him to finish. That's what I did, so I think it was all right."

Elliott and fill-in crew chief Ernie Cope worked together for the first time this weekend while Greg Ives stayed home to be with his wife, who delivered their third child Friday. Elliott also had only a half-lap of practice Friday after he damaged the engine by missing a shift.

The performance was the eighth top-five finish through 14 races this season for Elliott, who remains third in the points standings, 11 back of leader Regan Smith.

Tough finish:Sam Hornish Jr. muscled his way to the lead three times, but throttle issues and race strategy relegated Hornish to 14th place.

He also felt that his team was off a bit with car setup for wet conditions, and he said he struggled from the 27th lap to the end.

"We didn't have a good enough forward drive off the corner just being able to put the throttle down in the dry conditions," Hornish said. "When it got wet, that made it a little more difficult to deal with. And then we were between gears where we wanted to be. We were not benefited by any water on the racetrack."

Hornish said he made the wrong call in the closing laps with not switching from grooved to slick tires as the track died, and getting a bump from behind also didn't help.

"I felt like it was too wet for dry tires and made it to the exit of pit road, in that 5 minutes or whatever it took us to go around the track, I was like, 'Man, I made the wrong call,'" Hornish said. "And then we got ran into and pushed the fender into the rear tire, and it just killed that tire.

"It was almost like putting a break on the tires. Every time I thought something was going to go right at the end, it ended up going the opposite way."

Bad break: Rookie Dylan Kwasniewski started second and ran with the leaders, but his race was derailed by a broken drive shaft. Kwasniewski finished 26th after his team was able to make a repair to his Ganassi Racing Chevrolet.

"We just had a freak accident with the drive shaft," Kwasniewski said. "It broke where the yoke was. We had a really fast car and passed (Hornish) when he was in the lead to gain a lap back. It's unfortunate when you have that fast of a car and have a mishap."

Kwasniewski said it was a great learning experience to run behind Hornish.

"I wanted to see where I was getting beat, and I picked up a couple spots and gained some speed," he said. "It was a learning experience and confidence booster."

Trans-Am: Appleton's Cliff Ebben fell 1.518 seconds short of Doug Peterson of Bonita Springs, Fla., victory in the 25-lap race that finished the day. Hurley native Tony Ave completed the podium.

Double duty:JJ Yeley finished fifth and Landon Cassill eighth and then headed to Sonoma, Calif., to run Sunday's Toyota/Save Mart 350 for the Sprint Cup Series.

Pirelli World Challenge: Pole-sitter Mike Skeen recaptured the lead from Johnny O'Connell with five laps to go and then beat Andy Pilgrim to sweep the weekend.