POLITICO Pro Margaritas, grocers caught up in FDA menu rule

Restaurant chains will soon have to post calories for every dish of chicken Alfredo, every cheeseburger combo, every margarita and most every other item on the menu thanks to new rules from the FDA expected Tuesday.

The two long-delayed and far-reaching regulations will cover foods served at chain restaurants, grocery stores, vending machines and even movie theaters.

Story Continued Below

But this piece of President Barack Obama’s legacy on food policy won’t take effect without a fight.

Big chain restaurants are on board: They pushed for a national standard to override a patchwork of state and local menu labeling rules. McDonald’s adopted its own nationwide labeling in 2012. But grocery store and convenience store chains, the likes of Whole Foods, Sheetz and 7-Eleven, are expected to put up a fight about slapping calories next to their kale salad, nachos and Big Gulps. Movie theaters and the alcohol industry are also expected to fiercely protest being included in the mandate.

A year from now, the calorie counts will have to be posted on menus right next to food items, including at the drive-thru, and businesses will have to provide more complete nutrition information upon request. The rules apply to chains if they have more than 20 locations.

“This is a landmark public health policy,” said Margo Wootan, director of nutrition policy at Center for Science and the Public Interest. She’s pushed for menu labeling for more than a decade. “The Republicans should be all for this. This is not nanny state run amok — this is ensuring that people have the information to make their own choices.”

Industry groups are not weighing in until they see the full text of the rule, which is expected to be posted before 9 a.m. EST.

The “final rule appears to go beyond what Congress intended,” said Rob Rosado, director of government relations for the Food Marketing Institute, which represents large national grocery chains like Walmart and Kroger. Rosado said FMI was denied early access to details of the rule.

Sen. Tom Harkin (D-Iowa) and Rep. Rosa DeLauro (D-Conn.), the duo credited for inserting the menu labeling language into the Affordable Care Act, had urged the administration to go big with the rule. Both lawmakers lauded the Food and Drug Administration for covering such a broad swath of establishments and for putting movie theaters and alcohol into the rule — a bold move as neither were in the original proposal.

Getting alcohol in the rule was a big win for health advocates, as booze is the fifth-largest source of calories for adults. A Squeezarita at Don Pablo’s, for example, has 359 calories, which would be listed next to it on the menu.

“The overwhelming majority of the comments [the agency received] were very supportive of including alcohol on public health grounds,” said FDA Commissioner Margaret Hamburg, on a call with reporters Monday.

Grocery and convenience store chains that want nothing to do with labeling have allies in Sens. Roy Blunt (R-Mo.) and Angus King (I-Maine) and Reps. Cathy McMorris Rodgers (R-Wash.) and Loretta Sanchez (D-Calif.). They introduced a bill last year aimed at keeping the regulations narrowly focused on chain restaurants, with a special provision to let pizza chains post calories online instead of on their menu boards.

Blunt, a member of the Senate GOP leadership, remains opposed to menu labeling and “will continue to fight against it,” an aide recently told POLITICO.

The White House fully expects the rules to spark backlash on Capitol Hill, but the administration is betting that food companies will only go so far to publicly stand against calorie disclosures that it believes American consumers want — especially as they consume one-third of their calories outside of the home.

Health advocates are thrilled because the final regulations are as strong, if not stronger, than the rules that have taken effect in New York City, California, Philadelphia and elsewhere. In some cases, menu labeling has led companies to reformulate their products to contain fewer calories so they appear healthier on menu boards — it’s exactly what nutrition proponents hope will happen nationwide.

The menu labeling rule is expected to cost the food industry some $315 million to implement — about $1,000 per establishment — and about $44 million per year after that, FDA’s original cost-benefit analysis shows.

A separate rule mandating calorie counts be posted for products in vending machines — if a company owns more than 20 machines — is expected to apply to the vast majority of vending outlets in the United States, costing the industry about $24 million annually. That comes out to less than $10 per machine each year, according to FDA. Vending companies covered under the regulations have two years to comply.

The agency could not tally the economic benefit of the two rules, citing a lack of data on what impact calorie counts might have on consumer purchases, but if less than 1 percent of obese Americans shaved 100 calories per week off their diet, the costs of each rule could break even with the economic benefit, FDA’s analysis says.

Food fight

It’s been more than three years since FDA issued its proposed rules in April 2011 — a long delay that most blamed on politics and intense lobbying from retail giants and the pizza industry.

But implementing the obscure Affordable Care Act provision also proved more difficult than the agency had anticipated, FDA’s Hamburg said Monday.

“It was much more complicated than we had initially thought it would be in terms of really defining restaurant-type establishments,” she said.

Defining what types of establishments should be covered has been at the heart of a bitter, years-long fight between the restaurant industry, which pushed for a broad rule, and basically everyone else. The National Grocers Association, which represents independent grocers, the American Pizza Community, FMI and others formed a coalition to try to keep the supermarkets out and give more flexibility to pizza chains that didn’t want to post the calories for a whole pizza on menu boards.

FDA ended up working in more flexibility to the rule, allowing pizza companies to post calories per slice as long as they also list how many slices per pie. It’s not clear whether the move will ameliorate the industry’s concerns. The agency also narrowed what types of foods would need to be labeled in grocery stores, carving out exemptions for loaves of bread and sliced deli meat, but still covering hot food bars and other prepared foods.

Still, it’s a safe bet that the grocery industry will push for regulatory relief from Congress.

“There’s bipartisan interest in addressing these issues,” Rosado said before the final rules were issued. “What we’ve been proposing is not radical.”

Restaurants argue that since supermarkets increasingly compete with their sector by offering various prepared foods, they should have to post calories the same way.