A Tulsa physician who prosecutors said is known on the streets of Tulsa as the “queen of lean” will continue to be barred from practicing medicine, based on a medical board decision Thursday.

The state Board of Medical Licensure and Supervision voted unanimously to keep an emergency suspension in place on the medical license of Dr. Tamerlane Rozsa, a Tulsa-based family medicine physician.

Rozsa will have another hearing before the board in September, when the board likely will determine whether she can keep her medical license.

Her license was suspended after an emergency hearing in early April in Tulsa.

The hearing was held after board investigators asked her to stop practicing medicine and stop prescribing narcotics, and Rozsa refused, according to board records.

“(Rozsa) is in no condition mentally or physically to practice medicine at this time,” the board complaint reads. “...(Rozsa) is prescribing large quantities of CDS (controlled dangerous substances) without establishing any medical necessity and without adequate records.”

Lawyer says her health better

At Thursday’s hearing, Rozsa’s attorney, Daniel Gamino, said her health has improved since board investigators came to her office, and her office has undergone construction to improve conditions for patients.

“The doctor is able to practice medicine without danger to public safety and welfare,” Gamino said.

During the hearing, Rozsa said her medical license has been in good standing for years and that she doesn’t have any pending malpractice claims.

Meanwhile, prosecutors argued that not only was Rozsa’s medical office “filthy,” but she prescribed high quantities of painkillers, controlled dangerous substances, without much discretion about whether patients needed them.

Jason Seay, an assistant attorney general for the board, said Rozsa’s case was not about “old paint and ugly carpet,” but rather how much and how often Rozsa prescribed powerful painkillers and how she acted during patient visits.

Seay said Rozsa was known as the “queen of lean” among drug seekers because of the amount of promethazine with codeine that she prescribes.

Substance called ‘Purple Drank’

The substance is known as “purple drank,” especially among hip hop artists, and is sometimes mixed with soda pop or candy to enhance its flavor.

Rozsa told investigators, “It’s a very popular drug among the black population” and her black patients preferred the cough syrup to others, according to board records.

Rozsa said Seay and the board’s claims against her were “largely untrue.”

Seay asked Rozsa if she remembered when the state Health Department representative came to investigate her office. Rozsa said she did.

“You had her escorted out of your office?” Seay asked.

“I did,” Rozsa said, adding that the woman came without documentation showing she had authority to look around the office.

Both Gamino and Seay made multiple objections throughout the hearing.

Seay showed a photograph of Rozsa sitting in a wheelchair in her office with blankets over her, her prescription pad in her lap.

Seay said Rozsa lived in her office, sleeping on an air mattress.

Rozsa said that wasn’t true and that her home was being remodeled, has mold and was burglarized and trashed.

“It just seems, to some extent, unbelievable,” said Dr. J. Andy Sullivan, a longtime board member. “You were living in your office in a wheelchair.”