SCOTTSDALE, Ariz. — The crux of Boone Logan’s problem is his left elbow. It’s sore again and the reliever has yet to pitch in a Cactus League game.

Logan, who signed a three-year, $16.5 million deal with the Rockies before the 2014 season, said he “got a little quick, a little too soon” when spring training opened.

“It’s nothing major,” he said. “It just takes a little longer to get going than it did back in the day.

Logan, 31, has had trouble with his elbow since having bone chips and a bone spur removed in the fall of 2013, after his final year with the New York Yankees.

He pitched in just 35 games in 2014, posting a 6.84 ERA. Last season, working primarily as a lefty specialist, he made 60 appearances, posting a 4.33 ERA.

Logan said he doesn’t know when he will pitch in a spring game, but he was encouraged by a 25-pitch bullpen session Saturday.

Rockies Mailbag: Pose a question for Patrick Saunders

“It felt good … I definitely think I can be ready (for opening day),” he said, adding that there is no structural problem with his elbow.

Injury updates. The Rockies haven’t suffered any major injuries so far this spring. They do, however, have a few players sidelined.

The most concerning injury is the strained right oblique suffered by pitching prospect Tyler Anderson. He was scratched about 15 minutes before first pitch on Saturday while playing catch. He’s scheduled to undergo an MRI on Monday.

Anderson, the team’s top draft pick out of Oregon in 2011, has a 6.75 ERA in two Cactus League games. He missed last season because of a stress fracture in his left elbow suffered late in the 2014 season at Double-A Tulsa.

Utility infielder Daniel Descalso’s left hand remains swollen and he will also get an MRI on Monday. He was hit by a pitch on Friday.

“We X-rayed it and there were no broken bones, so that’s a good thing,” Descalso said Sunday. “But it’s still really swollen, so we want to see what’s going on.”

Descalso, 29, is a veteran, so missing a few spring games is not a big deal to him. Still, he wants to get back on the field.

“I want to get this cleaned up and get back to it,” he said. “I realize that now is the time to be cautious and not push it. Yeah, I want to get out there and play, but I want to make sure it’s not something that is going to linger.”