Follow along with News 9 and News On 6 as we post in-game updates from Saturday's Bedlam clash in Stillwater. We'll be posting updates after every quarter on different in-game developments.

UPDATE: FINAL - Oklahoma 33, Oklahoma State 24

Wow. Complete and utter Bedlam in Stillwater. The Cowboys took a 24-20 lead with a very quick, 89-yard drive. The Cowboys needed just 2:41 and seven plays to re-take the lead with 1:46 remaining in the game. The Sooners got the ball at their own 34-yard line with Blake Bell at quarterback. Bell worked quickly, hitting Sterling Shepard and Jalen Saunders for big chunks of yardage. OSU cornerback Justin Gilbert dropped a game-clinching interception, and Bell eventually hit Saunders for the game-winning score with 24 seconds remaining.

The Cowboys had one final shot, but Charles Tapper sacked Clint Chelf on second down and on OSU's final play, the Cowboys fumbled a hook-and-ladder play and OU's Eric Striker fell on the ball in the end zone for the final margin.

Check back with News9.com for complete postgame coverage.



UPDATE: 8:00 remaining in the fourth quarter - Oklahoma 20, Oklahoma State 17

The Sooners ran off 5:30 on a 12-play, 53-yard drive that resulted in a 39-yard Michael Hunnicutt field goal. The Cowboys came back down the field, but their drive stalled, forcing a punt. Kip Smith pinned the Sooners at the 1-yard line, and that's where the Sooners have it with eight minutes to play.

UPDATE: End of the third quarter - Oklahoma State 17, Oklahoma 17

Well, Bedlam is breaking out in a big way in Stillwater. After an interception by Oklahoma's Julian Wilson gave the Sooners the ball at the OU 40-yard line, Bob Stoops and Josh Heupel broke open the play book to tie the game.

First, the Sooners ran a double reverse to Jalen Saunders, who gained 37 yards to the OSU 7-yard line. Kendal Thompson threw the key block that sprung Saunders for the big gain. On third down, Blake Bell found Brannon Green open in the back of the end zone, but Daytawion Lowe knocked the ball away, bringing up fourth down.

Instead of kicking a field goal, the Sooners pulled the fake and holder Grant Bothun hit kicker Michael Hunnicutt for the score. Hunnicutt was plastered just after crossing the goal line. The play was reviewed and the call was confirmed.







UPDATE:13:18 left in third quarter - Oklahoma State 17, Oklahoma 10



Kendall Thompson in for the Sooners to start the second half threw an interception to OSU's Kevin Peterson on the first play of the third quarter.

The Cowboys pounced on the opportunity, going 82 yards in six plays capped by a pass from Chelf to Roland on a wheel route for a 15-yard touchdown. OSU reclaims the lead 17-10 with 13:18 left in the quarter.

Knight is in a shoulder sling on the sideline.



UPDATE: Halftime – Oklahoma State 10, Oklahoma 10

The Cowboys and Sooners each tacked on a field goal in the second quarter, heading to the locker rooms deadlocked at 10 a piece.

OSU had a chance for more early in the quarter when a 51-yard scamper from Desmond Roland set the Pokes up in the red zone but OU's defense held firm inside the 5, stopping OSU on a fourth-and-goal run from the 1 to earn a turnover on downs.

The Cowboys' field goal drive took five plays for 17 yards before Ben Grogan connected on a 41-yard attempt to give OSU a 10-7 lead with 8:40 remaining.

The Sooners answered on the next drive with a 15-play, 60-yard drive but the OSU defense turned the offense away, as well, forcing Trevor Knight out of bounds for no gain at the 4-yard line on third down. Michael Hunnicutt made a 21-yard field goal to knot the game at 10-10 with 38 seconds left.

Knight appeared to land awkwardly on his third-and-goal run near the end of the half and headed to the locker room early. We will update his status as soon as possible.

Oklahoma State has a 200-to-132 edge in total offense at the half and both teams have done the bulk of their work on the ground, with OSU holding a 158-to-104 edge in rushing.

Both quarterbacks have struggled throwing in the frigid temperatures so far. Clint Chelf is 5-of-12 passing for 42 yards and Knight is 3-of-7 for 28.

Roland has 110 rushing yards on 9.2 yards per carry and a touchdown and those numbers would be even more impressive if his 75-yard touchdown on the first play of the game hadn't been called back for holding. Jeremy Smith has added 36 yards on five carries.

Knight and Brennan Clay are neck-and-neck for the Sooners on the ground with 47 and 45 yards, respectively.

UPDATE: End of the first quarter- Oklahoma State 7, Oklahoma 7

The Oklahoma special teams are winning the day so far for the Sooners. After forcing a three-and-out, OU receiver Jalen Saunders fielded the Kip Smith punt and took it 64 yards for the touchdown.

The Cowboys offense is having a lot of success on the ground against the Sooners, and Oklahoma has yet to establish anything consistent on offense so far. The special teams are keeping OU in the game, but how long that will last is anyone's guess.



UPDATE: 4:00 left in the first quarter- Oklahoma State 7, Oklahoma 0

The Cowboys' Desmond Roland scores on a 1-yard touchdown run to cap a 99-yard drive for Oklahoma State. Roland scored on a 75-yard run on the first play of the game, but it was called back for holding.

The Sooners have had the ball twice in good field position, but have failed to do anything with the opportunities. Punter Jed Barnett has had two punts downed at the 1-yard line so far.

OU linebacker Frank Shannon left the game with an injury on the OSU touchdown drive, forcing walk-on Caleb Gastelum into action. The Sooners are now playing a true freshman and a walk-on at linebacker.