Legislation that would require all municipal police departments to equip patrol cars or patrol officers with cameras remains stalled on Gov. Chris Christie's desk, despite it passing the 45-day deadline for action.

The bill (A2280) -- inspired by sponsor Assemblyman Paul Moriarty's (D-4 of Washington Township) DWI arrest and subsequent dismissal of all charges -- was approved by the Assembly in May and the Senate in June, when it was then sent to Christie's desk for a signature or veto.

The 45-day period the governor had to act, or allow the bill to automatically become law, ended on Monday, but a clause in the state constitution allows Christie another chance at weighing in.

Specifically, it states that since the house is in temporary adjournment, Christie can act on the bill on the first day the house reconvenes.

A Christie spokesman, Kevin Roberts, said Friday that the bill "remains under review."

Christie originally pocket-vetoed the bill -- which was first introduced back in June 2013 -- this January by declining to sign or veto it before the end of the legislative session.

The legislation would require all municipalities in the state to equip newly purchased or leased patrol vehicles with in-car cameras to record motor vehicle stops and interactions with police.

When some opposed the potential financial impact of the bill, despite its establishment of a $25 surcharge on DWI convictions to fund the purchases, it was amended to allow police departments to opt for body cameras for police officers, which come at a substantially lower cost and the alternative benefit of mobility.

Evesham Township recently unveiled its purchase of 48 body cameras, one for each member of its patrol division, following in the footsteps of Wildwood Crest, Cape May County Sheriff and Atlantic City police departments.

The impetus for the bill came from Moriarty's 2012 arrest on DWI charges in his hometown of Washington Township, where he previously served as mayor.

It was an in-car police camera that recorded the arrest, showing multiple discrepancies between arresting officer Joseph DiBuonaventura's pursuit of Moriarty and what DiBuonaventura wrote about the incident in subsequent police reports.

Prosecutors cited the video as evidence Moriarty -- who has vehemently denied drinking that day -- was illegally stopped and targeted by DiBuonaventura, who is now facing 14 criminal charges including official misconduct, falsifying a police report and harassment.

Moriarty has said that the video of the incident was crucial to proving his innocence, and against the odds, since only nine out of the township's 50 patrol cars were equipped with cameras.

While the legislation would give citizens another line of defense against police wrongdoing, Moriarty said its main benefits would be toward police departments themselves, providing them with irrefutable evidence when faced with false accusations or lawsuits.

On Friday, Moriarty said he's still hopeful the bi-partisan support shown for the bill and the efforts to mitigate its cost will convince the governor to pick up his pen.

"Both Democrats and Republicans support this measure and we are still hopeful the governor will allow this important legislation to become law," said Moriarty.

---

Michelle Caffrey may be reached at mcaffrey@southjerseymedia.com . Follow her on Twitter @ShellyCaffrey . Find the South Jersey Times on Facebook