Tip to those of you who are emailing in campaigns for us to feautre. Many submitters are now sending us preview links prior to the campaign lunch. We love this and it is great! But we get a ton of submissions and sometimes it is a bit tough to keep up. Please be certain to email us once the campaign has launched as a reminder. While we cannot guarantee we will cover all of these crowdfunding campaigns we promise to look at each and everyone.

This is an all Kickstarter Mailbox this week. First we have the TriClops, a high intensity light that, while having many different uses – I am currently sizing this up for my mountain bike. Riding at night can be fun but a bit dicey. Especially if you cannot see where you are going. TriClops is perfect for biking as it generates lumens ranging from 40 to 2,500; this means it is really bright. The TriClops uses 10 Watt LEDs to generate the light. It is compact and easy to attach to just about anything. The campaign states it is GoPro compatible too. Crowdfunding on Kickstarter now, three brothers from Texas are looking to raise $40,000. This one is a Kickstarter Staff pick – watch the pitch video and you will see why.

Harold Holt was Prime Minister of Australia back in 1967. This is way before my cognizant time but Holt only lasted 22 months in office as he mysteriously disappeared, apparently while swimming, never to be seen ever again. If you jump back in time, this was a period of a great global fear as the Soviet Union was on the rise and communism was a dominant political concern. Between the cold war, intrigue and innuendo you have all the makings for a great conspiracy theory. Well crowdfunding on Kickstarter now is an effort to raise funds for a live short film. Sounds fascinating to me. Have you guys considered a feature film? There are lots of big names involved with this project by Scott Mannion as he seeks to find the Holt Truth.

RedHeads. You gotta love ’em. Two redhead sisters Adrienne and Stephanie Vendetti have started a unique business for all things redhead. They organized a Rock it Like a RedHead event in NYC and it was a big success. Now they want to take the show, and the “red carpet”, on the road and they are looking for funding on Kickstarter now. Since our 1st event, they have received thousands of requests about visiting cities all over the globe. Adrienne and Stephanie want to empower redheads everywhere. And now you can help. The Kickstarter campaign is looking to raise $15,000 now.

TriClops is the smallest and most versatile HID Lighting Technology designed specifically for use with all GoPro accessories.

“Patent Pending” TriClops will go anywhere you need a HID (high intensity display) light source. With 3 powerful 10W LEDs capable of delivering up to 2500 lumens where will you go?

A Cold War thriller that exposes the conspiracy behind Prime Minster Holt’s disappearance in 1967. Starring John Noble (Fringe, LOTR).

This is not a documentary, it’s a live action espionage short film made in the spirit of John le Carré.

SYNOPSIS

1967, the Cold War.

In the days preceding the mysterious disappearance of Australian Prime Minister Harold Holt, paranoia has engulfed the conservative government.

Rock it like a Redhead are live, red carpet beauty/fashion events for redheads. We will be touring 5 major cities in the USA in 2015!

We are Adrienne and Stephanie Vendetti — best friends, sisters, natural born redheads and co-founders of How to be a Redhead. It is the world’s only brand for redheads.