Houston Texans defensive end J.J. Watt has compiled some gaudy statistics over his last 16 games, including 24.5 sacks. Credit: Scott Halleran

By of the

WHAT'S TRENDING

The NFC playoff race is shaping up to be pretty heated with Carolina (11-0), Arizona (9-2), Minnesota (8-3) and Green Bay (8-4) leading the pack. As for the others, Atlanta and Seattle are 6-5, and the New York Giants, Chicago Bears and Tampa Bay Buccaneers are at 5-6. A look at each team's remaining opponents reveals some advantages. Based on the combined records of the remaining opponents, Atlanta has the toughest road. Its opponents are 35-20. Next among the contenders is the Giants' foes at 33-22 and the Vikings' at 32-23. The team with the easiest go of it is Washington (20-35), which does not have a team with a winning record left on its schedule. Chicago (25-30) also has a fairly easy path with just one opponent (Minnesota) left with a winning record. The Packers (25-19) have a tough road. They've got two losing teams — Dallas (3-8) and Oakland (5-6) — and two toughies — Arizona (9-2) and Minnesota (8-3). The Vikings, meanwhile, have a pair of gut-checks right away with Seattle (6-5) and Arizona (9-2). The Seahawks game is at home, the Cardinals game on the road. Of course, the Packers and Vikings meet in Week 17 in a game that may decide the division winner. The next couple of weeks should be interesting.

ON DECK

The Carolina Panthers are 11-0 and practically assured of the NFC South title. In fact, they can clinch the division with a victory at New Orleans on Sunday or an Atlanta loss on the road at Tampa Bay. Coach Ron Rivera isn't going to lay off the pedal for obvious reasons: He wants to clinch home-field advantage and he wants to go into the playoffs with momentum. But what about 16-0? Only one team, the New England Patriots, has done it. Here are the Panthers' remaining opponents: at New Orleans (4-7), Atlanta (6-5), at New York Giants (5-6), at Atlanta (6-5) and Tampa Bay (5-6). That's not exactly a murderer's row of teams standing in their way. The tough part are the division games. As the Packers have seen the last couple of weeks, nobody knows you better than your division foes. It wouldn't be surprising to see the Saints take the Panthers to the brink despite their horrible record. The game at New York probably isn't as tough as it might appear. The game at Atlanta might be the toughest just because the Falcons have experience playing against Cam Newton and Rivera's defense. Five more to go.

NORTHERN EXPOSURE

The Vikings play Seattle at home and that is going to be a barn-burner. Minnesota is going to try to run the ball against the remnants of what once was the best defense in the NFL. The Seahawks have shown some weakness on defense, but they still rank No. 4 in yards allowed and No. 7 in points allowed. The Seahawks are tough to run on. They hold opponents to a 3.8-yard per-carry average. Surprisingly, they rank 13th in opponent quarterback rating. The Vikings will have to find a way to run behind their shaky offensive line or else quarterback Teddy Bridgewater is going to have to carry the day. Seattle's offense is starting to put up big numbers, but the Vikings defense will give them all they can handle. The Bears have San Francisco and are looking to reach .500. It's not a hard assignment and the only danger for the Bears is a letdown after the big Packers game. With home games the next two weeks the Bears could be 7-6 heading into Minnesota. Detroit and Green Bay get 10 days to mull what happened at the end of that crazy Thursday night game.

GAME OF THE WEEK

Houston Texans (6-5) at Buffalo Bills (5-6)

When: Noon Sunday.

Key injuries: Texans — DE J.J. Watt (groin) and RB Alfred Blue (back) are probable. Bills — LB Nigel Bradham (ankle), G John Miller (ankle) and RB Karlos Williams (shoulder) are out; T Seantrel Henderson (illness) is doubtful.

Player to watch: In his past 16 games, Watt has 24.5 sacks, three forced fumbles, a safety, seven passes defensed and a touchdown catch.

Recent history: The Texans have won the last three, including a 23-17 decision at Houston last year.

Key statistic: Texans receiver DeAndre Hopkins leads NFL receivers with 143 targets, or about 13 per game. He has caught 81 for 1,081 yards and nine touchdowns.

Bottom line:This is going to be a tough game for both quarterbacks. Brian Hoyer will be facing a Bills defense that plays ferociously at home and could bring heat all game. Hoyer's counterpart, Tyrod Taylor, has to stand in reach of Watt, who changes the balance of a game by himself. Taylor has been playing fairly well. In his past seven games he has thrown for 10 touchdowns and one interception and posted a 101.2 rating. It really helps when he has running back LeSean McCoy healthy. McCoy is averaging 116.7 yards from scrimmage this year and has to get going early. Alfred Blue might get a ton of carries just to take some heat off Hoyer.

BY THE NUMBERS

PACKERS

53.3 Percent the offense is converting third-and-1 running plays this season (8 of 15).

11 Penalties left tackle David Bakhtiari has committed this season, most on the team.

23 Points the team has scored in the first quarter in the six games since the bye.

35.1 Percent the defense has allowed opponents to convert third downs over the past five games.

8 Special-teams tackles by wide receiver Jeff Janis, tied for fourth-highest in the NFL.

NFC NORTH

18 Career games in which Minnesota running back Adrian Peterson has rushed for 150 yards or more, tying for fourth-most in NFL history.

6 Touchdown passes Detroit Lions wide receiver Calvin Johnson has caught in his past seven games.

1.8 Interception percentage for Chicago quarterback Jay Cutler this year. He has been over 3% the last three seasons and in seven of his past nine.

214.5 Passing yards the Bears defense is allowing per game, second-lowest in the NFL.

103.5 Passer rating opposing quarterbacks have posted against the Lions, second-highest in the NFL.

NFL

68.7 Passer rating the Carolina Panthers defense has allowed opposing quarterbacks, lowest in the NFL.

2 Rushing touchdowns the New York Jets have allowed, fewest in the league.

178 Consecutive games the New York Giants' Eli Manning has started, the most of any active quarterback.

283 Consecutive passes Kansas City quarterback Alex Smith has thrown without an interception, the fourth-longest streak in NFL history.

4 Consecutive games Indianapolis quarterback Matt Hasselbeck has started and won, tying him with Brett Favre and Warren Moon for the most after turning 40.

Tom Silverstein