With all the talk about showdowns and throwdowns, it’s easy to forget that the real purpose of a primary debate like the one the Democrats are holding tonight is to allow primary voters to hear the presidential candidates explain their qualifications, their positions, and their plans for what they’d like to do if they become president. The real audience isn’t hoping for a “gaffe” or an angry confrontation; they actually hope that this event will help them decide their votes. So let’s consider some questions that Democratic voters want and need the candidates to be asked:

If you’re elected, you might have a Democratic Senate, but if you do it won’t be filibuster-proof, and you will almost certainly face a Republican House. You have some pretty ambitious goals. How are you going to get them passed through Congress? This may be the most important and most difficult question for a Democrat to answer. Barack Obama had his greatest legislative successes in his first two years, when he had large majorities in both houses. If anyone has an idea of how to pass liberal legislation through a Republican Congress, they haven’t shared it. So how are the candidates going to solve this problem?

President Obama has faced unusual hostility from Republicans, both personally and legislatively. Do you expect the same treatment if you win? Why or why not? It’s been said that Obama naïvely believed he could find common ground with Republicans, and took too him long to realize he couldn’t (this isn’t Obama’s interpretation of events, for what it’s worth). But it would be good to know what the candidates’ starting assumptions are about their opponents. Are they planning on facing the same wall of opposition, and if so, how does that affect their approach? And what about all the personal venom? Do they think there’s anything they can do about that, or is it inevitable?

For all the good the Affordable Care Act has done, it has been a constant struggle with setbacks along the way, like the disastrous rollout of healthcare.gov. What lessons have you taken from that experience about legislating? Health care reform was a Democratic priority for decades, and the victory was finally won in 2010. But implementing this vastly complex law has been one headache after another, even as it has brought coverage to millions. The Democratic candidates all have ideas that would be complicated to implement, so it would be good to know what the experience of the most significant piece of social legislation in decades taught them about what they should and shouldn’t do the next time around.

Every candidate says they’re going to break the stranglehold of special interests in Washington. If nobody has been able to do it before, why do you think you would? It’s easy to get applause by saying you’ll clean up Washington, but if it were simple to do, you’d think someone would have done it by now. So why hasn’t it happened, and what would these candidates do that previous presidents couldn’t?

Like any president, Barack Obama has made some mistakes. Can you tell us one or two things you think he did wrong or places he fell short, and what lessons you take from them? This isn’t a “gotcha” question or one that is just about encouraging the candidates to criticize the leader of their party, it’s about seeing how they learn from what goes wrong.

All of you have been in public life for a long time. Can you tell us some ways in which your thinking or your approach has evolved or changed from your earlier days as a public official? Among these candidates you’ve got former governors, mayors, senators, and administration officials. Presumably they’ve learned from their experiences and become better equipped to handle the presidency, so it would be good to learn how.

While Barack Obama has been president, Democrats have lost ground in state legislatures around the country. What specifically can you do as president to reverse those losses? This doesn’t get as much coverage in national media as it should, but Democrats have been in retreat in the states. Do the candidates think there’s anything a president can do about that, and if so, what is it?

We’ve spent a lot of time talking about gun violence lately, but we seldom talk about the central fact of guns in America, which is that there are already over 300 million of them in private hands. Does that mean we’re doomed to have high rates of gun violence no matter what we do, that we can only reduce it at the margins? No new measure for background checks or assault weapons bans would do anything about the incredible number of guns that are already out there. It would be good to know how the candidates incorporate that into their thinking about this issue.

If you could pass any law you wanted to address climate change, what would it look like? Sometimes it’s good to put aside the practical question of overcoming opposition and just ask what the candidate would want in a perfect world. That will tell you what they think ought to happen; you can move from there to what they think could happen.

In the last two administrations, we’ve faced foreign policy disasters like Iraq and complex challenges like Syria where we can’t seem to find the right approach to take (perhaps because all the options are bad ones). What kinds of questions will you be asking your military and foreign policy advisers when the next crisis comes along? The Democrats’ approach to foreign affairs is naturally more nuanced than the Republicans’ “We have to be strong!” answer to every problem. But it would be good to know how the candidates would approach those problems and what they think they need to know in order to find the right solutions.

The problems of inequality and stagnant wages have developed over the last few decades, through Democratic and Republican administrations. So what, fundamentally, are we doing wrong? And are there any lessons we can learn from our peer countries where levels of inequality are lower? The idea that we might have something to learn from others’ experiences is anathema in many quarters, certainly on the right. But other countries with broadly similar capitalist economies have pursued somewhat different courses when it comes to taxation, the safety net, the role of labor unions, workplace regulations, education, and lots of other things. Is there anything we can take from them about what works and what doesn’t? And do we need to just pass a few laws here and there, or should we be rethinking the basics of how our economy works?

These eleven questions — some about particular issues, some about the candidates’ approach to governing, some about their perspective on the current state of politics — are obviously just a beginning. There’s plenty more that Democrats would like to know about the people who would represent them. Let’s hope CNN and the other networks hosting debates will find their way past the gotchas, the dumb questions about what’s on the candidates’ iPods, and the “Let’s you and him fight” urging, to actually ask them something useful.