The Republican leaders make repealing medical-device tax top priority in 2015.

Senate Republican leader Sen. Mitch McConnell (Photo: Alex Wong, Getty Images)

WASHINGTON — The medical-device industry, which has spent nearly $150 million to lobby the federal government in the last five years, could be on the brink of a long-sought victory: killing a 2.3% excise tax on the products it sells in the United States.

House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, and the Senate's incoming Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., have made repealing the tax a top priority for the new Congress, now that Republicans will control both chambers in January. In his post-election news conference, McConnell — the biggest Senate 2014 recipient of political donations from device makers — declared that the tax has "exported enormous numbers of jobs" and should be abolished.

Device manufacturers are "cautiously optimistic" about the repeal's prospects in the Republican-controlled Congress, said J.C. Scott, head of government affairs at the Advanced Medical Technology Association (AdvaMed). "It is great to be part of the agenda for the new Congress, but there are a lot of intervening steps."

As momentum for the repeal builds, however, critics are casting doubts on the industry's claims of financial pain. For instance, an analysis released this month by the Congressional Research Service, Congress' non-partisan research arm, projected "fairly minor effects" from the tax, and estimated it would reduce jobs and industry output by less than two-tenths of 1%. The tax is more likely to increase prices for consumers than to reduce corporate profits, the authors concluded.

"This isn't about public health or policy," said Sherry Glied, an expert on health care policy and dean of New York University's Robert F. Wagner Graduate School of Public Service. "This is pure politics. "

"The medical-device industry is extremely effective at lobbying," she said. "Everybody hates taxes. They are just better at getting out of them than the rest of us are."

The tax, which took effect in January 2013, was enacted to help offset the costs of the 2010 Affordable Care Act. It applies to everything from surgical gloves to heart stents and has been projected to raise nearly $30 billion in federal revenue over a decade.

Repealing the tax, which has the strong backing of Democrats from states that are home to device makers, gives Republicans an opportunity to find a bipartisan way to chip away at Obamacare — long a top GOP target, Glied and other observers say.

The industry has fought the tax since its inception — organizing letter-writing campaigns by employees, taking politicians on tours of device plants and writing campaign checks. Device makers also have shifted their political giving to Republicans as the party has gained power in Washington.

More than 60% of the industry's contributions in this year's elections went to GOP candidates, up from 44% in 2010 — the year that the Democratic-controlled Congress passed the health law, according to a tally by the non-partisan Center for Responsive Politics.

McConnell, who won re-election this month, topped the list of Senate recipients in campaign donations from the medical-device and supply sector in the 2014 cycle, the center found. He received nearly $73,000 from PACs and individuals connected to the industry. He also was the biggest Senate recipient of 2014 contributions from AdvaMed's political action committee.

Scott said the trade group supports lawmakers "who are interested in working on issues that encourage innovation and Sen. McConnell has been interested in issues that I think are very relevant to the industry."

McConnell has "been opposed to this job-killing tax for years," his spokesman Don Stewart said in an e-mail. That makes questions about recent campaign contributions "moot," he said.

The biggest recipient in the House: Rep. Erik Paulsen, R-Minn., whose state is home to Medtronic, the nation's largest maker of heart-rhythm devices. Industry PACs and employees donated more than $91,000 to his re-election.

In a statement to USA TODAY, Paulsen said he's "happy to have the support of the engineers, technicians and small business owners who conduct critical work improving our nation's health care."

He also noted the broad bipartisan backing for the legislation in Congress. Earlier this year, the Senate approved, by a 79-20 vote, a non-binding resolution to kill the tax. More than 30 Democrats joined in.

AdvaMed's Scott said lawmakers from both parties support the repeal because using an excise tax — often applied to alcohol and tobacco products — is bad economic policy and serves only to stifle innovation. He argues that the Congressional Research Service's conclusion that companies can pass the cost on to consumers ignores that most purchasers of devices are not individuals but hospitals and other large institutions looking to contain costs.

The group's survey of its members concluded that businesses either cut or did not create 33,000 jobs as a result of the tax's first full year in effect. Industry officials maintain that the tax is particularly painful for the start-up companies that make up the bulk of AdvaMed's membership.

These firms must pay the tax on every device they sell, even if they have yet to turn a profit.

Follow @fschouten on Twitter.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1qIyBhk