A new website is helping people to avoid paying for abortion coverage in the new Obamacare health insurance plans.

The Charlotte Lozier Institute and the Family Research Council created the website showing which insurance plans cover abortion on the state insurance exchanges under the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, the Washington Examiner reported today.

The website, ObamacareAbortion.com, has a clickable map of all 50 states. When a visitor clicks on a state, the website provides a list of the health insurance plans offered in the state exchange and notes whether the plan covers abortion.

For some pro-lifers, the site provides welcomed news. For two years in Rhode Island, all of the Obamacare insurance plans sold in the state included abortion, according to the Washington Examiner. But for 2016, the state health exchange offers at least one plan on every level (bronze, silver and gold) that does not cover abortion.

Rhode Island was forced to add plans that don’t cover abortion to its list after facing a lawsuit from a pro-life legal group in May, LifeNews.com previously reported.

Half of the states, pictured in green on the website map, passed opt-out laws that ensure abortion is not included in any of the plans sold on the state insurance exchange. However, the website reminds taxpayers that they still are paying federal taxes that are used to pay for abortion coverage in states that include abortion in their health insurance plans.

Click here to sign up for daily pro-life news alerts from LifeNews.com

The groups that created ObamacareAbortion.com warn that the site is not complete: “The information available on this site is severely limited by the Obama administration’s failure to make abortion coverage information easily available.”

Both groups said they continue to “(pour) through documents” to figure out which plans cover abortion, according to the news report.

In 2015, under Obamacare, over 1,000 plans eligible for federal subsidies cover elective abortion.

A 2014 Government Accountability Office report also confirmed the difficulty in identifying abortion-covering plans, demonstrating that 11 of the 18 health insurance issuers interviewed did not make abortion coverage information available online prior to enrollment.