MACRA rule sets eyeballs rolling

With help from David Pittman

FEAR AND LOATHING OF MACRA — A few leading lights have had time to digest the 962-page MACRA proposal, and on the IT side, at least, some of the reviews are pretty chilly.

Story Continued Below

In a blogpost late Thursday, former ONC Standards Committee chairman John Halamka, who is CIO of the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, said the rule was so complex that “no mere human” can understand it. It left a sour taste in the often-cheery Halamka’s mouth: “This may sound cynical, but there are probably only two rational choices for clinicians going forward — become a salaried employee delivering clinical care or become a hospital-based clinician exempted from the madness,” he said. “[I]t’s hard for me to imagine implementing the NPRM as written in the timeframes suggested… As a practicing clinician for 30 years, I can honestly say that it’s time to leave the profession if we stay on the current trajectory.”

….Leading medical societies aren’t quite so pessimistic, but some of them may ask CMS to delay the start of MACRA’s Merit-based Incentive Payment Program, according to Bob Doherty of the American College of Physicians. The doctor groups are moving toward asking CMS to start the reporting period on July 1, 2017, rather than Jan. 1, Doherty told reporters on Thursday. The start date for MIPS wasn’t known until the proposed rule was released last week, and the rule probably won’t be finalized until this fall, leaving only a couple of months before MIPS reporting would start.

… In March, the last time he was asked in public about a possible delay in the MIPS reporting, Acting CMS Administrator Andy Slavitt said he was too busy thinking about implementation to focus on a delay.

Like Halamka, former ONC head Farzad Mostashari believes MACRA in its current form penalizes small practices. But CMS means well and has shown plenty of willingness to be flexible, he told POLITICO's "Pulse Check" podcast this week.

… Slavitt told hospital executives earlier this week that Medicare has listened to doctors and made meaningful use more straight forward under the MACRA payment programs. “Our proposal to replace meaningful use in the physician’s office with a new program, Advancing Care Information, is an example of where we have responded to considerable feedback to move the focus from ‘clicking’ to care provision and collaboration,” he said. http://1.usa.gov/24AuLMh

...We'll probably get a rosier picture next Thursday at an Energy and Commerce hearing.

Tweet of the day: fredtrotter @fredtrotter I am not sure if @Farzad_MD is going to Datapalooza this year. But he should, cuz our data release is going to make him very happy.

Welcome to Friday, one and all, where we’re counting down the few remaining days before Health Datapalooza, which makes us all nostalgic ‘cuz it launched POLITICO’s eHealth section exactly two years ago. Nostalgic and exhausted in advance. Buzz us awake at aallen@politico.com or tweet alarming news @David_Pittman, @arthurallen202, @DariusTahir @ POLITICOPro, @Morning_eHealth.

… If you’re in town for Datapalooza next Tuesday (i.e., May 10), make sure to drop by the District Architecture Center (421 7th St NW) a little after 5 p.m. for cocktails, snacks and conversation about the cost of keeping our data safe. Yes that’s right folks, it’s time for another Outside, In event, entitled “Unhealthy Hacking: Medical Privacy in the Age of Cyber Attacks.”

Yours truly will be moderating with Joanne Kenen and Dan Diamond. Watch us grill two panels loaded with health IT talent; tough questions and smart answers guaranteed. RSVP: http://bit.ly/1rV7Ldg, and contact Lindsay Monaghan (LMonaghan@politico.com) for assistance.

SPEAKING OF P’LOOZA: Medicare will release updated Part B data for the third year in a row at the meeting of Washington and Silicon Valley-type geeks next week. The data include submitted charges for services and procedures by each physician and supplier, allowing a comparison by doctor, specialty, location and types of services delivered.

HHS LEADERS TALK TO PROVIDER LEADERS: The agency is working to improve health information exchange by building common standards, helping doctors and hospitals give patients access to their records, and assuring that regulation improves data flow, Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell told a conference of internal medicine doctors Thursday. Better use of health information helps everybody, she said. “That’s why it is so important that hospitals and physicians stand up against data blocking.” http://1.usa.gov/1SSaOJq

PDMP FOR VETS: The American Academy of Family Physicians is urging the Veterans Administration to participate in prescription drug monitoring programs. AAFP Board Chair Robert Wergin wrote Undersecretary of Health David Shulkin that VA participation in the program — not mandatory at present — could help protect thousands of vets from opioid painkiller abuse. “We recognize the value of PDMPs and the interstate exchange of registry information and we see PDMPs as vital to curbing opioid misuse and diversion,” Wergin wrote.

GAO BEEFS UP ON HEALTH IT: The agency added three members to its Health IT Policy Committee: Jamie Ferguson, VP for health IT strategy at Kaiser Permanente in Oakland, Calif.; Karen van Caulil, CEO of the Florida Health Care Coalition; and Carolyn Petersen, senior editor of Mayoclinic.org.

TELADERMATOLOGY CAN HELP: A RAND/Harvard study shows that skin-doctoring-at-a-distance makes it easier for patients to get specialized care. The researchers studied a collaboration between Palo Alto, Ca.-based Direct Dermatology and Health Plan of San Joaquin, a Medicaid managed care plan with nearly 300,000 enrollees in an area where immigrant farmworkers get their share of skin conditions. “Patients covered by Medicaid have traditionally been one of the groups with limited access to dermatologists, but teledermatology is making it possible for patients to receive the care they need through a network of primary care physicians, teledermatologists and local dermatologists,” said Dr. David Wong, CEO of Direct Dermatology (now DirectDerm).

CAREER OPPOPRTUNITIES: The Indian Health Service is soliciting bids to provide telehealth services for its Great Plains district. More details here…. COME PLAY IN OUR SANDBOX: Update on the ONC’s Interoperability Proving Ground here. … FBI: WE DON’T RECOMMEND PAYING RANSOM: Further details on the growing incidence of ransomware attacks in this article on the agency’s website. … The Commonwealth Fund describes the concept of a “digital adviser” here…. Cerner and McKesson had earnings calls this week, if you care to investigate.

WHAT WE'RE CLICKING:

Forbes looks at Obamacare’s impact on hospital admissions http://onforb.es/1Ogi7Zo

MobiHealth discusses Fitbit and the FDA’s approach to devices http://bit.ly/21CaIes

John Halamka dives deep into MACRA, and surfaces with a frown http://bit.ly/1Tv8BDw