The Second Xconomy Boston Healthcare Summit: Request An Invitation

Xconomy Boston —

A lot has happened in healthcare over the past year. For starters, Healthcare.gov, the federal website for buying insurance under the Affordable Care Act, has gone up, crashed and burned, and been resurrected. For many, so has the possibility of affordable healthcare for the masses. For many others, not so much. Meanwhile, though, digital health is exploding, and advances continue in genomics, population medicine, doctor-patient interactions, hospital care, and a lot of other important healthcare arenas.

To get on top of the latest developments, trends, and technologies across the healthcare horizon, Xconomy is putting together an invitation-only event featuring leading innovators, entrepreneurs, practitioners, and investors in healthcare and health technology.

The second annual Xconomy Boston Healthcare Summit will take place on Tuesday, November 18. As the site of this exclusive gathering, we have once again reserved the deCordova Sculpture Park and Museum in Lincoln, MA.

We are limiting this event to approximately 80 attendees—so this is a great time to request your invitation, which you can do here. We are eager to hear from entrepreneurs, technologists, high-level managers, and investors working in or interested in the healthcare space. If you are a service provider, and are interested in sponsoring the summit, please write to sales@xconomy.com.

Our aim is to provide both an in-depth and uniquely broad view of healthcare—from drug discovery to consumer matters, from lab to hospital, from doctor to patient.

As with the inaugural event, we have invited speakers from across the Xconomy network and beyond. We will kick things off the evening of Monday, November 17, with a reception in Kendall Square. The event day itself will include keynote talks, interactive chats, fast-moving panels, and lots of time for networking.

Among our speakers: George Church, director of the Harvard Personal Genome Project; Lynda Chin from the MD Anderson Cancer Center in Houston; computer legend Stephen Wolfram; Imprivata CEO Omar Hussein; Noubar Afeyan of Flagship Ventures; Paul Bleicher, CEO of Optum Labs; and Katrine Bosley from Editas Medicine. We’ve also got the entrepreneurs behind some cool emerging consumer-facing companies, including Julia Hu, founder of Lark; Ben Schlatka, Co-founder of MC10; and Sridhar Iyengar from Misfit Wearables.

We’ve only got room for a limited number of attendees at this exclusive event. General registration is $795 (you can apply for a discount if you’re from a government organization, non-profit, or startup), and includes the reception the night before, the event (which has its own reception—yes, we like networking), a private tour of the deCordova for those who love art, and breakfast and lunch on the event day.

To request your invitation—and for more event information, including the full list of speakers to date—please visit our Healthcare Summit event listing.