Andrew Miller MP, pictured, warned that the terms and conditions on Facebook and Twitter were 'indecipherable' and required a 'US law degree'

Social media firms such as Facebook and Twitter should have to display ‘health warnings’ for their small print, a group of MPs has demanded.

The Commons Science and Technology Committee warns in a report today that you would need a law degree to understand the terms and conditions used by most companies.

Millions of people sign away control of their private information and pictures because they do not understand how their data might be used, the committee says.

It calls for social media groups to display much simplified notices on their websites - comparing them to the health warnings on cigarette packets.

Andrew Miller MP, the committee’s chairman, said the terms and conditions that users agree to are indecipherable.

He said nobody really knows how their information is used - because nobody can understand the documents.

The problem, he said, is that they are designed for civil cases in US courts, not normal people.

‘Let’s face it, most people click yes to terms and conditions contracts without reading them, because they are often laughably long and written in the kind of legalese you need a law degree from the US to understand,’ he said.

The information we put online can be invaluable to advertisers, enabling them to target their desired market more accurately than ever before.

The GPS trackers on our phones track our movements and the videos and photographs we take give a window into our private worlds.

Under data protection laws the companies have to obtain our ‘informed consent’ before using this information.

But MPs fear that we are not truly ‘informed’ when we click a button to give our consent – because we do not understand the rules.

The way technology companies use our data is unclear and the committee wants the Government to draw up new laws to bind them to a code of conduct.

That would involve telling users exactly how their data might be used - in very simple and concise terms - before they sign up to use a service.

A powerful Commons committee described the terms and conditions of social media sites as 'indecipherable'

The report says: ‘Clear communication with the public has been achieved in the past, for example in the use of graphic health warnings on cigarette packets.

‘Effective communication with the public can be achieved again.’

It adds: ‘Millions of individuals from across the globe have signed up to social media platforms, such as Facebook, Twitter and LinkedIn, and this phenomena has led to vast collections of personal data.

‘We have not been convinced that the users of social media platforms are fully aware of how their data might be used and what redress they may, or may not have if they disagree with how an organisation exploits that data.

‘This is exacerbated by our finding that terms and conditions contracts are simply too long and complex for any reasonable person to make any real sense of. Reading such documents has been likened to engaging with “Shakespeare”.

‘Drafted by lawyers, to be used in American court rooms, the contents of terms and conditions have been designed to protect organisations in the event of legal action.

‘As a mechanism for showing that users have provided informed consent, so that organisations can process incredibly persona data, terms and conditions contracts are simply not fit for purpose.’

The MPs are also critical of the Government’s own record on data protection.

They cite the disastrous NHS plan to harvest patients’ medical data to improve services - a programme that has been delayed over privacy fears.

The report said users are not 'informed' when they click their consent as they do not understand the rules

The committee demands that the Government gets its own house in order and improves data transparency, before it can turn its attention to pushing through a new set of guidelines for social media firms.

Mr Miller said: ‘Socially responsible companies wouldn’t want to bamboozle their users, of course, so we are sure most social media developers will be happy to sign up to the new guidelines on clear communication and informed consent that we are asking the Government to draw up.

‘I hope that a voluntary system of guidelines can work, because, if not, legislation might be needed.’

Facebook last night said it had recently simplified its terms and conditions.

In submissions to the committee in August, Facebook insisted it took data protection seriously.

‘We devote the necessary resources to ensure we meet our data protection obligations,’ the firm wrote.

‘This includes having a dedicated data protection team that brings together expertise from legal, policy, platform, law enforcement, security, engineering and community operations.’

Twitter said its privacy policy was just four pages and 2,000 words in length. It added ‘Twitter continually strives to ensure the right balance between providing adequate information whilst also ensuring it is approachable and user friendly.’