Vulnerable Democrats embrace 'If you like your plan, you can keep your plan' Obamacare fix as the president says 'sorry' for misleading on health insurance

Four Dem senators push bill to 'grandfather' ALL insurance plans that are in force by December 31

Some liberal lawmakers facing re-election in 2014 are putting distance between themselves and Obamacare as public outrage grows



House leaders are expected to vote on a similar Republican measure as soon as next week

Obama apologized Thursday for causing millions of insurance cancellations that he promised would never happen

The White House says as many as a million of them might qualify for Medicare, an inferior form of coverage that many doctors won't honor



Congress is gearing up for a series of votes on measures that could upend the entire Obamacare scheme, as both the House and Senate now have bills that would allow Americans to keep their health insurance policies in the face of the Affordable Care Act, no matter what.

In a 2009 speech to the American Medical Association – one of many he made in defense of his insurance overhaul law – President Obama pledged that 'if you like your health-care plan, you’ll be able to keep your health-care plan, period. No one will take it away, no matter what.'

Now, in the wake of Obama's public apology to millions of Americans who have received cancellation letters from their insurers despite his promises, four pieces of legislation – two in each house of Congress – are gathering steam to force the government to keep its word.

It's not just anti-Obamacare Republicans who are pushing the proposals.

Sen. Mary Landrieu, a liberal Louisianan who voted for the Affordable Care Act in 2009, is up for re-election in 2014. Like many Democrats who fear public anger over the law, she is moving to political redefine herself as an oath-keeper.

SCROLL DOWN FOR VIDEO

Civil war in the Democratic Party? Sen. Mary Landrieu (L) is pushing to rewrite a crucial part of President Obama's health care law in order to save her own political hide

Landrieu's 'Keeping the Affordable Care Act Promise Act' would gut the law's grandfather-clause section, allowing Americans to keep any insurance plan they are enrolled in by Dec. 31, 2013

Landrieu and three other Senate Democrats – Joe Manchin of West Virginia, Kay Hagan of North Carolina and Mark Pryor of Arkansas – are cosponsoring the 'Keeping the Affordable Care Act Promise Act.'

All four face tough re-election battles, and campaign-watchers say their group-pivot away from the White House is a matter of political survival.

'Manchin, like the others, has to watch his back,' a Republican campaign operative in West Virginia told MailOnline. 'They all understand that the longer the Obamacare mess drags on, the more their votes for it in 2009 will hurt them.'

If it should become law, the Democrats' proposal would allow taxpayers to keep any individual health care plan they were enrolled in as of December 31, 2013.

'Any such coverage shall be deemed to be a grandfathered health plan for purposes of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act,' the bill reads.

It also guarantees that 'grandfathered' plans would, by definition, meet the Obamacare law's minimum coverage requirements.

President Obama said Thursday that he's 'sorry' some Americans are losing their current health insurance plans as a result of the Affordable Care Act, despite his promise that no one would have to give up a plan they liked

The idea of grandfathered plans was a part of the Affordable Care Act that promised to protect Americans with existing health plans they wanted to keep, and the president took great pains to sell the law to the public based on that assurance.

But in the wake of the law's looking implementation, insurers have mailed millions of policy cancellation notices. Most cite the Obamacare law as the reason.

Senate Democrats blocked a Republican measure in 2010 that would have eliminated Obamacare's grandfather clause. GOP senators predicted at the time that it would, by design, cause as many as 69 per cent of businesses to lose thir group policies and force them to participate in government-run marketplaces instead.

Iowa Sen. Tom Harkin warned at the time that 'only in the District of Columbia could you get away with telling the people if you like what you have you can keep it, and then pass regulations six months later that do just the opposite and figure that people are going to ignore it.'



Obama himself has pivoted in recent days, adding a caveat to his oft-repeated 'if you like your plan, you can keep your plan' commitment that lines up with Harkin's forecast.

'If you had one of these plans before the Affordable Care Act came into law and you really liked that plan, what we said was you can keep it – if it hasn't changed since the law passed," he claimed on Nov. 4 during a Washington, D.C. speech to supporters.

But facing a public backlash and some analysts' predictions that the number of cancelled insurance policies could swell to as many as 12 million, Obama changed tack a second time with an apology on Thursday.

'I am sorry that they are finding themselves in this situation based on assurances they got from me,' he told NBC News.

West Virginia Sen. Joe Manchin, another Democrat facing angry voters at home, has signed on to Landrieu's bill in order to put distance between himself and the unpopular Obamacare law

Michigan Rep. Fred Upton (L) has chaired contentious hearings about the Affordable Care Act's disastrous implementation to date, and House Speaker John Boehner (R) is expected to bring his bill to the floor soon



The Landrieu bill is not alone. A second Senate version and two separate House proposals mirror and predate hers, increasing the likelihood that one of the proposals will gain enough traction to be taken seriously, and soon.

The other Senate bill, the 'If You Like Your Health Plan, You Can Keep it Act,' is co-sponsored by 38 Republicans including its author, Wisconsin Sen. Ron Johnson.

Its approach is similar to Landrieu's, but also guarantees individuals the right to add family members to their grandfathered plans. It also protects employers as they add new employees to existing group insurance policies.

The Johnson bill has a companion measure in the House, with 34 co-sponsors so far.

'More than a million Americans have been notified that the plans they like with the coverage they have chosen have been canceled,' Johnson complained. 'Millions more Americans will have the plans of their choice canceled in months to come.'

Americans, he said, 'don't want ObamaCare destroying what they have and what they like.'



House Energy and Commerce Committee chairman Fred Upton, a Michigan Republican, has introduced a separate measure, the 'Keep Your Health Plan Act of 2013.'



It's a more streamlined bill that extends only through the end of 2014, and would need to be renewed annually.

No worries? White House Deputy Press Secretary Josh Earnest, with Obama on Air Force One, reassured reporters that 1 million Americans with canceled insurance policies will qualify for Medicare instead

Backup plan: Sen. Ron Johnson has his own Senate bill, and has gathered the support of most of his fellow Senate Republicans

Upton, however, has 88 co-sponsors on his side, including several members of the House leadership.



The Hill reported Wednesday that House Majority Leader Eric Cantor had 'announced via Twitter that the bill would get a vote' in the coming week, but that tweet does not appear on Cantor's account.



“Many Americans are now learning the sad reality that their current plan will no longer exist beginning on January 1. ... This legislation is about providing folks the peace of mind that they will be allowed to continue their current coverage if they so choose,' Upton said in a statement last week.



Landrieu accompanied the president on his trip to New Orleans on Friday, and White House Deputy Press Secretary Joshua Earnest told reporters aboard Air Force One that he's open to legislative fixes like hers that address what he called a 'gap' in the law.

'The president has said for years now that he is open to working with members of Congress that have a genuine interest in trying to strengthen the Affordable Care Act,' Earnest said. 'That's been true for years now, and it’s true today.'

Earnest also tried to downplay the epidemic of cancellation letters, saying that 'about a million of them' have gone to Americans 'who otherwise would qualify for Medicaid.'

There's a wealth of differences between private health insurance coverage and the publicly funded Medicaid system, however: Many hospitals and doctors won't treat Medicaid patients, citing low reimbursement rates and administrative red tape involved with processing claims.

Millions of Americans have lost their individual health insurance plans since the Affordable Care Act became law; a website called mycancellation.com is publishing some of the bad-news letters

Even military veterans aren't exempt from Obamacare's cancellation axe, which may affect as many as 12 million Americans who buy their medical insurance on the individual market

Landrieu introduced her bill on Monday, reading a dramatic insurance cancellation letter on the floor of the Senate.

'This is a letter that thousands of people are getting,' she said. 'and this letter never should have gone out – because we said to people if you had insurance that you like, you could keep it.'