MCHENRY, Ill., Dec. 9, 2013 /PRNewswire/ -- Medela today announces the launch of a new service for moms. Medela's new supplier lookup feature on its website allows consumers to find an insurance-covered Medela breastpump by simply selecting their insurance provider and location. Coverage for breastfeeding supplies and support is one of the benefits provided by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA). Medela launched the supplier lookup so that moms have an easy way to access information on whether their insurance will provide them with a Medela breastpump.

(Photo: http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20131209/NE29686)

"Medela is continuously updating information on our website to provide moms the most current information they'll need to navigate the changes under ACA and how to find insurance-covered breastpumps," says Carolin Archibald, president of Medela, Inc.

It is important for moms to receive a research-based breastpump with compatible accessories that can help her build and maintain her milk supply and to achieve her breastfeeding goals. Additional information such as lactation services, accessories offered and other available pumps can also be found on the supplier lookup that can assist moms on their breastfeeding journey.

Medela's supplier lookup will continue to expand as more information is provided to us by suppliers.

About Medela

Medela provides the most technologically advanced, superior-quality breastpumps and breastfeeding accessories to nursing mothers around the world. A longtime champion of breastfeeding and a Healthy People 2020 Consortium member, Medela is the only company to develop products based on research by the world's leading lactation experts. As a result, Medela's breastpumps are the number one choice of healthcare professionals and healthcare facilities worldwide, including more than 80 percent of U.S. hospitals.

Medela has developed an extensive line of products to meet the diverse needs of nursing mothers. These products include hospital-grade, double- and single-electric and manual breastpumps; breastfeeding accessories such as pump cleaning products, breast care products and specialty feeding devices; and maternity and nursing intimate apparel.

Founded in 1961 by Olle Larsson in Zug, Switzerland, Medela continues to grow under the ownership of the Larsson family. Medela serves customers through a worldwide network of distribution partners in more than 90 countries and its 15 subsidiaries in the United States, Switzerland, Australia, Canada, Germany, Sweden, France, Benelux (Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg), Italy, Japan, Russia, the United Kingdom, Poland, China and Spain. The company entered the United States more than 30 years ago; its U.S. headquarters are located in McHenry, Illinois.

Media Contact:

Claudette Yasell

815-578-2452

Claudette.yasell@medela.com

SOURCE Medela