It’s one of the best things you could probably have around your house. With a history that spans over many continents and over thousands of years, it’s no wonder tea has such a good reputation. From China to the United Kingdom, tea is rooted in many cultures. But besides the amazing health benefits that different teas can provide, it’s also a great addition to your beauty routine. From healing small razor nicks to soothing your dry hair — tea is just more than a warm drink you enjoy on a cold winter night.

1. Tired Eyes: Take a black tea bag and soak it in warm water. Wait till the tea bags are cool enough, and then place them on your eyes. The caffeine in the tea helps to constrict blood vessels and reduce swelling. Lay down for about 10 minutes and close your eyes. After the time is up, your eyes should be refreshed and awake.

2. Dry Hair: Chamomile tea helps to soothe dry locks. Take half a cup of water and bring it to a boil. Add the chamomile tea to it and let it steep for about 10 minutes. Then add a quarter of a cup of olive oil to the tea. Pour the mixture over all of your hair and comb it through. Let it sit for as long as you’d like. The chamomile will help to remove any build-up, and the oil will help to condition your hair.

3. Stinky Feet: Soak your tootsies in black tea. The tannic acid in the tea acts like an astringent and will help to get rid of those odors.

4. Razor Burn: Sometimes shaving with a dull blade or too fast can cause nicks. To soothe them, take black tea bags and soak them in warm water. Hold them on the cuts for a few minutes, and it should stop the bleeding and the stinging.

5. Treat Acne: Green tea is a great drink to have every day. Its antioxidant properties can do wonders for your body on the inside and out. Take a tea bag and soak it in some hot water. Cut the bag open and empty the contents into a cream cleanser. Rub it on your face and let it sit for five minutes. Wash it off completely.

6. Steam Facial: Cut open either chamomile or green tea bags and pour them into a pot of boiling water. Use a towel to cover your head and bring your face close to the water, but be careful not to get too close (you don’t want to burn yourself). Steam your face for five minutes.