By MIKE D’ONOFRIO

JOURNAL STAFF WRITER

Tommy Moore has lived in a rent-controlled apartment in the basement of a multimillion-dollar condominium building in Hoboken for years, but he is now fighting to keep his home.

Moore shares the $600-a-month apartment at 1000 Hudson St. with his wife Natasha and two cats, but he wonders how much longer they will live there. Moore remains in legal limbo as he fights the buildings condo association over allegations his apartment is illegal.

Frank Marciano, Moore’s lawyer, says the 1000 Hudson Street Condominium Association is using “false allegations” to sidestep the law and zoning laws “as a sword to cut the landlord-tenant relationship. And they are not allowed to do that.”

Moore, 51, who works for the film industry as a location scout, said he’s been fighting the eviction since 2012 and has received numerous eviction notices.

The condo association took Moore and his wife to court in August 2013, but the case was dismissed. They’ll all be back in court Monday when a judge will issue a ruling whether the condo association can move forward with eviction proceedings.

The building’s board of directors claim there is no evidence that Moore’s apartment and two other basement apartments — where an elderly couple and a live-in superintendent reside — actually exist.

There is “no mention ... of the basement apartments in the master deed and there is no tax record for them,” according to a Dec. 17, 2012, email from Lori Turoff, then-president of the condo association’s board of directors, to Hoboken Zoning Officer Ann Holtzman.

The condo association’s board wants the tenants out so the basement can be converted into a “common area” and a “legal apartment for a live-in super,” Turoff said in a 2012 email.

The city sided with Turoff and the condo’s board.

In a Jan. 25, 2013 letter, Holtzman concurs that there are no records of the basement apartments with the city. These units, Holtzman wrote, “are not acknowledged by or registered as legal units in the Master Deed for 1000 Hudson Street Condominium.”

Moore, his wife and the elderly couple were given 60 days to vacate their homes, according to Holtzman’s letter. Marciano says the condo association board’s claims are bogus.

“You can’t evict a tenant unless you have good cause,” Marciano said, “and there is no good cause to evict these people.”

Marciano says he has evidence, including property records dating back to 1941, that show the basement apartments have long been acknowledged.

Turoff, who still sits on the condo association’s board, and is a spokeswoman for Arthur Edwards Inc., the management company that owns the building, refused to comment.

A response from Hoboken issued through city spokesman Juan Melli made no mention of the numerous city documents citing the basement apartments.

“The zoning officer explained to the board that three

units in the building are not legal and that they had various options for resolving the situation (eviction, relocation, or seeking Zoning Board approvals to make the units conform to code),” Melli said in an email.

Moore moved into the apartment with a roommate in the mid-1980s and moved out in the early 1990s, but his roommate continued to live there. Moore returned to the apartment, which he said has “nostalgic and sentimental qualities,” in 2003 and took over the apartment.

Moore’s apartment is located in one of the three connected buildings that make up at 1000 Hudson St. The five-story brick buildings are located in a quiet neighborhood and across the street from Elysian Park.

The 700-square foot apartment, with pipes running along the ceiling of the kitchen, has four rooms connected by a narrow hallway.

Moore said if he loses his battle, he and his wife would be forced to leave the city they call home.

“We wouldn’t just be giving up the apartment, we would probably be giving up Hoboken,” Moore said. “My wife and I both love Hoboken.”