The Washington Redskins addressed an area of weakness with their first fourth-round pick in the 2015 draft, selecting Duke wide receiver Jamison Crowder, a prolific kick and punt returner, with the 105th overall pick.

Crowder is undersized at 5 feet 9 and 175 pounds but has shown shiftiness and speed in the open field on special teams. In four years with the Blue Devils, he returned 44 kickoffs for 930 yards and 65 punts for 869 yards and four touchdowns.

“I feel like I can help out in multiple ways,” Crowder said in a conference call with reporters. “For one, I can come in and be a return man, a punt return guy, being able to help start the offense with good field position, score touchdowns. And then otherwise come in and be a good slot receiver as well. Come in, make plays and do whatever’s necessary to help the team win.”

SEE ALSO: Recapping the Redskins’ 2015 draft class, from Brandon Scherff to Austin Reiter

Crowder could fill a role similar to that of Santana Moss, who is currently a free agent, returning punts and serving as a slot receiver on offense. Redskins coach Jay Gruden said he has the potential to return punts and kicks as a rookie this season.

“He’s been productive at it when he’s had the opportunity,” Gruden said. “He’s such a good receiver at Duke that they probably didn’t use him as much as they would liked to have because he was such a key weapon for them on offense. But he’s the type of guy that did a lot for them, and he’s got the great, quick first step and he is a natural at punt returner. We’ll see how he does at kick returner, but he will definitely compete.

A native of Monroe, North Carolina, Crowder was a first team All-Atlantic Coast Conference selection in 2014 after catching 85 passes for 1,044 yards and six touchdowns.

“Special teams was something that I had great success with in college, and I feel like that’s a way I can get on the field and be able to display my talents and abilities in the open field,” Crowder said. “And then wide receiver, I feel like I’m one of the top receivers in this draft. I can go in and make an impact in the offense.”