A New Brunswick man and a 17-year-old youth have been arrested in connection with a shooting late last year, while four others also face weapons charges including a city man linked to another shooting last summer. (Photo: ~File) Story Highlights Police have made several arrests in connection with two separate shootings last year.

Erik Perez, 21, of New Brunswick and a 17-year-old youth were charged Jan. 2 with attempted murder, conspiracy to commit murder, possession of weapons for an unlawful purpose and unlawful possession of weapons in connection with a Christmas Eve shooting near the corner of Ellen Street and Livingston Avenue.

On Tuesday Alex Camarillo, who escaped injured in the Christmas Eve shooting, was charged with attempted murder, possession of a weapon for an unlawful purpose, unlawful possession of a handgun and certain persons not to possess weapons in connection with an Aug. 31, 2014 shooting outside the Howard Johnson Motel on Route 1 in New Brunswick.

Two more shootings have been reported this week. One on Monday in which a city man was shot in his shoulder on French Street and another one, Tuesday night in which a vacant car on Rutgers Street was hit.

A city man and a 17-year-old youth have been arrested in connection with a shooting late last year, while four others also face weapons charges including another city man linked to another shooting last summer.

According to police, Erik Perez, 21, a local resident, and a 17-year-old youth were charged Jan. 2 with attempted murder, conspiracy to commit murder, possession of weapons for an unlawful purpose and unlawful possession of weapons.

Police said the charges stem from a 1:24 a.m. Christmas Eve shooting near the corner of Ellen Street and Livingston Avenue.

A preliminary police investigation indicates Alfonso Dolores-Mendoza, 22, and his friend, Alex Camarillo, 21, both local residents , were in the area allegedly to purchase illegal drugs. When Camarillo stepped out of the vehicle Dolores-Mendoza was driving, Perez and the 17-year-old approached the vehicle and allegedly shot multiple times, striking Dolores-Mendoza in the shoulder. His injuries are not life-threatening.

Police said Camarillo was not injured in the shooting, which is the result of a continuing feud between the men.

When Perez and the juvenile were charged they already were incarcerated for charges related to an 12:15 a.m. Dec. 27 aggravated-assault incident on French Street near Suydam Street, police said. According to police, during the Dec. 27 incident a large fight erupted between a crowd of people. People involved in the fight reportedly were carrying knives, guns and bats.

During the fight, Apolinar Peleaz, 21, and Johnathan Peleaz, 18, both local residents , received nonlife-threatening head injuries, possibly from bring hit with a bat or another object.

Police arrested five people and recovered two handguns. Arrested were Perez and the 17-year-old youth, along with Miguel Barragan-Espanaza, 21, Raul Barragan-Espana, 19, and Luis Trujillo-Hernandez, 20, all city residents. All five were charged with two counts of weapons possession, two counts of possessing defaced firearms, aggravated assault and possession of a weapon for an unlawful purpose.

On Tuesday Camarillo, who escaped injury in the Christmas Eve shooting, was charged with attempted murder, possession of a weapon for an unlawful purpose, unlawful possession of a handgun and certain persons not to possess weapons in connection with a 3:20 a.m. Aug. 31, 2014 shooting outside the Howard Johnson Motel on Route 1 here.

During the August incident, Angel Rivera, 21, a city resident, was shot once in the abdomen when gunshots were fired into a crowd attending a motel party. Police said Camarillo was at the party earlier in the night and got into in an argument with other party guests. He left and later returned firing shots into the crowd, striking Rivera who suffered nonlife-threatening injuries.

Two more shootings have been reported this week.

Around 5 p.m. Monday police responded to 206 French St. and located German Flores-Peres, 26, a city resident, who had a gunshot wound to his shoulder. Flores-Peres was transported to Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital here where he is listed in stable condition.

Video surveillance shows Flores-Peres was chased by someone who fled the area in a dark colored vehicle. Police believe the assault stems from a continuing family dispute.

Around 9 p.m. Tuesday police investigated a report of shots fired on Rutgers Street. A 2004 Mercedes Benz was located with two gunshots to the vacant vehicle.

Both shootings this week are under investigation. Anyone with information is asked to contact the New Brunswick Police Detective Bureau at 732-745-5217.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1BAsJyt