MIAMI, April 21, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- The Health Insurance Marketplace shut its doors on February 15. However, it is still possible to acquire health insurance outside of the official enrollment period if certain conditions are met. HolaDoctor.com created an interactive tool that allows people to determine in which cases and situations a person would qualify for a Special Enrollment Period, entirely in Spanish.

The Affordable Care Act states that individuals who experience particular life events have special access to the Health Insurance Marketplace and can change their plan or purchase an insurance policy for the first time outside of the official dates.

"This interactive tool will let people know immediately if they are eligible to purchase or switch plans during the Special Enrollment Period," said Roberto Estrada, President and CEO of HolaDoctor--. The Special Enrollment Period is a 60 day window following certain qualifying life events -- such as marriage, the birth of a child or becoming a citizen, among many others."

HolaDoctor's tool is easy to use and can help not only the Hispanics who didn't enroll before the official open enrollment period and were left without insurance, but also those who have already signed up and currently own insurance but who need to modify their plan due to a special life event such as a change in income.

"The Special Enrollment Period is a nationwide benefit under the Affordable Care Act and applies to all fifty states. It is important, however, for people to know that they only have 60 days to report these life events and make changes to their insurance plan or obtain coverage for the first time," Estrada explained.

Holadoctor.com is also launching a one-of-a-kind Metal Plan Calculator which helps to easily determine which coverage category suits consumers based on their specific situation. For example, some consumers choose the Bronze level plans because these usually have the least expensive monthly premiums, but then learn that these plans also have higher deductibles when they do go to the doctor. It is very important for them to understand which benefits are included in the Bronze, Silver, Gold and Platinum levels before making their decision.

"With the help of this Metal Plan Calculator, people will have a better understanding of which metal category of the plan suits them best. All they have to do is register and answer a few questions", he said.

Spanish speakers who need to know if they qualify to buy health insurance before the next open enrollment in November, 2015 should visit Special Enrollment Period section at HolaDoctor.

HolaDoctor® is a leader in health services for Hispanics. Founded in 1999, HolaDoctor® manages the largest online community of Hispanics interested in health and wellness. The company is the exclusive health content partner of Univision Interactive Media. HolaDoctor also offers strategic marketing, communications and consulting services to healthcare companies looking to do business with Hispanic consumers, in the United States and worldwide. The company has extensive experience with the Affordable Care Act [http://holadoctor.com/es/seguros-de-salud], as well as health insurance, obesity and diabetes among other areas which are essential to increasing access to health care and to reduce disparities between Hispanics. Based in Atlanta, Georgia and with offices in South Florida and Latin America, HolaDoctor serves a growing portfolio of customers throughout the western hemisphere. For more information, visit www.holadoctor.net

Press contact

Omar Hernández

ohernandez@holadoctor.net

Communication Director

SOURCE HolaDoctor