Timothy Jost

February 20, 2015

Late in the day on February 20, 2015, HHS issued its 476 page final 2016 Benefit and Payment Parameters rule. It also issued a lengthy final 2016 Letter to Issuers and a fact sheet on the BPP rule. These will govern health insurance coverage and the premium stabilization programs, as well as participation in the federally facilitated marketplace, for 2016.

More specifically, the BBP governs the premium stabilization programs; the cost-sharing reduction payment program; user fees for the Federally-facilitated Exchanges; the open enrollment period; the essential health benefits; qualified health plans; network adequacy; quality improvement strategies for qualified health plans; the SHOP program; guaranteed availability and renewability; minimum coverage; rate review; the medical loss ratio program; and other issues. The letter to issuers governs participation in the federally facilitated marketplace for 2016.

I will be reviewing the BPP rule and Letter to Issuers over the next few days and providing a series of posts on them; this post covers the amended Multi-State Plan Program (MSPP) rules issued earlier in the day.

The Multi-State Plan Program

Although most of the work in implementing the Affordable Care Act is shouldered by the Departments of Labor, Treasury, and Health and Human Services, the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) fulfils an important role in managing the MSPP. This program was created by the ACA to increase competition in insurance markets by offering high-quality insurance sold in multiple states through the exchanges. Congress charged the OPM, which has decades of experience running the Federal Employees’ Health Benefit Program, with the task of creating the program.

Approximately 371,000 individuals enrolled in a Multi-State plan option in 31 states in 2014. For plan year 2015, the MSP program offers more than 200 MSP options in 36 states. The initial final MSP regulations were published in March of 2013, and today OPM finalized amendments to these rules. These amendments were proposed on November 24, 2014 and were described here.

Definitions. OPM received 43 comments on its proposal from a broad range of stakeholders. It finalized most of its proposals but changed a few. First, it replaced the term “Multi-State Plan,” which had been used to describe the actual plan offerings of Multi-State Plan Program and was obviously confusing, with “Multi-State plan option.” OPM also added a new definition for “state-level” issuer to denominate insurers that offer plans in a state for MSP insurers.

In the proposed rules, OPM had said that it might broaden the definition of the term “group of issuers,” the multi-state entity that offers MSP options. OPM had suggested that a more open-ended definition of this term might attract additional participants to the program, but decided to stick with the current definition under which a group may be linked by common control or a common service mark. OPM recognized that there is already considerable flexibility in the common service mark option, as is evidenced by the current MSPP insurers, Blues plans and the CO-OP plans.

Flexibility regarding expansion to national coverage. The ACA allows MSPP insurers to phase in their coverage to achieve national coverage in 4 years. The MSPP rule continues to include this requirement, but in the preface OPM recognizes that plans are having difficulties expanding rapidly and states that it intends to be flexible while encouraging nationwide expansion as quickly as possible.

The ACA is not explicit as to whether an MSPP insurer must cover an entire state. Under the initial rules, MSPP insurers had to submit a plan for reaching statewide coverage. This requirement is eliminated in the amended rule but MSPP insurers that also offer qualified health plans (QHPs) must offer an MSPP service area that is equal to or greater than the insurer’s QHP service area. OPM will also review MSP service areas to ensure they are nondiscriminatory.

Finally MSP insurers must meet the same requirements as QHP insurers for SHOP participation. Under this rule, MSP insurers must offer SHOP coverage in the FFM if the MSP insurer and affiliated insurers at the state level have a 20 percent or greater market share in the small group market.

Flexibility on benchmark. The amended rule gives MSPP insurers greater flexibility in choosing an essential health benefits benchmark. MSPP insurers can choose to use either the state-selected benchmark plan for the state in which the plan is offered or an OPM benchmark plan, which is to say one of the three largest FEHBP options.

This change gives insurers more flexibility and consumers more choices. However, it might also confuse consumers and create an unlevel playing field with QHP insurers, and open the possibility of adverse selection. OPM evidently believes the change is necessary to attract more plans to the MSPP. OPM also points out that because plans can already substitute benefits for the EHB benchmark, there is already variation among plans. OPM must still approve all benefit plans and will scrutinize them to ensure that benefit plans are not discriminatory.

MSPP insurers that use an OPM-selected EHB-benchmark plan may manage formularies around the needs of anticipated and actual users, but must have formularies approved by OPM, which will review them using OPM and HHS standards. MSPP insurers must comply with the federal definition of habilitative services and devices unless a state standard is more stringent, in which case it must comply with the state standard. In the absence of state or federal definition, the OPM definition will apply. MSP plans will continue to be subject to federal and state provider directory standards.

User fees. The OPM can collect user fees from MSPP insurers for participating in the program. Because of operational complexities, OPM does not anticipate collecting these fees for MSPP participation in state-operated exchanges for 2016 and will coordinate with the FFM regarding the collection of user fees for FFM states so insurers will not pay more than paid by QHP insurers.

Compliance. The amendments also make a few technical changes in application and compliance rules, including authorization of non-renewal of participation as a compliance sanction and clarification of notice to enrollee requirements when a plan is terminated, decertified, or non-renewed. The final rule clarifies that OPM may use discretion in deciding what information it will disclose to state regulators and exchanges.

Abortion. Finally, OPM is finalizing an amendment requiring MSPP insurers to provide notice to consumers prior to enrollment as to whether an MSP option will cover or exclude abortion services that cannot be paid for under federal programs (which limit coverage to situations involving rape, incest, or a threat to the life of the mother). MSPP insurers are required by the ACA to provide at least one option that does not cover abortions that cannot be paid for through federal programs, and in a few states these are the only options available that limit abortion coverage. The amended rules require MSP insurers to specify clearly whether MSP options cover abortions or not.