Topics: Anthony Edwards, Books, Cameron Crowe, Editor's Picks, Fast Times at Ridgemont High, Heathers, John Hughes, Movies, Phoebe Cates, Revenge Of the Nerds, risky business, Sean Penn, Tom Cruise, Entertainment News

The sensitive, vulnerable, brutally frank '80s teen comedies didn’t begin with John Hughes. In this excerpt from Marc Spitz’s newly released "Twee: The Gentle Revolution in Music, Books, Television, Fashion and Film" (IT/Harper Collins) the story of how the square-jawed leading man gave way to the sexually fumbling, awkward but no less heroic leading men and how any femme fatales left among the equally awkward leading ladies had to learn to deal with them.

Beginning with the very early days of the AIDS crisis, Hollywood seemed to presciently churn out more and more teen-angst or teen-confusion-based entertainment, featuring sex-terrified boys (Tom Cruise in “Risky Business”) on the cusp of manhood and confused girls (Jennifer Jason Leigh in “Fast Times at Ridgemont High”) on the cusp of womanhood. These characters became the surrogates for a new generation of teens who were experiencing similar emotions in their real lives. It’s as if the times forced films into frankness. New Wave music, which featured on many of these film soundtracks, was a step ahead (Sparks’ “Angst in My Pants,” the Gleaming Spires’ “Are You Ready for the Sex Girls?”), but by mid-decade, the screen stars were all Devo. Nerds, the proto Twees were ready for their close-up.

On MTV, the sexy librarian wasn’t sexy until she let her hair down, took off the glasses, and kicked it with ZZ Top or Van Halen. But in film, the librarians were slowly winning out.

Part of the reason 1982’s “Fast Times at Ridgemont High” remains, three decades on, the most transformative teen film ever made is that it highlights this shift in sexual power. This is embodied by the dynamic between Robert Romanus’s slick, strutting, fast-talking Mike Damone and Brian Backer’s mole-like Mark Ratner, the hapless, virginal movie-theater usher. “Rat” is the only one who gets the girl in the end, even if they still don’t go all the way. Meanwhile Judge Reinhold’s Brad, a “single successful guy,” loses his job, and, in the film’s most famous scene, is sexually humiliated by Phoebe Cates when she walks in on him pleasuring himself. And Damone, as Cates’s Linda scrawls on his locker for all to see, is just a “little prick.”

Rolling Stone journalist turned filmmaker Cameron Crowe, then not too long out of his teens himself, went undercover at a real Southern California high school to deliver the book “Fast Times at Ridgemont High,” then later adapted the screenplay for Universal Studios. Bronx-bred director Amy Heckerling turned Crowe’s script into a teen comic and a Twee milestone that would inform every other teen film that came later, from “Risky Business” to the John Hughes oeuvre. Jocks were on their sprint out.

“Cameron Crowe’s book set the tone,” says Eric Stoltz, who appears along with future “Revenge of the Nerds” star Anthony Edwards as one of Jeff Spicoli’s shirtless surfer buds, refused service at All American Burger (“No shirt, no shoes . . . no dice”). “It was rooted in the reality of the characters and situations. We were lucky enough to have Cameron on set every day, and he and Amy Heckerling were intent on making something true to life, rather than formulaic.”

“It’s no huge thing, it’s just sex,” Linda reassures Stacy as she prepares to lose her virginity, but everyone, even Linda (with her mysterious, off-camera, and possibly imaginary boyfriend), knows this is a lie. Hormones drive the film. Sean Penn’s Spicoli has ripped-out Playboy centerfolds taped to his bedroom wall; the film’s resident Buddha, zinc on his nose, has lust in his heart. Like the work of Dr. Seuss and Maurice Sendak, “Fast Times” is both sweet and, even with its occasionally broad, sketchy humor, painfully real. “If this film has a theme,” the powerful New Yorker magazine film critic Pauline Kael wrote, “it’s sexual embarrassment.”

“I can’t help doing what feels right to me [even] if it came out as awkward or sweet,” Heckerling says. “It wouldn’t occur to me to make those kinds of moments wacky.”

As with most future Twee films, from “Heathers” to Heckerling’s later foray into the world of unusually sensitive teens, “Clueless,” the adult characters are ridiculous. This is a very common Twee trope. In “Fast Times,” there’s Mr. Hand (Ray Walston), who greets people with “Aloha,” and is convinced that half his student body is “on dope.” There’s Mr. Vargas (Vincent Schiavelli), who digs lustily into cadavers and has just switched to Sanka. There are coaches, absent parents, obnoxious patrons at fast-food joints.

“I wasn’t thinking I wasn’t going to do a movie that was different than all other youth movies or anything like that,” Heckerling says. “I can only do what I come up with or feel.” It’s really the “youth” that Heckerling mentions that make “Fast Times” different, the literal freshness of Crowe and Heckerling and their game cast of future superstars.

“’Fast Times’ tested horribly,” Heckerling recalls of the advance previews major studios routinely do before releasing a film. “I showed the movie in Orange County, and it was unanimous. On all the cards, they said we were horrible Hollywood people making teenagers into sluts and druggies. And this is from young people—there were teenagers telling me this!”