Topics: 2016 Elections, Affordable Care Act, Healthcare Reform, Obamacare, Rand Paul, Ted Cruz, Video, Elections News, Politics News

As I watched Rand Paul deliver his speech yesterday announcing his candidacy for the presidency, one thought kept occurring to me: this guy’s got some ideas. Granted, many of the ideas were fairly old and well within the safe confines of Republican dogma, which runs counter to Rand’s “different kind of Republican” routine. And some of his ideas were gimmicky (the “Read the Bills Act” forcing legislators to read every word of every bill), while others were irresponsible and destructive (a constitutional amendment forcing Congress to balance the federal budget every year, an idea so bad that it unites conservatives and liberals in loud opposition). But hey, at least they’re ideas, right?

And Rand covered a lot of ground, given how brief a speech it was. He talked about debt, infrastructure, taxes, Iran, domestic surveillance, “economic freedom zones,” the Cold War, his grandmother – lots of stuff! But for all those ideas and all the issue areas he covered, Rand Paul’s speech contained not a single word about one of the biggest policy questions a Republican president will have to face: healthcare.

Seriously, not one measly word. Rand burned 84 words talking about his legislation to make legislators read legislation, but couldn’t spare a syllable for the country’s healthcare system. He didn’t even promise to repeal Obamacare, which most Republican legislators do in their sleep at this point. Ted Cruz worked in a pledge to kill the Affordable Care Act into his announcement speech – it’s a lay-up applause line that your supporters expect to hear, but Rand left his people hanging. And Rand Paul is an actual, real-life doctor – a fact he mentioned several times in his speech. For the Doctor Candidate to not mention healthcare at all is kinda weird.

That raises the obvious next question: what would Doctor-President Rand Paul do about healthcare? Well, even though he declined to say so yesterday morning, Rand is right in line with the rock-solid Republican consensus that the Affordable Care Act is no good and must be eliminated entirely. Beyond that, though, it’s not all that clear what Rand Paul has in mind for a post-Obamacare landscape.

National Journal’s Caitlin Owens and Dylan Scott broke down the healthcare positions of all the top 2016 GOP contenders along three lines: tax treatment of insurance, subsidized coverage options for the poor and people in need of substantial medical care, and coverage for employees of small businesses. When it came to Rand Paul, they had a difficult time nailing down what he intends to do when it comes to taxes and coverage options for small businesses. The only thing they knew with any certainty is that Rand supports block-granting Medicaid, which would effectively create barriers to accessing the program and likely result in many low-income people losing coverage.