SKY-HIGH FLAMES: Residents looked at a fire in Aleppo, Syria, Sunday. Haleem Al-Halabi/Reuters …

SADNESS: The mother of Hussain Mahdi Habib, center, mourned over his body during a funeral in Sitra, Bahrain, Sunday. Mr. Habib, a political prisoner who escaped from prison on May 19, was found after he was allegedly shot dead near Al Malkiyah, Bahrain. Mohammed Al-Shaikh/AFP/Getty Images …

AUTOGRAPH: Malala Yousafzai, who was shot in the head by the Taliban for campaigning for girls' education, signed a copy of her book before an event launching her memoir, 'I Am Malala', at the Southbank Centre in London on Sunday. Olivia Harris/Reuters …

AIRBORNE: Miami Dolphins wide receiver Brandon Gibson, 10, jumped over Buffalo Bills free safety Aaron Williams, 23, and strong safety Da'Norris Searcy, 25, for a touchdown during the first half of their NFL football game on Sunday in Miami Gardens, Fla. Buffalo won 23-21. Lynne Sladky/Associated Press …

WITH WHITNEY: A member of the London Gospel Factory Choir took a photograph with the wax figure of singer Whitney Houston at Madame Tussauds in London Monday. Carl Court/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images …

WIFE AND WIFE: Beth Asaro, left, and Joanne Schailey, right, celebrated after Lambertville, N.J., Mayor David DelVecchio officiated their marriage at 12:01 a.m. Monday; it was the city's first same-sex marriage. Gov. Chris Christie dropped his legal challenge to the marriages on Monday. Rich Schultz/Associated Press …

FAINTING SPELL: President Barack Obama reached out to help Affordable Care Act beneficiary Jessica Ugalde, who began to faint during the president's speech Monday at the White House. He said that the law's overall potential shouldn't be measured by the health-law website's rocky start. Jason Reed/Reuters …

DRESSED UP: Jan Fisher, dressed as a bear, kept dry under an umbrella at a Halloween festival for young children, called the ZooBoo, at the Como Zoo in St. Paul, Minn., Sunday. Renee Jones Schneider/The Star Tribune/Associated Press …

SUPER SMOG: A man rolled a bicycle as he walked up stairs toward a bridge amid heavy pollution in Harbin, Heilongjiang province, China, Monday. Flights were canceled and some highways and schools were closed as visibility shrank in northern China. Associated Press …

STUCK: A boy walked on the back of a beached whale shark as fishermen prepared to pull it back to the sea at Kenjeran beach in Surabaya, Indonesia, Tuesday. The whale shark survived and was successfully released. Trisnadi/Associated Press …

TAKEN OUT: Israeli soldiers loaded the body of slain militant suspect Mohamed Aatzi into a vehicle in Bilin near the West Bank city of Ramallah on Tuesday. Israel's security service and the military said Israeli forces killed Mr. Aatzi, who was believed to be responsible for a Tel Aviv bus bombing in 2012. Nasser Nasser/Associated Press …

IN PURSUIT: Firefighters tried to capture a Greater Rhea bird in Wehrsdorf, Germany, Tuesday. The animal escaped from his owner but the fire department was able to catch it and return it. Rico Loeb/European Pressphoto Agency …

FRONT-ROW SEAT: Residents watched a containment fire in the Blue Mountains in Australia on Tuesday. Firefighters Tuesday deliberately merged two major blazes in Australia in a desperate battle to manage the advancing blaze as weather conditions worsen. William West/AFP/Getty Images …

SIBLINGS: Sannam Othman held her brother Zardar on the outskirts of Islamabad, Pakistan, Tuesday. Muhammed Muheisen/Associated Press …

SAY CHEESE: Boys posed for a photograph on the outskirts of Islamabad, Pakistan, Wednesday. Anjum Naveed/Associated Press …

BABY JOE: The skeleton of a baby Parasaurolophus dinosaur nicknamed 'Joe', which died 75 million years ago, sat in London on Wednesday. National News/Zuma Press …

GENTLE THERAPY: Patients listened to slow-paced music and used glasses to look at pictures of scenery as part of anger-management therapy at a hospital in Quzhou Zhejiang province, China, Wednesday. Reuters …

EYE CONTACT: A piece of land art entitled 'Wish' showed the face of an anonymous six-year-old local Belfast girl in Belfast, Northern Ireland, Wednesday. The artwork by artist Jorge Rodriguez-Gerada spans 11 acres, is made up from 2,000 metric tons of sand, 2,000 metric tons of soil and some 30,000 wooden pegs. Cathal McNaughton/Reuters …

COVERED: Palestinian children played on the shore of Deir al-Balah Sea in the Gaza Strip on Thursday. Majdi Fathi/NurPhoto/Zuma Press …

SPOTTED: Rebel fighters held a position in a Deir Ezzor, Syria, Thursday. Ahmad Aboud/AFP/Getty Images …

STANDSTILL: South Korean Air Force honor guard threw their guns into the air during the Seoul International Aerospace & Defense Exhibition in Cheongju, South Korea, Thursday. Lee Jin-man/Associated Press …

CRUSHED: A woman was overcome with grief after hearing of the death of Thembe Kumalo, the second person to die during clashes with police in Bekkersdal, South Africa, Thursday. The township residents took up arms this week to protest against bad service delivery. Kim Ludbrook/European Pressphoto Agency …

BOTTOMS UP: Belgian physicist François Englert hefted a mug of beer after a news conference in Oviedo, Spain, Thursday. Mr. Englert, U.S. professor Peter Higgs and the European Organization for Nuclear Research will receive the 2013 Principe de Asturias Award for Technical and Scientific Research on Friday. Eloy Alonso/Reuters …

WOMAN WEEPS: A woman mourned Somdet Phra Nyanasamvara, who led Thailand's Buddhist monks as the country's supreme patriarch, Friday in Bangkok. The ailing patriarch died Thursday at 100 years old. Athit Perawongmetha/Reuters …

FROM ABOVE: A video still shows damage from a wildfire in the Blue Mountains region of Australia, west of Sydney, Friday. Fires have destroyed more than 200 homes and damaged another 100 in the region. High Alpha/European Pressphoto Agency …

BUNNY SLOPE: Ski instructors helped a girl ski down a small slope in central London Friday. The event was meant to introduce people to skiing and snowboarding. Lefteris Pitarakis/Associated Press …