When James Madison wrote the U.S. Constitution in 1787, he intended the system of checks and balances to operate in such a way that by separating the powers of different institutions, "tyranny of the majority" would be countered.

Even now that Congress has passed the Affordable Care Act, and the president signed it into law, Madison's system of checks and balances enables the House of Representatives to stand in the way of its effective implementation.

I don't believe the Founding Fathers ever imagined that statesmen would behave in such an unstatesmanlike manner, risking default on government debt, penalizing federal workers, or those in the military, with job suspensions and related pay suspensions. Yet many federal government functions and offices are now shuttered. The consequences for business, financial markets, and the future well-being of American retirees can be substantial and range from merely negative to disastrous.

The next opportunity for the conservatives in Congress to bring up a check on the other houses is to withhold agreement on raising the federal debt ceiling. The last time they did this the nation's credit rating was reduced and world markets reacted by devaluing American treasuries.

Even though it is out of context with 18th-century financial systems, it is precisely what the separation of powers was intended to make possible. At the time of the writing of the Constitution, the wealthy minority were afraid that democracy was a threat to property ownership. The dilemma they faced was reconciling economic inequality with political freedom. I don't believe they anticipated congressional standoffs would translate into potentially great financial losses for the very wealthy it was intended to protect.

Although the Constitution allows almost all in the political system to have their views heard it also encourages stalemate. The system was intended to promote the politics of bargaining and compromise — something this Congress doesn't seem to get.