Adam Gabbatt of The Guardian newspaper holds images of potential Republican candidates, from left, Rick Santorum, Sarah Palin, Ted Cruz, Scott Walker, Donald Trump, Chris Christie, Marco Rubio, Jeb Bush, Rand Paul, and below, Rick Perry, during the Conservative Political Action Conference on Feb. 26, 2015. (Photo: Carolyn Kaster, AP)

NATIONAL HARBOR, Md. — The 2015 Conservative Political Action Conference kicked off Thursday in National Harbor, Md., with a gaggle of potential Republican presidential candidates pitching their 2016 credentials at the annual event. The highlights so far:

WALKER'S MOMENT

Scott Walker blasted President Obama's leadership and vowed to restore America's standing around the globe, couching himself as a standard-bearer for conservatives eager to retake the White House.

"We need a leader in America who stands up and realizes that radical Islamic terrorism is a threat to our way of life and to freedom-loving people around the world," Walker said. "We need a leader who will stand up and say we will take the fight to them and not wait until they take the fight to American soil."

The CPAC audience rose to its feet several times as Walker spoke, including sharing his now-familiar story of how he fought special interests in Democratic-leaning Wisconsin to win three elections in the last four years. He slammed the way politicians in Washington — especially Obama — make govern and make decisions.

"The president measures success by the people who are dependent on government," Walker said. "We should measure success by how many people are no longer dependent on government."

The governor won raves inside the convention hall for his reference to fighting unions back home in Wisconsin, but he also was criticized for this comment: "If I can take on 100,000 protesters, I can do the same across the globe," Walker said, responding to a question on how he would defeat the Islamic State.

In an interview with the Wisconsin State Journal after his speech, Walker said he did not regret his statement. "You all will misconstrue things the way you see fit," he said. "That's the closest thing I have in terms of handling a difficult situation, not that there's any parallel between the two."

Democrats and their labor allies shot back. "If Scott Walker thinks that it's appropriate to compare working people speaking up for their rights to brutal terrorists, then he is even less qualified to be president than I thought. Maybe he should go back to punting," said Mo Elleithee, communications director for the Democratic National Committee.

— Catalina Camia

STRONG WORDS FROM JINDAL

Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal told conservatives that Washington lawmakers need to do their jobs, and that includes congressional Republicans.

"It is time for them to govern the way they campaigned, and get rid of Obamacare," Jindal said in his speech.

In addition to repealing Obama's health care program, Jindal also hit other hot-button CPAC issues by saying the U.S. must remove Common Core education standards "from every classroom" and "win the war against radical Islamic extremism."

While Islamic State-style terrorism threatens the United States, Jindal said that President Obama has proven himself "incapable of being our commander-in-chief."

While saying "this president has done a lot of damage," the Louisiana governor also had harsh words for Republican lawmakers who, in his view, have failed to stand up to Obama.

"It is time for our Republican leaders in Congress to grow a spine," Jindal said.

— David Jackson

A woman piles up stickers for Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, at the Conservative Political Action Conference on Feb. 26, 2015. (Photo: Alex Wong, Getty Images)

CRUZ: 'DEMAND ACTION, NOT TALK'

Ted Cruz served conservatives a red-meat diet, delivering a speech heavy on themes of liberty and freedom laced with biting attacks on President Obama, Hillary Rodham Clinton and the ways of Washington

"Washington wants Obamacare, the people want liberty," the Texas senator said in one example. "Don't believe President Obama when he says when you like your Internet, you get to keep your Internet."

Cruz took aim at Clinton, saying she's the embodiment of all that's wrong with Washington. He also threw out a zinger amid reports that the Clinton Foundation accepted funding from foreign governments while she was secretary of State. "We could have had Hillary here, but we couldn't find a foreign nation to foot the bill," he joked.

As for his GOP rivals with their eye on the White House, Cruz seemed to raise doubts about moderate-minded presidential candidates who say they are conservative. He didn't mention anyone by name, but said there is a way to test their conservative bona fides.

"Demand action, not talk," Cruz said. "If a candidate tells you the Obamacare, fantastic. (But) when have you stood up and fought against it. If a candidate says they oppose Obama's illegal executive amnesty, terrific. When have you stood up and fought against it."

Invoking Ronald Reagan and his ability to build coalitions across ideological lines, Cruz also exhorted the CPAC attendees to "paint in bold colors" and avoid candidates who "talk the talk but don't walk the walk."

— Catalina Camia

New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie speaks at the 2015 Conservative Political Action Conference on Feb. 26, 2015. (Photo: H. Darr Beiser, USA TODAY)

CHRISTIE'S JEB DIG

Don't call him short-tempered or hot-headed. Call him "passionate.''

That's how New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie described himself before a full house of conservative activists at the CPAC gathering Thursday, when talk-show host Laura Ingraham read off a list of the unflattering adjectives sometimes applied to Christie.

"The word they miss is passionate," Christie said. Referring to a much-viewed video of Christie barking at a New Jersey resident during a town hall meeting. "Sometimes people need to be told to sit down and shut up," Christie said, to applause.

"Some more of that stuff should be happening in D.C.," he said. "There's so much ridiculous stuff being spewed."

But he told Jeb Bush, in so many words, to stand up and start talking. The town hall meetings he conducts in New Jersey are "what elected officials owe to their constituents," Christie said, an unsubtle reference to Bush answering only pre-screened questions at his recent speeches. "Everybody who aspires to high positions of leadership … should be willing to take unscreened, unrehearsed questions from the people who pay their salary."

— Martha T. Moore

Carly Fiorina waits to be interviewed at the annual Conservative Political Action Conference on Feb. 26, 2015. (Photo: Nicholas Kamm, AFP/Getty Images)

FIORINA TAKES ON CLINTON

A Republican woman who may seek the presidency devoted part of her CPAC speech Thursday to bashing another female candidate: Hillary Rodham Clinton.

"Mrs. Clinton, name an accomplishment," Carly Fiorina told the Conservative Political Action Conference, later adding: "Hillary may like hashtags — but she does not know what leadership means."

Fiorina, the former CEO of Hewlett-Packard, criticized the Democratic front-runner over foreign money: "Please explain why we should accept that the millions and millions of dollars that have flowed into the Clinton Foundation from foreign governments do not represent a conflict of interest."

Asked about the importance of having a female candidate, Fiorina said, "I think our party needs to be as diverse as the nation we seek to represent."

Women are not a "special interest group," she added — "we are a majority of the nation."

— David Jackson

Ben Carson is surrounded by supporters as he waits to be interviewed at the annual Conservative Political Action Conference at National Harbor, Md., on Feb. 26, 2015. (Photo: Nicholas Kamm, AFP/Getty Images)

CARSON'S KICKOFF

Ben Carson kicked off CPAC on Thursday morning with an attack on big government liberalism, saying it cannot solve problems ranging from health care to the federal debt.

"We need to move in a very different direction," Carson said.

In a critique that stretched back to the Great Society programs of the 1960s, Carson said that government programs are about "redistribution and control," while debt and radical Islam are threatening to "destroy" the United States.

Carson, a neurosurgeon, has not formally announced his candidacy, but is considered a potential 2016 presidential contender. But he is backed by a group of supporters who have organized in early primary and caucus states, including every county in Iowa.

The government should have a "safety net" for people in need, Carson said during a question-and-answer session, but eliminate programs that create "dependency " for too many people.

"What I want is for people to have real freedom," Carson said.

— David Jackson

DEMS ARE WATCHING

CPAC isn't just a must-see event for Republicans eager to win back the White House. Democrats are also focused on CPAC, but as fact-checkers and critics.

Trackers from American Bridge, a Democratic opposition research group, are roaming the hallways with cameras in hand in the hopes of catching an "oops" moment or quote that will become fodder for attacks. They're also trained on the main stage, where Chris Christie, Jeb Bush, Rand Paul, Scott Walker, Ted Cruz, Marco Rubio and other Republicans hoping to become president will speak.

"We've seen this circus before," said Debbie Wasserman Schultz, chairwoman of the Democratic National Committee. "We have to watch if any of the speakers lose the general election before we get to 2016."

— Catalina Camia

Supporters of Sen. Rand Paul work at a stand at the annual Conservative Political Action Conference at National Harbor, Md., on Feb. 26, 2015. (Photo: Nicholas Kamm, AFP/Getty Images)

RACKING UP SWAG

Ah, political conventions … an opportunity to meet new friends … reconnect with like-minded activists … and get a whole lot of free stuff.

"That's a stress ball," says Edwina Rogers, CEO of the Secular Policy Institute, offering a rubber ball painted like a globe.

Vendors at the CPAC are offering a variety of products in efforts to attract delegates, and potential customers. Attendees can get a Townhall Media coffee thermos, or free one-on-one career counseling sessions. The 60 Plus Association, which wants to repeal the "death tax," is offering free T-shirts, letter openers and candy.

Whether candy or comic books, the goal is the same: Get attention for gifts, but promote your ideas to interested parties.

"The freebies are helping a lot," Rogers said. "Especially with the younger folks."

— David Jackson

Jack Baumann looks out through American flag glasses during the Conservative Political Action Conference in National Harbor, Md., on Feb. 26, 2015. (Photo: Carolyn Kaster, AP)

SELLING IDEAS

Like many conventions, CPAC includes sessions on how to sell various products — in this case, conservative political ideas.

Delegates are looking to promote both policies — particularly health care and education — as well as the simple nuts and bolts of getting conservative-leaning people out to vote.

"Yes, We Won in 2014 — but Still Fail on the Ground and Online," announces the title of one breakout session.

Other sessions are devoted to "The Conservative Replacement to Obamacare," "Common Core: Rotten to the Core?" "When Should America Go To War?" and "The New Frontiers of Data."

Meanwhile, conservative activists roam the halls of the convention center at National Harbor, selling causes that range from legalization of marijuana to asset forfeiture laws. One group hands out buttons reading "God Bless Free Enterprise."

— David Jackson

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1BBITu5