NEW YORK, June 24, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- Ernst & Young LLP proudly announced today that it was presented with the top honors for the 2015 Stevie® Awards Innovation of the Year – Business Service Industries category for the Affordable Care Act Compliance & Analytics Support System (ACA COMPASS℠) at the 13th Annual American Business Awards in Chicago on June 22.

The Gold Level Stevie® Award was accepted by Ali Master, Ernst & Young LLP's Partner-in-charge of ACA Services. More than 3,300 nominations from organizations of all sizes in virtually every industry were submitted this year for consideration in a wide range of categories. More than 200 executives worldwide participated in the judging process to select this year's Stevie® Award winners. The ACA COMPASS℠ technology platform is also a finalist in the category for Technical Innovation of the Year – At Organizations with 1,000 or More Employees that will be announced on September 11 in San Francisco.

"The ACA COMPASS℠ platform earns praise from clients and associations across the US by providing the most extensive technical ACA compliance capabilities, in addition to the firm's professional analysis, strategic recommendations and depth of knowledge," said Master. "We are honored that the judges recognized our holistic approach to resolving an immediate business challenge and the exceptional work of a tremendous team responsible for the creation and development of ACA COMPASS℠."

As organizations face a tight reporting deadline that requires volumes of data to comply with the ACA, they discover that other technologies only offer cursory abilities to break down and analyze data, precluding them from leveraging and balancing the full scope of workforce and tax options. The increased urgency to put the appropriate systems in place has resulted in growing recognition and accolades that ACA COMPASS℠ can address all these issues in a customizable platform. ACA COMPASS℠ assists employers with a true technical analysis and application of the ACA regulations as well as future Internal Revenue Service (IRS) reporting. The complexity of the law allows employers multiple options for their implementation methodology. As employers move through the decision making process of how to implement, critical decisions along the way can have far reaching and expensive consequences if the law is not accurately applied.

About the Stevie Awards

Stevie Awards are conferred in six programs: the Asia-Pacific Stevie Awards, the German Stevie Awards, The American Business Awards, The International Business Awards, the Stevie Awards for Women in Business, and the Stevie Awards for Sales & Customer Service. Stevie Awards competitions receive more than 10,000 entries each year from organizations in more than 60 nations. Honoring organizations of all types and sizes and the people behind them, the Stevies recognize outstanding performances in the workplace worldwide. Learn more about the Stevie Awards at http://www.StevieAwards.com/ABA.

About EY

EY is a global leader in assurance, tax, transaction and advisory services. The insights and quality services we deliver help build trust and confidence in the capital markets and in economies the world over. We develop outstanding leaders who team to deliver on our promises to all of our stakeholders. In so doing, we play a critical role in building a better working world for our people, for our clients and for our communities.

EY refers to the global organization, and may refer to one or more, of the member firms of Ernst & Young Global Limited, each of which is a separate legal entity. Ernst & Young Global Limited, a UK company limited by guarantee, does not provide services to clients. For more information about our organization, please visit ey.com.

This news release has been issued by Ernst & Young LLP, a member firm of EY serving clients in the US.

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20130701/NY40565LOGO-b

SOURCE EY