SARASOTA — More than 2,500 men and women are expected to travel to Southwest Florida this October for the International Breast Cancer Paddlers' Commission Dragon Boat Festival at Nathan Benderson Park.



And park officials want to make sure that each team has a local "ambassador," who can provide information about hotels, food and attractions, as well as major streets and roads, a brief history of Sarasota and how to call and find emergency services.

"They are the first point of contact for all these international and national teams," volunteer coordinator John Krotec, who works for the nonprofit that runs Nathan Benderson Park. "They are going to be a true and direct reflection of the community at large."

More than 95 ambassadors will be needed throughout the three-day event, and roughly 50 have committed so far, Krotec said Tuesday.

Volunteers will be fed and hydrated during the event, and receive a free t-shirt. A luncheon is planned for volunteers in early October. The festival is from Oct. 24 - Oct. 26.

The Dragon Boat festival is held every four years and celebrates the first boat of breast cancer survivors that formed in 1996 after Canadian sports medicine professor Dr. Don McKenzie began pushing patients toward dragon boat racing in order to boost energy, strength and spirits. The movement was also meant to challenge a widespread assumption that upper-body exertion put breast cancer survivors at a greater risk of lymphedema — fluid retention and tissue swelling that can be caused by cancer treatments.

This is the first year that the international competition has been held in the United States, and is also the first major international event that Nathan Benderson Park will host. The park is slated to host the 2017 World Rowing Championships.

"When they leave here, we want to make sure that they say they want to come back to Sarasota-Bradenton," Krotec said.

If interested, contact John Krotec, the Suncoast Aquatic Nature Center Associates volunteer coordinator by email at John @SANCA.US or phone at 941.358.PARK.