Major U.S. corporations and business lobbying groups have grown audibly critical of the Obama administration’s workplace discrimination enforcers, who have “struck an inflamed nerve” by challenging the legality of corporate wellness programs.

As a result, those corporations and their CEOs are threatening to undermine the 2010 Affordable Care Act, saying that the most recent legal action by the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission targets a company that has tried to comply with the health overhaul.

Some of those corporate officials — members of the Business Roundtable, an economically conservative Washington, D.C., association of 200 U.S. CEOs, whose firms employ more than 16 million and sponsor health plans for 40 million — were set to meet President Barack Obama in a closed-door session Tuesday, according to Reuters news service.

“If the EEOC were to be successful in this lawsuit, it would set a precedent that would make it fairly difficult for a lot of wellness plans as they now exist to go forward,” said Mike Fischer, an employment law attorney and a partner in the Milwaukee office of Quarles & Brady LLP.

Earlier this year, the EEOC sued two small Wisconsin companies — Flambeau Inc., and Orion Energy Systems — claiming their wellness programs violated federal law, but the actions didn’t generate much backlash. In both cases, the companies were alleged to have engaged in clear-cut violations: Flambeau was accused of cancelling the medical insurance of an employee who didn’t particulate in a wellness program, and Orion is alleged to have fired an employee who objected to health screenings.

But when the EEOC’s Chicago office sued corporate giant Honeywell International Inc. on Oct. 27 on similar grounds, alarm bells were sounded. Honeywell’s CEO, David M. Cote, is a member of the Business Roundtable, and sits on its executive leadership committee.

“It’s hard to overestimate the amount of anxiety that this EEOC action has caused,” said Gretchen K. Young, senior vice president of health policy at the ERISA Industry Committee in Washington, D.C. Honeywell operates “a relatively mainstream wellness program. People said, ‘Are you kidding me?’ ”

Wellness programs, at the employer level, use a variety of carrots and sticks to motivate employees to lose weight, quit smoking and take their own health more seriously, in hopes of keeping the workforce healthier and reducing corporate health claims. Most programs include some combination of medical physicals, biometric screenings, smoking cessation incentives, at-work flu shots and weight-loss programs, and wellness quizzes meant to show employees how lifestyle choices affect their own health.

The programs have proliferated in recent years because the Affordable Care Act permitted employers to use financial incentives — gift cards, higher premiums, extra cash in health savings accounts — in order to secure participation in such programs.

As of 2014, by way of the ACA most employers are permitted to steer up to 30 percent of the total amount of employees’ health insurance premiums toward wellness “incentives.” Another 20 percent can be added to the mix if companies try to prevent or reduce tobacco use, meaning as much as 50 percent of employees’ premiums could be at stake, depending on their participation.

That could amount to hundreds or even thousands of dollars a year in penalties and incentives.

That Obamacare permitted those incentive programs and allowed companies some leeway in how those carrots and sticks are deployed is one of the reasons large U.S. companies have been on board with the Affordable Care Act, even though there wasn’t much in it for them besides extra paperwork.

“Large employers have been somewhat upset that the ACA hasn’t really panned out the way they were hoping,” Ms. Young said. But “they’re still good soldiers,” and haven’t badmouthed the ACA the way many small and mid-sized businesses have.

“Then to have this happen, it really has been upsetting ... This suit of Honeywell struck an inflamed nerve with businesses,” she said.

Large companies with relatively generous health benefits packages also hope to use wellness programs as a way to blunt the potential impact of the ACA’s so-called “Cadillac tax,” which penalizes companies for health plans that cost more than $10,200 for individual premiums, and $27,500 for families, starting in 2018. The excise tax is to be paid by health insurers, but those costs will passed down to employers and employees, unless employers can find a way to keep policy costs in check.

Wellness plans such as Honeywell’s are supposed to do just that.

“Wellness is one of the levers to reduce the [cost of] health care,” said Steve Wojcik, vice president of public policy at the National Business Group on Health. “The conflicting messages that are being sent by the government on employer-sponsored wellness programs” is concerning to businesses.

The conflict is based in the nature of the Honeywell suit: The EEOC claims that Honeywell is violating the Americans with Disabilities Act and the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act by compelling employees to submit to health screenings and blood tests. Participation for employees and their spouses is optional, but up to $4,000 could be at stake for those who decline to participate: the loss of up to $1,500 in health savings account contributions from Honeywell, a $500 surcharge applied to health plan costs, a $1,000 “tobacco surcharge” (because Honeywell assumes those who don’t submit to a biometric screening are smokers), plus another $1,000 tobacco fee for a spouse who doesn’t participate.

With penalties so high, what is technically a voluntary plan acts a lot like a compulsory one. But Honeywell says the fees fall within the range prescribed by the Affordable Care Act.

In November, a judge agreed with Honeywell, and rejected the EEOC’s attempt to shut down the wellness program. The federal lawsuit, however, remains in effect.

The issue will flare more often as companies get more aggressive, and punitive, with wellness programs and health screenings. Last year, for example, Penn State University spiked a controversial plan to charge employees $100 a month if they refused to submit to a battery of health care screenings.

So far, the Honeywell suit is the only objectionable one filed by the EEOC, business groups say. But U.S. firms are firing a warning shot regardless, and rallying to Honeywell’s defense, in hopes of receiving more guidance from the Obama administration and heading off future action from the EEOC. Notably, Ms. Young said, all of the complaints originated from the EEOC’s Chicago office, and the Honeywell suit was not instigated by the full EEOC board of commissioners, but rather by attorneys in Chicago.

Without a bright line separating what’s a voluntary wellness program and what is compulsory, it’s hard to know who’s safe.

“If it can pop up against Honeywell, it can pop up against anybody,” Ms. Young said.

It’s up to the EEOC to draw that bright line, but it hasn’t, despite promises to issue regulations earlier this year, said Mr. Fischer, the Milwaukee attorney. EEOC commissioners now say they plan to issue wellness plan regulations some time in 2015.

Until then, employers, insurers and human resources attorneys will have to wait and see how EEOC interprets the various workplace and medical privacy laws already in effect, enforced through the U.S. Department of Labor and the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act.

“Different federal agencies are giving what appears to be conflicting advice,” Mr. Fischer said. “It’s like trying to play pin the tail on the donkey.”

Despite the noise coming from CEO groups, Mr. Fischer said he doubts big businesses are really preparing to do battle with Obamacare, and he also acknowledged that the EEOC has a difficult job: Trying to protect worker privacy in an era when employers want more health data information about their employees.

“I know people are upset. Are they upset enough to tear down an [unrelated] piece of legislation? I just don’t think that’s productive,” he said. “I don't think vilifying the EEOC here is the right approach.”