By Roni Caryn Rabin

Being "fat" is the most common reason children are bullied, and something needs to be done about it.

That is the predominant view of thousands of adults from four countries who, when asked why children are bullied, said the most common reason was not race, religion, physical disability or sexual orientation, but weight. Nearly three-quarters of respondents said schools and anti-bullying policies need to address the issue, with many calling it a "serious" or "very serious" problem.

Yet most state anti-bullying laws don't protect overweight children, said Rebecca Puhl, deputy director of the Rudd Center for Food Policy and Obesity at the University of Connecticut in Hartford and the lead author of the report, the first cross-national study investigating weight-based bullying, published in Pediatric Obesity.

There are no federal laws that guarantee equal treatment of people who are overweight or obese.

"It is actually legal to discriminate on the basis of weight, and that sends a message that bias, unfair treatment or bullying of overweight children is tolerable," said Puhl, a professor of human development and families studies at UConn.

As obesity rates have risen, she said, so much emphasis has been placed on taking personal responsibility for body weight and changing behaviors "that there is a perception that these youth are somehow to blame for their weight and in some way deserve this treatment."

'"There's also a widespread misperception that stigma may not be such a bad thing, and that maybe criticism will get people motivated to lose weight," Puhl said.

In fact, she said, the opposite is true: People who are picked on because of their weight often engage in unhealthy behaviors. Students who are teased for being fat in gym class, for example, often start skipping PE to avoid being bullied.

For the new study, researchers surveyed the views of 2,866 adults in the United States, Canada, Iceland and Australia. These four countries have similar rates of childhood and adult obesity, as well as similar cultural attitudes that laud thinness and being physically active, Puhl said.

At least 70 percent of participants in all of the countries perceived weight-based bullying to be a common problem, with 69 percent characterizing it as a "serious" or even "very serious" problem. While about half of respondents listed "being fat" as the most common reason children are picked on, fewer than 21 percent in any country listed race, ethnicity or nationality as the most common reason. Fewer than 15 percent listed sexual orientation, fewer than 12 percent listed physical disability, and fewer than 6 percent listed religion or academic ability.

About three-quarters of participants across countries said schools should make efforts to raise awareness about weight-based bullying and implement policies that protect overweight kids, and supported bolstering anti-bullying laws to address weight-based bullying.

Support for a more active government role was weaker among Americans, however, with only half saying the government should play a more active role and only 47 percent supporting a federal law to prohibit weight-related bullying.