BERGTON, Va. (AP) - After 45 years of leading the Green Valley Clinic in Bergton, 81-year-old Dr. Linford Gehman is closing the center’s doors for good - but he’s not retiring.

The country doctor plans on practicing for another two years, this time from the halls of E.A. Hawse Health Center in Mathias, W.Va., a mere eight miles up the road from Green Valley Clinic on Brocks Gap Road.

Gehman knew years ago while trying to recruit another full-time physician at Green Valley, that his successor would be required to make various upgrades to the rural clinic over time, especially the transition to electronic medical records. Those changes “wouldn’t be cost-effective to keep (the clinic) open in a low population area,” Gehman said.

Gehman said it would be in the best interest of the patients to close the clinic and continue practicing from the Hawse center, which he said has a “federally funded, state-of-the-art program.”

The center, he said, will be convenient for his many patients who had been crossing state lines to be seen at Green Valley, as well as those who live in Fulks Run, Criders and other rural northern Rockingham communities.

Green Valley’s three employees - medical assistant Patty Miller, registered nurse Elaine See-Dellinger and licensed practical nurse Debbie Whetzel - will be joining Gehman at the Mathias clinic.

“We’re like family here,” See-Dellinger said in a phone interview, adding that she’s “never heard an unkind word” from Gehman.

“He’s a really supportive, compassionate person - there aren’t enough words to describe him,” she said.

Graduating from Eastern Mennonite College, now Eastern Mennonite University, Gehman continued his education at Jefferson Medical College in Philadelphia, from which he graduated in 1963 at age 30. He went on to complete his internship and residency at St. Luke’s Hospital in Pennsylvania.

His move to Bergton came after volunteering with the Mennonite Central Committee for nearly five years, first at a hospital in Nha Trang, South Vietnam, for more than three years during the Vietnam War, followed by another year in Biafra, Nigeria, during that country’s civil war in the 1960s.

In 1970, Gehman married his wife, Becky, who also has worked at Green Valley over the years as a nurse, and the pair made the “very peaceful move” to the Shenandoah Valley, relative to his previous assignments.

With his home just steps away from Green Valley, Gehman said the center’s office phone is also connected to his house, so patients can still reach him after office hours.

“The community has been very kind to us through the years,” he said.

Since Green Valley opened in 1949, it’s “been a place where people since then have expected to only have to go there,” he said That makes Gehman sorry, he said, for having to close its doors to more than 1,000 patients.

While acknowledging few doctors still practice medicine at his age, he maintains that he’s in reasonably good health, but knows “when to fold.”

“I don’t want to stay on (if) I’m not mentally proficient and capable of continuing to take responsibility for people’s health,” he said.

As the staff prepared to close Green Valley’s doors for good on Friday, Gehman said they are continuing to schedule patients without interruptions.

Starting Monday, he will resume seeing patients from the E.A. Hawse Center in Mathias.

“We’ve really appreciated the support of .a community of very gracious patients through the years,” he said.

___

Information from: Daily News-Record, http://www.dnronline.com