Topics: Captain America, Comic Books, Thor, Entertainment News

Marvel Comics turned heads this week with the announcements of a black Captain America (Cap’s old pal Sam Wilson, the Falcon, will be taking up the shield) and a female Thor (an unknown woman will be wielding Thor’s hammer Mjolnir after something happens to make the son of Odin unworthy of his mystical weapon). Though women have picked up Thor’s hammer before, and Wilson is not the first black Captain America, the geek-fueled media storm went nuclear thanks to the prominence of the Avengers, the ever-outraged Internet and announcements on “The View” and “The Colbert Report.”

Fans of increased diversity in the incredibly influential world of comics have praised the changes. Pinheaded geeks who can’t handle change, even for a couple years (which, let’s be real, is how long these switches typically last) have pitched online hissy-fits. White dudes who feel like they are a persecuted minority have been predictably outraged. Such reactions are common when the pasty white, overly testicular casts of old properties are updated. Remember the hubbub when the reimagined “Battlestar Galactica” turned Starbuck into a woman? While changing the gender or race of a character, much like killing a character, is definitely part publicity stunt, it’s nice to see publicity stunts that also feel like progress while pissing off jerks.

In comics, there’s a major tradition of new heroes taking up an existing character’s mantle, especially at DC: Jay Garrick, Barry Allen and Wally West have all been the Flash. A metric boatload of guys (and aliens) have been Green Lantern. For most of the past couple of years, villain Dr. Octopus took over the mind of Peter Parker and was Spider-Man. When Batman and Captain America were apparently dead, their former sidekicks Dick Grayson and Bucky Barnes took over.

But while Captain America and Thor aren’t the only white, male flagship characters to be temporary replaced, they also aren’t the only ones who have changed gender or race. There’s a small but clearly growing tradition in comics of embracing diversity. Here are a few examples of heroes who, over the years, have made the fanciful universes of superheroes look a little more like the world we actually live in.

The Shield

This character has nothing to do with the classic FX series. The Shield is an American-themed hero who debuted in 1940 (over a year before Captain America) and features the same star-spangled outfit, a very similar super-soldier origin, and the same type of Nazi-fighting early adventures. In fact, the reason Captain America carries a round shield is that his original triangular shield looked too much like the symbol on The Shield’s chest. In addition to Marvel’s recent switcheroos, Archie’s Dark Circle line announced this week that a new version of the character will be a woman, which is a pretty cool development for one of comics’ most obscure yet influential characters.

Spider-Man

In 2000, Marvel launched their Ultimate Universe as a place to reinvent their characters, make them more contemporary, and take more chances than in the regular Marvel Universe. The standout comic from the Ultimate line was Brian Michael Bendis and Mark Bagley’s “Ultimate Spider-Man,” which created a new Peter Parker who was fresh yet completely in the spirit of Stan Lee and Steve Ditko’s original. When Peter Parker died — he took a bullet for Captain America — the death stuck, unlike deaths in the regular universe. Peter was then replaced by Miles Morales, a half black, half Hispanic kid who was also bitten by a radioactive spider. Miles has been Spider-Man ever since in the Ultimate Universe, and let’s hope the brain trust who make the Spider-Man films decide to use him. After the abysmal “Spider-Man 2,” that franchise needs helps fast.