Health reform is bringing sweeping changes to the health insurance industry, including how employers can use Health Reimbursement Arrangements (HRAs). Here's four things to know about HRAs and health reform in 2014 and beyond.

#1) Integrated HRAs

Integrated HRAs are generally compliant in 2014.

An Integrated HRA is an HRA linked with a high deductible group health insurance plan. The Integrated HRA is offered only to those at the company who take the group health insurance plan as it is a supplement to help with deductible costs.

An Integrated HRA is often called a deductible-only HRA, a linked HRA, or a GroupHRA.

In regards to health reform, employers should work with their broker to ensure that their group health insurance plan, combined with the Integrated HRA, meets all health reform requirements. For example, see: Integrated HRAs - Minimum Value and Affordability Calculations.

#2) Retiree HRAs

Retiree HRAs are generally compliant in 2014.

With a retiree HRA, the HRA is designed to reimburse employees only after retirement.

According to the current regulations, a "retiree-only HRA is generally not subject to the rules in PHS Act section 2711 relating to annual limits."

In regards to health reform, employers who offer a retiree HRA should work with their HRA administrator to ensure compliance.

#3) Stand-Alone HRAs

Stand-Alone HRA plans (with two or more participants starting on or after 1/1/14) are generally not compliant in 2014.

A stand-alone HRA is not linked to a group health insurance plan. Rather, the employer offers the stand-alone HRA plan as an alternative to group health insurance. With stand-alone HRAs, the plan is generally set up to reimburse individual health insurance premiums and other out-of-pocket medical expenses.

In regards to health reform, on September 13, 2013, the Department of Labor issued Technical Release 2013-03 which modifies existing annual limit regulations as they pertain to stand-alone health reimbursement arrangements (HRAs) for plan years starting on or after January 1, 2014.

The September regulatory change put a halt to most businesses and organizations using a stand-alone HRA (again, for plan years starting January 1, 2014 or later).

But there's good news for employers using a stand-alone HRA... employers can still reimburse employees for individual health insurance premiums. Read on.

#4) One-Person Stand-Alone HRAs

One-Person Stand-Alone HRAs are generally compliant in 2014.

One-person stand-alone HRAs are exempt from PHS 2711 annual limit regulations, and are still compliant. In other words, if a small business or non-profit stand-alone HRA only has one participant, they can continue to offer the stand-alone HRA in 2014 and beyond. That's because the Technical Release clearly states that the new market reforms only apply to health plans with two or more participants.

Read more about one-person stand-alone HRAs here.

How Employers Can Reimburse Individual Health Insurance Premiums

The September Technical Release was a blow to small businesses who offered a stand-alone HRA and their employees. But, for the first time, the Department of Labor, the Department of Treasury, and Health and Human Services coordinated to issue formal confirmation that employers are 100% allowed to reimburse individual health insurance premiums tax-free under the tax code.

For employers using stand-alone HRAs, or looking to transition to a "pure" defined contribution approach, one solution is to adopt a limited Healthcare Reimbursement Plan (HRP). The HRP is structured to only reimburse:

Health insurance premiums up to a specified monthly healthcare allowance, Preventative care as required by PHS Act Section 2713 at 100% without cost-sharing.

This structure ensures the HRP complies with the PHS Act 2711 annual limit requirements and the PHS Act 2713 preventative care requirements as outlined in the Technical Release.

Read more: How Healthcare Reimbursement Plans (HRPs) Work With New "Market Reforms"

Questions about HRAs in 2014? Leave a comment below.