3911592

(OFA Update: An OFA spokesman has asked the Daily Caller to change this headline. Duly noted.)

(OFA Update 2: A statement from OFA: “We neither support nor approve of the inappropriate language used in a sign on the mall today. OFA believes that John Boehner should stand up to the extreme wing in his party, pay their bills and end this now.” Whereas I believe that Obama could end this shutdown with the stroke of a pen. Only one of us is right, and it ain’t the flack for King Barry the First. Also, see Rules for Radicals #4, #5, #8, and #13. Not nearly as much fun when they get turned around on you, huh?)

If there’s one thing we’ve learned in the past week, it’s that the behavior of one guy at a protest reflects the group as a whole. For example, one guy was carrying around a Confederate flag at the Million Vet March in DC this weekend, which means all veterans are racists or something. (Or Uncle Toms, I guess, depending.)

Okay, okay, not all veterans. Just the ones who want to visit the war memorials that Obama has barricaded because he’s not getting his way.

Anyway, based on that standard, the following young fellow represents all OFA volunteers. Courtesy of Charlie Spiering at the Washington Examiner, here’s a look at OFA’s “Budget Shutdown Day of Action Event” in front of the Capitol Building today:

OFA sign: “Thanks Tea- Tards” pic.twitter.com/NPatoUPxzQ — Charlie Spiering (@charliespiering) October 15, 2013

And Politico’s Reid J. Epstein also spotted the clever youngster:

OFA rally on the Capitol steps pic.twitter.com/INqPs9Jknu — Reid J. Epstein (@reidepstein) October 15, 2013

Here’s a wider shot of the protest:

A protest this big deserves a panoramic shot #OFAprotest pic.twitter.com/LLdcNKQm3C — Charlie Spiering (@charliespiering) October 15, 2013

Clearly, America is fed up with those damn Republicans.

Hmmmm, I don’t see the “THANKS TEA-TARDS” guy anywhere, though. Perhaps he ducked out to touch up his antiperspirant. Does Obamacare cover that? If not, why not?

Update: This fellow is claiming to be the one with the sign.

@reidepstein glad everyone likes my sign. I am not part of OFA I just showed up — david roper (@dwroper) October 15, 2013

Ooooh, a false flag operation? Or just an OFA idiot covering his tracks? Stay tuned!

Update: Dang it, Burge…

In Soviet America, government protests you http://t.co/St4ov57JVy h/t @instapundit — David Burge (@iowahawkblog) October 15, 2013

Update: Question, and answer.

Is the guy with the “Tea-Tards” sign now the spokesman for all of OFA? Are we see him as indicative of a general attitude? — Charles C. W. Cooke (@charlescwcooke) October 15, 2013

I’ve been watching the @OFA account, and so far they are in full endorsement of the “TEA TARDS” sign guy. — Defund #DemCare (@lheal) October 15, 2013

Update:

Weird. Why did @dwroper delete this tweet, denying he's part of @OFA? https://t.co/9YcF29sExT — Jim Treacher (@jtLOL) October 15, 2013

Update: I don’t think I can do that, Mr. Searcy, but that’s pretty much my opinion as well.