Today's "Jeopardy" answer: Yes, but goodness, gracious, look at those numbers.

Your answer (in the form of a question, of course): Is there still life in the traditional Milwaukee Public Schools system?

In fact, there's quite a bit of life in many MPS schools. Good things are happening, kids are being taught by dedicated teachers, and there are efforts that deserve respect when it comes to trying to rev things up. Things are not as bad in MPS as lots of folks think, to put it plainly.

Furthermore, despite what some of those folks — sometimes in high places — seem to want, MPS is not going to just wither away. It's too big to be ignored, and the futures of thousands and thousands of children depend on keeping MPS schools going and improving.

But it's another year in which enrollment in the main body of MPS schools shrank. That carries long-term implications.

Every year for at least the past half-dozen, the percentage of Milwaukee kids who are getting publicly funded kindergarten through 12th-grade education through MPS has gone down a percentage point or two from the prior year. This year, it went down more than two points.

I wrote a story for this newspaper about seven years ago with a premise that at the time was very striking to me: A third of all Milwaukee kids getting publicly funded educations were doing so outside of the conventional public schools.

It was such a change from days not long ago when the answer was always that publicly funded education meant you went to the public schools.

Now, instead of 33%, the figure is an even more eye-catching 43%. The official figures for this fall show 56.9% of the 120,895 publicly funded students were in schools staffed by MPS teachers.

You can see the day looming (maybe four years? maybe five?) when that percentage is 50% or less.

Where are all the other kids? I use the term publicly funded because Milwaukee remains one of the nation's biggest arenas for options in schooling. Parents can utilize public support to send kids lots of places.

To give some specifics, 113 private schools, the large majority religious, had 26,930 students this fall paid for by publicly funded vouchers worth generally between $7,000 and $8,000 each. That is up from 25,820 a year ago and 20,113 in the fall of 2008.

Charter schools (independently run, not religious, authorized by one of three government bodies in Milwaukee) show continuing strong growth.

Charters authorized either by Milwaukee city government or by the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee reported 8,446 students, compared with 4,947 six years earlier.

Independent charters authorized by the Milwaukee School Board (but not staffed by MPS employees) had 6,899 students; six years earlier, that was 2,503.

Combined, those two groups of charter schools have seen 106% growth in six years.

Then there's the 8,128 kids who live in the city and go to public schools in the suburbs.

They do that by using either Wisconsin's open enrollment law or the Chapter 220 voluntary racial integration law.

Chapter 220 (down to 1,456 city-to-suburb transfers this fall) has been shrinking for years. But the open enrollment figure went down from 6,906 in fall 2013 to 6,672 this fall, which is rather a surprise. This year's number is still up 42% from six years earlier.

Driver sees good signs

MPS Superintendent Darienne Driver suggests that open enrollment dropped because of good things happening in MPS schools that are attracting more parents.

Several MPS schools where enrollment was up this year, including Reagan High School, are along the southern edge of the city, which has been prime open enrollment turf.

Driver thought MPS was taking steps that will pay off by keeping kids in the system or bringing kids back. She pointed to increases in music, art and gym teachers, which means restoration of some degree of the specialty classes that had taken a huge beating in prior years.

Also, every school now has a parent coordinator, a person who is supposed to help improve relations between school and home and increase involvement of parents.

And popular specialty schools, including language immersion and Montessori schools, are being treated as valuable by MPS leaders, which wasn't so true several years ago.

But the good things worth attention don't change the large number of schools — and the overall systemwide reality — of outcomes and achievement that are just too low.

This comes with an important partner statement: The voucher and charter schools overall aren't doing much better, and, in some specifics, are doing worse. Almost all schools in the city have a long way to go.

In the big picture, declining enrollment means declining resources, not only proportional to the student numbers but overall.

In the Act 10 world, MPS has made large cuts in long-term commitments to retirees and health insurance costs, which have helped the financial picture a lot.

But, as Driver acknowledged, "Obviously, if we have fewer students in our traditional schools, it is more difficult to provide the levels of resources necessary."

Class sizes in general are large and 20% of students in MPS have special education status of one kind or another (a higher percentage than the voucher or charters overall).

How should MPS respond?

"I think our families want high-quality programs for our children, and that's what we need to provide in MPS every day," said Driver, who is in her first months as superintendent.

So what's ahead for MPS?

For one thing, MPS generally has resisted closing schools in recent years.

Can that go on much longer?

Driver didn't answer directly, but plans for next year have to be announced soon.

Especially school by school, things might improve. I give MPS leaders credit for trying.

But overall, parents are choosing. And the results are taking a toll on MPS. Just look at those numbers.

Alan J. Borsuk is senior fellow in law and public policy at Marquette University Law School. Reach him at alan.borsuk@marquette.edu.