WASHINGTON, June 28, 2014 – Have you heard the latest joke from Washington? House Speaker John Boehner is filing suit against Barack Obama for overstepping his authority as President.

Is anyone laughing yet? The lawsuit isn’t a joke. Boehner is.

READ ALSO: Time to say goodbye to the GOP?



The lawsuit is another bizarre step taken by a Republican Leadership that is totally out of touch with its base and with America.

The Republican Leadership and those who want to be in leadership immediately hailed what Boehner announced he was going to do.

Really?

The men who wrote the Constitution had a great idea. They wanted to check tyranny and preserve liberty. The Constitution was written with someone like Barack Obama in mind. The Constitution gives the Senate and the House of Representatives many options to deal with an out of control President. These range from impeachment to simply defunding him and his operations.

A lawsuit?

If Thomas Jefferson isn’t rolling over in his grave, he is laughing hysterically.

READ ALSO: The mass suicide of Republican leadership: Will the Tea Party leave the sinking ship?

A lawsuit will take years to be concluded and probably will end up being dismissed at some point because it is moot as soon as Barack Obama leaves office. What we are really seeing is more of the Republican shadow theater in Washington.

The GOP is totally out of touch with America and the voters who put them in power. If anyone doubts that, just look at the Tea Party. The reason the Tea Party sprang into existence in 2009 was not Barack Obama and the Democrats’ control of Washington.

That was the cause but not the reason.

The reason the Tea Party came into being was the Republican Party had long since abandoned its conservative values and is now the party of Democrat lite.

The Republicans over the last few years have mastered the technique of the meaningless vote. the perfect example of Republican shadow theater. Like Eric Cantor’s fifty plus meaningless votes to repeal Obamacare.

In the Senate the Republicans mastered the technique of voting for cloture or to end a filibuster on a controversial issue. When it was time for an actual vote on the issue, when they knew it would pass, they voted against it as a show vote.

Then they ran back to their home state saying I voted against this, when in reality their vote for cloture made it possible for the bill to pass.

Conservatives in America are asking when the GOP is going to do something. When ever Barack Obama starts a fight, all John Boehner wants to do is raise his freshly laundered white flag of surrender.

The fate of Boehner’s deputy, House Majority Leader Eric Cantor should be a cautionary tale for the Republicans. Apparently it isn’t.

In Mississippi, senile senior senator Thad Cochran pulled out a surprising victory over conservative challenger Chris McDaniel by getting Democrats to vote for Cochran and race baiting in a manner worthy of Jesse Jackson or Al Sharpton.

READ ALSO: Cochran wins in Mississippi but the GOP loses big

Now in Mississippi, conservatives are talking about returning the favor, if McDaniel does not win his challenges to the election by sitting the election out or even voting for Travis Childress, the Democrat.

Conservatives are tired of a party that is little more than a joke. Conservatives are tired of a party that simply surrenders all the time and then has the nerve to lie to the base about that.

The question is, how much longer will conservatives be willing to tolerate this before they vote with their feet?