Paul McKendrick’s five-year contract as superintendent of the Tuscaloosa City School System will not be extended for an additional two years. At least not immediately.

In a school board meeting held Friday, McKendrick retracted the request he made at Tuesday’s board meeting to extend his contract. He instead suggested that the board consider his request at its first meeting in June 2014.

“I’m OK with it being pushed back until June because I’m focused on children, engaging the community and developing a good relationship with the board,” McKendrick told the board. “Nothing should come before the board that detracts from that.”

The board unanimously approved that the issue be taken up in June.

“Though some may argue this, I’m not sure you have a stauncher supporter than me,” said Kelly Horwitz, the outgoing District 4 board member. “But I was concerned coming into this meeting because of your extension request. If I was forced to vote on it today, I could not have given you my vote. This is an issue the new board should take up.”

McKendrick asked for a two-year extension to his contract after the board released the results of his first evaluation, which he received high marks on.

The request also fell on the last school board meeting that the current board was in power.

On Monday, three new board members — Lee Garrison, Norman Crow and Cason Kirby — will be sworn in.

The board didn’t immediately respond to McKendrick’s extension request Tuesday, but later that evening they called a meeting for 7:30 a.m. Friday to discuss or approve it.

The actions apparently caused some controversy. McKendrick said that a few people accused him and the board of slipping in a deal before the current board’s term expired.

“I didn’t want to give the appearance that this was a back-door deal,” McKendrick told the board. “It just fell on the (board’s) last day because that’s when my evaluation was reported.”

Some board members said McKendrick’s contract extension request caught them off-guard.

“I echo what Kelly said, but I have to say that I was caught completely unaware by this,” said Marvin Lucas, a board member who represents District 6.

Lucas asked outgoing board chairman Dan Meissner if he knew about the request for a contract extension before McKendrick made it. Lucas told Meissner that if he did, Meissner should have told the rest of the board. Lucas said it was unfair to the board, the community and to McKendrick for the issue to be sprung on them.

“It was awkward to have it come up the other night and not everyone knew about it,” Lucas said.

Meissner admitted that he did know about the request before Tuesday’s meeting, but said he mistakenly didn’t tell the other board members about it because he assumed McKendrick would have told them himself. He said he didn’t think it was his place to advocate for McKendrick’s extension.

“I apologize,” Meissner said.

McKendrick said after the meeting that he and Meissner discussed extending his contract a few months ago.

“This just didn’t come about on Tuesday when I walked in,” McKendrick said. “It was just perceived that way.”

McKendrick said his request wasn’t about money as some people in the city have been saying since his request became public.

He said he requested an extra two years because he wants to bring stability to the system. He said he doesn’t think the two and a half years he has left in his contract is enough time to position the system where he’d like it to be.

“In the last two years, we’ll have had six new principals,” McKendrick said. “We added a new principal at Woodland Forrest Elementary, Skyland Elementary and Southview Middle last year. Right now, we don’t have a full-time principal at Paul W. Bryant High (where former assistant superintendent Dorothy Richardson is serving as interim principal), and we’ll be bringing in new principals at University Place Elementary School and Northridge High School. We’re looking at Nov. 8 as being the last day for Dr. (Deron) Cameron at University Place.

“We need stability and school systems without steady principals don’t do well,” he said. “With all the changes going on, including with Common Core and the new ACT+ exam, we have to train everyone.”

Board vice chairwoman Earnestine Tucker said McKendrick’s done a good job raising the system’s academic rigor, but she would like to see him do more before they add another two years to his contract.

“We’ve spent two years just trying to get rid of some things we needed to get rid of,” Tucker said. “We don’t really know Dr. McKendrick. We don’t know what he can do beyond get us out of where we were. He’s been a moving target since he’s been in the system. We haven’t really dissected him.

“I believe he can do well, but we’re under a microscope and can’t afford to make any mistakes. ... The next three years will be important.”

Incoming board members Garrison and Crow, who both attended the Friday meeting, said they think the board made the right choice by pushing the vote on McKendrick’s contract extension back to June.

The contract extension request “was a surprise to me,” Garrison said, “but the right decision was made. As I said to Dr. McKendrick yesterday, I look forward to working with him and seeing constant and never-ending improvement of the system on a daily basis. When the contract extension conversation comes around in June, we’ll be in a much better position to discuss it.”