4051751

A contingent of Arizona Republicans is set to vote this weekend on whether to censure GOP Sen. John McCain over his “long and terrible record of drafting, co-sponsoring and voting for legislation best associated with liberal Democrats.”

The group doesn’t represent the Arizona GOP as a whole. But the Maricopa County GOP’s proposed censure resolution criticizes the state’s senior Republican senator and 2008 GOP presidential nominee and accuses him of siding with Democrats on immigration, defunding Obamacare, the debt ceiling, gun rights and judicial nominees.

The Maricopa County GOP could not be reached for comment on Tuesday.

Here’s the full text of the proposed censure, posted on icarizona.com.

Senator John McCain Censured by Arizona’s Republican Leadership As leaders in the Republican Party, we are obligated to fully support our Party, platform, and its candidates. Only in times of great crisis or betrayal is it necessary to publicly censure our leaders. Today we are faced with both. For too long we have waited, hoping Senator McCain would return to our Party’s values on his own. That has not happened. So with sadness and humility we rise and declare: Whereas Senator McCain has amassed a long and terrible record of drafting, co-sponsoring and voting for legislation best associated with liberal Democrats, such as Amnesty, funding for ObamaCare, the debt ceiling, assaults on the Constitution and 2nd amendment, and has continued to support liberal nominees; Whereas this record has been disastrous and harmful to Arizona and the United States; and, Whereas Senator McCain has campaigned as a conservative and made promises during his re-election campaigns, such as the needed and welcomed promise to secure our borders and finish the border fence, only to quickly flip-flop on those promises; and Whereas McCain has abandoned our core values and has been eerily silent against Liberals, yet publicly reprimands Conservatives in his own Party, therefore BE IT HEREBY RESOLVED that the Maricopa County Republican leadership censures Senator McCain for his continued disservice to our State and Nation, and BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that until he consistently champions our Party’s Platform and values, we, the Republican leadership in Arizona will no longer support, campaign for or endorse John McCain as our U.S. Senator.

Follow Alex on Twitter