Posted: Aug. 8, 2015 10:41 pm Updated: Aug. 11, 2015 10:41 pm

By ERIC OBERNAUER

eobernauer@njherald.com

NEWTON — The director of social services for Sussex County, in a newly filed lawsuit, has accused County Administrator Stephen Gruchacz of retaliating against her for advocating on behalf of a sickly patient at Newton Medical Center earlier this year against Gruchacz’s wishes.

The five-page complaint by Carol Novrit, which was filed in Superior Court July 31, alleges that Gruchacz violated Novrit’s rights as a conscientious employee and later secured the county administrator’s job over her based partly on his assurances to three of the five freeholders — Phil Crabb, Dennis Mudrick and Rich Vohden — that he would protect them from the fallout of a multimillion-dollar solar project settlement that the three of them voted to approve in February.

The three freeholders and Gruchacz are all named in the lawsuit as defendants, as are County Counsel John Williams and former County Administrator John Eskilson.

Crabb, in a brief phone conversation Friday, acknowledged learning of the lawsuit early last week but said he would have no further comment for now. Phone and voicemail messages left for Gruchacz, Williams, and the other freeholders were not returned, and an attempt to reach Eskilson was unsuccessful.

Novrit alleges in her complaint that she has been the target of retaliation by Gruchacz ever since she sent a letter on Jan. 13 to Newton Medical Center urging that a female patient not be released to the care of her husband, who was said in the letter to be incapable of providing that care. Her complaint alleges that ever since then, Novrit has been treated by Gruchacz "with disdain" and been the victim of a hostile work environment.

Gruchacz — who was then the administrator of the county’s Department of Human Services, within which the Division of Social Services is housed — allegedly "became incensed" upon learning of what Novrit had done, "accused (her) of sending out confidential information," told her the hospital was "ballistic," and ended by hanging up the phone on her.

At the time, according to the complaint, Gruchacz was intent on building a relationship with Newton Medical Center, with which the county had partnered three years earlier on a transitional care program for which the hospital had provided seed money.

The program, which was established under Gruchacz and which mirrors incentives provided to hospitals under the Affordable Care Act, uses county staff to provide support services to Medicare patients following their release from the hospital so as to reduce their readmission rates.

The complaint alleges that Gruchacz, after being promoted to the county administrator’s position in June, acted with the support of the three freeholder defendants to appoint "a less qualified individual with less experience" than Novrit to Gruchacz’s former position as human services director.

Though not identified by name in the lawsuit, Sarah Balzano — who coordinated the transitional care program under Gruchacz — was approved by the three freeholders at their July 22 meeting to succeed Gruchacz as the county’s new human services director — an appointment that the complaint, without providing details, alleges was influenced in part by John Eskilson.

The complaint states that because of Novrit’s advocacy on behalf of the female patient at Newton Medical Center, who would have faced "an unsafe condition" as a result of being released to her husband, Novrit has suffered "a hostile work environment" and "adverse employment decisions" in violation of the Conscientious Employee Protection Act — also known as the whistleblower law — "by being deprived of the promotion to first, County Administrator and then, to Administrator of the Department of Human Services."

The three freeholder defendants, it is further alleged, all chose Gruchacz as county administrator over Novrit based partly on considerations stemming from their support for a February settlement calling for the infusion of another $6.7 million into the county’s $28 million solar initiative.

"There has been widespread criticism of the three Freeholders who supported the (solar) settlement," the complaint states. "Defendant Gruchacz was selected by the three Freeholder Defendants because of his commitment to keeping the settlement in place and his commitment to protect the three Freeholder Defendants from ramifications of having entered into the solar project settlement."

The complaint states that in the interim period between January and the end of June, the hostile work conditions encountered by Novrit were controlled and mitigated to some degree by the intervention of former County Counsel Dennis McConnell, who retired July 1.

Since then, it is alleged, the hostile work conditions have returned with the acquiescence of newly appointed County Counsel John Williams, who is said to have "consulted with ... Gruchacz and carried forward Gruchacz’s hostile work environment" against Novrit.

The complaint specifically references a meeting Novrit held with Williams on or about July 20, where he allegedly told her he was unfamiliar with what had taken place previously but said he would look into the matter.

Subsequently, on July 22, Williams allegedly called Novrit to his office where he "berated her" and "told her she was suffering from anxiety," according to the lawsuit.

It is alleged that at that meeting, Williams also "criticized (Novrit) for ‘shoving her resume in his face’ and further stated, ‘I thought there was something about you.’"

Novrit, who has headed the county’s Division of Social Services since 2007, is seeking unspecified damages and demanding a trial by jury.

She is being represented in her lawsuit by Sparta-based attorney George Daggett.

Novrit declined to comment for this story and has advised that all inquiries should be directed to Daggett, who also declined further comment.

A trial date has not been set.

Eric Obernauer can also be contacted on Twitter: @EricObernNJH or by phone at 973-383-1213.