Heroin's Toll Agencies feeling the strain

Share This Story 1,071 Tweet Share Email

The 26-year-old sat in his beat-up car outside a fast-food restaurant in southern Louisville with a crumbled bag of hypodermic needles and a small packet of powdered heroin.

His tolerance has built up so much that the packet is barely enough to get him high, he says. But it will stave off the withdrawal pains for a few hours from an addiction that's consumed his life — and for now, that's enough.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share With the crackdown on prescription pain pills like OxyContin came a resurgence of heroin addictions in local communities, including Jefferson County. Alton Strupp/The Courier-Journal

He lives in a parent's home and spends two-thirds of his low-paying factory wages on runs to his dealer's house. He shoots up, feels shame, tries to quit, fails and then shoots up again.

"I desperately want to quit," said the young man, who wouldn't give his name for fear of being arrested. He recounts several near-overdoses, then admits, "I'm not going have anything if I continue to use heroin."

Increased numbers of people living with addiction to heroin — a drug that is notoriously dangerous to use, difficult to kick and challenging to treat — is producing a host of new strains on resources at Louisville's jails, treatment facilities, drug courts and hospitals.

And in a state that already had a shortage of drug treatment options, the heroin problem is badly outstripping Kentucky's ability to treat it. The state attorney general's Office says Kentucky has one-tenth of the treatment beds needed.

"We're just bursting at the seams," said Karyn Hascal, who is head of The Healing Place drug-treatment center and once worked for the state's office for drug control policy. "I've been around 35 years, I've never seen anything hit this fast and this hard."

• Heroin users, rare just a few years ago, now fill 90 percent of The Healing Place's detox beds and is the primary addiction for nearly half of its nearly 600 clients. Elsewhere, Our Lady of Peace hospital's addiction program added beds in part to address rising numbers of heroin users.

• The Louisville metro jail struggles to cope with 30 to 90 inmates each day suffering through heroin withdrawal. Since 2012, the jail has added four around-the-clock detox nurses, new detox dorm programs and training for officers — and "increased our inmate health care budget by hundreds of thousands of dollars," said Metro Corrections director Mark Bolton. The nurses added more than $700,000 in annual costs, he said.

Yet still, he added, "We're stretched thin ... and every day we're pushing people back on the street. (And) ... the first thing they do is get a fix."

• At the Jefferson County courthouse, drug courts have been swamped by heroin cases, increasing demands on staff because heroin users in the diversion program require more intensive supervision and case management to avoid relapses.

• Louisville emergency room doctors say it's now common for people to bring unconscious heroin users to the ER and drive off. And Louisville EMS had to use the opiate-countering drug naloxone 1,567 times last year, nearly double the number from 2009.

Though pain-pill abuse remains more prevalent in Kentucky, a state Health Issue Poll released in February found that 9 percent of Kentuckians, and 15 percent of young adults ages 18-29, reported a friend or family member struggling with heroin.

A 2011 survey by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention found that 5.2 percent of Kentucky's high-schoolers reported using heroin, nearly double the national average.

"It's everywhere," said paramedic Ben Neal. "And it's not just the stereotypical areas."

He recounts a recent run: The call came in as a cardiac arrest at a home in Fern Creek. But given the patient's age, in his early 20s, Neal suspected it could be a heroin overdose.

Indeed, he found the young man with a syringe and a belt used as a tourniquet. He administered nalaxone. The man woke up, Neal said, and "of course, denies using any drugs."

Addiction and treatment

Dr. Christopher Stewart, an addiction psychiatrist and medical director at the Jefferson Alcohol and Drug Abuse Center, says heroin may be "the most addicting drug there is."

That's partly because of how it works. Derived from the poppy plant, heroin crosses the blood-brain barrier and turns to morphine, binding to opioid receptors in the brain and sparking an intense rush of pleasure and euphoria — one that's far more sharp and immediate than opiate pills.

As tolerance builds, the rush, and the subsequent dreamy and drowsy state, takes an increasing amount of heroin to achieve. At the same time, withdrawal pains can set in within hours, bringing pain, vomiting, insomnia, spasms and cravings. The result is a powerful addiction.

And that brings an array of challenges to treating it, which starts with detoxing — simply waiting out withdrawal or getting medications to minimize symptoms, from pain to diarrhea.

Longer-term treatment for severe addicts is more difficult, and many experts favor a mix of behavioral and medical treatment, including months-long inpatient residential programs of recovery and counseling, as the most effective.

But Kentucky is woefully short of such care. The Courier-Journal reported in 2012 that only 40 of Kentucky's 301 treatment and recovery sites offer 24-hour residential care. Even in cities where they are concentrated, waiting lists are long.

"There are not enough open-entry detox and treatment beds in this community — I'm talking non-insurance beds," Bolton said.

While critics say methadone can create its own addiction, those who support it as a treatment option argue there are too few clinics providing it — only a few in Louisville and Southern Indiana. Cary Kaplin, supervisor at the MORE Center methadone clinic in Louisville, said his center stays full.

In addition, some argue there are too few doctors certified to use Suboxone, a drug that is meant to quell cravings, and a shortage of certified drug counselors across the state.

"We could do a lot better, there's no doubt about it," Stewart said.

Treatment centers taxed

Adam Davis walked past dorm beds filled with recovering addicts to the kitchen where he does chores at the Healing Place, a large addiction recovery center that is Louisville's only no-fee treatment facility.

At the peak of his addiction, he was spending $1,000 a day on drugs and selling heroin to cover his own use. Eventually, worried he'd wind up dead or in prison, he stopped selling but continued using. Finally, his health failing and unable to pay for his habit, he knew he'd have to quit.

"Heroin destroyed everything," the 30-year-old said, referring to his ability to work a job, stay healthy and live a normal life.

It's a common story at the Healing Place, whose 600 beds, including 48 for detoxing, draw addicts from jails, hospitals and the streets for an eight-month residential program of classes and programs.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share "I decided it's time to change," Davis said.

"Five years ago, you might have five heroin addicts out of 600 people," Hascal said. Now, heroin addicts constitute nearly half of the center's clients. Hundreds of people are on its waiting list; it can take six weeks to six months to gain a spot.

Jean Henry, director of addictions at Our Lady of Peace, where in-patient beds were expanded partly because of heroin, said such addicts often need at least two weeks of inpatient care and six weeks of outpatient care. That's difficult to find here, she said, particularly for addicts unable to pay for care.

Dr. Eric Fulcher is an emergency room doctor at St. Mary and Elizabeth Hospital, where the rise in heroin overdose cases since pharmaceuticals became heavily regulated was no surprise. "We saw this coming," Fulcher said.

(Photo: Alton Strupp/The Courier-Journal)

Statewide in 2009, two-thirds of the 21,474 Kentuckians admitted for treatment of any drug addiction entered once-weekly outpatient care, compared with 46 percent nationally. Less than 5 percent entered residential care, compared with 17 percent nationally.

"We definitely in this community don't have enough treatment beds for people with heroin," Henry said.

Providers, judges and others in Louisville say they're encouraged by a recent move by Attorney General Jack Conway to use $32 million in settlements with pharmaceutical companies to expand substance abuse treatment for drugs, including heroin.

But while health officials say substance abuse coverage through expanded Medicaid and Obamacare requirements also soon may help, they argue more needs to be done immediately — from education to treatment.

At Sts. Mary and Elizabeth in the South End, treating heroin on an emergency basis has become "the new normal," said Dr. Eric Fulcher, an emergency room doctor. "We're so used to it, we're almost numb to it."

Often, cars will pull up, the driver will urge nurses to pull out heroin users who are blue from lack of oxygen, and drive off, said ER nurse Jennifer Davis.

"There's usually a bang on the door, saying, 'We need help out here.' The patient is usually blue and sweating ... not breathing," she said. "Usually after two to three minutes they wake up fighting. ... If they want treatment we can give them a referral to Our Lady of Peace.

"Most of them do not. They want to go out and get high again."

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Eric Fulcher, M.D. and Jennifer Davis, R.N. share their experiences handling an increase in patients experiencing heroin overdoses in the Saints Mary and Elizabeth Hospital emergency room. Alton Strupp/The Courier-Journal

Gil Kerlikowske, former director of Office of National Drug Control Policy, has advocated expanding the availability of naloxone, used to counteract heroin overdoses. But a proposal failed this year in the General Assembly that in part would have made naloxone more widely available, along with other heroin-related measures.

Mothers in jail

At Louisville's Metro Corrections, more than a dozen women in yellow prison jumpsuits sat around metal tables one day last year in a large cell with metal bunk beds, gathered for a jail program focused on female heroin users.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share The Jefferson County Department of Corrections began providing an in-house treatment program 10 months ago, modeled after the Healing Place treatment program in Louisville. Alton Strupp/The Courier-Journal

On the wall were photos of children and handprints of women who have gone through the program, helping each other battle withdrawal marked by bone pain, body aches, nausea, spasms, vomiting, diarrhea and insomnia — followed by nearly three months of drug counseling.

Among them was Kimberly Holmes, a 2001 Seneca High graduate who was spending her 30th birthday detoxing in jail while her three children stayed with their father's family.

"This is the worst thing I've ever been through in my life," she said. "I've been detoxing four days, and I'm finally sitting up today."

Holmes said she never even tried pills before being introduced to something that quickly became a habit. She tried to quit, going to a hospital-addiction program, but couldn't afford it, she said.

"I thought, one time won't hurt," she said of her first taste of heroin. "And before you even realize it, it's got a hold of you so bad."

Ken Wright, leads a discussing with women inmates participating in the optional drug treatment program at the Louisville jail. Oct. 7, 2013

(Photo: Alton Strupp/The Courier-Journal)

Tiffiny Jenkins, a Louisville mother of two grown children who said she was arrested for using meth when trying to kick heroin, said heroin is astonishingly easy to get — and astonishingly difficult to quit.

She was off heroin while in jail awaiting trial and facing possible time in prison.

"I've been in this dorm for months, and there's been hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of young girls ... on this stuff," said Jenkins. "They need somebody to watch over them" and "hold their hair when we're throwing up, change the sheets, make sure you drink Gatorade. ... You sweat, you're cold, you cannot sleep and cannot eat."

Bolton said the addition of 24-hour detox nurses and new detox dorms for men and women came after several deaths related to heroin about two years ago. But most heroin users, particularly those held on minor charges, are released before they fully detox, and few seek treatment once outside — so eventually, they return.

"I don't have the resources to take these people by the hand, and you can't force someone into treatment," he said.

Filling the courtrooms

Derek Jarboe, 23, is a recoverying heroin addict currently enrolled in the Jefferson County Drug Court program. "I've been clean for over 100 days," Jarboe said. "I should be moving in to Phase two soon." Feb. 18, 2014

(Photo: Alton Stupp/The C-J)

Derek Jarboe walked to table in a courtroom before Jefferson District Judge Stephanie Pearce Burke, making a required appearance to report his progress since starting a drug court diversion program. He was back on track, he said, after slipping at least once back into heroin use.

"I'm really doing better," Jarboe, 23, one of 200 participants in Jefferson County District drug court, an 18-month treatment and oversight program, told Burke. He'd joined the diversion program to avoid prison after an arrest for allegedly making and selling meth to support his $350-a-day heroin habit.

It's a common story to Burke, who estimates that heroin use is present in more than three-quarters of her cases. Drug-court dockets "are out of control," she said, and the heroin cases result in more relapses and more returns to jail for failing to meet requirements than other drug offenses. Several participants have died from overdoses, she said.

Mark Baker, chief narcotics prosecutor at the commonwealth's attorney's office, said heroin now accounts for at least one-third of his team's cases, with more repeat offenders. "Without a really good intervention system, they have a much harder time of beating heroin than other drugs, (and the) recidivism rate become much higher," he said.

Kentucky Appeals Court Judge Allison Jones, who held a town forum about the issue at North Oldham High in March, said awareness is one place to start dealing with the scourge of heroin.

"People still have the idea that it's a drug from the '60s and homeless people in the park," she said. "But the face of heroin has changed. It's suburban teens and middle-class housewives, too."

Something has to give, Burke said, acknowledging that even diversion programs are not effective for heroin users.

"The successes are fewer; people are staying in the program longer," she said. "Often times we're afraid they're going to die."

Reporter Chris Kenning can be reached at (502) 582-4697. Follow him on Twitter at ckenning_cj.

Chapter 1: Heroin surges

Chapter 2: A drug's long journey

Chapter 3: A family's story

Chapter 4: Agencies strained

Chapter 5: A hellish addiction

Chapter 6: Efforts in N. Kentucky