Tara Oakman

April 20, 2015

In March 2015 the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation (RWJF) sponsored the second annual conference on health care price, cost, and quality transparency. At the conference, Niall Brennan, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) data officer, pointed out that just a few years ago, a three-day summit on health care transparency would have been unheard of because there would have been nothing to talk about.

At the summit pre-conference, the Network for Regional Healthcare Improvement (NRHI) did a deep dive about its RWJF-funded project focused on health care cost transparency at the local level that illustrated just this point about how far we have come.

In May 2013, when NRHI approached the RWJF to express interest in measuring the total cost of health care and resource use in five communities across the country in a standardized way (herein referred to as the Total Cost of Care project), it seemed unbelievable that, while we as a nation talked a lot about health care costs, we had no idea how much was really being spent at the local level. The project uses the Total Cost of Care measure created by HealthPartners, which includes all health care costs associated with a person and is calculated using health care claims data. The National Quality Forum endorsed the measure.

Cost reporting is a sensitive issue in health care. It can be easier to talk about at a high level than at a more granular one when you are talking about confidential issues of reimbursement and contractual negotiations.

Also, while policy makers, payers, and providers have been talking for years about the need for measurement alignment—choosing the same measures and reporting on them the same way to foster “apples to apples” comparisons—it had not actually been done before on costs.

Now, almost two years later and as the $1.4 million, eighteen-month grant to NRHI nears completion, we have achieved one of our major goals for the work—to better understand the challenges and opportunities associated with doing this work in a collaborative way at the local level, where health care utilization and spending actually happen.

At the pre-conference, NRHI and the five participating communities (Maine Health Management Coalition, Midwest Health Initiative, Minnesota Community Measurement, Oregon Health Care Quality Corporation, and Colorado’s Center for Improving Value in Health Care) shared many of the lessons learned from this project. These include (1) it is imperative for total cost reporting to be part of a multistakeholder effort to build trust; (2) cost reporting doesn’t make sense as a place for a community to start engaging in public reporting because of both the data being often incomplete, miscoded, and mischaracterized and the sensitivity that surrounds public reporting; and (3) getting the data to a place where it is reliable is key, but using the data to identify unnecessary spending is “where the rubber meets the road.”

This Total Cost of Care project began before the RWJF announced its new mission to build a Culture of Health, but it is key to helping us achieve that culture. In a Culture of Health, our economy would be unburdened by unnecessary, wasteful health care spending; health care would be affordable; and we would have more resources available to spend upstream on addressing poverty, education, housing, transportation, and nutrition. Having reliable, useful, local-level data on the total cost of care will help us to move toward our larger goal, as it provides information to payers that can help them design payment systems that pay for value, rather than volume.

This project enables us to look at the whole cost picture, rather than focusing on small, specific areas of utilization. As one person at the summit put it: this project enables you to look at the whole balloon and how to reduce its size, rather than squeezing one part of it and having the shape change, but the size remain the same.

The project also provides information to providers so that they can act on it and work together, and with other stakeholders, to identify unnecessary tests, treatments, and overall spending. For example, one of the communities shared the story of a provider who looked at total cost data for his practice and opened the door to dialogue about change by asking why costs were at the level they were—and what he could do about it.

Paired with information on quality, total cost data can also be useful to consumers who want to go to high-value providers and practices, based on their own well-informed decisions.

Lastly, but very importantly, data on total cost of care can be critically important at the local or regional level, so that communities can better understand where their resources are being spent— that is, how much are they spending on health care compared with other public health and social services—services that also affect health outcomes? These data can help communities make transparent decisions about what their spending priorities can and should be to build a Culture of Health at the local level.

This current phase of the Total Cost of Care project wraps up at the end of April. For the next phase, we are considering ways to continue investing in the measurement and analysis of commercial claims data, but also ways to expand this effort to Medicare and Medicaid data and, importantly, continuing to dig deeper on how Total Cost of Care data might be used at the local level for all stakeholders.

Many of these lessons were shared at the summit pre-conference and, on April 30, NRHI will be hosting the National Summit on Cost Transparency from the Ground Up to continue to disseminate and discuss results from this phase of the project, the local and national implications of the work, and the next steps.