As Republican hopefuls Governor Scott Walker (R-WI) and Governor Bobby Jindal (R-LA) showed themselves to be spineless against the far right by refusing to refute Rudy Giuliani’s cheap and obviously empty Palinesque attack on President Obama’s patriotism, Senator Marco Rubio (R-FL) tried to walk a finer line. He demonstrated how to be weak and spineless while playing more subtly with Palin fire by laughingly suggesting that while he has “no doubt” Obama loves this country (not one high profile Republican seems capable of saying Obama loves this country for sure), his polices are so terrible for the nation.

Rubio told the AP that he had “no doubt” that Obama loves the country, “but I just think his policies are bad for our nation.”

Sure, if by bad Rubio thinks record stock market gains, the economy gaining “nearly five times more jobs under President Barack Obama than it did during the presidency of George W. Bush” with the unemployment rate dropping “to just below the historical average,” improved rights and protections for women, lgbtq, and undocumented immigrants, measured responses to international crises, avoidance of Iraq WMD type errors, getting Osama, corporate profits nearly tripling, affordable healthcare via the Obamacare exchanges which are growing more popular by the day, and fighting for a raise to the minimum wage which caused Walmart to grudgingly give a raise to their workers are bad. Just naming a few things. There’s more.

Oh, yeah. Obama’s America is almost Bush’s Katrina, but not. It’s the opposite; showing how government can work well.

A refresher: Rudy Giuliani said, “I know this is a horrible thing to say, but I do not believe that the president loves America. He doesn’t love you. And he doesn’t love me. He wasn’t brought up the way you were brought up and I was brought up through love of this country.”

This rests on the same cheap hatred as Palin’s desperate 2008 “This is not a man who sees America the way you and I see America.”

This is the kind of attack Republicans revel in. It’s a fallacious argument impugning the alleged motives of their opponent. The only time someone engages in this kind of shoddy argument is when the facts and the evidence aren’t on their side.

So Republicans run entire campaigns on suggesting Obama is “pallin’ around with terrorists” and “hates America”. What does it mean and upon what is this based? Let’s see. Obama got Osama. He has fought hard for the middle class. He has managed to rescue this country from the Great Bush Recession of 2008 in spite of relentless and admitted deliberate obstruction by Republicans, who only stood in the President’s way out of spite. If anyone has demonstrated contempt for this nation, it is Republicans.

And that is precisely why they rely upon this kind of cheap shot. They are all going Palin, because they can’t go policy. A whole lot of snarling pit bull with no bite. Republicans have a problem and that is that they can’t afford to alienate their base, but their base jumped the hate shark a long time ago. This leaves Republicans looking decidedly unpresidential and petty when responding to easy questions like this. The right answer isn’t hard. It’s a time to pass on cheap shots. It’s a time to act above the fray, to show themselves as presidential — but they just can’t do it. They can’t resist the cheap shots.

Republicans are like a crazy stalker ex. They just can’t quit their Obama hate.