'The atmosphere just feels really happy and free'

Lyra Jones, 3, left, with her mother, Marketa, reacts to a story about frogs being read by librarian Crystal Niedzwiadek during storytime at the new children's library at the main Boulder Public Library on Friday. ( David R. Jennings / Daily Camera )

The children who were gathered around librarian Crystal Niedzwiadek sang along as she built a "Mat Man" out of a mat and accessory pieces.

"Mat Man has two eyes, two eyes. Mat Man has two eyes, so that he can see," they repeat. "Mat Man has one nose, one nose. Mat Man has one nose, so that he can smell."

"What does the new children's area smell like?" she asks. "Construction."

The main Boulder Public Library opened its new children's area this week. It's one of several major changes as part of a $3.7 million, yearlong renovation project paid for through a voter-approved bond.

The renovation includes a new teen space, which opened this summer, a new computer and reference area on the second floor and significant new meeting space.

The last phase of the project — a new entranceway, circulation area and fiction section where the children's area used to be, just to the right of the main entrance — is now underway. Library patrons have to enter on the Canyon Boulevard side from now through January.

On the bridge across Boulder Creek, adults and children alike use chalk to doodle on particle board lining the way.

The new children's area, enclosed in glass, opens to the left. There are pint-sized computer desks, a play area with a see-saw rocker and giant foam letters overlooking Boulder Creek, low shelves to let children see books and parents see children and a large open area for storytime and other activities.

Advertisement

"So far, the thing that has struck me is how nice it is to have an enclosed space," said early literacy specialist Krissy Jensen. "Everyone feels freer. The kids can make the noise that they make without that tension from the adults of, 'Oh, be quiet,' and because it is enclosed, there isn't that worry about a kid being out of sight.

"The atmosphere just feels really happy and free."

Chika Lambert visited the children's area for storytime with her 3-year-old daughter Kalina on Friday.

Charlie Beamer, 2, listens to stories with his nanny Corey Dempsey during storytime at the new children's area of the main Boulder Public Library. (David R. Jennings / Daily Camera)

"It's more enclosed," she said. "It just feels more comfortable. It's easier to find the books."

Cindy Hannah, who took her grandson Shay, 3, to the library, said the new area was "great."

"It seems more child-oriented," she said. "There's more visibility. It's closed, so if they do take off, you can find them."

Mary Jane Holland, youth services manager for the Boulder library, said the new children's area includes a lot of hands-on activities, new ways to find books and kid-friendly amenities.

There is an exploration station that will feature a new theme each month. Right now, it's a scavenger hunt to introduce children to the new space. Next month, it will have a nature theme.

There's a "discovery wall" with well-loved books and characters.

And there are private bathrooms just for kids and their caregivers.

But the focus remains books and reading.

"Our collection is strong and vibrant and very much intact," she said. "We've maintained the book focus while accommodating some activities in our space."

Erica Meltzer: 303-473-1355, meltzere@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/meltzere