Revels' artistic director has been music to Boulder County's ears

Class of 2014 Click here to meet the other 2014 Pacesetters Award recipients.

Karen Romeo believes some people are born with music in their heads. They have pitch, rhythm and tone constantly ringing in their ears and just can't live without music.

Romeo is one of those people.

Her entire life has revolved around music, and she has been lauded not only for her prowess as a musician but for her ability as a teacher.

She served as assistant concertmaster for the Boulder Philharmonic Orchestra and founded Boulder Arts Academy, which gave countless students the opportunity to find the same passion Romeo was born with.

She has taught violin to more than 100 children throughout Boulder County after giving her first lesson at age 16. Parents say Romeo has an innate ability to get youngsters excited about learning music.

Those achievements notwithstanding, Romeo might best be known as artistic director of the Rocky Mountain Revels.

The Revels originated in Cambridge, Mass., and Romeo decided to bring the concept to Boulder by producing a similar show around Christmas in 2000. In her role as director, Romeo is in charge of the entire production — the script, auditions and arranging the music.

The Rocky Mountain Revels' productions have become popular because of the shows' ability to bring the community together, Romeo believes.

"I think it's a fine example of a true community-based arts organization where one of the main points of the whole thing is to get as many community members involved as we possibly can," she said. "That's where the arts become invaluable.

Romeo brings her teaching ability to the Revels. Every year, the cast is filled with amateur performers, with a few professionals mixed in. The casts have consisted of professors, businesspersons, computer programmers, Nobel Prize winners and even children. Revels productions are an opportunity for cast members to let go of their daily lives and transform into performers.

"I remember so many different people who put everything behind them for an evening and they become someone from Victorian England or a shopkeeper," Romeo said. "They shed off whatever it was they were working on today and become another character in another time."

Romeo believes her biggest strength as director is getting the best out of the talent she is presented with. She works with people who maybe haven't sung since high school choir and helps them find their voice.

This will be Romeo's last year with the Revels, but she will leave knowing she has touched countless lives as a teacher, a performer and a person.