A plan by Encana Corp. to drill 13 wells between two affluent suburban subdivisions in Erie has renewed debate over how close oil and gas operations should be to residential areas.

The Erie Board of Trustees is slated to vote on the plan Tuesday night.

The town planning commission has already approved the plan, and the company has its state drilling permits, according to Wendy Wiedenbeck, a spokeswoman for Calgary-based Encana.

Under the plan, Encana would sink 13 wells from two drilling pads on private land between the Vista Pointe and Vista Ridge developments.

Vista Ridge, which bills itself as being “like a five-star resort,” has homes for sale on listing services in the $400,000 to $500,000 range. Vista Pointe homes range from $329,00 to $865,000, according to the listings.

The issue is ” a microcosm of a heated debate that is engrossing all of Colorado and its residents,” Vista Ridge resident Parker McMannes said in an e-mail.

At the planning board’s July meeting, Vista Ridge residents said the board must decide whether Erie is a suburban area or an industrial area, according to press reports.

Encana has been developing the site under a memorandum of understanding it signed with the town in 2012.

The binding agreement requires higher operating standards than state rules in drilling, hydrofracturing or fracking, and in ongoing operations.

Still, some residents in the developments say they were surprised .

“We made an honest attempt at outreach,” said Encana’s Wiedenbeck.

The proposed wells are aligned with existing wells at the site — as recommended by state rules, Wiedenbeck said.

The closest wells to residences are about 770 feet from a Vista Ridge property line and 1,000 feet from a Vista Pointe property line, according to Encana. The state’s minimum setback is 500 feet.

Last week, the oil and gas company held one meeting at Vista Ridge and one at Vista Pointe.

“Some people listened and had questions,” Wiedenbeck said. “Some just wanted to know what it would take for us to go away.”