Simon Gerrans on the podium after receiving the Sprinters jersey after stage 5. Photo: Getty Images

After five days, 730 kilometres and more than 18 hours of racing, the best ever edition of the Tour Down Under has now come down to a battle for one second that will be decided on Sunday's finale stage in Adelaide.

After Simon Gerrans overhauled Cadel Evans to claw his way back into the race lead in Saturday's 151.5km fifth stage from McLaren Vale to the top of Willunga Hill, that one little second was all that separated them.

But as tenuous as the lead Gerrans (Orica-GreenEDGE) has on second placed Evans (BMC), the fight for overall victory is not a two horse race.

Gerrans, who first took the race leader's ochre jersey on stage one but lost it to Evans on stage three, also only has a five second lead on third placed Italian Diego Ulissi (Lampre-Merida) and 10 seconds on Australian Richie Porte (Sky), who is now fourth overall after winning the stage.

Advertisement

With time bonuses of 3, 2 and 1 seconds on offer in the three intermediate sprints in Sunday's 85.5km circuit race, and 10, 6 and 4 seconds for the stage finish, this already thrilling 16th Tour Down Under is poised for a nail-biting finale that could go down to the last pedal stroke.

Stage five on Saturday lived up to everyone's expectations – well, for all but Evans, whose aggressive riding did not reap the return he so wanted.

"When you have an opportunity to win a big race you want to win it," Evans said afterwards.

"Coming to here with the lead it was a very realistic opportunity."

The stage was brilliantly won in a polished solo attack on the last 3.5km climb by Porte who began the stage placed 10th overall at 33 seconds.

Porte finished 10 seconds ahead of Ulissi and Gerrans in that order, and 14 seconds clear of Dutchman Robert Gesink (Belkin) in fourth, South African Daryl Impey (Orica-GreenEDGE) in fifth and Evans in sixth.

"This result is more than I hoped for," Porte said.

"It was a very stressful day with crosswinds, but I had my team doing incredible work for me.

"A stage win on Willunga, that's probably more than I thought I could get here. Willunga is probably the stage to win."

Gerrans, the Australian road champion, is one day from becoming the first three times winner of the tour after wins in 2006 and 2012 and said retrieving the lead was "not only a huge thrill, it's a huge sigh of relief".

Gerrans is optimistic he has the team to help defend his jersey. Plus, knowing he has been in a similarly as tenuous lead in this race before helps.

"I went into the final stage with less than that (a one second lead) two years ago, on equal time with Alejandro Valverde," Gerrans said.

"One second is a lot better than I've had in the past … so I'm really confident with the team I have around me going into the final stage."

While Evans believes Orica-GreenEDGE will be up for the challenge, he will still try to pull off a come-from-behind win.

"The race isn't over. That is true," he said.

"But we are going against a team that I'd designed specifically for this race. We don't have a pure sprinter here.

"If you don't come here with a lead out team, or a sprinters team, that becomes difficult to achieve."

On Saturday, Orica-GreenEDGE put the pressure on the peloton on the descent from the first passage of Willunga Hill by putting numbers at the front and forcing the pace to try to distance the BMC riders.

But it was early on the second climb up Willunga Hill and after the main contenders caught the lone attacker, German Jens Voigt (Trek), that the fireworks began for the race lead.

And setting them alight were two of Evans' teammates, Switzerland's Steve Morabito and American Brent Bookwalter, with a huge surge at the front with Evans in tow that momentarily left Gerrans adrift.

"When they jumped clear, I thought, 'Geez, if they maintain that pace, it's really going to be difficult to peg them back again'," Gerrans said.

"But I just bided my time. Simon Clarke did a great job at the bottom of the climb for me and Daryl Impey stuck to my wheel and closed down the gap later in the climb."

Shortly after Evans, Porte and then Gerrans and Ulissi were all in position for the final scrap that exploded when Porte attacked with 2km to go.

As Porte rode away through a massive and cheering crowd, Evans tried to distance Gerrans and Ulissi, but they caught him.

Inside the last kilometre, Evans attacked once more - and again in vain.

The effort also cost him in the sprint for second and third places and the six and four second bonuses that went to Ulissi and Gerrans respectively.