Hillary Clinton made a return trip to Chicago's Bronzeville community on Wednesday, this time to encourage her supporters to vote in the March 15th Illinois primary and to take advantage of early voting which essentially starts on a wider scale Monday, February 29. In some parts of the state early voting has already started. According to the Chicago Tribune, Hillary Clinton's speech at the Parkway Ballroom in Bronzeville had been billed as a get-out-the-vote (GOTV) rally aimed at galvanizing African-American support in Illinois ahead of the March 15 Illinois primary election. Hillary Clinton touched an emotional chord, talking about the impact of the Affordable Care Act. "Obamacare has made a huge difference. I talk to lots of people and one man, a father whose daughter suffered with a disease that no insurance company would insure. He had two daughters with cystic fibrosis and could not buy them insurance at any price." She said they told him, "We do not insure burning houses." This man looked at me with tears in his eyes and said they called my two little daughters "burning houses." He now has insurance under Obamacare, Hillary Clinton told the packed crowd.

Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton is introduced at a campaign rally in the historic Bronzeville neighborhood by Geneva Reed-Veal, the mother of Sandra Bland in Chicago, Illinois. Sandra Bland was found dead in a Texas jail cell. Photo by Scott Olson/Getty Images View all 10 photos Photo by Scott Olson/Getty Images

She then turned her attention to Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont. "He does not get the credit he deserves,” she said referring to President Obama and then tying those remarks to her opponent. Hillary Clinton her opponent, Senator Sanders, for not being supportive of President Barack Obama. Clinton said Sanders called Obama "weak" he's called him "disappointing" and said he advocated someone to run against him in 2012. Clinton went on and listed of litany of Obama accomplishments, including reform of the financial industry with the passage of Dodd-Frank. "I will build on the progress that President Obama has made." Clinton added, "I will take it further."

The GOTV rally was also aimed at getting national attention, and specifically, the voters in South Carolina too, which is holding its primary election this Saturday, Feb. 20. Hillary Clinton was joined by Geneva Reed-Veal, the mother of Sandra Bland, a 28-year-old black woman who was found hanged in a jail cell in Waller County, Texas, on July 13, 2015, following a frivolous arrest by police in Texas. The New York Times reported at the time that her death was classified as a suicide by the county coroner, and was followed by protests against her arrest, disputing the cause of death, and alleging racial violence against her.

This was Hillary Clinton's second visit to the Bronzeville community since announcing her candidacy for president. Last year, she held a roundtable with child care workers to discuss the soaring out-of-pocket costs of childcare and the need for paid family leave. Her husband, former President Bill Clinton has been to Bronzeville in past campaigns.

U.S. Rep. Danny Davis urged the crowd to register voters and in keeping with the theme of the event, urged supporters to get out the vote. U.S. Rep. Robin Kelly (D-IL) made a pitch for support, passionately displaying a sense of urgency for spread the word of the importance of this election. Rep. Kelly cited Hillary Clinton's support on the issues of "common sense" gun reform legislation and that Hillary Clinton addresses the issue of health care disparities in communities of color, both key issues with Kelly. That is in keeping with her two pet issues, both of which reports were issued.

The 2014 Kelly Report on Gun Violence in America, was the first-ever Congressional analysis of the nation’s gun violence epidemic that offers a blueprint for ending the crisis. The following year, The 2015 Kelly Report on Health Disparities in America, an official Congressional analysis of the state of African American health in the U.S. that offers a blueprint for reversing negative health trends in communities of color. Hillary Clinton has embraced both issues.