This entire coaching dilemma at Dove Valley is little more than a distraction to what really matters.

The current state of the Broncos has little to do with John Fox leaving, Gary Kubiak arriving or John Elway in the middle of all these comings and goings.

All things Broncos depend on Peyton Manning staying.

If Manning returns, then all is reasonably well with the Broncos. If Manning was the quarterback, I could coach the Broncos and they would go no worse than 10-6 and reach the playoffs.

Klis: What do you want to do against the Chargers this week, Peyton?

Manning: I think we should (football gibberish, X’s, O’s, gibberish, gibberish).

Klis: OK, Peyton, do you think maybe C.J. should get a few … I see. You’re right, he is a good receiver out of the backfield. All right, Peyton. Make sure you tell the coaches and players what we’re doing.

If Manning doesn’t return, either because he’s had it or doesn’t think he would be a good fit in Kubiak’s pocket-moving system, then it doesn’t matter who coaches this team.

The Broncos are in trouble.

I understand there is concern Manning is getting old and his performance is declining. But consider what the reaction would be in Kansas City, San Diego and Oakland if Manning retires.

Andy Reid would do cartwheels, heaven (and earth) forbid. Mike McCoy is not exactly Mr. Excitable, but he would holler and high-five his way down the hallways at Chargers headquarters.

Jack Del Rio will know the 2015 Broncos better than any other opposing NFL coach save Fox, who will host his former team at Chicago’s Soldier Field this fall.

Think they’d rather play the Broncos with Manning or without?

I do think Manning is coming back. In fact, I still think he’s going to play two more years.

Manning is a guy who writes a list and crosses things off as he goes. He has five years on his Broncos contract. Only three have been crossed off.

I also don’t think age, arm strength or even thigh injury were the reasons Manning went from 22 touchdown passes and three interceptions through seven games this season to 18 and 12 in the final 10. Maybe a little. But mostly I think the Broncos had a unique, fast-paced, spread-’em-out offense that was unstoppable — and then defenses adjusted.

I counted out Manning once before and was mistaken. I thought he was damaged goods at age 36 as he came off four neck surgeries that forced him to miss the entire 2011 season with Indianapolis.

Kubiak must have felt the same way, because his Houston Texans passed on pursuing the free agent Manning in March 2012.

The Broncos’ next head coach is going to be Kubiak, not me. But if I were him, I wouldn’t count Manning out again. I’d also listen to what he has to say during Chargers week.

Mike Klis: mklis@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikeklis