Well, it's between Hillary and Trump. I am not surprised. A couple of months ago, I said how the delegates were rigged. Well, except for Hillary's superdelegates, Bernie would be right there with her. The DNC wants her, not Bernie.

As for Trump, the liberals and the RNC establishment don't want him, but the voters do. Why?

Well, the liberals might lose Obamacare, millions of illegals who could vote for them, a restored military, coal, oil and gas back in production and a budget.

The RNC, they just know why Trump is so popular. Really? I thought you elite establishment snobs were smart.

You sand give us the House and Senate majority and we'll stop Obama. We gave you both and what did you do? Nothing.

John Boehner rolled over like a puppy who wanted to be petted by Obama. You gave him all the money he asked for without a fight.

The RNC lied to us and you lied to Trump, saying you would unify behind him if he won. No one trusts the RNC establishment. Possibly your egos were bruised because you're so smart, I don't know. Maybe it's because Trump refuses donations and you're losing out on hundreds of millions or just the fact that he promises to do what you would not do.

I just hope that conservatives who don't like Trump or just won't vote realize they automatically vote for Hillary. She will be far worse than Obama. She will destroy the coal, oil and gas industries. The borders will be wide open under her and our military will suffer greater cuts. Our national debt will probably double and our taxes will definitely go up. Also, if she gets the next four to eight years, how many Supreme Court justices will she replace? The entire court could be far left. She could force America into socialism for the next 75 to 100 years. (Goodbye, Constitution.)

Republican and Democrat conservatives, Trump may not be your preferred choice, but he is far better than Hillary for America. I ask you to think long and hard and vote for Trump.

If he gets the economy moving past the last eight years of Obama stagnation, 18- to 30-year-olds can see that capitalism is far superior to socialism. It could be a wake-up call for them, especially if companies started hiring at good salaries again.

I love this nation. I fought for it once, and I'll fight for it again.

Michael P. Ayo

Theriot