A traffic jam in New Castle, Delaware. (Photo: USA TODAY NETWORK file photo)

What is it about traffic jams that make politicians so happy? The average American worker wastes a week per year behind the wheel as the result of insufficient road capacity, crumbling infrastructure and largely non-existent transit systems.

And yet the elected classes do nothing. For years, financing for major improvements has been readily available in the form of low-interest loans. More recently, an enticing solution has come in the form of plummeting oil prices. Gasoline prices, now under $2 a gallon in many places, have fallen so much that Washington could hike taxes and consumers would barely notice.

Into this void steps President Obama with his latest effort to fund road and transit improvements. In his 2017 budget proposal, released Tuesday, he calls for a $10.25-per-barrel tax on oil, to be phased in from 2017 to 2022. The $319 billion tax over the next 10 years would go into the highway trust fund and into various ideas for green transportation, including electric car charging stations and mass transit rail projects.

The tax would have the added benefit of helping to fight climate change by discouraging consumption of fossil fuels and making alternative energy sources more economically viable.

Although the proposal is a political non-starter in an election year, it deserves serious consideration. Then again, virtually any plan to tax oil or gasoline or carbon would be a worthwhile way to raise money for transportation projects and trim the federal deficit.

America’s infrastructure is one of the assets that keep companies from shifting jobs overseas where wages are lower. But, with the interstate highway system showing its age, and with relatively few mass transit systems being built, that advantage is rapidly disappearing.

For consumers, the problem of inadequate roads and transit is apparent in their frustration, and in their eagerness to see improvements. Pro-road groups say they know of no state politicians who have lost their jobs as the result of hiking gasoline taxes to pay for improvements.

Washington, though, is another matter. Not only has Congress failed to increase fuel taxes to pay for infrastructure improvements, it also has allowed the existing federal gasoline tax of 18.4 cents, last raised in 1993, to be eroded by inflation.

The result has been that an ever larger share of what has been spent on roads has come from the general taxpayer and from foolhardy financing gimmicks, such as undermining corporate pensions and selling oil from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve.

Obama’s plan would amount to about 25 cents a gallon of gasoline when fully phased in. That might seem like a lot, but the average driver has seen gas prices drop by about $1.90 per gallon since the oil plunge began a year an a half ago.

It is, to be sure, a very difficult sell in Congress. Many Republicans have taken anti-tax vows. And many Democrats are loath to raise taxes on gasoline, heating oil and other energy staples. But, just as the time to fix a leaky roof is when the sun is shining, the time to raise energy taxes is when oil prices are low.

An investment in infrastructure is clearly needed and would help all Americans. It would provide construction jobs immediately and, over time, would help the economy undergo a more robust growth. Congress’ failure to deal with this issue is getting tiresome — about as tiresome as sitting in traffic for hours on end.

Written by USA TODAY's Editorial Board.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1Tjn6yJ