FMS Solutions (http://www.fmssolutions.com) has partnered with MyHRConcierge (http://www.myhrconcierge.com) as a means to give grocers even more tools they need to stay up to date and compliant with today’s complex labor laws. FMS services over 3,500 independent grocery locations with accounting and payroll software and services, industry best practices, and benchmarking. MyHRConcierge provides workforce management services that allow business owners to focus on growing their business, rather than getting bogged down with HR Management.

This official partnership will give hundreds of independent grocers the opportunity to connect with MyHRConcierge’s suite of HR solutions. Participating retailers will now have access to affordable, best-in-class HR support to help them navigate complex state and federal labor laws.

“FMS is very proud to officially announce our partnership with MyHRConcierge,” says Mark Ehleben, Vice President of FMS. “For years our survey studies and conversations with retailers have shown that one of the biggest concerns they have about their business is regulations, especially the Affordable Care Act. Our goal working with MyHRConcierge is to address that concern.”

“It’s an honor to partner with FMS to provide HR management and administration services for grocers across the U.S.,” noted Chris Cooley, co-founder MyHRConcierge. “Right now, many grocers are scrambling to comply with the healthcare law’s Employer Mandate including required 2015 IRS reporting. We’re here to assist grocers with these complex details and to help them address the Affordable Care Act strategically.”

About FMS, Inc: Headquartered in Baltimore, Maryland, FMS, Inc. (http://www.FMSSolutions.com) provides over 3,500 independent retail grocer and independent supermarket operations with financial, accounting and consulting services such as industry benchmarking, best practices and mission-critical decision support throughout the United States, Canada and in the Caribbean. FMS is proudly the National Grocers Association’s preferred provider of industry benchmarking, best practices, and mission-critical decision support.

About MyHRConcierge : MyHRConcierge (http://www.myhrconcierge.com) delivers HR management and administration services designed specifically for small and mid-sized U.S. businesses. Faced with increasing risks from lawsuits, government inquiries and fines, many employers are looking for a simpler, more affordable way to effectively handle HR challenges. MyHRConcierge is addressing this need with knowledgeable experts backed by secure systems who help our clients with Affordable Care Act Compliance, Employee Screening, HR Policy Development and a host other challenges.

###