Venetia Ellis' drawing depicts a soldier's emotional sacrifice

This untitled image by Venetia Ellis depicts a war veteran being comforted by the ghost of a fallen buddy. ( Special to the Reporter-Herald )

A soldier who has just returned from war sits on a bed, comforted by the ghost of a friend he saw die in combat.

The untitled image, done in pencil and charcoal, depicts how the mental battle can continue long after a term of military service ends, something Loveland resident Venetia Ellis. 19, wanted to show through her art.

Ellis, a 2014 Thompson Valley High School graduate who will be attending the Laguna College of Art and Design in Laguna Beach, Calif., got the attention of the Ladies Auxiliary of the Colorado Veterans of Foreign Wars.

In early May, she won first place in the state level of the Young American Creative Patriotic Art Awards contest for grades 9-12, a contest requiring a painting or drawing and a written statement about the piece's meaning.

Loveland resident Venetia Ellis, 19, won the state level for the VFW Ladies Auxiliary Young American Patriotic Art Contest. (Special to the Reporter-Herald)

"A lot of times what I feel isn't shared is the trauma and the sacrifices soldiers made for this country, and when they return, it's devastating for some people," Ellis said.

Ellis, the only high school student to enter to the VFW Ladies Auxiliary Post 41 in Loveland, competed against other first-place state winners at the national level but did not place, she said.

"She's good. She's really good," said Karen Magrum, president of the VFW auxiliary, who will present an award later this month to Ellis for winning state. "The whole part of it together was really good."

Ellis wanted to steer away from the traditional symbols of patriotism, such as flags and eagles, and instead wanted to show what soldiers returning from war may experience.

Advertisement

"I was trying to show how courageous the soldiers are, the sacrifices they make for this country," she said.

Ellis won $500 — $250 from the state and $250 from the Loveland Auxiliary.

"I thought her image was very powerful because it's the soul of a soldier that was lost comforting his friend who's remained," said Jeanette Minnich, Ellis' mother. "She did capture imagery we need a lot of, the idea that the comrades we lost are still with us."

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Shelley Widhalm at 970-669-5050 or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com. Follow her at twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm.