Bloomberg

Dollar General’s $78.50 per share bid will get the attention of the Family Dollar Stores board. With a cash price of roughly 5% more than Dollar Tree’s pending cash and stock merger with Family Dollar, Dollar General’s bid seems to be ahead of Dollar Tree’s offer in terms of value.

Dollar General’s bid, however, offers Family Dollar few protections if antitrust regulators try to block it, leaving Family Dollar vulnerable to being left with no deal at all.

Dollar General said it’s “confident it can quickly and effectively address any potential antitrust issues” and that that it is prepared to divest up to 700 stores for that purpose. And the all-important definition of the companies’ market arguably could extend far beyond the dollar store segment, since most of its merchandise also is sold in grocery stores, big box stores and online.

But that makes it all the more surprising that the protections offered to Family Dollar in the antitrust area aren’t strong.

A strong antitrust package by a bidder trying to break up another pending deal usually contains one of two provisions.

First, the interloper can agree to a “hell or high water” provision, which means the buyer will do whatever it needs to do–including selling an unlimited amount of assets to get government approval for the deal. This is what Tyson Foods offered Hillshire Brands Co. to break up its deal with Pinnacle Foods Inc. Dollar General’s proposal allows the company to walk away if the government wants the companies to dispose of more than 700 stores.

The other protection frequently offered is a “reverse termination fee,” which would be payable if the government blocks the deal. This is what Men’s Wearhouse, Inc. offered to Jos A. Bank Clothiers Inc. to get it to abandon its acquisition of Eddie Bauer earlier this year. A reverse termination fee gives the target a big cash windfall to compensate it if the buyer walks away for antitrust reasons. Dollar General hasn’t indicated that it’s offering such a payment.

The Dollar General proposal mirrors the Dollar Tree deal. Dollar Tree proposed to dispose of up to 500 stores, which Dollar General said Monday is about the same percentage of stores of the combined company it is prepared to sell if necessary. And there is no reverse termination fee in that deal.

But the Dollar General proposal is being made under substantially different circumstances. Family Dollar has a “bird in the hand,” a deal with Dollar Tree that it would have to abandon to merge with Dollar General. When Dollar Tree was negotiating, there was no other competing deal on the table. If the deal died for antitrust reasons, the two sides would walk away without having lost much. If industry-leader Dollar General gets picked and runs into antitrust headwinds, Family Dollar loses both deals.

If I were a director worried about the antitrust risk of merging with the market leader, I’d be concerned about Dollar General’s commitment to a deal when push comes to shove with the FTC. In a regulatory filing last week, Family Dollar said it met with “Company A”–widely believed to be Dollar General–on June 19 and was told that “Company A was not interested in a strategic transaction with Family Dollar at this time.” I would be wondering if, once Dollar Tree has been chased away, Dollar General could revert to that lack of enthusiasm and not go beyond its contractual obligations. It’s also worth asking why an enthusiastic buyer who believes there is low antitrust risk isn’t willing to offer a significant reverse breakup fee.

Perhaps Family Dollar can extract more concessions from Dollar General, but it would likely go into any negotiations with a relatively weak bargaining position. Even if it rejects the Dollar General bid now, Family Dollar’s shareholders may turn down the Dollar Tree merger in order to get a higher price. That would leave Family Dollar in an even weaker position in trying to negotiate with Dollar General.

That’s what happened a few years ago to Hertz Global Holdings Inc., which had a signed deal to buy Dollar Thrifty Automotive Group Inc. Avis Budget Group Inc. made a competing proposal that the board rejected–largely on antitrust grounds–and the Dollar Thrifty shareholders turned down the Hertz deal. Hertz ultimately bought Dollar Thrifty two years later.

The board of Family Dollar will need to weigh that against the risk that antitrust regulators may decide to take a hard line.

Send questions, comments or story ideas to Dealpolitik@gmail.com and follow Ron on Twitter: @Dealpolitik.