Eddie Butler nearly sliced his ERA in half Saturday at Coors Field. The Rockies rookie, called up with so much pomp and promise in June to make his major-league debut, finally made his second start. And he began to confront his expectations.

Butler, back to basics with a heavy sampling of two-seam fastballs, allowed just one Arizona batter to reach second base in the first four innings. He left after six innings having given up only one earned run and five hits.

Between Butler’s second big-league start and LaTroy Hakwins’ 997th to finish the game, the Rockies ran to a 5-1 victory over the hapless Diamondbacks.

“That guy’s great,” the 23-year-old Butler said of the 41-year-old Hawkins. “He told me earlier to shut up and sit down and get ready.”

The Rockies won a fifth consecutive game after losing seven in a row. And, with seven games remaining, Colorado (64-91) is now two games ahead of Arizona (62-93), which has the worst record in the National League.

The Rockies are rolling — too little, too late for a team that fell to last place in the NL West on July 18. But it’s the perfect time for Butler’s second chance.

The rookie right-hander jumped up from the Double-A Tulsa Drillers on June 6 to start against the Dodgers at Coors Field. It was a forgettable experience — Butler gave up six runs on 10 hits over 5 innings. He lost. His ERA started at 10.13.

Worse yet, Butler fell to the disabled list the following day with a muscle strain in his right armpit. He eventually ended up back in the Texas League.

PHOTOS: Colorado Rockies beat Arizona Diamondbacks 5-1, Sept. 20, 2014

“I just want Eddie to be himself,” Rockies manager Walt Weiss said.

On Saturday, Butler gave up a line-drive single to Ender Inciarte to open the game, then retired seven of the next eight. He forced Jake Lamb into a inning-capping 4-6-3 double play to end the second.

And Lamb’s home run in the fifth, after Butler’s first strikeout, of Chris Owings, was the only run the Diamondbacks would get. He forced a 5-4-3 double play to end the sixth.

Butler finished with one strikeout, one walk — and one major-league win, his first. His ERA is now 5.56.

“I was definitely keeping it simple,” Butler said. “We attacked a lot of guys in.”

The Rockies made it possible for Butler to pitch mostly stress-free. They’ve scored 53 runs in their past five games after Corey Dickerson’s triple in the first inning off Trevor Cahill scored Justin Morneau. And Dickerson’s solo home run in the fifth gave them a 5-1 lead.

Morneau doubled and scored twice. Charlie Blackmon tripled. Rafael Ynoa, the rookie third baseman, playing for a sick Nolan Arenado, also doubled.

“They did a lot of swinging today, putting up five runs early,” Butler said.

Footnotes. The Rockies have homered in 21 consecutive games, their longest streak since 32 in a row in 1999. Dickerson’s home run was his 24th, a team high. … Morneau went 2-for-4 to raise his batting average to .318. He was tied with Pittsburgh’s Josh Harrison for the National League lead before the Pirates faced Milwaukee. … Arizona reliever Oliver Perez threw four strikeouts in the seventh inning, just the 44th time that’s happened since 1998. Morneau struck out to start the inning, but got to first on a wild pitch.

Nick Groke: twitter.com/nickgroke or ngroke@denverpost.com

Looking ahead



D-backs’ Wade Miley (8-11, 4.17 ERA) at Rockies’ Christian Bergman (2-4, 5.56), 2:10 p.m. Sunday, ROOT; 630 AM

The Rockies are now on a six-man pitching rotation to end the season after Eddie Butler was activated and inserted Saturday. That leaves Bergman to pitch the home finale on an extra day of rest. Bergman lost in his last start, to the Los Angeles Dodgers, but he struck out a career-high seven batters after striking out only one in his previous two starts combined. Against Miley, Rockies catcher Wilin Rosario is hitting .474 this season with two homers and three doubles.

Monday: Rockies’ Tyler Matzek (6-10, 4.19 ERA) at Padres’ Eric Stults (7-17, 4.59), 8:10 p.m., ROOT

Tuesday: Rockies’ Jorge De La Rosa (14-11, 4.14) at Padres’ TBA, 8:10 p.m., ROOT

Wednesday: Rockies’ Yohan Flande (0-5, 4.91) at Padres’ TBA, 7:10 p.m., ROOT

Nick Groke, The Denver Post