Topics: Donald Trump, Editor's Picks, Elections 2016, Islam, Islamophobia, Mike Huckabee, Muslims, Religion, Life News, News

We can pardon some species of ignorance and suffer little grief for it. Unfamiliarity with the joys of classical music or the aesthetic frisson afforded by the poetry of Sylvia Plath may be regrettable; not being up to snuff with Epicurus’ idea of the good life is nothing any literate individual would wish to boast about. Such are shortcomings we might want to correct at our leisure. But other kinds of ignorance put us at risk and cannot be so lightly dismissed – especially when religion is concerned.

These days, as we know, across the globe and here at home people are dying and killing for one religion in particular, Islam. We need to understand Islam and the relationship between its canon and the behavior, at times violent, arising from it. We need to maintain perspective and refuse to let fear color our response when dealing with it. And we need, most of all, in dealing with the challenges the faith presents us with, to stand by our Enlightenment values of freedom of speech, secularism and equal rights for all.

We need, it follows, frank, informed discussion about Islam, and not, say, Trumpian invective or “uncorked” commentary from the likes of Gov. Mike Huckabee or the anti-constitutional musings of Dr. Ben Carson. Yet progressives, well-intentioned though they are, have imposed strictures on this discussion that make it risky to speak about the religion without dread of castigation. Criticize Islam (not Muslims as people, Islam), and pseudo-liberal martinets will descend upon you and try to silence you with charges of “Islamophobia.”

I’ve defined this insidious junk noun many times. I won’t repeat myself here, but will instead cite the words of the late Christopher Hitchens: the “stupid term — Islamophobia — has been put into circulation to try and suggest that a foul prejudice lurks behind any misgivings about Islam’s infallible ‘message.’” Hitchens’ efforts to expunge it notwithstanding, the “stupid term” has long enjoyed a vogue; and those wielding it as a weapon, the self-appointed status of defenders of civil liberties and the downtrodden. The “stupid term” has thoroughly infected our speech code, which the 2016 GOP contenders gleefully flout to prove they can declare truths about the religion before which we craven liberals supposedly quiver and quail.

This week I find myself writing of a Huffington Post article, “Five Ways Journalists Can Avoid Islamophobia in Their Coverage,” by Gabriel Arana. I first noted its publication with some surprise. Major press outlets have already been taken in by the “Islamophobia” ruse and regularly publish feel-good pablum that steers well away from any incisive treatment of the faith. Do journalists really need additional prodding to censor themselves about Islam even more than they already do? Of course not.

Yet that didn’t stop HuffPo. In his “5 Ways” piece, Arana expands on and codifies all the wrong responses to Muslim-bashing from the likes of Fox News stars Sean Hannity and Bill O’Reilly (as well as Trump), and, in the process, does injury to the cause of free speech.

For starters, obviously, Arana falls for the semantic swindle inherent in the notion of “Islamophobia.” Remember, linguistically speaking, “Islamophobia” ought to denote an (irrational) fear of or prejudice against the religion, not Muslims as people (which would properly be “Muslimophobia,” or just “anti-Muslim bigotry”). Firebomb a mosque or harass Muslims on the street and you commit hate crimes and acts of violence, and are liable to prosecution. But question, challenge, disrespect or even ridicule Islam, and you are availing yourself of your constitutional right to free speech. You are dispraising a religion, which is nothing more than a hallowed ideology.

And ironically, progressives should find a lot to criticize in Islam. If you are a woman, for instance, you might dislike what the Quran says about your worth vis-à-vis men. You might remember that the Islamic canon condones female genital mutilation, though the sickening practice antedated the religion. And you might take little comfort in knowing that the Quran ordains wife-beating. To put it mildly, the ideology of Islam offers little for liberals to rejoice about, and there should exist no objective reason to stigmatize those who point this out.

Back to the HuffPo piece. It wants journalists to “make sure they’re accurately representing a community made up of 1.6 billion people worldwide,” which is tough, since “The heart of the problem with the media’s coverage of Muslims is that most of us simply do not know enough about Islam.” To rectify this, he suggests visiting a mosque and purchasing a copy of a book on Muslim Americans he links to. I know nothing of the book, and think visiting a mosque is a fine idea, but why not just read the Quran? It’s far shorter than the Bible, much more gripping, and certainly more informative, being, after all, the inerrant, sacred Word of God, according to Islam. Once you’ve done that, you might delve into Why I am not a Muslim, by the Islamic apostate Ibn Warraq. That Warraq had to write under a pseudonym should tell you something.

Arana announces that “Those of us in the media must cultivate personal relationships with the Muslim members of our communities — the greatest antidote to prejudice there is.” He adds that, “The tenor of the coverage of Muslims and the Islamic world would be far better if each member of the media had a close friend who practiced the faith.” Again, lost in the confusion stemming from the word Islamophobia, Arana conflates criticizing Islam with prejudice against Muslims as people. Befriend a Muslim, discover that he or she is no monster, and presumably all your liberal objections to the highly illiberal doctrines laid out in the Islamic canon will vanish? I think not. Would the “tenor” of journalists’ coverage of al-Qaida atrocities have differed if they had had tea with Osama bin Laden? One should hope not.

One also wonders whether anyone would appreciate being enlisted as a journalist’s token Muslim friend. In any case, objectivity and fact-based analysis are what’s called for, not sentiment.

Arana’s Point 2 is “Be careful whose views you give a platform to.” “Among the more harmful misconceptions,” he writes, “about the role of media is that it’s our duty to provide ‘balance’ and let the audience decide between opposing points of view.” His recommendation to avoid such misbegotten “balance”: don’t allow “Islamophobic ideologues” like Pamela Geller to “spew racist garbage.”