Good morning and welcome to Wake-Up Call, your guidebook to and roundup of the latest in city, state, and national political news.

Hillary Clinton's dodging projectiles, the city is picking apart Mayor de Blasio's assessment of his first 100 days in office, and President Obama touches down to speak at the National Action Network's Manhattan conference...

First it was George W. Bush — and now it’s deja shoe for Hillary Clinton: Clinton was forced to duck Thursday when a female protester threw a shoe at her as she spoke at a Las Vegas event, report our Dan Friedman and Bill Hutchinson. Clinton had just begun a speech about recycling when the shoe whizzed by her right ear. The startled former secretary of state flinched and moved to her left, yelling, “Was that a bat!” The shoe was thrown by a blond woman in a blue dress, who raised her hands as if under arrest as she was hustled out of a meeting room at Mandalay Bay casino resort.

Taking stock after 100 days in office, Mayor de Blasio vowed to stay the course Thursday, saying his government has made “great strides” in restoring “New York’s proud legacy” as the “center of progressive America.” The nearly hour-long speech, at Cooper Union in the East Village, was part valedictory, part pep rally and part manifesto as he sought to re-energize supporters after the up-and-down start of his mayoralty, our Erin Durkin writes.

He made no new policy proposals, offered no regrets, and acknowledged no missteps, referring only to “resistance” from unnamed “powerful interests.” And he provided few details of his plans for the next phase of his mayoralty.

Former Mayor David Dinkins had some advice Thursday for Mayor de Blasio on his 100th day in office— move into Gracie Mansion already!

Dinkins, the city’s 106th mayor, said he thoroughly enjoyed living in the Upper East Side mansion, and doesn’t understand why de Blasio isn’t jumping at the chance to live in the official mayoral residence. “He should move in,” Dinkins told the Daily News' Jennifer Fermino. “It’s a great place to live. I don’t know what’s taking him so long.”

NY1: "In his first 100 days in office, the mayor has had a clear partner on the other side of City Hall, as the City Council, under Melissa Mark-Viverito, has proven to be a defender and ally, willing to shepherd through key parts of his agenda."

One of the “regular” people tapped to give video testimonials marking Mayor de Blasio’s 100th day in office is related to the Brooklyn bishop who was sprung from jail after the mayor made a call. Bishop Eric Garnes, brother-in-law of Bishop Orlando Findlayter, appeared in the video shown at Cooper Union, where de Blasio also spoke, report our Kerry Burke and Erin Durkin. “How’s that important?” Garnes asked at his home Thursday night of his Findlayter tie. “I am an innocent citizen of America and a resident of New York City.”

david handschuh/new york daily news Mayor de Blasio greets the public after his Cooper Union speech.

He’s struggled through his first 100 days, but at least one person is already thinking about a second term for Mayor de Blasio, Fermino writes. First Lady Chirlane McCray, speaking at the National Action Network Women’s Power Breakfast, told the crowd she hopes to be around for “at least eight years.” McCray, the keynote speaker at the annual event, also admitted she hasn’t fully adjusted to life in the City Hall fish bowl. “When things settle down, or more accurately when I settle in, I hope to speak with you as individuals because you inspire me,” she said. “I hope that this is just the beginning of a very long conversation, at least eight years.”

Cap NY: "Among the accomplishments Mayor Bill de Blasio touted in his speech marking his first 100 days in office was a 3.4 percent drop in shootings so far this year compared to last year... While the very fact that there was a drop is politically significant, the size of it is quite modest, in raw terms: In 2013, there were 208 shootings. This year, 201."

Our Mike Lupica's column:"One hundred days into being mayor, after surviving blizzards and creating one of his own by the way he bungled the issue of charter schools, after 73% of the vote against Joe Lhota has suddenly become a 49% approval rating, Bill de Blasio still sounds as if he is running for the office he already has. Or a higher one."

Gov. Cuomo (inset) and U.S. Attorney Preet Bharara.

A federal prosecutor is giving Gov. Cuomo an election-year headache. Manhattan U.S. Attorney Preet Bharara refused Thursday to rule out probing whether Cuomo improperly meddled with his own anti-corruption commission, reports our Ken Lovett. The governor announced he would disband the Moreland panel last month after legislators agreed to ethics reforms. The News ran a series of stories last year detailing allegations that Cuomo's office interfered with which subpoenas the panel sent out.

The 9/11 Victim Compensation Fund is beefing up management amid frustration with the slow pace of award rulings for sick workers and their families, reports our Joseph Straw. The $2.8 billion fund said Thursday that it had set award amounts for 502 claims out of 6,702 complete submissions, with more than 20,000 people believed eligible.

Former Mayor and federal prosecutor Rudy Giuliani on Thursday dodged questions about whether he knew about -- or possibly even arranged for -- the Rev. Al Sharpton to wear a wire in the '80s as part of an investigation into the mob, I report. "I'm constrained here by the fact that I was United States attorney at the time," Giuliani told WABC radio's Noam Laden. "Wait a minute -- so were you the one that wired him?" broke in Laden.

"Giuliani thinks [de] Blasio’s constant tardiness is a sign of deeper issues," notes the NYO.

BARRY WILLIAMS FOR NEW YORK DAILY NEWS Rep. Charlie Rangel.

Rep. Charles Rangel brought swagger and braggadocio to the first debate against the two challengers trying to oust him from the congressional seat he has held for 22 terms, reports our Annie Karni. During an hour-long debate Thursday night against State Sen. Adriano Espaillat and Rev. Michael Walrond, Rangel pitched himself as the only candidate with the experience and White House connections to represent the district in Washington.

Homeland Security Chairman Jeh Johnson didn’t say much to members of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus about how he might change the Obama administration’s policy on deportations. But Johnson, in an hour-long meeting Wednesday, left members encouraged that he was sympathetic to their perspective on the issue, according to lawmakers and aides, writes our Dan Friedman. “It was probably one of the most productive meetings I’ve seen on the issue,” said Rep. Jose Serrano (D-Bronx). “He had a full understanding of our concerns.”

"I've gotta get inside this dude's pelt and crawl around for a few days..."

The price keeps growing for Trump Golf Links at Ferry Point, the course the Parks Department has spent the past 14 years building at the foot of the Whitestone Bridge in the Bronx, reports our Juan Gonzalez. The city now expects to spend an astonishing $236 million to complete the Ferry Point project by next spring over a former landfill, according to new figures compiled for the Daily News by the Independent Budget Office. That includes $181.4 million for the 190-acre golf course itself, plus another $54.6 million for 30 acres of adjacent new parkland and a waterfront esplanade, the IBO says. The total is more than 10 times the original cost when construction started in August 2000.

Three Harlem homeowners in a city-subsidized co-op want one of the city’s most prominent real estate developers to pick on someone his own size, writes our Daniel Beekman. Madison Park Development Associates, headed by BFC Partners managing principal Donald Capoccia, has slapped three 1831 Madison Ave. residents with a rare $4.25 million defamation and interference lawsuit over their complaints to politicians about shoddy construction and repairs.

debra l. rothenberg for new york daily news Sandy's wrath.

C&S: "Fresh off of a sit-down at City Hall with the de Blasio administration’s Superstorm Sandy recovery team, the Alliance for a Just Rebuilding has released an 'Action Plan' for rebuilding after the storm, hoping to influence the mayor as he revamps the slow recovery effort."

"More than 11,000 Long Island taxpayers whose homes or businesses were damaged in superstorm Sandy have applied for assessment reductions," Newsday reports.

NYT: "Kathleen Sebelius, the health and human services secretary, is resigning, ending a stormy five-year tenure marred by the disastrous rollout of President Obama’s signature legislative achievement, the Affordable Care Act."

"The White House on Friday will throw Sylvia Mathews Burwell into one of the most contentious jobs in Washington: running Obamacare," reports Politico.

A New Jersey legislative panel investigating Bridgegate is mulling an appeal of a judge’s ruling that two key players implicated in the scandal don’t have to turn over documents, reports our Bill Hutchinson. Judge Mary Jacobson dealt the joint state legislative committee a major blow Wednesday by ruling Gov. Chris Christie’s former aides Bridget Kelly and Bill Stepien don’t need to comply with the panel’s subpoenas.

"A federal grand jury handed up an indictment Thursday of former Connecticut Gov. John Rowland, charging him with illegal activity in connection with two congressional campaigns," reports the WSJ. "The indictment marks the second time in a decade that Mr. Rowland has faced corruption charges."

AP: "A team of caffeine-fueled cadets is spending long days this week in a computer lab trying to fend off threats cooked up by experts at the National Security Agency. The annual Cyber Defense Exercise will determine which of the five [military] service academies can create computer networks that can best withstand [a] four-day barrage."

From our James Warren in Washington:

Edward Bennett Williams, long ago Washington’s powerhouse attorney, once said the town regularly needs to burn a witch. On Friday President Obama announces Sylvia Mathews Burwell will be the new HHS Secretary after Kathleen Sebelius, the latest witch, quit amid the fumbling rollout of Obamacare. Unspoken will be the reality of who really botched matters through inattentive management, namely Obama himself. The scene will be more upbeat, rife with faux gratitude toward Sebelius, at a morning White House ceremony introducing Burwell. Matters should be even cheerier later when Obama and Michelle split to Al Sharpton’s National Action Network convention in New York. If Sebelius gets too morose about her fate, she need only consider Rev. Sharpton and his improbable ascent to legitimacy after trespasses far greater than hers.

From our Bramhall's World:

Leaders' Lineup:

President Obama

10:00 AM: Receives the Presidential Daily Briefing, Oval Office

11:00 AM: Makes a personnel announcement; The Rose Garden

3:05 PM: Arrives New York with the First Lady, John F. Kennedy International Airport

4:10 PM: Delivers remarks at the National Action Network’s 16th Annual Convention, Sheraton New York Hotel, Manhattan

11:30 PM: Departs New York with FLOTUS

Gov. Cuomo is in New York City; no public schedule

Mayor de Blasio

11:00 AM: Joins Google Hangout to discuss his first 100 days in office

Tuning In:

"Morning Drive," AM 970, 6 a.m.: Dr. Brian Halpern of the Hospital for Special Surgery on sports injuries; Yevgeniy Feyman of the Manhattan Institute on the Sebelius resignation; Michael Connors, the Host of “Ask the Lawyer” Saturday nights at 6PM on AM 970 with a show tease; Rod Gilbert on the hockey news of the day; Film critic Jeffrey Lyons on movies this week and baseball; Mike Gallagher, nationally syndicated radio host, with a show tease.

“The Brian Lehrer Show,” WNYC 93.9 FM, 10 a.m.: "Some dogs and cats are treated like humans. What kind of legal rights do they deserve? Plus: Amsterdam Mayor Eberhard van der Laan; the lime shortage that goes beyond your cocktail; the online security bug known as 'Heartbleed' and what to do about it; and Mayor de Blasio’s first 100 days in office."

"Inside City Hall," NY1, 7 p.m.: Tour of the Museum of the City of New York's hurricane exhibit; Green Party Candidate for governor Howie Hawkins; Reporters Roundtable.

"This here's a zoo and the keeper ain't you."

News tips, schedules or suggestions? Email ckatz@nydailynews.com.