CMS Innovation Center Pilots New Value-Based Payment Model For Oncology

By Christine Kern, contributing writer

A new Affordable Care Act initiative aims to encourage better oncology care.

The CMS Innovation Center has announced it is establishing a new value-based payment model for oncology care. Dr. Patrick Conway, CMO and deputy administrator for innovation and quality at the CMS said the new Oncology Care Model would allow CMS “to achieve three goals in the care of this medically complex population who are facing a cancer diagnosis: better care, smarter spending, and healthier people."

Cancer is one of the most devastating and financially crippling diseases in the U.S. and the National Institutes of Health estimated it resulted in $263.8 billion in medical costs and lost productivity in 2010 alone. Based on recent trends in incidence, survival, and costs, the cost of cancer care would increase to $172.8 billion dollars in 2020, a 39 percent increase from 2010, according to a 2011 study from the National Cancer Institute.

“Based on feedback from the medical, consumer, and business communities, we are launching this new model of care to support clinicians’ work with their patients,” Conway stated in the release. “We aim to provide Medicare beneficiaries struggling with cancer with high-quality care around the clock and to reward doctors for the value, not volume, of care they provide. Improving the way we pay providers and deliver care to patients will result in healthier people.”

The new model was developed as part of the Department’s “better care, smarter spending, healthier people” approach to improving health delivery. Interested providers are asked to submit letters of intent by March 19, 2015 to participate in the Oncology Care Model. A preliminary design of the program was released in August.

In a letter to Dr. Patrick Conway, Allen S. Lichter, CEO of ASCO responded to the new value-based payment model, commending the CMS Innovation Center for “developing an initial framework for reform in this area.”

However, the letter also expressed concern, stating, “The proposed OCM relies on adjustments to the current fee for service payment system, attempting to control costs while maintaining quality of care and this strategy should be tested. However, we strongly urge the Department to also test models that include more fundamental reform, away from fee for service, which represents a change many oncology practices believe is vital to sustaining a robust cancer care delivery system.”

Ultimately, Lichter concludes “To be meaningful, the incentives embedded in OCM must reflect decisions that are under the control of the oncology practice, performance measures must be robust and applicable to the patient population, and the overall system must reflect the variability in labor and resources required to treat individuals with cancer.”