Some of Lamar Odom's fans have gone as far as offering their kidneys, via social media, if the NBA star has to undergo a kidney transplant.

Some of Lamar Odom's fans have gone as far as offering their kidneys, via social media, if the NBA star has to undergo a kidney transplant. Getty Images

Following his recent brush with death, Lamar Odom has received an outpouring of support from family, friends, and former teammates. But while his health is steadily improving, the basketball star isn’t completely in the clear. The former NBA forward will likely have to undergo a kidney transplant, and surprisingly, many of his fans have expressed their intent to help.

According to TMZ, super fans of Odom’s are offering up their own kidneys in the event that he needs a transplant. In fact, some fans have been so generous that they’ve sent their blood type and contact information to Khloe Kardashian, Odom’s wife, via social media. One Twitter user, for example, wrote, “If Lamar needs a kidney I will be the first to step up and donate one of mine! That is a promise. Lamar deserves a 2nd chance.”

On Oct. 13, Odom was found unresponsive at a Las Vegas brothel where he allegedly engaged in a five-day sex and drug binge. Among the drugs he reportedly took: “herbal Viagra” and cocaine. He subsequently suffered an ischemic stroke due to a drug-induced blood clot, which blocked blood flow to his brain. To prevent any further harm, Odom was placed in a medically induced coma and put through dialysis.

The LA Daily News reported that Odom is currently dialysis for about six to seven hours a day at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center. Dialysis is a procedure that helps patients with failing kidneys remove waste, retain needed chemicals in the blood, and control blood pressure. In light of his condition, he’s expected to undergo months of dialysis and physical therapy.

Odom’s toxicity report is currently under investigation, as blood samples obtained through a warrant are still pending. The brothel, however, alleges that employees saw him drink alcohol and take herbal Viagra supplements that go by the brand name Reload. In 2013, the Food and Drug Administration issued a warning for Reload after it was found to contain sildenafil, the active ingredient in prescription Viagra. Odom allegedly overdosed on cocaine as well, however, the brothel’s owner Dennis Hof, as well as his employees, claim they didn’t see him take any drugs.

Fortunately, Odom is reportedly making great strides with his vision and speech. “He is beginning to gradually flourish both mentally and physically," said Alvina Alston, publicist for Odom's aunt JaNean Mercer, in a statement. "His use of speech has increased and he's more cognitively responsive." The statement also confirmed that Odom’s therapy regimen is “aggressive,” but did not elaborate any more.

Authorities have not ruled out the possibility of taking action against the brothel or Odom.