Another 100,000 people in New Jersey with health plans that do not meet the standards of the Affordable Care Act will be shopping for coverage next year.



AmeriHealth of New Jersey, which covers more than 100,000 people in individual and small-group health plans, announced Tuesday that it will not renew 2013 health plans that do not comply with the new health care law next year.



That brings the total of New Jersey residents with individual and small-group plans that can’t be renewed next year to more than 680,000.



Last month, the state Department of Banking and Insurance gave insurance companies permission to renew non-compliant plans for another year.



President Obama encouraged the companies to do so, after a backlash when insurers started notifying customers that they could not renew their current coverage. He was accused of breaking an oft-repeated promise that if you like your health coverage, you can keep it.



AmeriHealth joins Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey, the state’s largest insurer, and Aetna, in deciding not to ­renew health plans that don’t comply with the Affordable Care Act.



“After much consideration about the impact on our members, we have decided to move forward with the suite of ACA-compliant health plans we have worked so diligently to create over the last several years,” said Judith L. Roman, AmeriHealth New Jersey’s president and chief executive officer, in a statement.



The company’s new plans offer a variety of options at various price points, she said.



At renewal, customers will be given information about the new choices that are comparable to their previous benefit plans.



The standard individual and small-group plans in New Jersey have not previously included pediatric dental and vision care coverage, and sometimes provided coverage for prescription drugs and maternity care as separate riders. The 2014 plans must include all of these as part of the 10 essential health benefits.



At the end of September, AmeriHealth of New Jersey covered 92,400 people through 12,800 small-group contracts, and 9,183 people with individual coverage, according to state insurance department data.



Email: washburn@northjersey.com