Millions of Americans bought health-insurance via healthcare.gov, the Affordable Care Act's online marketplace. (Photo: Special to the Register)

The insurance carrier CoOportunity Health is pulling out of an Iowa program that provides government-financed coverage to moderate-income residents.

The Iowa Department of Human Services announced today that CoOportunity has decided not to continue covering participants in the Marketplace Choice Plan next year. The program is an integral part of Iowa's version of Medicaid expansion under the federal Affordable Care Act.

CoOportunity's president said the company is losing money on the 9,700 people it is covering under the Marketplace Choice Plan, and couldn't continue to participate without charging more to other members.

CoOportunity Health is one of two insurance carriers that provided coverage this year under the Marketplace Choice Plan. The other carrier, Coventry Health Care, plans to continue offering such coverage, the department said in a press release.

The 9,700 Iowans who have CoOportunity Health insurance under the Marketplace Choice Plan will be switched to public coverage, the state said.

"These Iowans will continue to receive consistent benefits and quality care," department Director Charles Palmer said in the release. "Members can see a doctor as they normally would, and they'll have the same requirements for completing healthy behaviors. They should watch their mail for more details, and they can call Medicaid Member Services if they have questions about their coverage."

The Marketplace Choice Plan is for Iowans whose incomes are slightly above the federal poverty line. The program uses federal money to purchase private coverage for those people.

Members will be receiving letters about the change. Those wanting more information can call DHS at 800-338-8366.

CoOportunity President Cliff Gold said his Des Moines-based company is losing money on members of the Marketplace Choice Plan. He said that if it continued to offer such coverage, it would have had to raise premiums on other customers. "We didn't think that would be appropriate," he said.

CoOportunity was founded with financial backing from the Affordable Care Act. It is a co-op owned by its members.

The Marketplace Choice Plan is part of the Iowa Health and Wellness Plan, which is Iowa's version of an expanded Medicaid program. Gov. Terry Branstad, a Republican, had resisted expanding Iowa's Medicaid program as called for under the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare. But he agreed to do so with modifications. One of those was offering some participants private insurance policies, paid for with federal money.

Gold said part of the problem for CoOportunity Health was the heavy use of medical services by members who used to get coverage in the IowaCare plan. IowaCare, which expired in 2013, was a limited public program covering poor Iowa adults. Many of its participants were people with serious chronic illnesses. They wound up in the Health and Wellness Plan, which offered more extensive coverage. Gold said everyone knew those people would use a lot of expensive care, but the situation was more severe than expected.

Gold said the decision to pull out of the Marketplace Choice Plan does not signal that his young company is in financial trouble. He said the company has 96,000 members in Iowa and Nebraska, and even with the loss of the 9,700 in the Marketplace Choice program, it will be ahead of projections. Most of the company's other members bought policies with federal subsidies available under the Affordable Care Act.

Besides pulling out of the Marketplace Choice Plan, CoOportunity also has decided to sell individual policies in Iowa only on the government's online marketplace. For 2014, CoOportunity also sold policies to Iowans through traditional channels. But Gold said it only sold about 1,000 policies in Iowa that way, and the company decided it wasn't worth continuing to do so.

He said such adjustments in strategy should not be a surprise for a company that just started selling policies a year ago. "This is just all part of a re-calibration of our product line," he said.

A DHS spokeswoman said the agency is "exploring options" for the 9,700 Iowans now receiving private coverage from CoOportunity under the Marketplace Choice Plan. For now, they will be folded into the main part of the Health and Wellness Plan, which provides public coverage to about 86,000 poor Iowa adults.

Rohan Hutchings, a spokesman for Coventry's parent company, Aetna, said the carrier is committed to serving people on the Marketplace Choice Plan. He said the program meets "essential health care needs of previously uninsured Iowans."

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1tzY6Yv