Republican presidential candidate Ben Carson speaks during a rally Friday, Oct. 30, 2015, at West Memphis High School in West Memphis, Ark. (Nikki Boertman/The Commercial Appeal via AP)

A year ago, Politico Magazine published a spicy comment in a story about systemic troubles at the Secret Service. Writer Ronald Kessler lamented the extremes that might be necessary to turn the situation around: “Agents tell me it’s a miracle an assassination hasn’t already occurred,” wrote Kessler. “Sadly, given Obama’s colossal lack of management judgment, that calamity may be the only catalyst that will reform the Secret Service.”

People freaked. Offensive to suggest that the president must die to reform an agency, they protested. Pressure on Politico mounted, especially on Susan Glasser, who was then making the transition from the top magazine editor to leadership of the entire Politico newsroom.

The naysayers prevailed, and the story was revised to read, “Agents tell me it’s a miracle an assassination has not already occurred. In typical Washington fashion, nothing gets reformed until a disaster happens. If anything unites Republicans and Democrats, it is that nobody wants to see a tragedy: We all just want the Secret Service fixed.”

Instead of acknowledging that it had phrased things poorly, Politico chose to express its Beltway journalistic arrogance:

Editor’s note: Some readers have misinterpreted the original last line of Kessler’s article as somehow suggesting that the president should be held responsible in the event of his own assassination. That couldn’t be further from the truth, and we’re sorry if anyone interpreted Kessler’s meaning in any other way.

Let’s hope that the site’s advertisers asked for a discount after learning that Politico readers aren’t that smart, after all.

Such unwillingness to admit fault plagues Politico’s big story of the day, which premiered just before noon and alleged that Republican presidential candidate had admitted to fabricating a scholarship offer from West Point. As all of Twitter — not to mention the Carson campaign — has pointed out, Carson admitted no such thing. At issue was a passage in Carson’s 1990 autobiography “Gifted Hands,” in which he described being “offered a full scholarship to West Point.” He never applied to West Point, however, and Politico reported that he had.

Faced with these factual challenges, Politico has changed its story. Whereas the headline once read:

Ben Carson admits fabricating West Point scholarship

It now reads:

Exclusive: Carson claimed West Point ‘scholarship’ but never applied

And whereas the original lede once read:

Ben Carson’s campaign on Friday admitted, in a response to an inquiry from POLITICO, that a central point in his inspirational personal story was fabricated: his application and acceptance into the U.S. Military Academy at West Point.

It now reads:

Republican presidential candidate Ben Carson on Friday conceded that he never applied nor was granted admission to West Point and attempted to recast his previous claims of a full scholarship to the military academy — despite numerous public and written statements to the contrary over the last few decades.

As of 5:05 p.m. Friday, there was no asterisk or correction or editor’s note alerting readers to the material changes in the Politico story, under the byline of Kyle Cheney. The absence of such concessions squares with a statement that the outlet supplied to the Erik Wemple Blog, which insists:

We stand by our story which is a powerful debunking of a key aspect of Ben Carson’s personal narrative. The story online includes additional details now as well that bolster this account.

To unpack this week-ending brouhaha a bit, Politico’s apparent error in alleging nonexistent admission by the Carson people that the candidate was guilty of fabrication is a big one — one that by any standard of modern or ancient journalistic hygiene should trigger a correction. The question of whether Carson ever applied to West Point is a bit more complicated, as one Twitter user notes:

Politico stands by Carson story – The Washington Post – To be clear, can't be "offered" scholarship without applying https://t.co/hO1QHBw5kZ — Cedric Evans (@Ced_Evans) November 6, 2015

Social-media backlashes have the unfortunate knack of stiffening any newsroom’s stubborn caucus. This dynamic emerged over the summer, when the New York Times published late at night a blockbuster story about a federal investigation into Hillary Rodham Clinton’s e-mail usage. Rebuttals emerged quickly, and corrections from the New York Times sluggishly.

Politico plowed this very ground back in 2013. Its superb congressional team caught wind of touchy Capitol Hill negotiations relating to the transition to Obamacare. The resulting story framed the discussions as an attempt to “exempt” the Hill from the Affordable Care Act’s mandate that it enroll in the Obamacare exchanges: “Congressional leaders in both parties are engaged in high-level, confidential talks about exempting lawmakers and Capitol Hill aides from the insurance exchanges they are mandated to join as part of President Barack Obama’s health care overhaul, sources in both parties said,” read the story, which blew up the newsphere.

Like today’s Carson piece, the Obamacare story was on to something, just not the precise something in the article. Lawmakers, in fact, weren’t scheming to get out of the requirement that they fetch their health-care plans from Obamacare’s exchanges; they were trying to fix a “drafting error that prevents the federal government from paying into insurance exchanges on behalf of congressional staffers who got caught up in a political controversy,” as Ezra Klein put it. Politico never ran a correction on the story, despite sustaining pressure to do so.

And that’s ultimately what drives decisions to write corrections in this industry: E-mails, tweets and blog posts seeking a line or two of italicized text. The next few days should provide some insight into how effectively Politico’s leaders can tune it all out. Should they decide to revisit the story, perhaps they’ll want to check just how “central” the West Point anecdote has been to Carson’s life tale. “Peripheral” maybe?