SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Frustrated and increasingly enraged by their waning influence and inability to shape public opinion on everything from guns, Syrian refugees, Global Warming, Donald Trump, and ObamaCare, in just the past two weeks the DC Media has hurled the kind of hate rhetoric against conservatives, the Faithful, and everyday Americans you expect to see only in the bowels of the Internet.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

“Well, I wonder if this forum [with Republicans] will take place in, you know, these American-Muslim internment camps which I’m sure is going to be the next step in—-the rhetoric– and I hope you all come visit me in these internment camps because it’s getting absurd. I mean, it’s absolutely[.] …

“I wonder if the two Muslim members of Congress, my buddy Keith Ellison Andre Carson would they be in that database with Mohammed Ali, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, funniest guy in America, Dave Chappelle? You know, we talked about special IDs for Muslims. Would that be similar to the yellow Stars of David that many Jewish people had to wear in Nazi Germany? Would it be a yellow crescent this time?”

“And the tactic of “prayer shaming” is catching on in the pages of the mainstream media.

“As Clinton and fellow Democrats try to downplay the possible religious motivations behind Muslim suspect Syed Farook’s rampage, instead focusing on gun control, the liberal media scrambled to mock and disparage Christians for offering their prayers on social media and in public statements.

“While the Huffington Post blasted a headline calling prayer “an ineffective strategy,” anti-gun journalists tweeted out their militantly atheistic bile. NBC News even reported on the “Thoughts and prayers backlash,” crediting ThinkProgress editor Igor Volsky with leading the charge.”

“Our beloved elite media loves to fabricate a major freak-out over “rhetoric” whenever a Republican says something they don’t approve of (like the truth). But when it comes to actual hate rhetoric and the kind of fear-mongering that could get someone hurt, no one is worse than the elite media. Case in point: Friday, on the front page of the New York Daily News, the NRA’s Wayne LaPierre is attacked in big red letters as a “TERRORIST.”

“LaPierre’s mug shot resides right next to actual terrorists Syed Farook, Robert Dear, Adam Lanza, James Holmes, and Dylann Roof.”

“The hate-message Cillizza is sending out to the world is that the next president of the United States could be dangerous — a “real danger.” We’re a big country, and as we have seen in the Obama era, there are a lot of nuts out there of all stripes eager to do violence — eager for the national publicity the DC Media awards certain killers, eager to be heroes to a certain cause.

“Stopping — I want to be careful with my language — a “real danger” from becoming president is the stuff of movies, where the person who does so is seen as the hero. This thinking is part of our popular culture and was recently resurrected with the Baby Hitler meme that Cillizza himself helped spread — and did so within the context of the current presidential campaign.”

“Early Monday morning, Chris Cuomo, co-anchor of “New Day,” the failing morning show on the left-wing CNN, compared a majority of Americans concerned with domestic security to Americans who, in a 1938 poll, wanted the United States government to refuse Jewish refugees fleeing the hell of Nazi Germany. In one fell swoop, Cuomo not only smeared the American people, he downplayed a deeply shameful period in our history.

“In the wake of the recent Paris terror attacks, to have a major network news anchor openly compare a majority of present-day Americans, worried over national security, to American anti-Semitism from nearly 80 years ago, shows a serious ramping up of the hateful and divisive rhetoric the DC media is willing to use in order to protect Barack Obama.”

Media Blames Pro-Lifers for Planned Parenthood Attack

“According to CNN legal analyst Sunny Hostin, conservative “rhetoric” “tossed fuel” onto the fire that is the abortion debate. The journalist appeared on The View, Monday, and demanded Republicans be held accountable in the wake of a Colorado Planned Parenthood shooting last week. Hostin blamed, “I don’t think we can ignore the rhetoric that has been out there from the Republican Party, from the right.” — Source

“Ruth Marcus has come close to blaming Republicans for the Colorado Springs shootings. Appearing on Jose Diaz-Balart’s MSNBC show today, Washington Post columnist Marcus said that ‘the Republican candidates . . . have been part of the inflamed and inflammatory rhetoric about Planned Parenthood, about the sale of baby parts, about dismembering live babies . . . I think it’s a fair conclusion, especially based on his . . . alleged mentioning of ‘no more baby parts,’ that this kind of rhetoric helped create this environment.’” — Source

“Following the November 27 attack on a Colorado Springs Planned Parenthood that killed three people and injured several more, right-wing media pundits immediately denied that violent anti-choice rhetoric may have motivated the shooter. However, anti-choice groups have a history of promoting violence to support their cause. After it was reported that the alleged shooter made comments about “no more baby parts” during questioning, right-wing media echoed the repeatedly debunked anti-choice claim that Planned Parenthood illegally sells fetal tissue, arguing that Planned Parenthood ‘deserves much of the harsh criticism directed toward it.'” — Source

Follow John Nolte on Twitter @NolteNC