Photo

ST. LOUIS

WHAT: A three-bedroom two-bath condo

HOW MUCH: $689,900

SIZE: 3,482 square feet

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $198

SETTING: This penthouse is downtown in a former office building, one of several conversions finished over the last 15 years. The 12-story brick-and-limestone building, which has cast-iron trim on the first floor, was built in 1925 and is on the National Register of Historic Places.

The downtown area is the city’s cultural and commercial hub. Washington Avenue, one of its main shopping-and-dining corridors, is two blocks away, as is the St. Louis Gateway Mall, a series of city parks one block wide and about a mile and a half long. At one end of the mall are the Mississippi River and the Gateway Arch; along the way to the other end are artworks by Richard Serra and Keith Haring, in addition to the city’s old courthouse and central library.

INDOORS: The three-story open-plan penthouse has panoramic views of the city. Exposed brick walls, concrete supports, ductwork and ceiling beams in the common areas give the unit an industrial look. The great room has over 1,100 square feet, with a double-height ceiling and windows on three sides, as well as a fireplace in the living area. The space opens to a balcony. The kitchen has granite countertops and an island bar. One of the bedrooms is on the entry level. The second is on the mezzanine, with an open catwalk leading across the unit to a walk-in closet and storage. The master suite, on the third level, has a walk-in closet and a steam shower. The unit conveys with two parking spots and storage.

OUTDOOR SPACE: Off the master, a landscaped terrace wraps around three sides of the building.

TAXES: $7,468 a year; condo fees: $547 a month

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

CONTACT: John Hecht, Re/Max Gold (314) 517-7999; stlgoldhomes.com

•

MADISON, WIS.

WHAT: A four-bedroom two-and-a-half-bath house

HOW MUCH: $699,900

SIZE: 3,686 square feet

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $190

SETTING: This 1920s stone-and-stucco house is in West Lawn Heights, just outside downtown Madison and the University of Wisconsin’s main campus. The neighborhood, which is also a district on the National Register of Historic Places, is characterized by Colonial Revivals, Tudors, and Prairie School architecture built mostly during the early 20th century. The area is known in part for its parks and nature, including a city lake about 10 blocks away and the University of Wisconsin-Madison’s arboretum.

INDOORS: The three-story house was built in 1926. Original features include oak and maple floors, a living-room fireplace, and built-ins throughout. Many of the first-floor rooms also have arched doorways with molding. Common areas include a living room and a den, both with fireplaces, and a library. The den and the dining area share a room that spans most of one side of the house; it has skylights, a wall of windows, and doors opening to a patio and backyard. Stainless-steel appliances in the kitchen were installed within the past two years, though the room retains most of its original cabinetry.

Bedrooms are on the second floor. The master suite has a walk-in closet, a walk-in shower and a claw-foot tub. The third floor, formerly the attic, has been furnished as living space, as has the basement, which has family and exercise rooms.

OUTDOOR SPACE: The house is on a fifth of an acre, with an oak-shaded backyard and a patio.

TAXES: $14,822 a year

CONTACT: Maria Antoinette, Restaino & Associates (608) 692-5177; mariaantoinette.com

•

DENVER

WHAT: A three-bedroom two-bath foursquare

HOW MUCH: $697,500

SIZE: 2,787 square feet

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $250

SETTING: This 1909 foursquare is on the border between Country Club and Capitol Hill, older neighborhoods just outside downtown Denver. Capitol Hill, named for the state capitol, is characterized by mansion-size historic houses, some converted to apartments or offices; part of Country Club is in a district on the National Register of Historic Places. Around the corner from this house is a commercial corridor with a movie theater, a cafe, bars and restaurants.

INDOORS: The two-story brick house retains its original hardwood floors, dark-wood window frames and built-ins throughout. Openings between the first-floor common rooms are accented by wooden pillars and molding. The living room has a brick fireplace flanked by bookcases with leaded-glass doors. The adjoining dining room has a built-in buffet. Several of the windows have leaded- and stained-glass decorations. Kitchen appliances and tile flooring were updated in 2013.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The three bedrooms are upstairs. The master suite has a Juliet balcony. The basement has a family room and a laundry/utility room.

OUTDOOR SPACE: The house has a front porch and a deck off the kitchen, with steps leading down to a flagstone path that meanders through the backyard toward a garage.

TAXES: $2,242 a year

CONTACT: Casey Shea, Live Urban Real Estate (303) 550-3108; caseyshea.liveurbandenver.com