Civic Plaza Ice Rink (Alex Goldsmith/KRQE)

Numbers in for Civic Plaza’s ice rink

ALBUQUERQUE (KRQE) – As of Monday afternoon, more than 250 people had rented ice skates to try out Civic Plaza’s rink since Friday. There’s already been talk within City Hall of expanding the surface due to that support. The one in Civic Plaza is being borrowed from the BioPark Society.

Bill would ban candidates from pocketing campaign funds

ALBUQUERQUE (KRQE) – A state lawmaker wants to bar candidates from pocketing public campaign money. Democratic Sen. Peter Wirth has pre-filed the bill for New Mexico’s upcoming legislative session next month. He also wants to stop candidates from paying family members for their campaign work. This comes after a national study gave New Mexico not only a failing grade, but a zero on money in state politics.

Carlsbad fastest growing city in NM

ALBUQUERQUE (KRQE) – According to a study conducted by the University of New Mexico, Carlsbad’s population went up by nearly 5% in the past two years. Between 2011 and 2013 the city saw 1401 people move within its boundaries.

New Director for NM VA to be introduced at town hall meeting

ARTESIA, N.M. (KRQE) All veterans are invited to attend a town hall in Artesia in January. Vets and their families will be able to meet Andrew Welch, the New Mexico VA and address any concerns.

The town hall is Jan 6 at 11 a.m. at the Elks Lodge on Quay Avenue.

Norovirus outbreaks in NM double in 2014

ALBUQUERQUE (KRQE) – A very contagious bug took off big time in New Mexico this past year. State health officials say there have been nearly twice as many norovirus outbreaks in 2014 compared to 2013. Most of the outbreaks this past year happened at nursing homes and assisted living facilities. Common symptoms include vomiting, diarrhea and stomach cramping. Most people recover in a day or two. Proper hand washing is a big key to keeping the virus in check.

$2M will help state overhaul health care system

ALBUQUERQUE (KRQE) – New Mexico has been awarded about $2 million from the federal government to help overhaul the state’s health care system. According to the Alamogordo Daily News, New Mexico is one of 28 states to receive the funding from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. The money, which comes from the Affordable Care Act, will be used to design health care payment and service models to improve quality and lower costs.

Inaugural events take place for Martinez

LAS CRUCES, N.M. (KRQE) – Before she gets sworn in for a second term, New Mexico Gov. Susana Martinez got a send-off in Las Cruces. The event was held Sunday at the Pan American Center on the New Mexico State University campus.

Martinez cruised to an easy victory over Democratic challenger Gary King with a little more than 57 percent of the vote. In the past 50 years, no New Mexico GOP governor has won with more than 55 percent of the vote.

The inaugural celebration will continue Wednesday in Santa Fe, and a public swearing-in will follow at the state capitol on New Year’s Day.