It looks like the Obama administration will soon be able to tout another victory in the ongoing battle over Medicaid expansion, as last week, the Montana state legislature voted to expand the state’s program.

Medicaid expansion is a key component of the Obama administration’s drive to increase health insurance coverage under the Affordable Care Act. The law provided states with additional federal dollars to expand their Medicaid programs to all low-income adults under the age of 65.

But in 2012, the Supreme Court ruled that the Medicaid expansion is optional for states, which has given way to political battles over expansion across the country. According to Politico, the Montana legislature’s vote of approval comes after a long legislative fight.



[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on Obamacare]

By expanding its Medicaid program, Montana will be able to provide health insurance coverage for 70,000 additional people in the state. That’s a lot of people that will now be able to access the health care system. Montana’s state legislature finally got this one right.

In too many states, though, the debate about Medicaid expansion has focused on the wrong things. Policymakers have scuffled over the Obama administration, the philosophy of the Affordable Care Act and the philosophy behind entitlement programs. Too often, the plight of the uninsured has gotten lost and the needs of people who can’t access proper health care have taken a back seat to political battles.

For the states that have let politics win over people, this has been mistake. The Medicaid expansion offered by the Affordable Care Act gives states an immediate means to help relieve the suffering of thousands of their citizens. While state officials hold out against expansion due to political beliefs, people in their state are needlessly unable to access the help they need.

The lack of action is particularly unconscionable in the face of the Obama administration’s willingness to negotiate with states to help them expand Medicaid in a way that best fits their needs. In discussing the legislature’s vote to expand Medicaid, Montana State Rep. Ellie Hill told Politico, “This vote will save lives.” She is right. Increasing access to health care will save lives in Montana, and that’s the barometer by which all states should be making this decision.



[SEE: Republican Party Cartoons]