Drawing a line from the patriotism of Nathan Hale in the Revolution to the tea party roots of rage against out-of-control federal spending, Dr. Ben Carson warned that America’s position as the anchor of the global currency market is being threatened by irresponsibility in Washington that raises the specter of the United States becoming a “Third World nation.”

The national debt “is a much bigger problem than most people believe,” Carson said in his introduction to Texas Sen. Ted Cruz’s speech Friday at the Palm Beach County Republican Club’s annual Lincoln Day Dinner at the Mar-a-Lago Club. “Many people in our government are trying to hide that from you.”

Because the dollar is the basis of international markets, the United States can continue to print money to keep running, Carson said. But other countries, tired of what they see as irresponsible behavior in Washington are working to topple the U.S. from that position of primacy, Carson said.

“If they succeed, we will become a Third World nation overnight,” he said. “This is a very precarious situation that we’re in.”

The key, Carson said, is for conservatives to educate themselves about who they’re representatives are and what they stand for.

“If there are people who are voting to increase our debt, you need to find out who they are and vote them out of office,” Carson said.

Carson alluded to both critics in the conservative movement who’ve attacked Cruz for his role in October’s government shutdown over Obamacare as well as national Republican leadership.

“The reason that we have divided government is because when one branch gets out of control, the other was supposed to rein it in – not be afraid someone was going to blame them for something,” he said.

Conservatives — under attack from divisions within the Republican Party as well as a hostile mainstream media — need to take up the “mantle of courage” from revolutionaries like Hale and the American heroes who stormed the beaches of Normandy, Carson said.

“Those people who say that America is not an exceptional nation don’t know what they’re talking about,” he said.

Check out the video here.