Joe Sestak said he dove into politics after a long career in the Navy because he believed everyone should have the kind of health care that saved the life of his cancer-stricken 4-year-old daughter.

And after backing passage of the Affordable Care Act as a congressman, the Democratic U.S. Senate candidate said he'd like to return to Washington because "more needs to be done."

"I fought hard for the Affordable Care Act," Sestak told about dozen people at a talk in downtown Allentown on Thursday morning. "It wasn't perfect, but it was a vast step."

Sestak, a retired three-star admiral who lives in Edgmont Township, Delaware County, launched his campaign last year with a 422-mile walk across Pennsylvania. He is running in the Democratic primary against Katie McGinty, Gov. Tom Wolf's former chief of staff, and John Fetterman, mayor of Braddock, outside Pittsburgh. The winner of the April 26 primary will challenge Republican U.S. Sen. Pat Toomey in the fall.

Toomey, of Zionsville, is seeking a second term in an electoral environment that is likely to be more challenging than the one he rode to victory in 2010. During that race, Toomey won a close 2-point victory over Sestak as part of the Republican wave at the height of the tea party movement.

With Democratic turnout likely to be higher in a presidential year, Toomey will need to do especially well among independents and moderate Democrats to retain his seat.

Sestak, speaking at A Taste of Soul Cafe on Hamilton Street, credited the ACA, or Obamacare, with expanding health insurance to 17 million Americans and slowing the increase in health care costs to the lowest rate in 50 years. While premiums for the benchmark health care plans on ACA exchanges have gone up, premiums for employer-based plans have gone up even more, he noted.

McGinty also supports the ACA. Her spokeswoman, Sabrina Singh, said as Wolf's chief of staff, McGinty helped expand Medicaid coverage to a half-million Pennsylvanians.

"As senator, she will promote access to affordable medical coverage while reining in out-of-pocket costs and supports full parity of coverage for mental and behavioral health care — because it's critical for families dealing with the devastating effects of addiction," she said.

The Fetterman campaign could not be reached for comment.

Toomey is an ardent critic of the ACA and has voted to repeal or gut the law.

"It's bad for patients, it's bad for doctors, and it's bad for our economy," reads a statement on his website.

In Allentown, Sestak recounted his daughter's battle with brain tumors a decade ago. As a military dependent, she received treatment at Walter Reed National Military Medical Center in Washington and, subsequently, at a children's hospital. The experience gave him a newfound appreciation for the importance of health care, he said, which is why the longtime independent became a Democrat and ran for public office.

Had not his daughter become sick, he said, he'd probably be a military contractor today.

"It changed my life," he said.

Asked if he agreed with Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders' call for single-payer health insurance, Sestak suggested he was more closely aligned with Sanders' competitor, Hillary Clinton. Clinton, a former secretary of state, has described single-payer, also known as "Medicare for all," as an unrealistic goal considering its entrenched Republican opposition.

Sestak said he believed that the ACA would eventually achieve the same objectives as the single-payer model by eliminating health insurance companies through "a natural progression." Specifically, he said insurance companies — the "middleman" of health care — would become redundant with the expansion of nonprofit health insurance cooperatives, or co-ops, and as more hospitals move toward direct payment for their services.

"Do you need to have a middleman? Are insurance companies necessary? No," he said.

Sestak also touched upon some of his other health care goals, such as expanding mental health services and support for rare disease research and empowering Medicare to negotiate drug prices with pharmaceutical companies.

He also wants to prohibit "pay for delay," which is when, after the expiration of a drug patent, one pharmaceutical company pays another to not make a generic competitor. (The Federal Trade Commission has estimated that "pay for delay" costs consumers $3.5 billion a year.)

Affordable health care is not a "liberal" goal but a "practical" one, Sestak said.

"In the Navy, we make sure all our sailors have health insurance not only because it's the right thing to do, but because it makes us a stronger, healthier, more prepared military," he said. "The same idea applies to our nation: Improving our nation's health security will create a healthier workforce, contribute to our shared economic mission and ensure America's continued status as the land of prosperity."

skennedy@mcall.com

610-820-6130