Proving termination for having family dependents can be difficult

Lori A. Higuera (Photo: Fennemore Craig) Story Highlights Proving termination for having family dependents can be difficult

Earlier this year, I had a baby. Over the next few weeks after returning from maternity leave, my boss claimed my production was down and I wasn't meeting my job description. Both of these were false, and records I kept of my work support that. But they said I wasn't meeting expectations and fired me. I think the reason was because I have a baby and they didn't want to pay for my family's health insurance, especially because I was no longer putting in 50-60 hours a week. Was I wrongfully terminated?













Lori A. Higuera

Fennemore Craig

You likely do not have a wrongful termination claim related to your suspicions about insurance coverage.

Until the Affordable Care Act becomes fully effective, an employer has no obligation to provide insurance to its employees or pay a penalty for not doing so. When an employer provides insurance to employees, it needn't provide insurance to all employees. However, it must have a legitimate non-discriminatory reason for deciding which of its employees are eligible for insurance. The number of hours that an employee regularly works in a workweek may be an acceptable reason to determine eligibility for insurance coverage.

While you may not have a wrongful termination claim related to insurance coverage, you may have other claims depending on different factors.

First, if the company is a covered employer under the Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA), you may have some claims under FMLA. If your maternity leave was actually FMLA leave and you were terminated for taking that FMLA leave, you may have a retaliation claim under the act. If your "reduced production" or "reduced hours" were the reason for the termination and related to your FMLA leave, you may have a claim that your employer violated the act.

Second, you may have an action under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA). If your employer terminated you to deny you benefits to which you were entitled under the company's health plan, you may have a claim under Section 510 of ERISA.

If any of these factual circumstances exist, you should consider meeting with an employment law attorney to inquire further.

















Craig O’Loughlin (Photo: handout)

Craig O'Loughlin

Quarles & Brady

The answer probably depends on whether you can show that the reason for termination stated by your employer is actually a fabricated reason. If you can show you were terminated because of your pregnancy, and show that your employer did not have a legitimate reason for your termination, you may have a claim of wrongful termination.

Under Arizona law, which tracks the federal Pregnancy Discrimination Act – part of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act – an employee may file an action for wrongful termination if an employer terminates, or even disciplines, an employee for discriminatory reasons related to an employee's pregnancy, childbirth or related medical conditions.

To establish a claim of pregnancy, or sex, discrimination, in addition to showing a discriminatory motive by the employer, an employee must show that she is a member of a protected class, that she was satisfactorily performing her job, that she suffered an adverse action such as a termination and that there is a causal connection between the termination and her pregnancy or childbirth.

If an employee can make this showing, the employer must then provide a legitimate non-discriminatory business reason for terminating the employment, such as for poor job performance. If the employer provides this reason, the employee has an opportunity to provide evidence that would show the employer's reason is not the actual reason and has been "made up" to justify the termination.

Consequently, whether or not you have a claim depends on how well you can disprove the employer's reason for termination.

— Compiled by Georgann Yara

Send your questions to asktheexperts1@gmail.com.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/ZBLV03