It’s the first Saturday of September and Singing Brakeman Park in Downtown Meridian was packed with different vendors, organizations and community members finding new and exciting products, pets, and foods.

“You never know what you are going to find at Earths Bounty and I look forward to it every month,” explained Jessi Bouder, Inter with Meridian Main Street.

Earths Bounty started four years ago as a way to showcase the day to day farmers market under the 18th Avenue Bridge and it continues to give local entrepreneurs an avenue to showcase goods.

“Earths Bounty has been a great experience for me, it helped get me started to the point where I have even branched out to other farmers markets, so I have really enjoyed this, it helps the farmer sell their product from home,” explained Kathy White, Owner of White Hill Farms.

White Hill Farms of Union, won best of festival booth this month, and owner Kathy White says Farmers Markets like Earths Bounty provide healthier options for shoppers.

“It is wholesome for the public, everybody is hunting a product that is noncommercial now, and everybody is hunting a healthier way of life,” explained White.

From fresh produce, to adoptable pets, live music, there is truly something new and exciting to be seen and on this Saturday the 4-H Club of Lauderdale County held a poultry judging competition.

“He judges the chicken and he feels them and looks at our scrapbook that we made and then the second time it is showmanship where we hold their feathers out and he looks at their feathers and to find out which one is the best,” explained Zeke Pulido member of the 4-H Club of Lauderdale County.

Each Saturday Earths Bounty is held, it continues to grow, and be supported by the community.

“It is really amazing to see the community come out and support the local farmers and it is a big event, it draws a lot of people from the community,” explained Bouder.

For more information about Earth's Bounty or how you may become a vendor of the festival, call Meridian Main Street at 601-693-7480.