After passing Obamacare into law, people were appointed and committees were set up. I’m not talking about the work on the website, which failed astronomically. No, I’m referring to all those who, after publicly supporting and voting for Obamacare, lined up in droves to try and obtain waivers and exemptions to the law. The Obama administration quickly responded. To date, according to the Heartland Institute, there are six types of waivers: medical loss ration (MLR) waiver for min-med health plans; annual limit waiver; MLR waiver for states; state innovation waiver; Accountable Care Organizations anti-trust waiver; and individual mandate waiver. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services granted one-year waivers to 1,231 companies and other organizations. In defense of granting waivers, the administration explained that many large corporations have self-funded plans. They are, in effect, their own insurance companies. They have to pay these fees and get no benefit in return. So, certain self-insured, self-administered plans were exempted from these requirements. This exempted the unions from paying up to $600 million. Center for Union Facts’ J. Justin Wilson said, “Obama is buying the unions silence with a $600 million payback.” How about Congress, that bastion of inequality? Did they get an exemption?” That depends. The Office of Personnel Management ruled that those in federal government could still contribute to their health care premiums. This rule keeps subsidies in place only for members of Congress and staff who enroll in Small Business Health Plan Options program available in the District of Columbia. Robert Moffitt, co-writer of the Heritage Foundation’s paper on Obamacare, cleared up the confusion. He said the OPM rule amounts to “special treatment ... members and staff are legally exempted from the terms and conditions that apply to every other American who must buy coverage in the exchange.” U.S. Rep. Nancy Pelosi, D-San Francisco, found a way to grant waivers to 1,800 small companies that are friends of hers. In trying to defend herself, she said, “They’re small. I couldn’t speak to all 1,800 of them, but some on the list that I have seen have been very, very small companies. They will not have a big impact on the economy of our country.” Wasn’t the health care law put into place to save businesses money on health care costs? So why are the “very, very small companies” trying to get out of it? Thus far, 106,000 have visited the Obamacare website and enrolled, and 27,000 were able to sign up. They had hoped to sign up a half-million the first month of open enrollment. Obama called a press conference Thursday to announce that all those whose health care plans were canceled by insurance companies could be renewed for one year. He tried to sound like a savior but the fact is, the Obamacare law dictated that the insurance companies cancel those plans. It wasn’t the fault of the insurance companies. By now you must know what is going on here. Obama wants to blame everyone but himself for the train wreck we call Obamacare. It isn’t working. His poll numbers are the lowest since he became president. And don’t forget: The purpose of Obamacare was never to provide you with affordable health care. The objective was to take over your life. We are gradually losing our individual rights. I saw a great bumper sticker: “Don’t like your health care? Replace your congressman.” But don’t stop there. Replace your senator; Replace your president. Chuck McDougald headed the Veterans Coalition, first for California, then for the Western Region, when Sen. John McCain ran for president in 2008. In 2010, he served as statewide volunteer chair for Carly Fiorina’s campaign for the U.S. Senate. He is currently the Western Region director for ConcernedVeteransforAmerica.org and is a member of the National Rifle Association. He lives in South San Francisco with his wife and two kids.