Pending official approval by Roseville City Council on Aug. 19, Rob Jensen is set to become Roseville’s new city manager.

Jensen, who took over as interim city manager following Ray Kerridge’s retirement in July, has served as Roseville’s assistant city manager since 2011. He has been a Roseville resident and city employee since 1990.

"The city council has asked Acting City Manager Rob Jensen to be Roseville's next city manager, effective Jan. 1, 2016 (after Ray Kerridge’s retirement on Dec. 31), and Rob has accepted, which is why the contract is on the council’s agenda for consideration,” city spokeswoman Megan Macpherson said in an email to the Press Tribune. “It’s a significant position to be CEO of the region’s only full-service city, and along with that comes the responsibility of overseeing a half-billion-dollar annual budget, 15 departments and 1,200 employees, so it’s a priority for our City Council to determine who will fill that role.”

Jensen’s appointment comes with relative speed, as the city conducted a seven-month nationwide search before hiring Kerridge on June 17, 2010.

Kerridge had planned to retire in the near future and considered doing so last December, but uncertainty in regard to the timeline of his recovery after a vehicle accident in late June prompted an immediate decision.

Kerridge said in a statement last month that giving the council ample time to appoint a new city manager was a priority to him, though they did not end up needing so much notice.

Kerridge held the position of city manager in Roseville for five years, after leaving the same position in Sacramento. The London native retires with four decades of public service.

His tenure saw the Vernon Town Square, a new Sutter Health office and downtown traffic roundabout completed in Roseville.

Jensen’s official capacity was changed from “interim” to “acting” city manager at council’s Aug. 5 meeting, as city regulations require council to make an appointment in the event a city manager is absent longer than three months, as Kerridge will have been.

Jensen’s contract will start with a $255,000 annual base salary. The contract officially begins in 2016, when Kerridge’s contract expires.