Why is it that some guys seem to get all the girls while others struggle to snag a single date? It’s not their fault; women are hardwired to go for a certain type of guy. This explains why the “cool guy” stereotype remains more or less unchanged generation after generation. So, according to science, who are these men who are capable of effortlessly wooing women? The answer may be more obvious than you think.

Men Who Drive Fast Cars

Researchers in Austria found that women may subconsciously change their perception of a man based on the type of car that he drives. Instinctively, women prefer a dominant and powerful mate and will often associate a man’s character or status with the type of car he chooses. More powerful cars, such as a Mustang or sports car, translate as a more powerful man — a characteristic women subconsciously look for in a mate.

“When we were having babies who were very dependent on us, we couldn’t hunt and take care of ourselves, so we were looking for the man who had the most social status — who was the best hunter — who was going to bring home the biggest chunk of meat for our babies. It’s the same thing today,” explained Dr. Laura Berman, a sex educator and relationship therapist.

Men With Hairy Faces But Smooth Bodies

According to Pavol Prokop, a professor of biology at Trnava University in Slovakia, evolutionarily speaking, hairless men should be preferred in areas (or cultures) that are closer to the equator due to the increased parasitic threat. Interestingly, after a study comparing two countries with differing parasitic threats, Trnava “found no differences in women’s preferences,” with both groups going for men with less body hair. Theories suggest this preference may have come as a way to avoid lice and other parasites, but no one can say for sure.

When it comes to facial hair, studies have shown the more hair, the better. An Australian study found that women prefer men with heavy stubble over clean-shaven men and men with a full beard. Our findings confirm that beardedness affects judgments of male socio-sexual attributes and suggests that an intermediate level of beardedness is most attractive while full-bearded men may be perceived as better fathers who could protect and invest in offspring," explained the researchers, as reported by The Huffington Post.

Men With Deep Breathy Voice Who Holds Off On The Compliments

Women can’t explain it, there’s just something about a deep breathy voice that makes us weak in the knees. According to a British study, women prefer men with deeper voices because it’s subconsciously perceived as a sign of masculinity. The study asked 60 women to rate the sex appeal of 10 male recorded voices, with results showing that the deeper breather voices, which were voices both masculine and tender, win in overall popularity. "These results suggest that what makes the voice attractive are mostly properties that enhance the characteristics already in the averaged voice of the sex," explained the authors, the Daily Mail reported.

What this deep breathy voice says is also important in winning a female’s affection. A separate study found that women are less inclined to speak with men who present themselves as too friendly too fast, taking this as a sign of insincerity. The lead author of the study suggests another reason for this lack of enthusiasm for enthusiastic men: “Women may perceive a responsive man as vulnerable and less dominant,” Gurit Birnbaum told Medical Daily via email.

While women may not like men who initially come off as too nice, a separate study showed that over the long haul, ladies love a man who can make them laugh. Science has found that female brains are more perceptive to positive feelings in response to laughter. Female preference for funny men may stem from this biological difference.

Above All, Tall Men

The stereotype has been recognized across geographic and cultural boundaries. There’s just something about tall men that women find irresistible. Unfortunately, this infatuation with tall men often leads to a denial of shorter men. A 2008 study of 382 college students found that only four percent of women would be in a relationship with someone who was shorter than them, Medical Daily reported. The reasoning for this, according to Dr. Pepper Schwartz, a sociology professor at the University of Washington, is because: “Women’s cultural vision is being feminine, having a man big enough to make her feel protected.” Schwartz added that many women hold this stereotype to a point where it excludes a lot of people they might be interested in otherwise.