No other metropolitan entity conjures such a bright future in this recharged market as Broomfield – gone from a way-point on the old Boulder Turnpike to a city/county entity that has some of the most promising new development in the metro area, and has been posting some very high new home prices. But today Taylor Morrison will show you a single-family neighborhood where you could be inside Broomfield’s coveted city limits, with a 3-car garage, starting from well under $350,000.

That’s what Taylor Morrison’s Jennifer Taylor and Jim Lettis can show you at The Village at Palisade Park – taking shape close to the new Children’s Hospital on Highway 7, just west of I-25; and across from a site where University of Colorado Health is planning a 66-acre campus. You’ll see the new hospital – but what you WON’T see are finished models (they’re still a month from finish – along with six for-sale homes that’ll be ready for move in this fall).

The tradeoff for getting involved with Palisade Park now, while the layout still requires a little imagination, is pricing that is almost certain to go up before those models are complete, says Taylor Morrison’s Becky Hunt. There’s an Appaloosa ranch – two bedrooms plus a study, 1,819 square feet plus partial basement and a THREE-car garage, from $340,990; and a ‘Caspian’ (one of the models you’ll see underway) with 2,643 feet, four bedrooms plus a main floor study and a kitchen sized for an oversized island and walk-in pantry, at only $375,990.

Meanwhile, this location has four commuter routes working for it: close to I-25 into downtown or 120th Avenue; Highway 7/Baseline into Boulder; and quick access onto 470 – just ten minutes from Interlocken/Flatiron Crossing, and 25 minutes, door-to-door, to Denver International Airport. The area just to the west along Highway 7 has already generated some of the area’s most attractive master-planned communities, with homes priced way beyond this.

Those ‘spec’ homes underway, at prices likely to go up by model opening, include one of that Appaloosa ranch plan – full basement and 3-car garage, plus slab granite kitchen tops and stainless gas appliances, for just $409,975. Taylor Morrison has a park planned, anchored by a vintage barn you’ll see on the west side that they’re planning to preserve as a landmark. To visit The Village at Palisade Park, take I-25 north past 470 to the next exit, Highway 7, and turn west a half mile to Palisade Parkway – same entrance as Children’s Hospital, then head north a half mile to Taylor Morrison’s sales center.

Pre-sale of The Village at Palisade Park by Taylor Morrison, family-sized homes in city of Broomfield, 6 new plans including 2 ranches, 3-car garage standard on most. 502 W. 169th Pl., Broomfield; take I-25 north past 470 to Hwy 7, turn west ½ mile to Palisade Pkwy (entry to Children’s Hospital), north to sales center

From the high-$300s, summer deliveries from $409,975

303-325-2445

Mark Samuelson writes on real estate and business; you can email him at mark@samuelsonassoc.com.You can see all of Mark Samuelson’s columns at DenverPost.com/RealEstate. Follow Mark Samuelson on Twitter: @marksamuelson