4351802

Barbra Streisand sent a fundraising email on behalf of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee yesterday asking potential donors, “Have you seen Congress lately? It’s a mess. And it’s only going to get worse if people like Karl Rove and the Koch Brothers continue to treat corporations better than people.”

The email asked for $5 or more and warned, “We have to act now. We’re running out of time and money,” according to The Hollywood Reporter.

Repeating a mantra the President Barack Obama recently adopted of the economy being better than people realize, Streisand wrote, “Whether you know it or not, in the past six years we have seen huge progress under President Obama.”

She then listed Democratic talking points:

Unemployment is at the lowest level since before President Obama took office, before the Great Recession started. The deficit is rapidly dropping and is just 2.8% of GDP — the lowest since 2007. And thank God for President Obama’s Affordable Care Act, which has helped millions of people around the country gain access to health care. Additionally, he has championed equal pay for women, while Republicans try to take away long-term unemployment insurance and kill a minimum wage increase.

Left unsaid was that the workforce participation rate, measuring the number of Americans of working age working, is at historic lows. Obama more than doubled the deficit with his $832 billion stimulus before it started shrinking, millions of Americans lost health insurance they liked thanks to Obamacare, his White House pays women significantly less than it pays men and Democrats failed to raise the minimum wage when they controlled Congress from 2009 to 2011.

Streisand, who has a net worth of $500 million dollars and has a homeless stepson who was recently spotted eating out of garbage cans, concluded her plea for money by writing, “There is still so much more we can do. And that can only be achieved with an active Congress, not an obstructive one. That is why it is so important to support Democratic candidates.”