Pero says he's laying the district's cards on the table so to speak. He said that 98% of school districts across the state offer full day kindergarten.

Pero is advocating for full day kindergarten in the district, but it will come at a cost of $2 million or about $150 for each homeowner the first year. But it will cost less each subsequent year. That money will cover the cost of hiring 18 new teachers and providing busing for students.

Surveys went out to parents and staff on Thursday asking their opinion. The results of those surveys and exit surveys at the May budget vote will determine if the district moves forward. But Pero says he doesn't see full day kindergarten as an option any longer, but rather a necessity to improve student performance.

"If you look at our students who attend half day kindergarten and their reading results and compare those results to students who attend full day kindergarten at area schools," says Pero. "Twenty percent more of our students are not at benchmark and there's a direct line between full day kindergarten and half day kindergarten, just relative to that."

We spoke with Melissa Davis, whose daughter Ruby is currently in kindergarten. Her son Owen also went through the program.

"There's only two hours functionally of school, and they eat up so much of that having to eat a snack and breaks during the day," said Davis.

Davis says that she is happy with Pittsford's Kindergarten program. She also says that Ruby is also in the YMCA's Wrap Around Program, which is an additional cost.

"It sounds like there's certainly is advantage on so many levels to extending to full day kindergarten," said Davis.

Davis said that she is in favor of all day kindergarten, which is music to the ears of Superintendent Pero. He is concerned about all of the things teachers can't get to because time doesn't allow for it.

"So when I think about kindergarten, I think about opportunities for reading, writing, and math, and our teachers are having to make a choice between those on a daily basis," said Pero.

Pero says if 60 percent of surveys come back in support, the district will move forward. He says there is some good news: state and federal aid will offset about $700,000 of the launch cost, but that money would not come until the second year of the new program.

You can take a survey on the change by clicking here.

For more information you can go to http://pittsfordschools.org/