By Joanna Garado

Poll showed low Obama approval rating, even as compared to other former US presidents, including George W. Bush.

Recent survey conducted by CNN/ORC International Poll released on Wednesday, showed a considerably low Obama approval rating.

49% of the respondents said they have an "unfavorable" opinion towards the president but the survey also returned an equal number of "favorable" opinions at 49%.

In comparison, more Americans now see George W. Bush in a favorable light at 52%, while only 43% find him "unfavorable."

However, if compared to Bush's approval rating on his last term in office in 2009 (34% favorable; 62% unfavorable), the latest Obama approval rating may be considerably higher than that of the former president.

CNN/ORC also reported that 53% of Americans believe that the economy has taken a turn for the worse, while 43% believe that Obama is handling the country's progress well.

Despite the low Obama approval rating, Americans who think "the economy has started to recover but still faces most of those problems it faced in 2008" increased from 40% in 2014 to 46% this year.

The survey also discussed some of the most pressing issues that the country is facing, such as the Islamic militant group, ISIS and Obamacare.

Based on the results, 51% Americans believe that Obama is not handling the problem of terrorism well, while 63% found his strategies against ISIS unfavorable.

Meanwhile, more than half of the respondents (54%) still disapprove of the "Patient Protection and Afforable Care Act" or "Obamacare", which extends healthcare insurance to all US citizens who lack it.

On the other hand, 44% think that Obamacare is a positive change for the US.

Aside from Bush, the survey also placed Obama side-by-side other presidents such as Jimmy Carter, Bill Clinton and George H.W. Bush.

Bill Clinton and George H.W. Bush were both pegged as the most favorable at 64%, while Jimmy Carter follows closely at 56%.

However, the Democratic Party in which Obama belongs, returned a higher number of "favorable" results at 47%, while 45% find it "unfavorable."

Meanwhile, 49% find the Republican Party "unfavorable" and only 41% find it "favorable."

The study, conducted on May 29-31, intervewed 1,025 American adults via telephone.

Tags : barack obama, George W Bush

© Copyright ISchoolGuide.Com