By Roni Caryn Rabin

When my mother, Pauline, was 70, she lost her sense of balance. She started walking with an odd shuffling gait, taking short steps and barely lifting her feet off the ground. She often took my hand, holding it and squeezing my fingers.

Her decline was precipitous. She fell repeatedly. She stopped driving, and she could no longer ride her bike in a straight line. The woman who taught me the sidestroke couldn’t even stand in the shallow end of the pool.

“I feel like I’m drowning,” she’d say.

A retired psychiatrist, my mother had numerous advantages — education, resources and insurance — but getting the right diagnosis took nearly 10 years.

Each expert saw the problem through the prism of a single specialty. It took a long time before someone connected the dots.

My mother was using a walker by the time she was told she had a rare condition that causes gait problems and cognitive loss, and is one of the few treatable forms of dementia.

The bad news was that it had taken so long to get the diagnosis that some of the damage might not be reversible.

“This should be one of the first things physicians look for in an older person,” my mother said recently. “You can actually do something about it.”

A series of neurological evaluations had ruled out the obvious suspects: My mother didn’t have the tremor typical of Parkinson’s, a devastating, progressive disorder, and she did well on cognitive tests, which eliminated Alzheimer’s disease.

Next, my mother went to see an orthopedic surgeon. He said she had stenosis, or narrowing of the open spaces of the spine, and recommended surgery. She underwent a complicated, potentially dangerous back operation, and she seemed to be walking more smoothly afterward — for a few months.

She developed other symptoms. Perhaps because she wasn’t exercising, her blood pressure went up. She gained weight and was at risk for diabetes. She developed a persistent hacking cough, but no one could identify the cause: Her lungs were clear.

She was also having trouble getting to the bathroom on time, so she had more surgery, this time to implant mesh designed to alleviate urinary incontinence. Medicare and private insurance picked up the tab, but once again the relief was temporary.

Any physician who took a careful family history would learn that my mother had long suspected that her mother’s dementia was caused by normal pressure hydrocephalus, or NPH, a buildup of cerebrospinal fluid in the brain that causes difficulty walking, urinary incontinence and cognitive loss, in that order.

When my mother met with specialists, she floated the idea that she might have NPH. In some ways she hoped that was the diagnosis, because it often can be treated by implanting a small shunt into the brain to drain off the excess fluid.

A neurologist in Bethesda did briefly consider NPH. He did a spinal tap to withdraw a small amount of cerebrospinal fluid but ruled out the diagnosis when he saw no immediate improvement in my mother’s gait. But he may not have withdrawn enough fluid to see a change, experts told me.

Two years ago, doctors finally got it right.

My mother and stepfather had gone to visit friends in Gainesville. They urged her to make an appointment at the University of Florida’s Center for Movement Disorders and Neurorestoration. Doctors there suspected NPH as soon as they saw my mother walk across the room.

They recognized the shuffling gait and what they call “magnetic” footsteps that seemed glued to the floor. They ordered additional tests, including a spinal tap to see if her walking improved after a large amount of cerebrospinal fluid was withdrawn — it did — and another imaging scan to rule out the possibility that the buildup was caused by an obstruction, such as a tumor.

Why was my mother’s diagnosis missed by so many, and for so long?

For many physicians, “the possibility just doesn’t come to mind,” said Michael Williams, who serves on the medical advisory board of the Hydrocephalus Association, an advocacy organization, because it’s so rare.

Daniele Rigamonti, a neurosurgeon at Johns Hopkins School of Medicine who wrote and edited a textbook about NPH, is convinced that many nursing home residents who seem to have Alzheimer’s or Parkinson’s dementia may actually have NPH.

He says it’s important to diagnose it early, before the buildup of pressure on the brain causes damage as the enlarged ventricles displace and compress adjacent brain tissue.

“To wait for the full triad [of symptoms] is foolish,” he said, referring to the three symptoms that define NPH: gait disturbance, incontinence and dementia. Even though it is a challenge to diagnose NPH when the only symptom is gait impairment, he said, “you don’t wait for a cancer to metastasize and spread to the brain before you recognize it.”