TOP STORIES

For all that we’ve endured in the last few years, it is pretty amazing to listen to presidential candidates fight over who is more Obamacare than the other. Bernie Sanders said he wrote some of the Affordable Care Act, Hillary Clinton says he wants to derail it and around and around they went during last night’s Democratic debate.

There was some meat in this discussion: Sanders released his own healthcare reform plan which seems to increase costs for both the middle class and richest Americans. How the Democratic presidential nominee looks at Obamacare (dramatically or incrementally change it) will have a major impact on policy in the next year. – Washington Post, Business Insider, The Health Care Blog, The Hill, The New York Times

Because of the Martin Luther King holiday, MedCity News’ publishing will be lighter than usual.

LIFE SCIENCES

Infectious disease company Centauri Therapeutics has acquired the Alphamer immuno-therapeutics platform technology and raised a fresh round of capital to develop treatments against anti-microbial resistant pathogens. – Business Wire

The FDA has accepted for Priority Review the supplemental New Drug Application for Eisai’s lenvatinib to treat patients with unresectable advanced or metastatic renal cell carcinoma (RCC) in combination with everolimus. – PR Newswire

PAYERS-PROVIDERS

We really, really are going to try and re-analyze resident work hours. Here’s a plan that won’t work. – KevinMD

ZDoggMD is out with a new one: “I Can’t Feel My Face.” You should listen to the whole thing, but here are some of the zippier lines:

I could just go bankrupt

From just one MRI test

I can’t feel my face

My tongue won’t move

Amy I strokin’?

Am I strokin’?

I feel a little icky about this one because – though not his intent – some will take the song to mean ZDogg is mocking stroke patients rather than skewering the medical establishment. – GruntDoc

TECHNOLOGY

Diagnostics company LifeWatch has received FDA clearance for its heartbeat monitor LifeWatch Mobile Cardiac Telemetry (MCT) Patch. – Business Wire

China’s massive search engine Baidu is in trouble with the country’s technology regulators for, among other things, false medical claims. – Financial Times

“CES 2016: The largest collection of insecure devices in the world.” Remember: each one will try to access a hospital network soon! – VentureBeat

Malaysian virtual medical appointments app BookDoc closed a seven-figure seed round with investors including a member of the Brunei royal family. – DealStreetAsia

A LITTLE BIT EXTRA