The first day you can apply for health insurance coverage through Obamacare Open Enrollment starts November 15. A newly updated Healthcare.gov website will be tested to see how well it performs, hopefully not facing disastrous complications that crippled the first year of health enrollment.

In a related report by The Inquisitr, after the GOP took majority of the Senate President Obama gave a speech talking about the 2014 election results and working with the Republican Congress. But if a Republican Congress does attempt to repeal the entire Affordable Care Act he reiterated, he will not sign the bill.

For anyone wanting health insurance for 2015 through Obamacare they must apply for coverage during the Open Enrollment period from November 15, 2014 to February 15, 2015. For those that had coverage under Obamacare for 2014 the benefit year ends December 31, 2014. Before then would be the time to renew or choose a new health plan through the Marketplace.

For those with coverage for 2014 who do nothing may be surprised that their plan was automatically renewed. The Wall Street Journal reported the Obama administration decided this summer it would automatically renew coverage for everyone who doesn’t come back to the site by December 15.

If you choose to go uninsured for 2015 the fine has been increased from that of 2014. The fee will be whichever is greater of these two, 2 percent of your income or $325 per adult and $162.50 per child. For some, this may still be their desired route.

The Marketplace is supposed to provide affordable private health insurance with savings based on income. Plans cover essential health benefits, pre-existing conditions, and preventive care. The Marketplace application also doubles as an application for Medicaid and Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) and if eligible could provide free insurance.

Premium tax credits and savings on out-of-pocket costs are based on household size and income. During the application process, you must guesstimate your income for the year and depending on your family size will determine the tax credit amount. It is possible to finagle the numbers to get the highest amount. To do that is not a good idea. The following tax year will require the real numbers and inaccurate estimated incomes that were reported during the application process could result in a debt of money to Obamacare.

Many are leery of returning to Obamacare’s website Healthcare.gov from their previous experience. U.S. News reported that of those polled who used the Marketplace during last Open Enrollment period 51 percent said they will not use the health insurance exchange website this fall. But of those polled 43 percent are willing to give it another chance.

The users experience with the Healthcare.gov is expected to be better this season. The Wall Street Journal reported the Obama administration focused primarily on the user-experience parts of Healthcare.gov. Officials have reportedly worked out the flaws that made the news when the site opened last fall. Yet new problems may surface this coming year, especially for those whole enrolled for 2014 coverage.

While much time was spent on the front end of the website, some back end parts have had some problems and others haven’t been built. The main problem is for those currently covered by health insurance coverage that decide to change to a different plan, a small number of those may find themselves next year double covered with their old and new plan. The problem lies in a missing component of the Healthcare.gov website that makes it difficult for insurance companies to know whether a consumers plan has been canceled or is still active. It would be advised to those who do change plans to follow up with their insurance company.

The Obamacare Open Enrollment period starting November 15 is coming very soon. The newly updated Healthcare.gov website will be tested and hopefully will perform much better than last year. Taking care during the process could provide access to health insurance coverage, but make sure to do your own follow up with your provider on any changes.