The doctor will spy on your now: Hospitals and insurance companies are using credit card data to monitor how patients eat, whether they belong to a gym and when they smoke

Two healthcare groups are beginning to use data from marketing companies to track their patients

ObamaCare mandates that penalize hospitals if too make patients make routine visits are driving the track programs

Companies are using data to call patients an intervene to stop bad habits

Patients and privacy advocates are not happy and say the new programs are invasive

Doctors, hospitals and insurance companies have begun spying on patients using credit card data and other private details.

Sneak a pack of cigarettes, let your gym membership lapse or start eating unhealthy foods and you could get a scolding phone call from your doctor or insurance provider.



The companies that are using the new tracking programs say the data allow doctors to make sure their patients stay healthy in between visits. The information also helps them to spot bad habits between they become harmful.



Privacy advocates and many patients aren't impressed. They say the new technology is invasive and hurts the doctor-patient relationship.

Big doctor is watching you? A new program could track whether you buy cigarettes or fatty foods or let your gym membership lapse by tracking credit card purchases

Bloomberg News reports that several healthcare groups are beginning to use advanced demographic and spending data - from both credit cards and store loyalty cards - to track patient behavior, though the program remains in its infancy.



The changes can be chalked up to ObamaCare, which has put pressure on hospitals to keep patients health and out of emergency rooms. Hospitals can be fined if patients are re-admitted within a short time of treatment.



Carolinas HeathcareSystem, a Charlotte-based company that operates 900 hospitals, clinics, doctor's offices and surgery center in North and South Carolina, is on the forefront of the trend.



'What we are looking to find are people before they end up in trouble,' Dr Michael Dulin, who is in charge of the program for Carolinas, told Bloomberg.



'The idea is to use big data and predictive models to think about population health and drill down to the individual levels to find someone running into trouble that we can reach out to and try to help out.'

University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, which has 20 hospitals in Pennsylvania and an insurance company, is using a less detailed model that collects general demographic information, like whether the patient has children or owns a car to make predictions about whether emergency room visits - which is one of the most costly ways to get treatment.

Both companies use the data to call patients before they ever come in for treatment. University of Pittsburgh Medical Center tries to set up its clients with a doctor or nurse practitioner appointment to get ahead of any health problems.

Jorjanne Murry, an accountant from Charlotte, North Carolina, with Type 1 Diabetes, said she is already getting regular phone calls from her insurance company, wanting to talk about how she is managing her disease.



'It is one thing to have a number I can call if I have a problem or question, it is another thing to get unsolicited phone calls. I don’t like that,' she told Bloomberg.



Irina Raicu, an Internet ethics professor at Santa Clara University, blasted the new strategy as 'very paternalistic toward individuals, inclined to see human beings as simply the sum of data points about them.'