Needmore can pump a limited amount of water with its temporary permit but will have to get a permanent permit.

Many of the same people who fought for or against the Electro Purification project are involved with Needmore.

Just as the Wimberley Valley activists who organized to oppose Electro Purification’s controversial water project in Hays County are starting to see results, they are gearing up for a new fight against an old foe: the Needmore Ranch Municipal Utility District east of Wimberley.

The ranch, home to the locally beloved Little Arkansas swimming spot on the Blanco River, is owned by Greg LaMantia, a politically powerful South Texas beer distributor. Like Electro Purification’s well field, most of the ranch was in a “white space,” or unregulated area, before the Legislature in June expanded the reach of a local conservation district so that all groundwater in Hays County is regulated.

Both enterprises have since obtained temporary permits from the Barton Springs/Edwards Aquifer Conservation District to pump limited amounts of water, but they must go through a rigorous testing process to get permanent permits. Needmore applied to pump 289 million gallons per year for agricultural and was permitted for 179 million gallons per year.

Many of the players lining up on both sides of the Needmore issue also worked for or against Houston-based Electro Purification’s plan to pump and sell up to 5.3 million gallons per day out of the already-stressed Trinity Aquifer. The Needmore district has hired the same lawyer, Ed McCarthy, and hydrogeologist, Kaveh Khorzad, as Electro Purification, which recently lost two of its three customers. The Citizens Alliance for Responsible Development, a formidable Wimberley activist group, and the Trinity Edwards Springs Protection Association, which was founded to fight Electro Purification in court, are calling for limits on Needmore’s operations.

The latter group this week asked the conservation district to reverse its decision to grant the temporary permit to Needmore, saying the application was inaccurate and the district lacked the authority to issue a temporary permit for a pumping operation that wasn’t already underway. The well was dormant when district inspectors visited it, the group said.

“The potential for overpumping this aquifer is very real,” said Vanessa Puig-Williams, an attorney for the group. “We must insist that the letter of the law be applied to the facts if we are to have any chance to protect this wonderful water resource and the much smaller wells of local property owners.”

The citizens group, which unsuccessfully fought the formation of Needmore’s utility district in 2013, said opposing the permit is its “latest CARD call to action.”

McCarthy said the groups are creating a controversy where there is none. For now, LaMantia is planning to use the water only for livestock and agriculture, not development, he said.

“The LaMantia family has a great history of stewardship of land and animal husbandry,” McCarthy said. “There’s a lot of fear-mongering that’s trying to keep the LaMantia family from its rights.”

He said the district could amend its permit request for a different use in the future. Municipal utility districts are traditionally created to facilitate development, not agriculture. “They wanted to have all of the options available for the development of the property, so they created the MUD,” McCarthy said.

LaMantia was a driving force behind the strong and unexpected opposition to the bill by state Rep. Jason Isaac, R-Dripping Springs, that expanded the conservation district’s reach, according to officials who are familiar with how the legislative battle unfolded and asked to remain anonymous for fear of repercussions. The bill passed only after Hays County Commissioner Will Conley persuaded Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick to support it when he was visiting Wimberley to see the damage after the May floods.

The Legislature this year also loosened a restriction on the Needmore utility district that allows it to pump groundwater at the ranch, rather than requiring it to import surface water from elsewhere.

One key player in the fight against Electro Purification that might be not be as active in the Needmore bout is Conley. He said the ranch is entitled to pump some water, and that the conservation district’s permitting process should determine how much is appropriate.

“It is a very large ranch in the Wimberley Valley that certainly has the right to a certain amount of groundwater based on their acreage,” he said. “The reason why this is becoming a talking point is that now, for the first time, it’s regulated.”