Buick updated its Regal for 2014 and created a sexy, sweet, smooth car that's remarkably aggravating.

The 2014 Buick Regal GS. (Photo: GM) Story Highlights Style: Nice shape, busy details

Power: 2-liter turbo has plenty

Controls: Aggravating

Buick updated the Regal sedan for 2014 and wound up with a smooth, sexy, sweetheart that is, like so many sweethearts, aggravating.

It has fetching, sculpted looks, and the GS models tested have premium interiors that need no apologies for appearance and fit.

The engines are responsive, powerful, lovely to spur hard.

Steering and brakes respond about as you wish, turning and stopping in reasonable proportion to the force you apply.

It is well-provided with smaller considerations, too, such as:

The trunk conveniently pops wide open when you punch the latch or the button on the remote, a Buick signature feature. A few inches of snow on the trunk defeats the pop-open, though.

Regal has instant, "where have you been all my life" phone pairing.

A tire pressure readout tells you pressure in each tire, instead of a silly warning light when some tire, somewhere is low.

The drivetrain is interesting. Most models get a punchy turbocharged 2-liter four-cylinder with 259 horsepower and 295 pounds-feet of torque, good numbers that propel the car to 60 miles per hour in the 6-second area.

An all-wheel-drive system that seems very effective on slick roads is an option. It was mated to a too-stiff suspension, though.

The optional six-speed manual transmission — Buick bills Regal as a sport sedan — is well done. So few makers offer stick shifts nowadays that it's a surprise, and an even bigger surprise when it shifts gracefully.

Buick says 6% of GS-model buyers opt for the stick, just enough to justify offering it. More typical is 3% to 5%.

On the other hand:

The climate controls are loathsome. Surface-touch operation is a major failure.

They don't work with most gloves, and even bare-handed, they require you to hold your touch to operate the seat heaters or change the temperature. No simple swipe or gesture.

Close to being a deal-breaker on our priority list, where "nothing stupid" is near the top.

Knobs and switches, people. Easy to operate without taking your eyes off the road and easy to know whether you're turning something up or down, on or off. Usually work with gloves, too.

The back seat, which once seemed fine, now feels too tight by comparison.

The latest compacts and even subcompacts scoop, carve and finagle enough space for back-benchers to enjoy reasonable knee and toe space.

Regal's back doors are big enough to be a drawback in tight parking spots, for no appreciable practical gain in ingress/egress ease.

Fuel economy's disappointing, and thus, an aggravation.

The turbocharged four cylinder in the all-wheel-drive model tested couldn't rise quite to 15 mpg in city/suburban use. It climbed to 24.9 when highway travel was mixed in.

As a colleague says, if you give me the mileage of a V-8, then give me back my V-8. That's an easy sentiment to applaud, because no turbo four we have driven matches the smooth, effortless power delivery of a V-8 with similar horsepower and torque ratings.

In fact, the notion that small, turbo engines are the equal of bigger engines has become the auto industry equivalent of the emperor's new clothes fable. The emperor is naked in the fable, and small engines mostly are lame.

Ford is boldest at promoting small-displacement, turbocharged engines as the answer to demands for both mileage and power. But Consumer Reports and AutoWeek, as well as USA TODAY, have noted mileage well short of ratings. CR also pointed out the EcoBoost models didn't give exceptional performance, either. CR called them "EcoBoast."

We'll give Regal's turbo four credit for being zippy, and pretty smooth. It has most of the formula right, exceptional mpg being the missing piece.

Maybe our mpg isn't so bad, relatively speaking. The government city rating for that AWD test car is 19 mpg, and Test Drive usually hits a bit less than the city rating in our suburban motoring.

Regal's 2014 update seems mostly on-target, and sales are rising, so buyers seem to agree.

But the aggravations — silly climate controls, stiff-riding AWD, disappointing mpg — make it an unlikely candidate for our personal shopping list.

What? Update of midsize four-door sedan. Front-wheel drive (FWD) or all-wheel drive (AWD).

When? On sale since October.

Where? Made at Oshawa, Ontario, Canada.

How much? Starting prices from $30,615 with shipping for base, to $40,195 for sport model GS turbo AWD. Test cars: well-equipped GS FWD with manual transmission, $41,415, loaded GS AWD automatic, $44,480.

What's new? Headlights, front fascia, interior, next-gen infotainment system, updated suite of electronic safety features.

What makes it go? Most models have 2-liter turbocharged four-cylinder rated 259 hp. Mileage choice is eAssist mild hybrid with 2.4-liter gasoline four-cylinder rated 182 horsepower and electric motor that can add 15 hp.

How big? A little bigger outside than Audi A4.

Passenger space, 96.8 cubic feet. Trunk, 14.2 cu. ft. (11.1 cu. ft. in eAssist hybrid).

How thirsty? 2-liter turbo rated 19 to 21 mpg in the city, 27 to 31 mpg on the highway, 23 or 24 mpg combined city/highway.

AWD test car got 14.9 mpg (6.71 gallons per 100 miles) in city/suburban driving, 24.9 mpg (4.02 gal./100 mi.) on highway. FWD test car with manual: 24.7 mpg (4.05 gal./100 mi.) in even mix of highway, city, suburbs. Regal eAssist not tested; is rated 25/36/29.

Overall: Lovely car, aggravating controls, disappointing mileage.

What stands out

Style: Nice shape, busy details.

Power: 2-liter turbo has plenty.

Controls: Aggravating.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1mWrtxW