Observers often paint Massachusetts, New York and California as the liberal leaders in the United States. However, in recent months, it is the Mountain West and Pacific Northwest that have spearheaded the most progressive drug reforms in the world. This year, Colorado and Washington began implementing the bulk of marijuana legalization policies that were passed through statewide referenda in 2012. These reforms, though not identical, allow individuals 21 and older to purchase marijuana for recreational and not simply medicinal purposes.

TBR Research presents insights and excerpts from peer-reviewed scholarship.

Such reforms, including the legalization of the possession, use, cultivation and processing of cannabis, were unprecedented. Not even Amsterdam’s lax laws rival the steps taken in these two states. While the moves make for intoxicating delight for some and pun-filled headlines for journalists, there is a serious question at the heart of such action: how well can a state implement a dramatic policy reform that has no comparable model anywhere in the world?

To address this question, I traveled to Colorado in May to examine implementation of legalization policy. In so doing, I interviewed numerous individuals involved in implementation, including the Gov. John Hickenlooper’s staff, leadership from the Colorado Department of Revenue (the agency that regulates marijuana) and officials from law enforcement and public health communities—groups often opposed to liberalized marijuana laws. In addition, I spoke with members of the industry, including individuals working at dispensaries and grow operations, as well as leaders from industry groups. The goal was to get a broad and balanced assessment of how implementation is proceeding, what is working and what is not.

COLORADO’S LEGALIZATION: A BRIEF HISTORY

Colorado approved medical marijuana in 2000 and began a system that ran into numerous problems due to loose regulation. In 2010, the state established the Medical Marijuana Enforcement Division in an effort to bring regulatory order to what was described as the “Wild West of weed.” Although such regulatory goals were admirable, the division did not achieve many of its goals, often facing funding challenges and enforcement limitations. “The voters have spoken, and we have to respect their will. This will be a complicated process, but we intend to follow through.” — Colorado Gov. John Hickenlooper, November 2012

In November 2012, Colorado voters passed Amendment 64, changing the Colorado Constitution to allow the cultivation, production, sale and possession of marijuana through state-approved enterprises (though counties and municipalities could opt out of legalization). It also allowed individuals to “homegrow,” whereby an adult could grow six marijuana plants, three of which could be budding (localities could not opt out of this, as it is a constitutional right).

The state began implementation of this new policy soon after its passage through actions from the governor, the state legislature and regulatory agencies. The governor established the Task Force on the Implementation of Amendment 64, which worked furiously in early 2013 to produce recommendations to the legislature before the close of its session in May. The legislature passed many of these recommendations into law, and the Department of Revenue began regulatory efforts under the new Marijuana Enforcement Division (MED), which would have regulatory authority over both the new recreational program and the existing medical program.

The effect was a cultivation system that was up and running for the production of recreational marijuana—product hit the shelves at recreational dispensaries by the intended date of Jan. 1, 2014.

HOW IS COLORADO DOING?

My research in Colorado led to a report titled, Colorado’s Rollout of Legal Marijuana is Succeeding: A Report on the State’s Implementation of Legalization. The paper details my findings and describes a metric by which implementation may be assessed.

One proponent of Amendment 64 praised the Hickenlooper administration for its “good-government approach.” What are the key elements to that approach? Effective leadership and commitment to good government

Inclusive planning with statewide taskforce

Competent management within and across bureaucracies

Effective communication and coordination, including the appointment of a “marijuana czar”

Flexible administration that adjusted to new policy feedback Read more about this approach in the author’s full report.

Overall, I found that Colorado has been quite successful in implementing Amendment 64. The state has met numerous and often rapidly approaching deadlines surrounding the production and sale of marijuana and the promulgation of regulations. It designed a system that was state-regulated but not state-run, allowing for a blend of heavy regulation and market forces to produce outcomes. Leadership in the state also helped. The governor, the state attorney general and others initially opposed Amendment 64, but after it passed, they made a commitment to successful implementation.

In addition, MED began re-staffing and selecting new leadership to spearhead the unprecedented regulatory efforts. The MED works closely with state government and stakeholders on both sides of the debate, often employing working groups whose members offer diverse perspectives when developing new or adjusting existing regulations.

Next, the governor—cognizant that marijuana policy would require substantial coordination and communication across and outside of state government—created a new position: Director of Marijuana Coordination. This position effectively functions as a marijuana czar.

The state produced regulations that sought to address critical concerns from the outset. Regulations limit minors’ access to marijuana, seek to prevent the diversion of product to the black market or to other states, work to remove the initial burden on the regulatory agency, improve safety at grow facilities and dispensaries, as well as work toward a host of other goals. What’s more, state officials do not see regulatory efforts as fixed. Instead, they are committed to engaging in regulatory lookback in order to ensure that regulations are adjusted when they are not functioning in the intended way or so they are responsive to changing political, social and/or policy environments.

Finally, the state set up a tax framework around recreational marijuana that sought rates that were low enough to avoid consumers staying in the black market yet high enough to provide funding for a variety of items. It includes funding for the Marijuana Enforcement Division so that the division does not need to depend on annual legislative appropriations to meet its needs. Tax revenue also funds items like school construction, addiction services, transportation and law enforcement.

While implementation has been broadly successful, challenges still exist. Marijuana edibles pose risks because of their potency, serving sizes and labeling issues. Those issues have led to over- or mistaken consumption. In addition, homegrows have presented challenges to public safety, particularly involving efforts to extract THC-rich oils from product. Finally, specific incentives involving differential tax rates between medical and recreational marijuana have generated unintended market outcomes. How the state responds to these challenges will have much to do with the future success of both implementation of the policy and the policy itself.

WHY IS IT SIGNIFICANT?

Colorado’s effort to implement legal marijuana was the first of its kind (Washington’s implementation process was slower). The progress and the success thus far shows that a system of legalized marijuana can be designed and rolled out in a smooth and orderly way, though much of that success depends on the personnel, institutions, expertise and political support surrounding the policy.

Skeptics argued that the unprecedented nature of the policy posed risks for implementation, and, in many ways, those skeptics’ fears were well placed. Implementation is difficult. There are plenty of high-profile examples—particularly at the federal level—of implementation failures, such as the relief efforts after Hurricane Katrina and the rollout of the Affordable Care Act’s federal exchange website. These failures materialized despite the federal government’s long experience with hurricanes and website rollouts. Colorado had no such experience or reference when establishing legal recreational marijuana, yet the state managed to get it done.

In many ways, what is happening in Colorado is a stark contrast from federal policymaking in Washington, D.C. Colorado shows what can happen when a policy’s opponents are willing to work with its proponents to generate better outcomes, rather than working to undermine implementation efforts. It shows what can happen when elected officials set aside their own opposition in order to respond to the public will. Finally, it shows what can happen when a government shows a commitment to implementation instead of a focus on political rhetoric and ploys. Marijuana legalization may anger a lot of officials in Washington, D.C., but when it comes to policy making, D.C. ought to experiment with what Colorado is doing.