The biggest surprise of the 2016 presidential campaign is, without a doubt, Donald Trump. One year ago, he was the star of a reality show with middling ratings. Today, he's leading the Republican presidential pack and is the odds-on favorite to be the GOP nominee.

But Trump's rise — and the angry, divisive, xenophobic campaign he is running — shouldn't be shocking at all. The clues to how he would run for President have been lying in plain view. Before this year, the billionaire developer had twice considered a presidential run. In 2000, he formed a presidential exploratory committee for a potential bid under the banner of the Reform Party created by Ross Perot five years earlier. In 2012, he briefly led in GOP polls before deciding not to get in the race.

Peddlers of conventional wisdom suggest he's been making up his campaign as he goes. They emphasize his previous donations to Democrats, the fact that he was a registered Democrat in the 2000s and his flip-flops on conventional litmus-test issues like gun control and abortion as proof of an opportunistic evolution.

But while it's true that Trump's policy positions have shifted, sometimes dramatically, his overarching rhetoric has been amazingly consistent for decades: an affection for authoritarianism, a fetishization of "strength," a tendency toward xenophobia and scapegoating and a commitment to "telling it like it is."

Back in 1990, Trump sat for an interview with Playboy magazine. It contains the usual braggadocio for which Trump is known. But when asked to talk about the world, Trump's language takes on a more aggressive — and familiar — tone.

"The Japanese cajole us, they bow to us, they tell us how great we are and then they pick our pockets. We're losing hundreds of billions of dollars a year while they laugh at our stupidity," Trump complained.

But Trump did have begrudging respect for Japan's leaders, since "they have totally outsmarted the American politician." These comments came at a time of rising concern about Japan's growing economic power, but they closely mirror what he says on the campaign trail today.

Listen to Trump for 10 minutes these days and you're likely to hear similar praise for the strength and cunning of America's neighbors, rivals and enemies: In Trump's mind, the leaders of Mexico, China and Iran routinely outsmart the idiots who run the United States of America.

Earlier this month, Trump said one has to give credit to North Korea's leader Kim Jong-Un for consolidating power and wiping out his potential rivals.

He said practically the same thing 25 years ago in offering praise to the Chinese government for the Tiananmen Square crackdown. "They were vicious, they were horrible," said Trump, "but they put it down with strength."

As to the Soviet Union, he ripped its leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, as "Not a firm enough hand." He has no such qualms about Vladimir Putin: "He's running his country and at least he's a leader, unlike what we have in this country," says Trump.

Though in 1990 Trump said that he would never run for President back, when asked what he would do if elected he was quite specific: "A toughness of attitude would prevail. I'd throw a tax on every Mercedes-Benz rolling into this country and on all Japanese products, and we'd have wonderful allies again." Sort of like building a wall and making Mexico pay for it, forcing Apple to make its products in America and slapping a 45% tariff on all imports from China.

Ten years later, when Trump started an exploratory committee to consider a presidential bid, his foreign policy rhetoric was unchanged.

Other "regimes are playing us for suckers," he said in his 2000 book, "The America We Deserve," which was a sort of political manifesto for his potential presidential bid. He portrayed China as a growing military threat to the United States and endorsed "The Coming Conflict with China," a controversial book 1997 book that posited war with China was inevitable.

But Trump went even further when it came to North Korea. He complained "Uncle Sam is a sap" for avoiding confrontation with the country then led by Kim Jong-Il over its nuclear program. Would he have been willing to bomb a nuclear reactor there? "You're damned right," Trump said.

According to Trump, "Few respect weakness. Ultimately we have to deal with hostile nations in the only language they know: unshrinking conviction and the military power to back it up if need be. When we are resolute (as Roosevelt and Reagan were) we win."

That militaristic swagger still animates Trump today, whether he's pledging to "bomb the s-t" out of ISIS and take its oil, as he also says the United States should have done after invading and occupying Iraq. For Trump, unless the United States is waging war and profiting directly from the exercise, he's not interested.

But it's on trade — and in xenophobic attacks on foreign regimes — where Trump's rhetoric has been most consistent. In 2000, he pledged, if elected, to also take on the position of U.S Trade Representative: "Our trading partners would have to sit across the table from Donald Trump and I guarantee you, the rip-off of the United States would end."

In an op-ed later that year explaining his decision not to run, trade was at the forefront of his message. He claimed that George W. Bush and Al Gore — both of whom supported NAFTA, the World Trade Organization and "current trade positions" — were "virtually indistinguishable." Trump complained that if not for apparently successful efforts to keep a Reform Party nominee out of the presidential debates, his argument that "America was being ripped off by our major trade partners … would have resonance."

Trump's focus on trade offered the opportunity to play up his business bonafides (America needs a "deal-maker" on foreign policy) while also making a play for working-class votes.

But there was another, darker side: It gave Trump an opportunity to scapegoat foreigners for America's economic problems.

In 2012 when Trump briefly considered a presidential run as a Republican, he embraced just such an approach. He accused China of "raping," "screwing" and "decimating" the United States. But they got away with it because their "leaders are smarter" than America's. In office, he said, he would tell China "you're either going to shape up or I'm going to tax you at 25% for all the products you send into this country." Sound familiar?

In another speech, he used a faux "Asian" accent to mock South Korea's attitude during trade talks with the United States, even as they relied on American military largesse for their security. In Trump's telling, OPEC nations are "laughing at us," and would raise oil prices to "suck the blood out of any [economic] recovery." Trump's solution: tell the Arab states, "You're not gonna raise that f---ing price, you understand me?'"

For a quarter century Trump has consistently voiced this kind of tough talk, macho posturing and harsh solutions to complex trade relationships.

And it wasn't just on foreign policy where Trump was so unforgiving.

In 2000, when Republicans like George W. Bush were talking about immigration reform and seeking to reach out to Hispanic voters, Trump's language was nearly as unsympathetic as it is today. "We must take care of our own people first," he wrote. "Our policy to people born elsewhere should be clear: Enter by the law, or leave."

On crime, he said America needed "a zero-tolerance policy toward anyone who is getting in the way of the safer America we all deserve," as he extolled the virtues of incarceration, capital punishment and the direct election of judges. He also called for forcing teenage mothers to "jump through some pretty small hoops" in order to receive "public assistance."

According to 1990 Trump, echoing a favorite line of George H.W. Bush, "if this country gets any kinder or gentler, it's literally going to cease to exist."

Yet, while Trump's rhetoric may seem consistent, his policy proposals are not. In fact, what is even more striking when looking back at Trump's political statements is how much he's shifted course over the years.

Now (Spencer Platt/Getty Images)

Back in 2000, Trump supported "a woman's right to choose" though he said he was "uncomfortable with the procedure." Today, he's "absolutely pro-life," with exceptions only for rape and incest or the life of the mother. Then, he criticized Republicans for "walk(ing) the NRA line and refus(ing) even limited restrictions" on guns like an assault weapons ban. Today, he's a strong supporter of gun rights.

Fifteen years ago, Trump proposed partial privatization of Social Security benefits; Today he's committed to preventing any cuts to the program. In 2000 he endorsed a one-time "14.25% tax on individuals and trusts with a net worth over $10 million" to pay off the national debt, cut taxes for working families and bolster the Social Security fund. Today, he's embraced conservative dogma and proposed a tax cut that would be huge boon to wealthy Americans.

This cycle, Trump has joined other Republicans in calling for the repeal of Obamacare; in 2000, he advocated, amazingly, for a modified single-payer plan that closely resembles Obamacare. In 2000, he made clear, "I hate intolerance and bigotry." Today, his campaign is predicated on the flagrant use of both.

What explains the reinvention? The statements from 16 years ago were made when Trump was running for the nomination of the Reform Party and he was trying to craft a more centrist political message that would appeal to both Democrats and Republicans. So straddling key social and economic issues made sense.

Today, in pursuit of the GOP nomination, it can hardly be a surprise that on conservative hot-button issues like, guns, abortion, taxes and health care, he's adopted the extreme positions that dominate the Republican party.

Unchanged, however, is the Trump affect and image. He believed back in 2000 that his "straight-shooting" and defense of the "American Dream" would appeal to ordinary people. "The working guy would elect me," Trump said 25 years ago, and it's clear that then as now he had a sense of how to reach them — by addressing not their hopes, but their fears.

He just needed to find the right year in which his message would most resonate - and at a moment of maximum political polarization and alienation, he's done just that

And in case one still imagines that Trump is making this up as he goes along, 15 years ago he evoked another Republican upstart, Wendell Willkie, a businessman who emerged from nowhere to win the 1940 Republican nomination. According to Trump, even though Willkie "was a millionaire businessman" he could relate to the "common man." He did so by criticizing Democrats and Republicans for "double talk, weasel words and evasion."

The "big media" of the day said Trump "found Willkie fascinating. Overnight he was a major contender for the presidency."

The question Trump asked then was "could it happen again?"

His answer, "I think so."

But then, you already knew that.

Cohen writes regularly on American politics and is the author of the forthcoming book: "American Maelstrom: The 1968 Election and The Politics of Division."