GLENDALE — We’ve all heard of Barbie, Star Wars and even Herman Munster. But what about McGregor, the Smoking Grandpa?

Joel Magee , better known as the Toy Scout, knows the stogie-puffing Scotsman well and paid $50 for a mint-condition McGregor in its original box.

It was one of dozens of deals Magee executed Saturday morning at the Denver Vintage Toy Buying Show in Glendale. The show, which runs from 9:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. at the Hampton Inn & Suites, continues through Tuesday.

One item Magee was unable to secure was a 19-inch-tall Shirley Temple doll in its original outfit. Magee’s offer of $250 was turned down by the doll’s owner.

“The few items that don’t sell? It’s usually an emotional attachment,” said Magee, who tours the country appraising and buying vintage toys. “I’m the middle guy. We restore these items and sell them to collectors.

That included a beat-up metal kitchen set with missing handles and an oven door that no longer closes that Magee purchased for $20.

Some people want nothing more than a chance to do some spring cleaning and pocket a bit of playing-around money while they are at it, Magee said.

Popular items this year are Star Wars memorabilia — the older stuff, mind you — and Masters of the Universe action figures.

“Our focus has been on the early Star Wars items from the 70s and 80s,” Magee said.

That meant a box of 1990s Star Wars and Star Trek toys brought in Saturday by Kathy Croom , of Bailey, wasn’t ripe enough to fetch a good price. Magee suggested she hang on to the items a few more years and try and sell them then.

Croom did manage to sell a 1960s Marx Streamline train set for $100 and a some old figurines from the 1920s that her 91-year-old father had passed down to her.

“We don’t have any space to display them and they’ve been sitting in boxes for years,” Croom said. “Nobody in the family is attached to them so there they go.”

As for the $200 she got for the entire loot?

“It was a lot more than we thought we would get,” Croom said.

John Aguilar: 303-954-1695, jaguilar@denverpost.com or twitter.com/abuvthefold

Denver Vintage Toy Buying Show

Hampton Inn & Suites, 4150 Kentucky Ave., Glendale. 9:30 a.m. – 5 p.m. through Tuesday.