The 18-year-old already long had been considered a hockey phenom, and he was about to play in Denver for the first time.

His name was Wayne Gretzky, and it was Dec. 21, 1979.

Gretzky and the Edmonton Oilers, in their first NHL season after they and three other World Hockey Association franchises joined the older league, met the Don Cherry-coached Colorado Rockies at McNichols Sports Arena.

Behind two goals from winger Ron De- lorme, the woebegone Rockies won 5-4. Gretzky, who began his pro career the previous season in the WHA, was limited to an assist, but it gave him at least one point in six consecutive games. The streak reached 12 games before he was kept off the scoresheet at Montreal on Jan. 7, 1980 — 19 days before his 19th birthday.

That was a little-noted run in what turned out to be the illustrious career of the NHL’s greatest player ever. Gretzky went on to win the Hart Trophy as the league’s MVP that season … and the next seven seasons too.

So if Avalanche forward Nathan MacKinnon last week seemed sheepish to be talking about equaling (at Chicago) then bettering (at Detroit) Gretzky’s previous league-best consecutive game point streak for an 18-year-old, it was understandable and also testament to his under-control ego. As his teammates teasingly called him or greeted him with “Gretzky!”, MacKinnon repeatedly acknowledged how “cool” it was to be mentioned with No. 99.

MacKinnon’s streak ended at 13 games Saturday, when he didn’t get a goal or an assist in the Avalanche’s 2-1 loss to St. Louis. But at least in one spot of the NHL’s archives, he always will be ahead of Gretzky.

“I never cared about the streak, I don’t think,” a somber MacKinnon said after Saturday’s game at the Pepsi Center. “It’s just a point streak. I want to help the team any way I can. I have to do a better job.”

Through 64 games, MacKinnon has 22 goals and 29 assists and is the runaway leader in NHL rookie scoring, making him the favorite to claim the Calder Trophy as the league’s rookie of the year. A natural center, he has been playing wing of late on the Paul Stastny-centered line. Stastny, who was 20 when he joined the Avalanche in 2006, has the franchise’s longest rookie scoring streak ever (20 games), and that’s still the longest in the NHL since 1998-99. Stastny played one shift Saturday before leaving with a back injury, and if he’s unavailable for any length of time, MacKinnon likely will be playing center.

At least at this point, it seems the Avalanche made the right move bypassing what would have been a popular choice — defenseman Seth Jones, the son of former Nuggets player Popeye Jones — and drafting MacKinnon with the No. 1 overall choice last June.

Crosby from Cole Harbour too

It also has been much noted that MacKinnon comes from Cole Harbour, the same Nova Scotia hometown as the NHL’s current top player, Pittsburgh Penguins center Sidney Crosby. But one of the overlooked aspects of his story is that Avalanche coach Patrick Roy, previously the part-owner, general manager and coach of major junior hockey’s Quebec Remparts, once before tried to land MacKinnon, but failed. This time, Roy wasn’t going to let MacKinnon get away.

Actually, city labels — whether in reference to Cole Harbour or other communities in the Halifax area — are tricky because of mergers into the Halifax Regional Municipality, but MacKinnon was raised in the Bel Ayr neighborhood and played in the Cole Harbour Bel Ayr Minor Hockey Association programs. He got Crosby’s autograph many times and had posters and pictures of Crosby playing at virtually every level. “When I get home, I’ll have to take that stuff down now. I think it’s time,” MacKinnon said recently.

In 2009, MacKinnon did what Crosby had done in 2002, leaving home to attend Shattuck-St. Mary’s School in Faribault, Minn. “I actually went a year earlier than he did to Shattuck,” MacKinnon said. “He played midget at 14 at home and then went to Shattuck at 15. I went to Shattuck at 14 and never played midget at home.”

MacKinnon stayed at Shattuck-St. Mary’s two years, playing for the school’s Bantam AAA and Midget AAA teams. “I loved it,” he said. “My first year was grade nine. Living in a dorm with a roommate was different. The best part was that everybody was together all the time. You lived with your friends, you ate with them, you went to school with them, you played hockey with them, and I got pretty close to them.”

“I was going to go to Omaha”

MacKinnon then was eligible for the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League draft. Playing junior hockey in the United States Hockey League instead would enable him to preserve his eligibility to receive a scholarship to play in an NCAA program. Or he could go to the QMJHL and major junior, where the stipends that players receive cause the NCAA to consider them professionals and ineligible to play U.S. college hockey.

He still was only 15 at the time, but prominent player agent Pat Brisson already was his “adviser.” Showily emphasizing his leverage, Mac- Kinnon skated with the Omaha Lancers of the USHL on the QMJHL draft day. The Lancers earlier had taken MacKinnon in the USHL draft.

Then he went to Baie-Comeau in the QMJHL draft. That city, about 250 miles northeast of Quebec City, is primarily French-speaking, and the team was terrible. “If Baie-Comeau wasn’t going to trade me, I was going to go to Omaha,” Mac- Kinnon said. “The owner is a good friend of my agent and it would have been a good situation for me. I was in Omaha, skating with the team, so I was serious about it. I had a blast there and I liked the city. I was all set to go there. I figured Baie-Comeau would trade me eventually, that it would be in everyone’s interests. If it would have been the next summer, I would have played a year in Omaha.”

If he had stayed in Omaha for two seasons, he at least would have kept open the option of NCAA hockey — beginning in, yes, the 2013-14 season. “I’d be in my first year in college this season,” MacKinnon said, smiling, “and I’d rather be in the NHL than college, that’s for sure.”

The MacKinnons had let it be known they would prefer that Baie-Comeau trade his rights to his hometown Halifax Mooseheads, but at least two other QMJHL teams would have been acceptable and were in the mix — the Saint John (New Brunswick) Seadogs and Roy’s Quebec Remparts. “It would have been funny if I’d played there and we came together here,” MacKinnon said. “But Patrick told me Baie-Comeau wouldn’t have traded me to Quebec.”

Roy said he asked Brisson if MacKinnon would be interested in possibly playing for Quebec. “He said yes and from there, I approached Baie-Comeau,” the Avalanche coach recalled.

How close did Roy come to acquiring MacKinnon’s rights back then?

“Not close at all,” Roy recalled. “I inquired, I checked, but I knew he was going to play (major junior) only two years. To pay as much as it would have been was too expensive. It would have been a lot of draft picks. I would have had to give too much in assets. We were in the process of rebuilding. There was no need for us to pay that much for Nate. It would have been nice to have Nate, but we would have had no defense and it would be a tough trade to make. Halifax was in a better position and it worked well for them and it worked well for Nate, because he was playing in his hometown. I knew he was going to be very special.”

Major scorer with Mooseheads

The Mooseheads acquired MacKinnon’s rights July 11, 2011, giving up two players and three first-round draft choices.

With the Mooseheads, MacKinnon was an immediate hit, getting his first hat trick against Roy’s Remparts. He played for Roy and the QMJHL all-stars in the Subway Super Series against Team Russia. “I enjoyed that,” Roy said. “He was asking me questions, what do you think of this, what do you think of that. We’ve talked about that and it makes him laugh more than me.”

In two seasons with the Mooseheads, often going against Roy’s Remparts, MacKinnon had 63 goals in 102 regular-season games and 24 in 17 playoff games.

His draft stock fluctuated during the 2012-13 season, and he slid from the top of most lists and fell below Jones when he had an unimpressive showing in the World Junior Championships and coped with a knee issue cleaned up in a minor procedure at The Steadman Clinic in Vail. But he closed with a rush, and the exclamation point came when he had a hat trick as the Mooseheads defeated Jones and Portland in the Memorial Cup championship game. The International Scouting Service put him back ahead of Jones on the draft list, while the NHL’s Central Scouting bureau still had Jones at the top.

The Avalanche, by then with Joe Sakic at the top of its hockey operations, along with Roy — also the team’s vice president of hockey operations — recalling what he had seen of MacKinnon for two seasons, took the speedy center.

And the rest is … well, most of the history remains to be written. But MacKinnon already has made a bit of it.

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com

Nathan mackinnon’s point streak

1, Jan. 25 at Tampa Bay ……..0 goals, 1 assist, 1 point

2, Jan. 27 at Dallas……………..1-0-1

3, Jan. 30 vs. Minnesota……….1-1-2

4, Feb. 1 vs. Buffalo…………….1-2-3

5, Feb. 3 at New Jersey………….0-1-1

6, Feb. 4 at NY Rangers………..0-1-1

7, Feb. 6 at Philadelphia………..1-0-1

8, Feb. 8 at NY Islanders……….1-0-1

9, Feb. 26 vs. Los Angeles……..0-1-1

10, Feb. 28 vs. Phoenix………….0-2-2

11, March 2 vs. Tampa Bay…….0-2-2

12, March 4 at Chicago………….0-1-1

13, March 6 at Detroit……………0-1-1