File photo of Sen. Ron Wyden (D-Ore.). Associated Press

Amid Washington’s usual gridlock, there are occasional moments of bipartisanship, such as when Sen. Ron Wyden (D., Ore.) recently joined with Senate Finance Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch (R., Utah) and House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Paul Ryan (R., Wis.) to introduce Trade Promotion Authority legislation.

The unusual political lineup has, on one side, Sens. Hatch and Wyden, Rep. Ryan, and President Barack Obama, with Democratic leaders Sen. Harry Reid (Nev.) and Rep. Nancy Pelosi (Calif.) on the other side.

The partnership on trade legislation is a powerful example of principled bipartisanship at work. Things that might have influenced Sen. Wyden, a longtime proponent of bipartisanship, include:

1. Wayne Morse. Mr. Morse served Oregon in the U.S. Senate first as a Republican (from 1944 to 1952), then as an independent (from 1952 to 1954), and finally as a Democrat (1955 to 1968). Party loyalty and going along were not his priorities. Mr. Morse was one of only two senators to oppose the Gulf of Tonkin resolution that expanded the U.S. involvement in Vietnam. He filibustered a separate bill for more than 22 hours. Mr. Morse was a principled maverick and proponent of bipartisanship, but his legislative accomplishments were less formidable. Ron Wyden was a driver in Mr. Morse’s final Senate campaign, and like Mr. Morse he has not been shy about taking on his party leadership. He joined Republican Sen. Rand Paul in a 2013 filibuster against the use of drones and was one of about two dozen senators to vote against the Iraq war.

2. Oregon’s congressional history. Oregon has put chairmen on the powerful Senate Finance Committee and the House Ways and Means Committee. Ways and Means Chairman Al Ullman (1974-81) was deeply involved in taxation and tax reform, though his support for a value-added tax contributed to his defeat in 1980. Senate Finance Committee Chairman Bob Packwood (1985-87), who beat out Wayne Morse for his Senate seat in 1968, exhibited some of his predecessor’s independence by opposing his Republican president’s Supreme Court nomination and breaking with his party on gun control and abortion. He was an architect of the bipartisan Tax Reform Act of 1986.

3. History with Paul Ryan. Mr. Wyden and Mr. Ryan are wonkish, passionate, and want to make this country a better place. One comes at that from a progressive view, the other from a conservative perspective. Mr. Wyden has said: “If you want to get something done in Washington, DC, it’s got to be bipartisan.” Mr. Ryan says that Mr. Wyden is a “man of principle” who “understands that true bipartisanship builds on the best ideas from both parties.” In years past, they worked together on health-care legislation.

Principled bipartisanship is what political leadership is meant to be. Mr. Wyden lines up with President Obama on immigration, LGBT rights, and the Affordable Care Act, but he isn’t afraid to stand with members of the GOP on other issues. Perhaps if more in Washington focused on enacting legislation, more bipartisan agreements could pave the way toward real progress on our country’s challenges.

Mark Bloomfield is president and CEO of the American Council for Capital Formation and co-authored “The Consumption Tax: A Better Alternative?” He is on Twitter: @MrCapitalGains.

ALSO IN THINK TANK:

Overhaul the Tax System Like It’s 1913

Enough Common Ground for Corporate Tax Reform in 2015

Paul Ryan Takes on Tax Reform

Could the Debacle Over Tax Extenders Kick-Start Tax Reform?