Prep coaches give CU high marks for in-state recruiting

When he was hired two years ago to rebuild the Colorado football program, coach Mike MacIntyre made it clear one of the cornerstones of that process would be getting the best recruits the state has to offer each year.

Much of the top talent in the state over the past five years has opted to leave Colorado in favor of playing elsewhere, including numerous prospects who have joined rival programs in the Pac-12 Conference.

But MacIntyre is making progress in rebuilding relationships with high school coaches in the state, some of which were frayed under former coaches Dan Hawkins and Jon Embree. Just this week, MacIntyre received a fourth commitment from an in-state prospect for the 2015 class when defensive lineman Frank Umu from Heritage High School in Littleton committed to wear black, silver and gold.

Umu's commitment gives MacIntyre pledges from three of the top-five prospects in the state with the other two committed to Nebraska.

"I feel like we're doing a good job of recruiting in the state of Colorado," MacIntyre said Monday at his final press conference of the season. "We're getting out everywhere, we've been to a bunch of games, we've been to a bunch of schools. We went out hard in May , we're out in schools today in Colorado. Last night, we were in homes in Colorado. So, there's a very big emphasis on that."

Advertisement

Not long after MacIntyre was hired, one of Colorado's most famous alumni, Denver Broncos radio play-by-play man Dave Logan, made it clear how much work there was to do and ground to be made up for CU's recruiting efforts in the state. Logan is a longtime prep football coach who recently won his seventh state championship in the state's largest classification. This one came at Logan's fourth school, Cherry Creek High School.

Logan told the Daily Camera in February 2013 that former coach Jon Embree had started to turn things around in recruiting in the state but that MacIntyre would still have a lot to do.

"You really have to work the state," he said. "You have to spend time in high schools. You have to develop a relationship with high school coaches. You've got to be visible, and too often that has not been the case of our in-state universities. So no disrespect to anybody who has been up there before, but I'm anxious to see if things are going to change as we move forward."

In discussing the struggles of the CU program on his afternoon radio show, Logan has since joined other area prep coaches in singing the praises of the efforts being made by MacIntyre and his staff to build relationships instead of trying to cherry-pick recruits late in the process.

Special teams coach Toby Neinas leads CU's in-state recruiting with help from others, including MacIntyre. There are several top in-state recruits who are pledged to programs outside the state once again this year, but CU obviously would like to change that before national signing day in February.

Top player

Valor Christian High School coach Rod Sherman has been in his job since 2007. He coaches some of the state's best players each year, including Eric Lee, a defensive back rated by Rivals.com as the best player in the state in this cycle and the 15th best defensive back in the nation.

Lee has deep family ties to the Nebraska program, and that played a big part in his decision to commit to the Huskers last February. But the recent coaching change at Nebraska and CU's persistent efforts have Lee at least considering an official visit to Boulder this month, Sherman said.

"Being an in-state coach, I actually think they take way too much heat for not doing a good job in-state," Sherman said of CU. "I believe he's going about it the right way. He's trying to build one relationship at a time. He's trying to let each kid and each program in the state know how important it is, and I think his strategy is different from the former staff of wanting to come in early on kids."

MacIntyre succeeded at San Jose State before coming to Colorado, in part, by outworking other coaches in that talent-rich state to find prospects Pac-12, Mountain West and Western Athletic Conference programs were overlooking. In three years he transformed that moribund program into one that was nationally ranked and a bowl game winner at the end of the 2012 season.

MacIntyre relies heavily on a philosophy of seeing prospects in person and being able to evaluate them as football players to the greatest extent possible and not just relying on film. They also rely heavily on insight from prep coaches.

Communication key

"There is a lot more communication, and I feel it's really genuine," Douglas County coach Gene Hill said. "Before it was, "Go ahead and come up here.' But then they would just put us in a room and not really talk to us. Where MacIntyre's staff, they do a good job of making sure we feel like they're actually there to help us. That's one of the things that I really appreciate."

While in-state recruiting is important for CU, MacIntyre will never build a championship-level program stocked with a high percentage of in-state players. Colorado generally produces five to 10 prospects with the skill to play for power-five programs each year. So CU will always have to recruit more populous states such as California and Texas.

Recruits in the state haven't grown up watching the Buffs compete for conference titles and appear in the national rankings the way they did a decade ago. The lack of success on the field in Boulder makes having a consistent presence and solid communication with prep programs vital to landing the state's best.

"He's a 10 out of 10 as far as recruiting in-state," Sherman said of MacIntyre. "His character, demeanor, openness to high school coaches, it's just exceptional. I don't know that I have enough strong superlatives to use to describe him. I think the whole coaching staff has been open. Coach Neinas recruits our area, and I can't imagine that he could do a better job recruiting us."

Kyle Ringo: ringok@dailycamera.com, twitter.com/kyleringo