The most renowned hospitals aren't being spared in the latest federal effort to force hospitals to eliminate preventable medical errors and complications.

Penn State Milton S. Hershey Medical Center and Geisinger Medical Center each were fined in the program, which penalizes hospitals for things ranging from blood-system infections to accidental cuts and tears during surgery to bed sores.

In the case of Geisinger, the fines will amount to $1.7 million as a result of poor scores at its main center in Danville and its Geisinger-Lewistown Hospital and Geisinger Wyoming Valley Medical Center.

The program is part of the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare. The other midstate hospitals that were fined are Memorial Hospital in York, St. Joseph Medical Center in Reading, Chambersburg Hospital and Ephrata Community Hospital, which is owned by York-based WellSpan Health.

Here is the full list of midstate scores and penalties.

All told, 39 hospitals in Pennsylvania and 721 hospitals across the country were fined, with the fines levied as 1 percent reductions in revenues from Medicare, the government program for seniors that makes up a huge portion of revenues at every hospital.

Called the Hospital-Acquired Condition Program, the program uses government-collected data to give hospitals a score of from one to 10, with a lower score being better. Hospitals that scored higher than seven were fined. The penalized hospitals comprise 25 percent of U.S. hospitals.

The fines are receiving special attention because some of the country's best-regarded hospitals, including more than half of teaching hospitals, received high scores and fines. These include the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, the Cleveland Clinic and Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.

Geisinger's main center received a score of 9.025. Dr. John Bulger, Geisinger's chief quality officer, said teaching hospitals such as Geisinger and Hershey are bound to have more complications because they treat the sickest patients and most complicated cases.

For example, he said those hospitals treat higher numbers of cancer patients who have had previous cancer surgery. Those patients are vulnerable to surgical punctures and cuts that are on the one hand expected, yet also are counted against the hospital, he said.

He further said bigger hospitals are more likely to have surveillance systems and electronic records that catch every infection, whereas smaller hospitals might lack the ability to catch and report each one.

However, Bulger acknowledged that preventable errors and complications are a national problem and didn't fault the program, although he said it requires refinement. He also said it's possible for a hospital to focus on getting a good score, yet not improve the actual care given to patients.

"It's important to focus on complications. This has made people do that," said Bulger, who noted Geisinger has already substantially reduced things such as infections related to central line catheters, which are a major problem nationally, and infections related to urinary catheters.

The scores and penalties are based on hospitalizations in 2012 and 2013. Two-thirds of a hospital's score is based on two measures: frequency of central line associated bloodstream infections and infections related to urinary catheters. The rest is based on frequency of these eight complications: collapsed lung resulting from treatment; blood clots in the lungs or a large vein after surgery; a wound that opens after surgery; accidental cuts or tears; bed sores; central line associated bloodstream infections; broken hips from falls after surgery; and bloodstream infections after surgery.

All of those things are considered preventable through strict adherence to hand-washing, sanitary procedures and best practices for caring for patients.

Penn State Hershey received a scored of 8.05 and received the penalty. Dr. Andrew Resnick, the chief quality officer, said in an email the grades are based on patients cared for in 2013 and further back, and would be more helpful to patients if they were based on more recent data.

He said Penn State Hershey reduced central line and urinary catheter related infections by 53 percent during a recent 12-month period, and recently was ranked in the top percent for safety by a consortium of academic medical centers. "We will continue to track a range of patient safety indicators, knowing we must do even better in the future," Resnick said.

Memorial Hospital in York scored 7.7 and was penalized. A spokesman noted in an emailed statement that York Memorial has been focused on reducing infections and other problems, and the hospital meets or exceeds national standards in some other measures. "Hospital committees focused on reducing healthcare-acquired infections regularly review outcomes and use evidence-based practice to develop new policies. Hourly nurse rounding and regular meetings are used to review current patient needs," the statement said in part.

WellSpan-owned Ephrata Communnity Hospital received a score of 8.35 and was penalized.

A statement from a WellSpan spokesman said in part, "This report indicates that we must continue to learn and improve – not just to avoid penalties but more importantly to provide the best possible care to our patients, consistently every day. We take the issue of hospital-acquired infections very seriously, and we continually assess data and processes to provide the safest, most effective care possible to our patients. That is why we have already begun implementing several process improvements to reduce infection rates. We have, for example, revised our processes to allow for more timely removal of certain catheters after surgery, and have seen positive results from those process improvements."

Chambersburg Hospital received a score of 7.25 and was penalized. So was Waynesboro Hospital, which is also located in Franklin County and also owned by Summit Health, and which received a score of 7.05.

A statement from Summit Health read in part, "We are focusing on the processes needed to achieve a rate of zero hospital-acquired infections. Since the outcome measures in this report, we have made improvements that further support our expectation of 100 percent safe care."

When preliminary fines were announced last summer, the Hospital & Healthsystem Association of Pennsylvania estimated fines against Pennsylvania hospitals would total about $19 million. This week, HAP criticized the program for assorted reasons, including the fact it penalizes the bottom 25 percent of hospitals even if they improve substantially but remain in the bottom quarter, and for "disproportionally" penalizing the hospitals which serve the sickest patients.

HAP said the government needs to come up with a better program which, as do some other government hospital improvement programs, rewards rather than penalizes hospitals for improving.

Kaiser Health News has reported extensively on the new program. Boston health researcher Dr. Eric Schneider told Kaiser there are numerous techniques that can reduce medical errors, but "there's a pretty strong sense among the experts we talked to that they are not widely implemented."

The Hospital-Acquired Condition program is one of an expanding group of programs under which the federal government is penalizing or refusing to pay hospitals for things such as medical mistakes and infections and when hospital patients have to be readmitted.