On his first official foray into Central Florida as a presidential candidate, Jeb Bush called Monday for debt relief for Puerto Rico, while declaring himself the positive Republican choice for the nation's top job.

Speaking to about 75 mostly Puerto Rican religious leaders in east Orange County, Florida's former governor said the island's financial crisis must be addressed.

"I think we ought to have structured recasting of their debt and structured recasting of their social obligations," Bush said.

Asked whether that would include the prospect of bankruptcy, a legal option Puerto Rico does not currently have, Bush replied, "If it is a way to get out of the spiral they have — yeah, yeah, I would support that."

Bush made three stops in a campaign tour of Central Florida. He went from the meet-and-greet in east Orange to a town-hall meeting with small-business owners in Longwood and later a rally in Maitland.

In various speeches throughout the day, Bush said he wanted to repeal the Affordable Care Act to help small businesses and declared his opposition to the new Iran and Cuba deals, calling the Iran deal "horrific."

He embraced school choice and creating a path to legalized status for most of the United States' 11 million illegal immigrants and vowed tax and regulatory reforms that he said would lead to 4 percent annual growth. He also offered assurances he would offer protection worldwide against persecution of Christians.

On Puerto Rico, he noted that he has worked on the island and visited often. Bush said he supports statehood but said the financial crisis must be solved first.

Florida is home to an estimated 900,000 Puerto Ricans, and about a third of them live in Central Florida. That makes the Puerto Rican vote valuable to any candidate who wants to win the region, considered crucial to any candidate seeking to carry Florida.

Bush also called for campaign and government civility and said he refused to speak ill of his opponents. He even deflected questions that gave him opportunities to respond to criticism from the GOP front-runner Donald Trump.

He vowed his campaign would focus on the positive.

"I'm a committed conservative. But I'm not angry. I believe we're on the verge of the greatest time to be alive," he said.

But he did strongly criticize the policies of both President Barack Obama and Democratic front-runner Hillary Clinton.

"Mrs. Clinton is running for a third term of economic policy that has failed this country," Bush said in Maitland. "Today she is advocating higher taxes. … People are stuck in jobs because they fear that they may lose their health-care insurance, and that's why we have this kind of tepid economic growth.''

Democrats were quick to poke him back. His tour of Central Florida had been billed as a Hispanic campaign event, though Hispanic supporters were a small minority at the Maitland stop.

"Bush's failed policies will devastate Hispanic communities," said Pablo Manriquez, the Democratic National Committee's director of Hispanic media. He cited Bush's opposition to a minimum-wage increase, to the Affordable Care Act and, as governor, to Florida's class-size reduction initiative.

Bush offered his pledge for comprehensive immigration reform at every stop, garnering different reactions. His proposal drew warm applause in east Orange and applause in Longwood, but complete silence in Maitland, even though the Maitland crowd of about 150 had been the rowdiest of all during other parts of his speech.

In east Orange, in answering a question, he declared, "We need to have a path to legal status for the 11 million people here. It's the logical thing when you think about it, because what else would you do?

"The idea of self-deportation or the idea of rounding people up is not an American value," he said.

Bush picked up endorsements from former U.S. Sen. Mel Martinez, state Rep. Bob Cortes of Longwood and Orange County Mayor Teresa Jacobs, who said she had not endorsed any major-office candidate since Martinez ran in 2004.

"I got to see firsthand how Governor Bush led our state with integrity and put in place conservative policies that really made a difference for Florida families," Jacobs said.

smpowers@tribune.com or 407-420-5441