Boulder Bach Festival music director Zachary Carrettin is including his trio, Aeris, this year as a way to "expand the festival's breadth." ( Courtesy photo )

Boulder Bach Festival fall events • Collaborative concert with Greater Boulder Youth Orchestras When: 4 p.m. Saturday, Sept. 27 Where: First United Methodist Church, 1421 Spruce St., Boulder Tickets: $10 Info: 720-891-2259 or greaterboulderyo.org. • Aeris "Capriccio": 17th and 18th century violin and cello sonatas by Italian composers and J.S. Bach When/where: 7:30 p.m. Oct. 16, St. John's Episcopal Church, 1419 Pine St., Boulder; 7:30 p.m. Oct. 17, St. John's Cathedral, 1350 Washington St., Denver; 7:30 p.m. Oct. 18, First Lutheran Church, 803 3rd Ave., Longmont Tickets: $30 ($28 senior, $10 student). Info: 303-444-7328 (Dairy Center box office) or boulderbachfestival.org

Zachary Carrettin has planted roots in Boulder.

The Boulder Bach Festival music director and his wife, pianist Mina Gajic, officially completed their move from Texas this month.

"It opens up so many possibilities for the festival, and with me here full time, the potential for growth and collaboration in the community is enhanced," said Carrettin, a virtuoso violinist whose work with the festival began as its concertmaster. He was offered a three-year contract to move to Boulder and to make the festival his primary work and activity.

Two things made Carrettin's decision easier.

An anonymous donor who wanted Carrettin in the role helped fund the family's move, Carrettin said, and the Bach Festival is "flexible, letting me play with my trio across the country (New York, Indiana and California)."

He added: "I am 100 percent committed to what we are trying to do with the expansion into a full-on series of chamber music concerts and larger events featuring the music of J.S. Bach."

In recent years, the festival has expanded from an isolated, weeklong event early in the year to a full season whose 2014-15 offerings stretch from September to June. These include a new experimental series called COMPASS, with two events in February and March, the main event — a performance of Bach's B-minor Mass in February — and a duo recital with Carrettin and Gajic in June.

Carrettin's residency and the season will kick off with two fall programs. The opener is Saturday, Sept. 27, at Boulder's First United Methodist Church, where the Bach Festival chorus joins the four ensembles of the Greater Boulder Youth Orchestras. This community collaboration will be directed by Carrettin and GBYO artistic director and conductor Gary Lewis (who also serves as conductor of the University of Colorado orchestras).

All four GBYO ensembles will perform. The two younger groups and the wind ensemble play arrangements and movements from Bach and Handel. With the most advanced group, Carrettin will play Vivaldi's violin concerto called "Il Grosso Mogul." The concert culminates with that group performing three movements from Vivaldi's "Gloria" along with the Bach Festival chorus.

The festival's own major opening event comes in October with a program, titled "Capriccio," performed by Carrettin's trio, Aeris. The concert plays Oct. 16 in Boulder at St. John's Episcopal Church (the date was changed from the original Oct. 19), Oct. 17 in Denver and Oct. 18 in Longmont. Carrettin is joined in Aeris by cellist William Skeen and harpsichordist Avi Stein. Stein also plays a five-string baroque cello, Carrettin said.

"I'm so blessed in life to work with these guys," he said. "They are exceptional and visionary artists, and they make me play better.

"We focus on 17th and 18th century Italian repertoire," he continued, noting the huge wealth of great sonatas from those two centuries.

The October program includes sonatas by six Italian composers from the period, including Vivaldi, along with a sonata by Bach in the Italian style. These are solo sonatas for violin or cello with "basso continuo" accompaniment from the harpsichord. The cello joins the bass line of that accompaniment in the violin sonatas.

"The Italian violinists were overnight successes across Europe: in Dresden, Amsterdam, London, and Paris," Carrettin said. "The school of violin playing in Italy was really something spectacular."

Carrettin said that Francesco Maria Veracini, whose G-minor sonata opens the program, impressed the great Giuseppe Tartini so much that the latter practiced bowing technique after hearing Veracini.

Sonatas by Alessandro Stradella, Giuseppe Valentini, and Pietro Antonio Locatelli also are on the program, as is a piece by Nicola Matteis that Carrettin described as "absolutely beautiful."

"It's a series of variations over a ground bass that explores a new style of ornamentation and embellishment for violinists," he said.

Carrettin also emphasized the improvisational nature of this music.

"In these sonatas, it was expected that violinists would express themselves freely, taking liberties with their own published notation."

Aeris performs in the spirit of that tradition.

"Bill, Avi, and I are in the same space, and we read each other's minds," Carrettin said, "and our improvisation is our own, informed by a study of the music."

The works by the most familiar composers are a cello sonata by Vivaldi (RV 46) and the "highly unusual" E-minor sonata, BWV 1023, by Bach.

"It's really unlike any other Bach sonata," Carrettin said, "and it sounds like it was written by an Italian."

The the idea of such a concert, Carrettin said, is to show how the older composers contributed to the later styles of Bach and Vivaldi:

"This type of concert is how I want to expand the festival's breadth."