Governor Christie, who so far has refused to say how he would approach immigration, is supporting a lawsuit aimed at preventing the start of programs that would shield from deportation millions of immigrants living in the country illegally.

AP FILE PHOTO Gov. Chris Christie

Christie has repeatedly criticized President Obama for failing to enforce existing laws and blamed Congress for not fixing what he said is a broken system. Meanwhile, he has, at times, courted Latinos to garner support, quietly signing the Dream Act — granting in-state tuition rates for immigrants here illegally and endorsing an expanded guest-worker program.

The “friend of the court” brief was filed Monday in the 5th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals by the Republican governors of Texas, South Dakota, Louisiana and New Jersey, who say the injunction prevents their respective states’ executive branches from “irreparable injuries.” The filing also rebuts an amicus brief filed in January by Washington State on behalf of 13 states supporting the executive actions.

“The question presented is whether the president can unilaterally legalize the presence of millions of people and unilaterally give them myriad legal benefits, including work permits, Medi­care, Social Security and tax credits,’’ the document reads.

Kevin Roberts, a spokesman for Christie, declined to comment on the brief.

The move marks a swing to the right for Christie, who hadn’t joined other Republican governors in challenging the president’s health care reforms.

Christie has called the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, a “failed program,” but it has helped New Jersey financially. Christie agreed to expand Medicaid, a health care coverage program for the poor that is the cornerstone of Obamacare, in 2013 because it brought more federal funds to the state. Increases in the number of uninsured in the program — nearly 400,000 people — coupled with the more than 250,000 state residents who purchase insurance through the new federal marketplace has allowed the state to cut the amount of aid it sends to hospitals for treating the uninsured.

Monday’s immigration filing was strongly criticized by advocates in the state who said the governor was using the issue to gain Republican support for his possible presidential run in 2016 at the expense of about 525,000 undocumented immigrants who live in the Garden State. Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal is also weighing a run for the GOP presidential nomination.

“The political timing seems very convenient for Governor Christie,” said Ana Bonilla, a member of the New Jersey Youth for Immigrant Liberation, who also organized and advocated for the In-State Tuition bill which was signed in December 2013. “Back in 2013, when he was running for his reelection in a blue state, he supported immigrant youth, and now that he will be seeking the Republican nomination, he is throwing our immigrant community under the bus.”

In November, Obama announced the executive actions that would have allowed more immigrants who live in the country illegally to remain without fear of deportation, including those brought to the country as children, and parents of U.S. citizens.

Weeks later, a coalition of states, which now numbers 26, filed a federal lawsuit to stop him. In February, a federal judge temporarily blocked its implementation. The Obama administration appealed and filed an emergency stay to allow applicants who could qualify for the immigrant programs to register while the lawsuit proceeds.

The brief filed this week also opposes the stay.

The deferred action programs could benefit an estimated 149,000 immigrants in New Jersey, according to the Migration Policy Institute, and boost the state’s economy by $2.9 billion, according to the White House Council of Economic Advisers.

“This impractical position will only harm New Jersey and its economy by preventing these residents from stepping out of the shadows,’’ said Gordon MacInnes, president of New Jersey Policy Perspective.

Gayle Kesselman, co-chairwoman of New Jersey Citizens for Immigration Control, lauded Christie for “standing up for the rule of law.”

“This is really good news, it shows that he is a man of principle,” she said. “I know he is going to take a lot of heat for this from groups in the community, but I think he is going to get a lot of support from the ordinary working Joe who is tired of paying taxes to provide benefits and give jobs to those who are not supposed to be in our country.”