5 Not-So-Obvious Candidates Who Should Drop Out

From our friends at hypeline.org

Thomas Hern

1) Jeb Bush

When Jeb Bush announced his run for the presidency he was the unanimous front runner. Thus far Bush has been able to raise a substantial amount of money and has a PAC supporting him with over 100 million dollars, giving him the most money to spend out of all Republicans running. Still Jeb Bush’s campaign has been one mistake after another, and he has failed to maintain his front runner status. Unless Bush can turn his campaign around, and quickly, it is time for Jeb to move on.

2) Chris Christie

In 2012 Chris Christie decided not to run for president, even though he would have been the immediate front runner. In 2016 Christie is falling behind the in the polls and was just recently demoted to the “JV” debate. Due to the “Bridgegate” scandal and an incredibly crowded field, Christie is struggling to raise money and his poll numbers. Soon it will be time for Christie to end his lackluster campaign.

3) Mike Huckabee

Mike Huckabee had great success in 2008, even winning Iowa. In 2016 Huckabee isn’t even polling in the top five in Iowa, a state which ideologically couldn’t be a better fit for Huckabee. Huckabee is struggling heavily to gain any press or recognition, and failed to qualify for the last primetime debate. Huckabee’s next step should be ending his run for president.

4) Carly Fiorina

Carly’s campaign started off with several terrific debate performances and punch lines. After the 2nd GOP debate on CNN, Carly appeared to be on her way to stardom. However as time has passed, she continues to use the same one liners and her lack of experience in foreign policy has hurt her poll numbers tremendously. As entertaining as a Carly vs Hillary debate would be, it has become very clear it will not occur. Fiorina would make a very strong Vice President, but it is time for her to end her run at being President.

5) Ted Cruz

Perhaps the least obvious candidate on this list, Ted Cruz is climbing in the polls and continues to raise enough money to run a top notch grassroots campaign. Sadly for Cruz his platform will only take him so far, in a general election against Hillary Clinton, Cruz is losing in almost every single poll. If Cruz cannot win the general election, then what is the point in him running for the nomination? If Cruz honestly wanted to be the President of United States he would not have taken countless partisan stances on issues Independents will never support. It is time for Ted Cruz to end his campaign and continue to work towards limited government as a U.S. Senator.

Follow the author on Twitter: @thomashern4

Read more at hypeline.org