Troy Tulowitzki showed up at Yankee Stadium on Sunday to watch the New York-Toronto game. And the sky started falling with speculation.

The Rockies’ all-star shortstop is on the East Coast to visit with Dr. William Meyers, a surgeon who specializes in sports injuries, in Philadelphia.

And Tulo’s visit to Yankee Stadium was only that, he said — a visit.

“It’s a short drive from Philly. I’m with my family. I wanted to see (Derek) Jeter play one more time,” Tulowitzki told The Denver Post.

A Tulowitzki trade is not imminent, to the Yankees or otherwise, a major-league source confirmed.

Tulowitzki, who is on the Rockies’ 15-day disabled list with a high thigh injury (technically a left hip-flexor strain), on Saturday night flew to Philadelphia for a consultation with the doctor who performed his sports hernia surgery in 2012.

On Monday, Tulowitzki will receive “dry needling” therapy on his leg, Rockies head athletic trainer Keith Dugger said. The procedure is meant to increase blood flow to an injured muscle.

“It’s not very invasive,” Dugger said. “We do it all the time here, and he’s had it done before.”

But Tulowitzki’s appearance at Yankee Stadium, one day after the Rockies’ misspelled “Tulowizki” jersey giveaway at Coors Field, only fueled the Tulo trade rumors.

The New York Post last week reported the Mets had contacted the Rockies about trade possibilities.

Tulowitzki is eligible to return off the DL on Aug. 5.

In 2012, Tulowitzki played just 47 games in part because of the sports hernia surgery. Meyers removed scar tissue that was irritating a nerve in his groin.

Tulowitzki’s high thigh strain is not the same injury, but the muscles involved are in the same area. And it’s possible Tulowitzki was overcompensating and stressing a hip flexor because of the 2012 injury.

Tulowitzki, by the way, showed up in the Bronx with a T-shirt that read at the top “There’s Always Money…” Stop reading into it. It ends with “In Banana Stands.” It’s an Arrested Development reference.