The family's search for Jaray Wilson continues unabated. They launch balloons each month for Jaray on the day of her disappearance. The family opted not to do the same for her 17th birthday, which would have been today.

Jaray Wilson's family has been trying to shine the national spotlight on their daughter and her disappearance from the very beginning.

Jaray's aunt, Ronette Thiessen, speaks for the whole family when she says they've been praying for a break in Jaray's missing person case.

"It's hard to go day to day not seeing her," Thiessen said, "not knowing if she is okay."

The family's search for Jaray continues unabated. They launch balloons each month for Jaray on the day of her disappearance. The family opted not to do the same for her 17th birthday, which would have been today.

"We thought she would be home way before now," Thiessen explained. "We never expected it to be almost 11 months."

11/12/2012 Related Story: Family Of Missing Weatherford Teen Starts Petition For ‘Jaray Alert'

The 16-year-old disappeared from Weatherford on Oct. 15, 2012. At that time, investigators believed Jaray might have been sold into human trafficking.

T-shirts, posters, and websites are still generating tips about the teenager's disappearance, and the state's human trafficking unit considers it an active, ongoing case. And now, the search for Jaray is about to get national attention.

"We're trying to figure out ways to keep the word out there, to keep it alive in the public, to let people know Jaray is still missing and we are still searching," Thiessen told us.

1/14/2013 Related Story: Search Continues For Weatherford Teen Who Went Missing 3 Months Ago

What they consider a birthday gift, on Jaray's birthday, is a special trip. The Wilsons were flown to NYC to meet with John Walsh to tape a segment on missing children for Katie Couric's talk show.

"The further we can reach it, the better to get her picture, the name, her message out there," said Thiessen.

News 9 will keep you posted on when the segment is expected to air.

10/2/2012 Related Story: Search For Missing Weatherford Teen Expands To OKC