Reprinted from SPECIALTY PHARMACY NEWS , a monthly newsletter designed to help health plans, PBMs, providers and employers contain costs and improve outcomes related to high-cost specialty products. Sign up for an $84 two-month trial subscription today .

After the FDA approved the first biosimilar, Sandoz Inc.’s Zarxio (filgrastim-sndz), last March, many industry experts believed the experience would help the agency work through any potential issues with approving these drugs. But even though the agency has accepted applications for other drugs seeking to come onto the U.S. market through the 351(k) pathway, it has yet to actually approve any other ones. While many payers are planning their management strategies for these drugs, one industry expert questions the FDA’s subsequent lack of action — and wonders if this is a sign that biosimilars are one and done in the United States.

When the Biologics Price Competition and Innovation Act passed as part of the Affordable Care Act in 2010, the BPCIA was fairly short on details surrounding the actual biosimilar pathway. Since that time, the FDA has issued various draft and final guidance documents on different aspects of the drugs, with the most recent guidance addressing the long-anticipated naming of biosimilars (SPN 9/15, p. 1).

Some experts have pointed to this uncertainty as a main contributor to the agency’s inaction on biosimilars. However, at a December 2014 conference, Sally Howard, deputy commissioner for policy, planning and legislation for the FDA, said that the six draft guidances the agency had released up to that point should help “the industry to understand the data they’ll need to submit to demonstrate biosimilarity.” The agency, she said, was of the opinion that “no additional guidance is needed before a product [can be] approved” (SPN 12/14, p. 1). The fact that the FDA is in discussion with multiple manufacturers about their potential biosimilars would seem to support this view (see story, p. 1).

Cause of Delays Is Unclear

So what’s the holdup?

Celltrion, Inc. said in August 2014 that it had completed the filing process for Remsima, a biosimilar version of Remicade (infliximab). But in February 2015, the FDA postponed a scheduled March advisory committee meeting “due to information requests” (SPN 3/15, p. 8). More than 50 countries have approved the product, with European approval coming in September 2013 (SPN 10/13, p. 5). Celltrion said it had worked with the FDA to conduct clinical trials that would determine Remsima’s bioequivalency to Remicade, including bridging studies that accounted for the almost 40 manufacturing changes that the reference product has undergone since its approval (SPN 3/15, p. 1).

And in late 2014, Hospira, Inc. submitted an application for Retacrit, a biosimilar version of epoetin alfa, which is sold in the U.S. as Epogen and Procrit. Pfizer Inc. acquired Hospira in September, and in its third-quarter 2015 earnings call on Oct. 27, Pfizer CEO and Chairman Ian Read said the FDA had issued a complete response letter on the application. “At this time we do not believe any further clinical trials are needed,” he said. “We are confident that the additional evidence we provide will support approval.”

Asked about the status of biosimilar applications that the FDA has accepted for review, including those that have passed the 10-month mark without a decision, a spokesperson for the agency’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research says, “Federal law prohibits us from disclosing information about an existing or potential application. That information is confidential and belongs to the sponsor.”

Retacrit was approved in Europe in 2007 and has “a gazillion patient days of treatment,” points out an industry expert who declines to be identified. The fact that “the FDA doesn’t want more clinical data…is a problem.” After all, the agency has approved large molecule follow-on biologics such as Omnitrope (somatropin) and more recently Basaglar (insulin glargine) under the 505(b)(2) pathway of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic (FD&C) Act. Both those therapies have been approved as biosimilars in Europe.

The source tells SPN that because of the FDA’s inaction on biosimilars after the Zarxio approval, that the 351(k) pathway is “missing and presumed dead” and adds that it seems presumable that the agency may not ever approve any other products through the 351(k) pathway — although it likely will continue to approve biologic drugs through other pathways that for all intents and purposes are biosimilars. When SPN asked for a comment on this, an FDA spokesperson pointed to the activity within its Biosimilar Product Development Program.

“The science is there. The issues are not scientific,” says the source. “In the 505 context,…the FDA is making decisions on the same scientific questions” it’s facing with 351(k) applications. But with the 505 pathway, the FDA doesn’t “feel quite the political heat” that it does with the newer 351(k) pathway, speculates the source. The BPCIA has a transition period that will shift proteins approved under the FD&C Act to the 351(k) route. But even when the agency unveiled its proposed naming strategy for biosimilars last August, it said it was unsure how it would handle naming of 505 therapies when they transitioned to BPCIA oversight.

The FDA also has approved generic enoxaparin, reference drug Lovenox, through the traditional generic route of an abbreviated New Drug Application even though it’s a large-molecule biologic (SPN 1/12, p. 1). “Enoxaparin is standing out like a flaming beacon,” maintains the source.

“Exclusivity is not the issue,” the source asserts, noting that “patents are always a bit of a morass.”

“If you look at all this, it’s a perfect storm created by the inability to answer these questions,” says the source, who wonders why the agency has not released guidance on interchangeability. “FDA’s caution is almost a move backwards.”

But with so much backlash over drug prices, which biosimilars are expected to help bring down, “this has got to come into the pricing debate at a political level,” says the source.

“We’re in for some interesting times” with the “missing and presumed dead” pathway. “At what point do we say it’s a problem?”

© 2016 by Atlantic Information Services, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

AIS's Health Business Daily is a free email newsletter with original content from AIS editors. Read more stories featured in recent issues of AIS's Health Business Daily.

At The AIS Marketplace — Specialty Pharmacy Trends and Strategies covers the most relevant topics in the specialty pharmacy arena, with details on the latest trends in: hepatitis C management; the medical benefit and site-of-care strategies; cost-control tactics such as formulary exclusions and copayments; oncology management; biosimilars; designing commercial health plans’ specialty benefits; the specialty pharmacy pipeline and other new products; and more. Click here for more information and to order the latest edition today!