Longmont native Julie Albers will make her debut with the Colorado Music Festival this week. ( Courtesy photo )

If you go What: Colorado Music Festival: Week 3 • Tuesday, July 14: Part I — Complete Bach Suites for Cello, 4 and 8 p.m., First Congregational Church, 1128 Pine St., Boulder • Thursday, July 16-Friday, July 17: Part II — "Impossible Dreams" with Desmond Hoebig, 7:30 p.m. Pre-concert talk with Kelly Dean Hansen, Daily Camera Classical Music Writer, 6:30 p.m. Thursday. • Saturday, July 18: Part III — Complete Beethoven Cello Sonatas, 4 and 8 p.m., First Congregational Church • Sunday, July 19: Part IV — "Classically Cello" with Julie Albers, 7:30 p.m. Where: Unless noted, events at Chautauqua Auditorium, 900 Baseline Road, Boulder Tickets: $12-$54 for Thursday-Friday and Sunday; $30 for Tuesday and Saturday (admission includes both 4 and 8 p.m. performances). Info: 303-440-7666 or comusic.org

The mini-festival lives!

The concept, introduced at the Colorado Music Festival in 2008 by then-music director Michael Christie, was one of his most popular ideas.

It was imperative to his successor, Jean-Marie Zeitouni, to retain the mini-festival (after last year's absence because of the conductor search), although the format will be quite different.

Christie's mini-festivals included as many as five orchestra concerts; this year there will be only two. But the CMF's expanded chamber music series provided an entry point for two additional events, which could be described as "super-recitals."

Zeitouni said the idea came to devote a week to the cello, noting that new executive director Andrew Bradford is a cellist.

"At first, I thought big," Zeitouni said. "I thought of seminars and master classes and many other things, but in the end, it is my first year, and in the context of the festival, I cut back on those ideas."

But the big thinking is manifest in the two chamber music events at First Congregational Church.

"The Bach solo cello suites were an obvious choice," Zeitouni said. "We decided rather than doing a selection, we would do all six of them and make it a double concert. It followed from there to do the same thing with the five Beethoven sonatas for cello and piano. These exaggerated programs fit in well with the expansion of chamber music and giving our musicians a platform."

The CMF also will provide a platform this week for a prominent cellist with local ties. The chamber orchestra concert on Sunday, July 19, will feature Julie Albers, a Longmont native making her debut with the festival.

But first come the Bach programs, at 4 and 8 p.m. Tuesday with a two-hour dinner break between them. The Beethoven marathon is at the same times Saturday.

Principal cellist Bjorn Ranheim, who plays three of the Bach suites (Nos. 1, 3, and 5 at 4 p.m..), said the suites are "the best music written for the instrument." He said that while he will play with a modern approach, colleague Guy Fishman, who specializes in baroque cello, will present a more historically informed reading of Nos. 2, 4, and 6 at 8 p.m.

Regarding the Beethoven sonatas on Saturday, Ranheim said that although they are landmark compositions for cello, the piano parts are a focal point. Vivienne Spy takes on the daunting task of playing the part for all five works. Morgen Johnson, Aaron Merritt and assistant principal Greg Sauer divide the cello duties. Nos. 1, 2, and 5 are at 4 p.m., Nos. 3 and 4 at 8.

Desmond Hoebig did not hesitate when asked to perform with the Colorado Music Festival. (Courtesy photo)

With cellists also performing on other chamber music programs, Ranheim said, almost the entire section gets the opportunity this year.

"We love the chance to get to know the audience on a more individual and intimate level that isn't possible in the full orchestra, and I think the audience loves that chance as well," Ranheim said.

For the two orchestra concerts of the "Cellobration," Zeitouni didn't go the obvious route with the Dvorák, Elgar or Schumann concertos. Indeed, one of the two guest cellists is not playing a concerto at all but, rather, the gigantic cello solo part in the tone poem "Don Quixote" by Richard Strauss.

The part was meant for the orchestra's principal cellist, but Zeitouni said that "for difficulty reasons, solo cellists wanted to appropriate the piece for guest appearances."

It is done both ways, often serving for an orchestra to showcase a new principal cellist.

With Ranheim occupied by Bach, Houston-based Desmond Hoebig joins the full festival orchestra Thursday and Friday. Hoebig, who spends much of the summer in residency with the Aspen Music Festival, comes to Boulder for the first time.

"When I was asked to come play this wonderful work, I said yes instantly," Hoebig told the Camera.

In the tone poem, a loose set of variations on a theme "of knightly character," the solo cello represents the titular figure.

"Strauss writes a sensational part with so many emotions," Hoebig said. "You have a raw connection with this individual and so much freedom for solo display. There are more flights of fancy and abrupt changes than you get with a traditional concerto.

"I love to play to an actual personality and to reflect the Don's chivalry, romance and passion," he continued. "He is a fool sometimes, of course, but at other times he has incredible depths of meaning, and I actually get to die at the end."

Zeitouni agreed with Hoebig that it is every bit as challenging for the soloist as a major concerto, with more integration into a very large orchestra. He pairs it with Wagner's Prelude to "Tristan and Isolde" and Prokofiev's second suite from the ballet "Romeo and Juliet."

"I wanted to create a program of 'Impossible Dreams,' where heroic figures cannot accomplish what they should," Zeitoiuni said of joining the Don with the two tragic sets of lovers. He noted that the "Tristan" prelude begins with a cello line.

Albers, who grew up in Longmont and attended Longmont High School, recently was appointed principal cellist for the great St. Paul Chamber Orchestra. She plays Joseph Haydn's Cello Concerto in D major, one of the few from the classical era.

Albers spoke with the Camera about her career and opportunities, giving the credit to "amazing" parents and teachers.

"At some point," she said, "it just becomes part of your life, and you don't think twice about the work and the discipline. There's luck involved too, along with incredible guidance.

"The cello is the closest instrument to the human voice. It has a range of color that really connects to the listener. It's one of the most versatile of all instruments with the most pure, beautiful tone. I was so fortunate that circumstance and encouragement led me to this instrument that I love."

Mozart's overture to "The Marriage of Figaro," another piece that begins with a famous cello line, starts the concert, and Bach's Brandenburg Concerto No. 3, which has three solo cello parts, opens the second half. The classical-baroque program closes with Mozart's "Paris" Symphony (No. 31).