The Washington Times this weekend launched an enhanced website designed to offer features for mobile readers, social media users and news enthusiasts who want to take greater control of their content.

The website incorporates many features that readers of The Times have been asking for, including a responsive design with more user-friendly tools to read the news, sports and opinion.

The top 10 enhancements at www.washingtontimes.com are:

⦁ A less-crowded format that is easy to read and navigate.

⦁ More places to showcase headlines with the news and opinion.

⦁ A responsive design that adapts to different sizes of devices.

⦁ More videos to help explain the stories behind the news.

⦁ Smarter use of photos to attract attention to the most important stories and opportunities, but not so much that it visually overwhelms the reading experience.

⦁ More engagement opportunities to let readers drill deeper into the news, meet like-minded readers or have fun using The Times’ resources and tools.

⦁ Improved organization of the hottest policy and news topics, plus trending news stories.

⦁ Better showcasing of top opinion writers such as Ben Carson, Monica Crowley and Wesley Pruden.

⦁ Easier ways to share content and photos with friends via email, social media and other tools.

⦁ Simpler methods to register and log in to the website, including the ability to use social media accounts as log-ins.

“With this groundbreaking redesign, we’ve launched a new era in the storied history of The Washington Times,” said Larry Beasley, The Times’ president and chief executive officer. “Our readers have told us they wanted more social media opportunities, more visual engagement, more news video content and the ability to personalize their news experience. We have done our best to provide all of those things.”

“The website responds to many requests from readers and advertisers who wanted more options online,” said John Solomon, editor and vice president for content and business development. “We’re confident readers will see lots of value in our new site and would love to hear directly from them how we can continue to improve and expand in the months ahead. For that reason, there’s a feedback button on each Web page.”