Brad Jacobsen’s campaign mailers trumpet his endorsements from various organizations and politicians. The establishment is circling the wagons to protect one of their own. His opponent correctly points out Jacobsen’s mistakes on two key areas.

First, Jacobsen supported the expansion of Medicaid. He did this by supporting “Healthy Michigan”, which is nothing more than Obamacare Medicaid expansion in disguise. He calls it a “private-sector” solution but it is nothing more than window dressing.

Mr. Jacobsen and the establishment Republicans thought they had cleverly side-stepped the controversy. I guess the temptation of federal money is hard to resist. Now that the U.S. Court of Appeals in D.C. has ruled that the federal exchanges may not give taxpayer subsidies, the Michigan Legislature and Mr. Jacobsen may end up scrambling to create a state exchange to allow eligibility for taxpayer subsidies. If that is done, it will be very difficult to claim he opposes Obamacare. He called his vote “common sense.” I would not.

The second grievous mistake Mr. Jacobsen made was his support for Common Core in Michigan. Common Core is an untested experiment on our school children. It purports to set minimum rigorous standards for all public schools. It will also require a new set of testing standards as well as data tracking of all children K-12.

Advertisement

On the surface it appears to be a benign program. However, as many parents and educators learn more about the shortcomings of Common Core, they are standing up to resist its implementation in their states. It has been found to contain many opportunities for abuse of privacy, indoctrination over education, and lowering educational results. Several states have repealed Common Core and there is a ground swell of resistance to its implementation in many other states.

I know that Mr. Jacobsen has heard from many concerned constituents who voiced their opposition to this insidious plan, yet Mr. Jacobsen chose to go along to get along with the establishment party politicians. It is little wonder that these establishment politicians are publicly voicing their support for his campaign. They owe Jacobsen for his votes for their interests over his constituents. By the way, I have not seen Mr. Jacobsen try to defend his support of Common Core in any campaign material. He does however claim to “fight bureaucratic regulations and red tape”. These two votes prove otherwise.

Therefore I support John Reilly for State Representative in the 46th District who views this type of voting history as harmful to Michigan’s future.

Jayson Corey is a Ford Motor Company retiree, a precinct delegate since 2010 who is active in local political clubs and resident of Oakland Township.