Reuters

STONE MOUNTAIN, Ga.–The Securities and Exchange Commission’s chief economist questioned whether U.S. regulators have taken the right approach in bulletproofing large banks as they seek to make the financial system safer following the 2008 crisis.

SEC Chief Economist Mark Flannery on Tuesday suggested regulators have been lacking a broad perspective about the impact of their rules, leading them to a new task: Reining in risk as it moves outside banks subject to the new, tougher rules.

“It’s not clear at all to me that making the banks safer has made the economy safer, and so there is a lot of pressure to regulate the shadow banks,” Mr. Flannery said at a conference hosted by the Atlanta Fed here, referring to non-bank financial firms that are holding more potentially risky assets as they move off of regulated banks’ balance sheets.

“If you regulate shadow banks, there may be less room for further evasion (of regulations), but there is also less room for innovation,” he said, adding that policy makers should be concerned about “which regulation is going to be effective for the society and the economy as opposed for the immediate regulated entities.”

Mr. Flannery has a voice in shaping policy at the SEC, which has responsibility for overseeing mutual funds and other non-bank firms that provide credit. But final decisions about rules are made by that agency’s governing commission, of which he is not a member. His comments came as top U.S. regulators are debating how to regulate non-bank firms after years of adopting new restrictions on banks.

On Monday, Fed Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer floated several ideas for regulating shadow banks, some of which might take SEC action to implement. On Tuesday, Atlanta Fed President Dennis Lockhart noted so-called shadow banks’ “large, growing presence” and pointed out that sector is “much less regulated than banks.”

Cleveland Fed President Loretta Mester said Tuesday regulators should be focused on regulatory gaps, noting that there are no longer “bright lines” between banks and non-banks, but instead “50 Shades of Grey. ” “And as you know with 50 Shades of Grey, it can be painful,” she quipped, in reference to the popular novel.

Managers of non-bank firms, such as bond mutual funds, have questioned whether there are significant threats to the financial system in the so-called shadow banking sector. Barbara Novick, Vice Chairman at BlackRock, the largest asset manager, told the crowd of economists, regulatory officials and Wall Street executives here that her firm is concerned regulators haven’t clearly identified and documented risks in the sector. BlackRock is in favor of “cleaner, safer neighborhood” in which the industry as a whole improves risk management, but “we’re not necessarily in favor of all the regulation that we hear about,” she said.