Michael Horn volunteers at the St. Vincent de Paul Charitable Pharmacy. (Photo: Provided, Provided)

The St. Vincent de Paul Charitable Pharmacy relies on a variety of local partners, donors, and volunteers, to fulfill its mission of providing completely free medication and pharmaceutical care for people from Hamilton, Butler, Warren and Clermont counties who are unable to afford their prescription medication.

As the only charitable pharmacy in southwest Ohio, it is a last resort for neighbors who are experiencing changes in coverage while continually making the tough choices between their medication and other basic necessities, such as food, clothing and utility bills.

Michael Horn, a lifelong member of the Westside community and retired CVS pharmacist, is a dedicated charitable pharmacy volunteer who shares his talents with his neighbors in their time of need. Horn says he volunteers because of the people he gets to help at the charitable pharmacy.

“The people we serve at the pharmacy, the working poor, are doing their best to get by, but their expenses still exceed their income,” Horn said. “We fulfill a vital need for them. The people really appreciate the help and I know because we counsel every patient.”

Volunteers like Michael ensure that the charitable pharmacy will continue to serve as a health care safety net for people throughout southwest Ohio even as the Affordable Care Act begins to take effect and local patients experience uncertain prescription benefits resulting in continued need for assistance.

The charitable pharmacy is focusing its resources on helping the thousands of local patients who are uninsured or underinsured with coverage through Medicare Part D, Affordable Care Act or private insurance and cannot afford their copays. A portion of the budget for the Affordable Care Act will come from a $716 billion cut to Medicare over the next several years.

The impending rise in cost of Medicare plans is just one example of a consequence that will leave many community members unable to afford their prescription medication. Other uncertainties include the cost of the Affordable Care Act plans and whether employers choose to offer health insurance or pay the penalties.

The Urban Institute estimates that even with the Affordable Care Act, 630,000 Ohioans will still be uninsured. The ACA Bronze and Silver plans have prescription copays and deductibles that may be unaffordable to many working poor in the community.

The pharmacy is open four days a week – 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Mondays, Wednesdays and Thursdays and 8:30 a.m. to noon Saturdays. If you need help and want to find out more, call 513-562-8841, ext. 228 or visit www.svdpcincinnati.org.

The Charitable Pharmacy is accepting financial donations, donations of sample medication from physician offices and pharmaceuticals from long-term care pharmacies. Volunteer pharmacists are also needed.

For more information or to get involved, contact Mike Espel at 513-562-8841, ext. 266. Donations will also be accepted online at www.svdpcincinnati.org.

Read or Share this story: http://cin.ci/1nmnmrM