BOSTON–(BUSINESS WIRE)–May 4, 2016–

Flare Capital Partners, a leading healthcare technology venture capital firm, today announced the appointments of Dr. Gary Gottlieb and Phyllis Gotlib as Executive Partners.

One year since Flare Capital’s launch and initial fund closing, the firm continues to expand its broad network of specialized resources that are leading the transformation of the business of healthcare. Flare Capital’s new team members offer unrivaled perspectives on the changing healthcare landscape and healthcare policy reform and practical insights into both the payer and provider markets. The new Executive Partners will advise on potential investment opportunities, be valuable resources to portfolio companies, and provide insights as to the direction of innovation in healthcare. They join the firm’s existing Executive Partners: Chris Kryder, founder and former CEO of D2Hawkeye/Verisk Health, Tom Mac Mahon, former Chair and CEO of LabCorp, and Bob Sheehy, current CEO of Flare Capital portfolio company Bright Health and former CEO of UnitedHealthcare.

“We are honored to have Gary and Phyllis as partners and expect they will be tremendous assets for our entrepreneurs,” said Bill Geary, general partner, Flare Capital. “Our Executive Partners are critical to the success of our portfolio companies. Most recently, we provided initial seed capital to Bright Health and partnered alongside the company’s co-founder and CEO Bob Sheehy, an Executive Partner at Flare Capital.”

Dr. Gary Gottlieb is currently CEO of Partners In Health, a major provider of health services to people in some of the poorest countries in the world. For nearly three decades, PIH has provided innovative health care solutions, including the introduction of advanced technologies, to people at great need in resource constrained environments. He previously served as president and CEO of Partners HealthCare, the parent of the Brigham and Women’s and Massachusetts General Hospitals, operating the largest health care delivery organization in New England and among the nation’s largest nonprofit biomedical research and training enterprises. Dr. Gottlieb is a professor of psychiatry at Harvard Medical School and a member of the National Academy of Medicine. Named to Modern Healthcare’s 100 Most Influential People in Healthcare list, eight times, he shares Flare Capital’s belief that innovative healthcare is transformational. Dr. Gottlieb will provide real-world experience of the provider industry and help solve real healthcare business problems for Flare Capital and its portfolio companies.

Phyllis Gotlib was the co-founder and CEO of iMDsoft, an acute-care technology services company that offered market-leading solutions that were designed to automate hospitals’ high-acuity clinical workflow. Ms. Gotlib led iMDsoft from inception through its exponential international growth and ultimately to its acquisition by TPG Growth in 2012. In addition to her business ventures, Ms. Gotlib is an active philanthropist and social activist. She holds leadership roles in various not for profit organizations including Zahal Disabled Veterans Organization (ZDVO) and the Israel American Council (IAC). Ms. Gotlib will work closely with Flare Capital’s entrepreneurs, providing deep healthcare technology insights and experience to support portfolio companies to be market leaders.

In addition to the Executive Partner additions, Jonathan Gruber joins the team as Chair of Flare Capital’s Industry Advisory Board. Mr. Gruber is a professor of economics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where he has taught since 1992. He is also the director of the Health Care Program at the National Bureau of Economic Research, where he is a research associate. An associate editor of both the Journal of Public Economics and the Journal of Health Economics, Mr. Gruber has been heavily involved in crafting public health policy. He was an architect of the 2006 Massachusetts healthcare reform legislation and a key advisor to the Obama Administration and Congress in developing the 2010 Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. As Chair of Flare Capital’s Industry Advisory Board, he will work with twenty of some of the most influential members in the healthcare industry to provide insights and depth of domain knowledge from all corners of healthcare. Mr. Gruber offers valuable industry and academic contacts for Flare Capital’s portfolio companies to leverage.

“Gary, Phyllis, and Jon are directly engaged in the transformation of healthcare, running some of the most important healthcare companies and building public policy from across the entire healthcare ecosystem,” said Michael Greeley, general partner, Flare Capital. “Each brings a wealth of real-world experience from scaling a healthcare technology company to running one of the most important healthcare systems in the country to being on the forefront of healthcare reform. We are excited about their contributions as we back some of the most passionate gifted entrepreneurs in healthcare today.”

About Flare Capital Partners

Flare Capital is a team of proven healthcare technology venture capital investors known for their unparalleled strategic industry resources, insight and total commitment to the success of its entrepreneurs. Flare Capital raised one of the industry’s largest dedicated venture capital funds focused exclusively on early stage and emerging growth investments in healthcare technology innovation and is privileged to closely partner with founders and management. Investments include Bright Health, ClearDATA, HealthVerity, Iora Health, Valence Health and Welltok, in addition to a strategic partnership with Rock Health, a healthcare technology incubator seed fund based in Silicon Valley. Learn more at www.flarecapital.com

View source version on businesswire.com: http://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20160504005354/en/

Flare Capital Partners

Kim Pegnato, 781-620-0016

kpegnato73@gmail.com