The field was being groomed during Peyton Manning’s news conference Sunday evening. A tractor pulling a massive vacuum preceded the sprinklers moistening the grass at Sports Authority Field at Mile High.

As the lights dimmed from the Broncos’ 24-17 divisional playoff victory over San Diego, the groundskeeper and seemingly everyone else in Denver began looking ahead, to the AFC championship game Sunday against the visiting New England Patriots.

That is, everyone except most of the Broncos players and staff. Most preferred to celebrate their victory and worry about New England come Monday. The Patriots own one of the three victories over the Broncos, having rallied from a 24-0 deficit to win, 34-31, in overtime on Nov. 24.

It was one of Denver’s three losses, and the one that hurt the most. Having taken a 24-7 fourth-quarter lead against San Diego and narrowly avoiding another monumental playoff collapse, the Broncos preferred to glow in the moment.

“I’m not addressing the Patriots right now. I’m enjoying my victory against the Chargers,” Broncos defensive end Shaun Phillips said, loud and clear.

The Patriots-Broncos winner will represent the AFC in the Feb. 2 Super Bowl at East Rutherford, N.J.

“There’s going to be plenty of tears (for the losing team),” said wide receiver Wes Welker, the former Patriots star. “We’re just going out there and execute the way we can execute and, you know, come away with the win. We’re definitely looking forward to it.”

The Broncos’ unwillingness to talk specifically about the Patriots might be orders from above. Said coach John Fox: “I think I’m going to enjoy this one first. It hasn’t sunk in. We’ll dig into that tomorrow. We’ll enjoy (the win) tonight. We’re very honored and pleased to be in that position.”

For many Broncos, this will be their first conference championship game. Among those players is wide receiver Eric Decker. “It’s fun to go on to the next step and just stay alive,” he said. “There are four teams left and to be one of them is pretty special.”

Manning threw for 230 yards Sunday to surpass Joe Montana and Brett Favre for most passing yards in postseason history. He is now No. two all-time, with 5,909 yards, trailing only the Patriots’ Tom Brady who has 6,147.

Manning said the rematch with Brady was not up for discussion.

“We’re going to address that (publicly) on Wednesday,” Manning said. “But, we’ll enjoy this one. You’re supposed to enjoy these wins. We’ll start working on the Patriots tomorrow.”

Sunday’s AFC title game is scheduled for 1:05 p.m. in Denver.

“It’s prime-time football,” said Broncos linebacker Wesley Woodyard, one of the few who chose to identify the challenge. “They’re one of the best teams and so are we. We’re excited to play these guys.”

Added defensive end Robert Ayers: “We’re going to have a lot for Brady. We’re looking forward to it. He’s going to bring his A game (and) we’re going to bring ours. It’s going to be a tough match. Regardless of what happened last time, if we don’t bring our A game we’re going to lose.”

Mike Chambers: mchambers@denverpost.com or Twitter: @MikeChambers