NORWALK, Iowa — In her second day on the campaign trail, Hillary Clinton rolled ahead with what has emerged as largely a listening tour, laying out only broad strokes of her policy agenda.

Clinton appeared more relaxed Wednesday during her second event in Iowa, where she presented herself as a champion of small-business owners, a reformer on immigration and a policy wonk when it comes to health care. She pledged to keep the best of Obamacare and talked generally about the need for economic competitiveness and growth.

Story Continued Below

“Slowly over time, it’s become more difficult, more expensive, more red tape, unnecessary regulation that has put a damper” on economic growth, she said. She praised the “virtuous cycle” of consumers jump-starting the economy with more spending.

But she remained light on policy details, saying that “before I roll out my policies, I want to hear from you on the front lines.”

The former secretary of state arrived at a warehouse for the fruit distributor Capital City Fruit just before 1 p.m. Wednesday, taking her seat at a square table surrounded by a group of six. Behind her sat high stacks of boxed tomatoes.

Clinton vowed to try “to build on what works in the Affordable Care Act” and said she would look into health care providers competing across states in a free-market system.

“It would be interesting to find out why in Iowa, a well-established company like yours is being asked to pay so much more for a private plan,” she told Brendan Comito, who owns a fruit distributor and complained that his premiums have risen by 13 percent over one year.

Clinton said she would protect changes in Obamacare that prohibit insurers from discriminating against people with preexisting conditions.

“I will defend those important changes in the Affordable Care Act because of somebody like you, Jennifer,” she told Jennifer Hansen, the owner of a small boutique, who revealed she was diagnosed with breast cancer last year.

On immigration , she said, “We are really missing out on economic opportunity because we haven’t been able to agree on comprehensive immigration reform.”

“Before I roll out my policies, I want to hear from you on the front lines," Clinton said. | AP Photo

Clinton tapped into her own family history to relate to the group of small-business owners, recounting her father’s work of printing and selling fabric for draperies. “Occasionally my mother and brothers and I would work the squeegee,” she recalled.

While she was relaxed with the small-business owners gathered at the table, she bristled at the press. Clinton bolted from the room when reporters shouted questions at her about why she had ignored a 2012 letter from congressional investigators asking about her personal email use at the State Department and why she appeared to change her position on the constitutionality of same-sex marriage.

During the roundtable, however, she was looser. She seemed to get a kick out of Bryce Smith, a recent college graduate who purchased the bowling alley he worked at growing up. Before she left, she asked him what the alley’s hours were.

“I’m going to be in Iowa a lot,” she said.

Follow @politico