While it was reported recently that nearly one-fourth of those who signed up for Obamacare have had issues with information given to health officials, consider the plight of a Chicago woman who couldn’t even get the ball rolling to get coverage despite numerous attempts.

Mary Ruth Clarke.

Mary Ruth Clarke, a screenwriter and playwright whose credits include the 2000 hit “Meet The Parents,” says the problem boils down to a simple issue: her name. Solving it, however, apparently is not so simple.

The trouble is Clarke has a double first name. The combination of “Mary” and “Ruth” is considered her first name — Margaret is her middle name — and that somehow has flummoxed government computers. She has been told her identity could not be confirmed.

“They didn’t have a solution — they just told me what the problem was,” she said. “I was very excited about the promise of Obamacare.”

Clarke’s income fluctuates, and smaller premiums would come in handy during lean years. She’s been self-employed and obtained her own insurance over the past 30 years.

Clarke’s case was brought to the attention of MarketWatch, after which Department of Health and Human Services officials were contacted to see if they could make sense of the matter. An HHS spokesman said Clarke’s name and her particulars needed to be confirmed through the Social Security Administration.

The 54-year-old Clarke says she’s had a Social Security number for many years and presented her identification to so-called navigators during four visits to local sign-up centers. But according to the HHS spokesman, identities are verified through means other than in-person visits.

“I have no insurance at this point,” Clarke reports. “I canceled my Blue Cross/Blue Shield.”

After Clarke was put together with HHS officials via MarketWatch, the issue still was not resolved. Clarke says that after she explained her situation to a woman at the HHS offices, the aide ultimately could only encourage her to reapply next year.

Because Clarke had a lean year in 2013, she’s also applying for Medicaid. She says the HHS officer didn’t know initially that Medicaid had been expanded and told her she was ineligible. Then the HHS officer looked it up and discovered that, yes, she could be eligible.

In an email after the exchange, Clarke called that conversation “jaw dropping.”

“It was jaw dropping in that it went on and on, and round and round, and solved NOTHING,” she wrote.

Clarke says she has yet to hear from Illinois Medicaid personnel about her application despite applying online in December, making two visits in February and March and phoning several times.

Follow @russbrittmktw



Follow @MWHealthBlog



More must-read health coverage from MarketWatch:

Popular Obamacare plan premiums to rise in eight states

Valeant makes it official, files tender offer

Rival to Gilead’s pricey Sovaldi expected to hit market later this year