Q&A: Donald Berwick Calls for 'Moral' Approach to Healthcare

The former head of CMS advocates for a single-payer system and for bringing "pride and joy" to the workplace among physicians, nurses, administrators, and executives who are all involved in doing the work of caring.

When Donald Berwick, MD, president emeritus and senior fellow at the Institute for Healthcare Improvement, was a candidate for the head of Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, opponents seized on his admiration of Britain's National Health Service.



Donald Berwick, MD

In the second part of Berwick's interview with HealthLeaders, (read part one), he spoke about his support not just for the Patient Protection Affordable Care Act, but for a single-payer health system. Both, he says, recognize health as a right and represent a needed "moral" approach to care. He also calls for a push to bring "pride and joy" to the workplace. The transcript of the interview has been lightly edited for clarity.

HLM: Do you think the provisions of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act will lead to quality improvements?

Berwick: I think it's a great step forward. [It's] not perfect, though. Part of the ACA is the insurance law. It's the attempt in our country to make healthcare a human right, to take a step in that direction. I thoroughly support it; I wish we could go further faster.

It's been productive and could be more productive. The decision to do this with private insurance systems was a political decision. We could have done it with an expansion of Medicare and Medicaid. But, we should be proud that the country is trying to make health a human right.

Donald Berwick on Better Care as a Route to Financial Success

I wish the Medicaid expansions were occurring in all states. I wish the exchanges had gone smoothly and had been more supported and had been more active in defending the rights of beneficiaries. But, all of those are improvements in a basically sound approach to improving healthcare coverage

On improvement, there is good news and news that could be better. There has been a lot of investment in transparency; remember, I'm not an enemy of transparency. There are parts of the law that are urging more access to Medicare data on the part of people who want to improve.

There is support for the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation, which has been doing brilliant and immensely important work with HENs (hospital engagement networks), which are providing hospitals the chance to learn from and teach each other.

There is support for continuity. There are major investments in community-based care transitions medical homes, ACOs, bundled payments. All of these are attempts to change payments to be more supportive of the real needs of patients.

One the other side, I wish we had more national support for the work of improvement. Even better and stronger networks for change, maybe a little less reliance on measure, measure, measure and maybe a little more reliance on health, health, health.