HUNTSVILLE, Alabama – Six days before government health insurance exchanges open in Alabama under Obamacare, a Blue Cross Blue Shield of Alabama attorney told small business owners in Huntsville that up to 75 percent of Alabama’s population could end up eligible for financial help from the federal government for health insurance under the new law.

“This is going to have a significant impact,” attorney Michael Velezis said, when those already getting Medicaid, Medicare and subsidies are added together.

Under the law, people and families are eligible for federal subsidies – often money off their income tax bill – if their income is up to four times the federal poverty rate. In Alabama, that means income up to $46,000 for an individual and $92,000 for a family of four.

Velezis said businesses with fewer than 50 full-time employees don’t have to worry about the law at all. “If you’re under 50, you’re good,” Velezis said. That means you don’t have to offer your employees insurance under the law, but you can.

Velezis also told the group at the Chamber of Commerce of Huntsville-Madison County that three companies will be selling policies on Alabama’s exchange: Blue Cross Blue Shield, United Health and Humana. Not all will offer policies in all counties, he said, but Blue Cross will. The policies will be available at the federal website Oct. 1, but Velezis said the companies can't discuss the specifics until then.



For small business owners, the key question is what “50” means. Companies with fewer than 50 full-time employees are not affected, but 50 is based on a calculation that makes part-time employees part of the company’s final total. The math works like this:

Any employee working 30 hours a week is considered one full-time employee. Part-time employees’ monthly hours are added together and divided by 120 (30 hours of week a month). The total of "full time equivalents" is added to the full-time employee number. Hit 50, and you fall under the law. That means, Velezis said, you “must offer minimum essential coverage and it must be affordable.”

Businesses can begin applying for new business plans on the exchanges on Oct. 1 – just like individuals – but they have been given another year before they have to. Penalties, and they are costly, won’t start for businesses until Jan. 1, 2015.

If the total for a business is 50 or greater, Velezis said, all it will take is one employee going to an exchange for insurance to trigger the penalties for having no company plan. But for companies under 50 and their employees, there still might be an incentive to consider the subsidized exchanges, as this back-and-forth between Velezis and a business owner showed.

“I’m under 50 employees and I provide a plan, but it doesn’t meet that test for affordable,” the man asked. “What are the impacts?”

“There’s no penalty,” Velezis said.

“I just keep on business as usual, but (the workers) can go to the exchange,” the man said.

“They can go to the exchange, they can get a subsidy, but you won’t be penalized,” Velezis replied. That's because the employer has fewer than 50 workers.



“Actually, in that world, I’m kind of getting a good deal,” the man said. “They can potentially go and get cheaper coverage than I’m offering, because I have a good plan. So that might be good for them.”

“There will be people that fall into that category,” Velezis said. “When you add the subsidies, it would be a better deal for them.”