School close to reaching target of $105M in donations

University of Colorado Chancellor Phil DiStefano and athletic director Rick George announced Saturday the athletic department has raised more than $72 million in gifts and corporate sponsorships in the past two years with much of the money targeted for the athletics complex expansion in and around Folsom Field.

They said they are targeting $85 million in private donations toward the facilities project and another $20 million toward an endowment initiative. They're calling the new public phase of their fundraising efforts "The drive to 105."

George said more than $57 million has been raised to date toward the facilities project and more than $15 million toward the endowment side. There is no deadline for reaching the $105 million target.

"We want to build a long-term, sustainable foundation," George said. "...When we leave here, whenever that is, we want to make sure that the foundation is bigger and stronger than it was before we got here. So it's important for us to grow our endowments.

"As we sit here today, we're not very competitive in that versus our peers, and we need to get better."

CU officials said more than 1,200 gifts from more than 800 donors have been received so far. George said he hopes to get as many Buffs fan and alumni as possible to invest in the future of the athletic department.

George said more than $500,000 has been donated unsolicited.

"To me, that shows that people believe in our plan and want to invest in what we're doing and want to invest in our student-athletes," George said.

Advertisement

When the goal of $105 million is achieved, George said they will turn their attention to raising money for other needs in the department such as renovations inside the Coors Events Center and Balch Fieldhouse on the west side of Folsom Field.

CU broke ground in May on the project that will cost $181 million initially with athletics responsible for $156 million and the campus paying close to $25 million to fund a 600 space parking garage immediately east of the stadium.

The department sold $150 million in bonds for the project in August and when interest is factored in and assuming the payments are made over the full length of the 30-year bonds, the actual cost of the project will be more than $243 million.

Bonds are needed because donations often come in over time and are not all received in lump sum payments as soon as they are pledged.

The project adds 337,000 square feet of new space for the athletic department in a building currently under construction in the northeast corner of the stadium as well as a permanent indoor practice facility that will sit on top of the parking garage. George said the new building in the northeast corner will be called The Champions Center.

The latest rendering of what the University of Colorado's athletics complex around Folsom Field will look like after expansion. (University of Colorado)

A high-performance sports center will be housed inside the new building and will be called the CU Sports Medicine and Performance Center. It is a collaboration between the university physicians group, Boulder Community Health and the CU school of medicine.

"We believe this high performance center is going to allow us to collaborate and bring more people to our campus to see what we're doing." George said. "We think it's going to be a great benefit to the Front Range and to all the residents of Colorado."

The project also includes renovations on 38,000 square feet in the Dal Ward Center, the longtime epicenter of the athletic department.

CU is expecting to move the bulk of its athletic department personnel into The Champions Center in June and expects to have the parking garage and indoor practice facility completed by the end of the year.

George introduced former Boulder High School and CU offensive lineman Ariel Solomon and CU alum Kristen Solomon as co-chairs of the Sustainable Excellence Initiative.

"We feel like it's an opportunity to create a legacy that is going to stand for a long, long time," Ariel Solomon said.

DiStefano praised Geroge for transforming the athletic department, the way it operates and the facilities it uses in the 17 months since he was hired. He said the athletic department wasn't operating as a business before but it has changed dramatically with George leading those efforts.

"I think our facilities when they're completed will be among the best, certainly in my mind in the Pac-12 and around the country," DiStefano said. "I think people now, other chancellors and presidents and ADs, are looking at Colorado very differently than when we first joined the Pac-12 because of the investments that we're making, the quality of coaches that we have, the athletic director. It's a solid team now at Colorado and I don't see that all the time at every other institution."