Researcher studies prostheses, form, efficiency

Have you ever seen anyone run nearly 30 mph?

I did recently over at the applied biomechanics lab on the University of Colorado campus, and it was quite impressive, especially because the runner, Richard Browne, is a single below-the-knee amputee.

Browne, one of the top Paralympic sprinters in the world, was in Boulder earlier this month getting his biomechanics, running form and efficiency tested by Alena Grabowski, an assistant professor in CU's Department of Integrative Physiology, and some of the students in her group.

In her lab over in the Clare Small building on the west side of campus, Grabowski is testing how changing the stiffness and height of a runner's prostheses — artificial limbs — changes his running gait, efficiency, comfort and speed.

Two sets of amputee athletes are being studied in the three-year project, one looking at running economy, the other at top running speeds.

"They are phenomenal athletes," said Grabowski, director of the state-of-the-art applied biomechanics lab. She is a long-time runner with a passion for the trails who heads up the group of post-docs and graduate and undergraduate students who help test the athletes.

Halfway through, the study "has been fantastic so far," said Grabowski. "It is awesome to see how the different prostheses affect performance."

The testing is rigorous and thorough. Browne, 24 — a former prep football star who lost part of his leg in an accident — spent hours in the biomechanics lab nearly every day of his 10-day Boulder visit.

Advertisement

"This will be key in helping me run faster," said Browne, who already runs quite fast, with two world records and a 2012 London Paralympics silver medal on his resume.

"They know what they are doing," he added, motioning toward Grabowski and the students with his head, holding his arms up in the air to allow the students to attach the reflective markers needed to monitor his form via a motion camera.

Mike Sandrock, On Running

Grabowski did her undergraduate work in kinesiology at CU before getting her doctorate under the direction of CU's Rodger Kram. They were part of the team that tested the "blades" worn by South African amputee Olympic and Paralympic athlete Oscar Pistorius. Grabowski then went on to complete post-doctoral work with Hugh Herr of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, another pioneer in lower-limb prosthetic research.

She has done "field work" outside the lab as well. Back in 2003-04 she worked at the Boulder Running Co.

"Biomechanics was Alena's forte, and if a customer came in, rest assured she knew what to do," said former Boulder Running Co. shoe buyer Henry Guzman, now co-owner of Flatirons Running.

"She has some wheels," added Guzman, who raced a 66K in France with Grabowski. "If she wanted, she could run with the best of the (ultra women) around here. Alena has the smarts and a passion for athletics."

Grabowski's "customers" now range from freshman physiology students to international athletes. She is calm and personable, letting her students prepare Browne for each of the many sprints on the lab's high-speed, force-measuring treadmill. He was running so fast that one of the students stood behind him with her hand out to ensure he didn't fly off the back of the treadmill.

As Browne got up to 27 mph, Grabowski walked around the treadmill, studying his form and prosthesis as if she were a sculptor looking at her latest work. Browne was indeed beautiful to watch, his arms and legs in perfect sync as he sprinted.

Here is an unseen side of Boulder, I thought, as I sat and watched. This is science at its most basic — performing tests, over and over, building a data base, which the public eventually sees only when someone like Pistorius, or Browne, wins a medal or sets a record. It is years of research and training in places like this lab that underlie those records.

Jumping off the treadmill, Browne told Grabowski the height was not quite right. He removed the leg and she adjusted it; the students replaced the sensors and Browne was back on the treadmill for yet another sprint.