If trends continue, one in three black males born today can expect to spend time in prison sometime in his life.

Dalton Sherman, 16, plans to change that.

Sunday morning at Concord Church in Dallas, cars packed parking lots in every direction for an MLK worship service with a theme of “Save Our Sons,” one of several weekend events that commemorated the life of Martin Luther King Jr.

Big-name pastors and Dallas Mayor Mike Rawlings spoke at the Red Bird church on a stage flanked by monster video screens. The crowd was packed nearly to the rafters.

But it was the oratory of two young black men — Sherman and 28-year-old poet Joseph Solomon — that inspired standing ovations and tears among many listeners.

“I live in a world where many of my friends are fatherless,” said Sherman, a junior at the Barack Obama Male Leadership Academy in east Oak Cliff. “For some of them, it can lead down a road with no discipline and no guidance about where they should go in life.”

Sherman won a local Martin Luther King Jr. speaking contest in 2008, at age 9, and stunned a crowd of 17,000 with his speaking skills during a DISD convocation ceremony. Soon after, he became a YouTube sensation and made a lap around the television talk show circuit, appearing on The Oprah Winfrey Show, The Ellen DeGeneres Show and NBC’s Today show.

Some have called him the next Barack Obama.

“What we need is motivation,” Sherman said, speaking about the pressure of being a young black boy. “We need somebody to show us there’s something greater and more important for us in life.”

Demonization’s effect

Sherman said his life so far has been insulated from racism, but he sees evidence of the demonizing of black men everywhere in pop culture. For example, he said, the new television series Empire lionizes the life of a black man who was a former thug but is now in the music business.

Those subtle things, he said, factor into the split-second, life-or-death decisions made by police, the discretion used by judges in sentencing and decisions made by doctors on medical care.

“When you see over and over black men being shown as violent,” he said, “that can play into a cop pulling a trigger or not pulling a trigger.”

Moments later inside the towering sanctuary of Concord, the Dallas mayor evoked a message intoned by King on March 31, 1968, four days before his assassination. “The arc of the moral universe is long,” King said in his last sermon. “But it bends toward justice.”

But as many politicians have said since — including Obama — every person has a responsibility to mold that arc.

“In Dallas, we have a huge issue of the haves and the have-nots,” said Rawlings. “And that economic gap is mirroring an education gap in our city.”

‘You are the light’

This year’s first graduating class from the Barack Obama Leadership Academy is a step in the right direction, he said, while holding up the speech delivered minutes earlier by Sherman.

“You are the light that will put away the darkness,” Rawlings said to thundering applause.

Moments later, Solomon, a traveling poet and musician from Houston, took the stage.

He read the poems “We Are Still Here” and “Words From My Father,” which he performs on the YouTube channel chaseGodtv.

“Many non-Christians I know think Christians are passive,” said Solomon in an interview after his presentation. “They use their faith as a way to say, ‘Everything’s OK. God’s in control. He’ll work it out.’ But God should be a motivator for us, because he wants justice.”

Racism, Solomon said, makes him cynical of people’s motives.

And as to demeaning stereotypes assigned to black men, he said it’s a chicken-or-egg question.

“Which came first?” he said. “Did we do these things and then the stereotype came? Or are these things a result of systemic racism, which means we’re presented a world that is much more limited than other people?”

Good deeds

That question was among many posed by people honoring King’s legacy over the weekend.

Thousands lined Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard to watch the 29th annual Elite News Martin Luther King Jr. Parade on Monday. It was the first parade since publisher William Blair died last year.

Nearby, 96 students and staff members from Dallas Baptist University volunteered to help Cornerstone Baptist Church prepare for its MLK Day program. On Sunday, more than 75 student athletes from the university fanned out across the city, working at churches, volunteering at city recreation centers and helping clean and stock a food pantry.

Also over the weekend, the Martin Luther King Jr. Community Center held a health fair, helped people sign up for insurance coverage under the Affordable Care Act and hosted a candle-lighting ceremony by Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity.