After being one of the worst-performing sectors since last summer, biotechnology firms have shown a few encouraging signs since March.

ETF flow into the sector was a positive $480 million in March, according to Mizuho Securities USA data. Then, the last two weeks of April saw an additional $454 million inflow, trimming outflow for the month to a net $239 million.

“There are 14 biotech ETFs in total, controlling almost $10 billion of assets, and in the first two months — because it was a risk-off momentum across the board — $2.1 billion departed,” said Monish Shah, Mizuho Securities USA executive director and head of ETF trading. “In the last week (of April), which was again a risk-off momentum, biotech ETFs did not see a major outflow technically.”

So is this a propitious time to start looking at biotech ETFs again?

Flows into biotech ETFs were a positive $23 million in the second week of May, but that gave way to a $39 million outflow in the third week, through Thursday.

Shah advises investors to be careful in the near term, even though the sector’s long-term prospect is good. “The trend seems to be holding up, but I advise near-term caution, because there are many positive as well as some negative factors.”

The two largest biotech ETFs, iShares Nasdaq Biotechnology (IBB) and SPDR S&P Biotech ETF (XBI) were in the positive flow territory through the end of April, adding a net $221 million and $85 million, respectively. The $6.2 billion IBB is down 1.06% in the past three months, and the $1.7 billion XBI is up 5%. They are still a respective 35% and 42% below their 52-week highs.

IBB has slipped below its 50-day moving average, a bearish sign, while XBI is testing resistance at its own 50-day line.

Next in line are $821 million First Trust NYSE Arca Biotech ETF (FBT) and $511 million VanEck Vectors Biotech ETF (BBH). They’re up roughly a respective 4% and 1% in the past three months. However, FBT experienced strong outflow each of the first four months of 2016, resulting in a net outflow of $1.75 billion. BHH saw some positive flow in April, but ended with a net $57 million outflow over the same period.

As with the first two funds, FBT and BBH are also both testing resistance at their 50-day lines.

A series of positive factors are, however, in the pipeline for biotechs. “The P/E ratios have been coming down. That may suggest to some investors that stocks are more reasonably valued,” said Michael Cohick, ETF product manager at Van Eck Global. He also notes that biotechs are poised to benefit from the continuing demographic factors of an aging population. Also, with the Affordable Care Act, more people are now covered by insurance and can afford some of the new therapies.

“That, along with the incredible continued innovation that’s coming out of the companies in the sector themselves, I think may point to potential entry points,” said Cohick.

That said, the sector is known for displaying very high volatility. “From terrible terrible negative performance in January to slightly negative in February (to a positive performance in March and April for the VanEck Vectors Biotech ETF), … the short-term performance story has returned,” said Cohick. “But I would suggest investors should always continue to monitor the biotech company earnings, as well as the M&A activity.”

That’s why he prefers a concentrated portfolio of the 25 largest and most liquid biotech stocks, such as represented in BBH. “If you want the safety of the larger companies, it may be a better way to play the sector,” he said.

The fund’s top holdings are Gilead Sciences (GILD), Amgen (AMGN), Celgene (CELG), Biogen (BIIB) and Medivation (MDVN), together representing about 45% of the fund’s assets.