Once again, Xcel Energy and the solar power industry are at loggerheads over incentives for solar customers.

Once again, most of the public has probably tuned out, considering the topic either too complex or of no personal relevance.

But here’s one way to think about this latest spat: How much longer should the fellow down the street with solar panels be allowed to sell excess electricity back into the grid at an advantageous price — and at your expense?

As an article in The Sunday Denver Post by Mark Jaffe explained, “Xcel customers get a credit for each kilowatt-hour they put on the grid equal to what a residential customer is charged for a kilowatt-hour — 10.5 cents.”

In other words, they get paid the retail price when their rooftop panels produce more electricity than they need at the time. It’s known as a net-metering credit (to be distinguished from tax incentives, rebates and other benefits for solar owners).

Obviously, homeowners should be paid for surplus electricity produced during the day’s sun-baked hours (at other times, remember, they suck electricity from the grid just like everyone else). But surely they should also contribute to the utility’s transmission and distribution system, upon which they remain no less dependent than customers without solar systems.

If solar customers are not going to be required to pay for basic infrastructure, then at the very least the extent of the subsidy should be transparent.

To that end, Xcel has asked the Colorado Public Utilities Commission to look into the matter and to fully account for net-metering subsidies. It’s a good moment to do so given the continuing rapid growth of rooftop solar.

Currently, the 15,000 or so solar owners still represent a small slice of Xcel’s customer base. So it’s not a big deal if they’re freeloading a bit. But as solar’s costs decline and that number grows, say, to hundreds of thousands, the subsidy could become a very big deal indeed.

As you no doubt have noticed, solar panels tend to sprout upon the homes of those with discretionary income — often the upper-middle class. And while third-party ownership and other innovations are putting solar within reach of an ever-widening pool of consumers, it’s safe to say the poor and working class will be late to the party. At some point, the net-metering credit will amount to a travesty of income redistribution.

That doesn’t mean we should take at face value Xcel’s estimate of the net-metering subsidy, which it calculates at 5.9 cents per kilowatt-hour. As Jaffe’s article noted, the solar industry has raised a number of serious objections to Xcel’s analysis. And solar enthusiasts are perhaps correct that “the utility industry sees rooftop solar as a threat to its business model,” as the president of Namaste Solar declared.

However, it’s also important to remember that the solar industry is, well, an industry no more or less virtuous and disinterested than a given utility — and no less likely to exaggerate its case.

Forbes contributor William Pentland, a big proponent of decentralized energy, recently suggested that “the rooftop solar industry would probably not exist — or, at least not exist at its present scale — without favorable net-metering policies.”

And yet, he added, “Why should your neighbors pay you more than the market rate for electricity generated on your roof during the day? They shouldn’t, and that is the pickle for many net-metering policies.”

E-mail Vincent Carroll at vcarroll@denverpost.com. Follow him on Twitter @vcarrollDP