This is The Monday Line

By Denis G. Campbell

Phil the groundhog saw his shadow. That means we will have six more weeks of winter. The oversized rodent made famous by Bill Murray in the film Groundhog Day has spoken and we must all suffer on.

But this winter we’ve not seen many sub-zero days. We had one hard frost in November and since then months of rain have fallen in a few days. January will likely go down as one of the wettest in British history.

When people remark about photos from Wales and how lovely and green everything is, my standard reply is… “it’s mould.”

For decades, mostly to avoid religious debates and fights, when people would ask me what my favourite holiday was, I would say definitively, “Groundhog Day.” It was a quiet, simple and inoffensive holiday.

Then my good friend and fellow journalist Robert Hunziker began regularly pointing out in his columns here that despite our reliance on the furry Pennsylvania prognosticator, every Groundhog Day and its winter, since the turn of the century, has been warmer than the previous. Indeed, despite a few weeks of polar vorteces, we are setting heat records each year despite his desire for more sleep.

That polar vortex dropped temperatures in the USA to levels normally seen in the Arctic because the jet stream is wobbling so badly that St. Louis and Atlanta were colder than Barrow, Alaska, the northern most city in the USA. That means polar ice will melt completely this coming summer meaning more crazy storms and weather, but deniers continue to mutter and moan and… get an equal major network audience.

How crazy is it? One of our two laying hens was so confused that today she laid an egg, six weeks ahead of schedule. Flowers are blooming and migratory birds are so sorely confused they were battered senseless all day yesterday by 60 mph winds and straight line thermal downpour rains that made our sky look more like Miami than Wales.

And as much of Britain is underwater, seventeen communities in California are in a drought situation so severe that they risk running completely out of water in the next three weeks. Forget oil, future wars will be fought over water resources and where to find them.

Our planet is sick. We’re belching way too much carbon into the atmosphere and yet the government of David Cameron’s Tories is using police resources to brutally bash more than 100 heads up in Barton Moss near Manchester for peaceful protests against fracking. His government contemplates spending £600,000 pounds per unit for massive Egypt and Syria style water cannons to stop unrest against their policies?

News flash David, try changing the policies and you won’t need the cannons.

Now, in March, there will be explosions underneath Scottish aquifers in a new procedure called coal-seam gasification. Companies burrow into old coal mines and ignite explosions underground, beneath aquifers, to force gas to the surface? It is so controversial that even the often politically neutered US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) just chastised a Wyoming company for using it in Australia before proper tests could be conducted.

The inmates are running this asylum. The Tories know they have less than a year to enact changes and reward all of their friends for five years of governing. So they will attempt to finish what Iron Lady Baroness Thatcher started, dismantle the safety net, privatise the NHS (and everything else) and, like George W. Bush, leave behind a mess for Labour to clean up.

I used to think living high atop a 200 foot cliff in Wales was protection enough from rising seas. Then a few weeks ago during the last high lunar tide my friend Keith Burgess captured the above wave as it struck another 200 foot cliff face a mile from here and rose high above it.

I hear environmentalists often say the French and German Alps will one day make for nice oceanfront property. Who knew it would happen in our lifetime?