Mike Lucas for Dow Jones

From this morning’s LBO Wire:

H.I.G. Capital took the exit ramp on its investment in Big Tex Trailers Inc., selling it to Bain Capital after about three years of ownership, Braden Kelner reports for this morning’s LBO Wire.

Founded in 1982, Big Tex makes a variety of trailers, including auto and motorcycle trailers, gooseneck trailers, dump trailers and equipment trailers.

During its time with H.I.G., the company expanded its operations through new manufacturing facilities, revenue growth and a focus on improving manufacturing processes and other operations, said Joe Lewis, Big Tex’s vice president of marketing.

“H.I.G. was a key financial resource for Big Tex Trailers as it grew from where it was to where it is now,” Mr. Lewis said. “We can deliver [products more quickly] because we’re geographically savvy, but also we have that inventory on the ground.”

More stories available to LBO Wire subscribers:

In its first investment, Ridgewood Private Equity Partners committed $100 million to Neptune Regional Transmission System LLC, a 65-mile power transmission system that provides 20% of electric needs of Long Island, N.Y....Blackstone Group secured at least $3.69 billion for its latest fund designed to capture market dislocations and deals that don’t fit neatly within the firm’s other offerings…and Berkshire Partners portfolio company Access Information Management acquired Archive Systems Inc., an information data company that had been backed by a consortium of investors, including Edison Partners and Carlyle Group.

(LBO Wire is a daily newsletter with comprehensive analysis of all the investments, deals, fundraisings and personnel moves involving private equity firms. For a two-week trial, visit http://on.wsj.com/DJPEVCNews, scroll to the bottom and click “try for free.”)

Elsewhere on the Web:

Backers of Carlyle Group’s Claren Road Asset Management asked to withdraw nearly $1 billion in the fourth quarter, people familiar with the matter told Juliet Chung of The Wall Street Journal, the latest in a string of setbacks for the hedge-fund firm.

The chief executive and investor relations head of London-based Doughty Hanson, Stephen Marquardt, is leaving the firm at the end of January, Yolanda Bobeldijk reports for sister publication Private Equity News (subscription required). The departure comes as the firm revives fundraising plans that had been put on ice in April.

After two years of ownership, Apax Partners sold Italy’s Rhiag-Inter Auto Parts Italia SpA to U.S.-based LKQ in a deal valuing the company at over 1 billion euros, including debt, reports the Financial Times.

Write to David Smagalla at david.smagalla@wsj.com