A sex offender set to be released has plans to move into the Rose Hill community leaving several neighbors outraged.

Billy Dotson has been granted parole after serving more than 25 years in prison for kidnapping and indecent liberties with a child.

Billy Dotson is will be released for parole any day now and plans to move into a house on Harris Drive in Rose Hill.

Dotson's attorney Craig Schultz is now responding to the backlash from the community. He understands the neighborhood's concern, but says they do not have to worry about their children's' safety.

"Billy Dotson is not a danger to anyone, he's not a danger to that community, he's not a danger to neighbors," says Schultz.

Several Rose Hill residents fear the opposite. Some even say they're considering moving.

"This is not the kind of threat we want around our children," says Andrew Powell.

"I have a five year old sitting in the back seat right now and I would protect her with my life," says Michelle Johnston. "She is no longer going to be able to play in my front yard."

Community leaders are trying to keep him out, but Schultz says Dotson has been approved to move into the neighborhood after following restrictions where he can and cannot live.

Since he was convicted before the sex offender registry act was formed in 1994, he does not have to register as a sex offender.

Schultz says while he respects neighbors concerns, he adds Dotson's served his time and is no longer physically capable of harming anyone as he's paralyzed on the left side and confined to a wheelchair.

"This is a guy who number one does not want to commit any crimes, he wants to get along, and number two he's not capable. He could not move from me to you in 15 seconds," says Schultz.

Records show Dotson has had dozens of disciplinary issues in prison including exposing himself. Schultz wouldn't comment on that issue, but says Dotson is absolutely no threat to anyone.

"It's my hope that people will let him live peacefully there. and in a sense to give themselves and him a chance. To live together with some degree of harmony," says Schultz.

Local police are aware of the situation and tell KAKE News they are going to be monitoring the neighborhood.