In the midst of a heated election season where issues that bring us together are few and far between, there is one that should unite Coloradans from across the political spectrum: increasing participation in primary elections, notably by restoring a presidential primary.

While Democrats had what appeared to be overwhelming turnout at the caucuses where their presidential preference polls were taken, the reality is that fewer than 15 percent of voters registered with the party participated.

On the other side, roughly 60,000 Republicans (out of more than 900,000) attended the caucuses that were the first step in the process of selecting delegates to the national convention.

Topping it off, party caucuses were not open to the largest bloc of voters in the state, those who choose not to affiliate with either party.

A Denver Post article summed it up: “Hundreds of Democrats were left in the cold. Thousands of Republicans didn’t get to vote. And 1 million unaffiliated voters sat on the sidelines.”

Unfortunately, it appears Colorado’s role in this presidential-nomination cycle will be remembered more for how participation was limited than for how our purple state helped influence the national discussion by involving as many voters as possible.

Let’s be clear: There was nothing sinister or underhanded about either party’s process. The reality is that we have simply outgrown the caucus system when it comes to the nominating process for presidential candidates.

Colorado can, and will, do better. Restoring a presidential primary and opening all primaries to independent voters are sensible steps toward that end.

Currently, participation in the primary phase is limited solely to party members. We’ve seen the results of that firsthand this caucus season, but we’ve also seen a decline in participation in our primaries in recent years.

A group called Let Colorado Vote is pursuing ballot initiatives that would restore the presidential primary in Colorado in 2020 and, before then, would open primary elections to the state’s 1 million independent — or “unaffiliated,” in election parlance — voters. Their proposals call for a semi-open primary, meaning unaffiliated voters could vote in either the Democratic or Republican primary, but not both.

In recent years, Colorado voters have been almost evenly divided between Republicans, Democrats and independents, with each comprising about a third of the electorate. More recent voter registration data paint a picture of how that is changing. Independent voters now account for 37 percent of registered voters, with Republicans and Democrats each tallying 31 percent.

In fact, Colorado leads the nation in the growth of unaffiliated voters since 2008, and young people are leading the way. Two-thirds of newly registered voters chose not to join a party in 2014, and nearly half of the voters age 40 and under in Colorado are unaffiliated.

As affiliated partisans, we support our parties and will continue working to involve voters in our organizations. But that doesn’t preclude us from supporting the work of Let Colorado Vote, which aims to increase voter participation in a critical phase of our democratic process.

In coming days, a bill that would restore a presidential primary (they were held Colorado in 1992, 1996 and in 2000, before being canceled for budgetary reasons after the dot.com bubble burst) is expected to be introduced in the state legislature. The heads of both parties have said they support the idea. A similar bill was introduced last year but was scuttled, in part, because of concerns about the cost.

Given the choice between what we witnessed this year and a presidential primary that draws more attention from candidates and higher participation from Colorado voters, we would surely argue that it would have been money well spent, even when lawmakers grapple with other pressing needs. We would also argue that when taxpayer money is used to pay for an election, that election should be open to all voters who wish to make their voices heard.

To be more succinct: If the legislature acts to restore a presidential primary, we encourage them to open that primary — and all primary elections — to independent voters.

Regardless of your political persuasion, we hope that you, like us, will agree that Colorado should be encouraging voter engagement, and pursuing policies that open our primary elections to all registered voters who want to participate.

Bill Ritter Jr. was Colorado’s 41st governor. John W. Suthers, former state attorney general, serves as mayor of Colorado Springs. Visit LetCOVote2016.com for more information.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.