ALLENTOWN – About 400 union workers at Phoebe Ministries facilities in Allentown and Berks County will hold a one-day strike Dec. 30, nearly two months after their contract expired.

"We wanted to send a message to management without hurting the residents," said worker Cindy Lazarus, a 30-year employee and union delegate.

The union and the nonprofit organization — which provides health care, housing and support service for senior citizens — have been at an impasse since Oct. 31. A Phoebe spokesman also said officials are making preparations to ensure that residents' care goes uninterrupted during the work stoppage, including the possibility of using replacement workers.

SEIU Healthcare PA said Phoebe management is seeking more than $2.7 million in concessions from workers. The union says givebacks include:

•Wage cuts of up to $4.14 an hour for two-thirds of the workers.

•Nearly $500,000 in cuts to workers' 401(k) plans.

•Hikes in health insurance premiums.

•Unfavorable changes in overtime, short-term disability and holiday pay.

The union also said the top six Phoebe executives have received $2.1 million in total annual compensation, according to Phoebe's most recent IRS statement for its fiscal year ended June 30, 2013, said SEIU spokeswoman Karen Gownley.

Meanwhile, spokesman Adam Marles said Phoebe management presented the union a "final proposal" on Dec. 2 that provides for wages of at least $17 an hour for most workers, with any employee earning less than $15 an hour receiving no pay reduction.

In addition, full-time employees will continue to receive between 20 and 30 days off annually and seven paid holidays.

"The implementation of the Affordable Care Act and the continued decline in government reimbursements have forced Phoebe Ministries to operate in a new financial normal," said Marles, who is vice president of advancement, marketing and strategic development. He said daily Medicaid reimbursements have been reduced and do not cover the daily costs of providing service.

The union said workers have countered management's offer with substitute, lower-cost health insurance coverage and some wage concessions that it says would save Phoebe $1 million per year.

"We tried to settle; they [management] just want everything," said Lazarus. She said food services workers receive pay ranging from $10.90 an hour to about $19 an hour, but if workers agreed to the Phoebe proposal, she would lose about $10,000 per year.

"That's not feasible," she said.

The union represents housekeepers, certified nursing assistants and licensed practical nurses. About 350 workers are at Phoebe's facility on West Turner Street in Allentown, while an additional 50 workers are at a facility in Wernersville, Berks County. Employees have continued on the job under a contract that expired Oct. 31.

But since Oct. 31, workers have sought to publicize their conflicts with management, holding information sessions and a rally Nov. 10 in Allentown.

Earlier in November, Phoebe brought in busloads of possible replacement workers as a contingency in case workers walk off the job. Marles has said Phoebe is doing contingency plans "as appropriate."

"We respect our employees' right to demonstrate," Marles said Friday in a statement. "At the same time, we will do all we can to ensure there is no interference in the delivery of care for our residents."

Phoebe Ministries has not seen a work stoppage in recent years, according to The Morning Call archives.

Workers are scheduled to hold a candlelight vigil at 3:30 p.m. Tuesday in front of Phoebe headquarters, 1925 W. Turner St.

asalamone@mcall.com

610-820-6694