U.S. Rep. John Mica likes to say he always campaigns as if he's 25 points behind — and then he almost always wins re-election by 25. The fantasy of underdog may be tougher and the big win easier this year, because his Democratic opponent quit campaigning, leaving only an unfunded, independent challenger.

"I can assure you, I'm still running like I'm 25 points behind," said Mica, a Winter Park Republican.

Not campaigning this year is Democratic nominee Wes Neuman, 28, a political and foreign affairs specialist from Longwood who suspended his campaign in August. Also in the race, albeit with no organization and no money, is independent candidate Al Krulick, 62, a salesman from Maitland.

District 7 includes most of Seminole County, much of north Orange County and some of southwest Volusia County.

A free-market economics conservative, Mica is seeking his 12th term. For much of his time in Congress, he has been Central Florida's point person for transportation and veterans affairs money. As chairman for a while of the House Transportation Committee, he pushed through funding for Interstate 4 expansion and SunRail.

Al Krulick Al Krulick Al Krulick

He says he has had bipartisan successes, passing or helping pass the federal aviation, transportation, Coast Guard, rail, water resources and pipeline safety and European trade bills.

He also, because of his opposition to the Affordable Care Act, was one of the more outspoken Republican federal budget opponents that forced the government shutdown in 2013.

He supports the air strikes against ISIS in Syria. He opposes same-sex marriage though he supports civil unions, and he is against abortion except in the cases of rape, incest or threat to the mother's life. He opposes any immigration path to citizenship program. He is a strong backer of gun rights.

Mica pushed the Department of Veterans Affairs to keep open the Lake Baldwin Clinic and to double the size of the Orange City Clinic, and has been a critical supporter of efforts to get the new long-delayed Lake Nona Veterans Medical Center funded and finished.

Neuman, making his first bid for elected office, sent an email to the Orlando Sentinel in September saying that he quit campaigning. He did not respond to a subsequent Sentinel request for an interview. If elected, he still could serve, but he is not saying if he wants to.

Krulick has twice previously run for Congress as a Democrat, in the 1990s. Both times he lost by more than 30 points.

He wants Congress to address climate change and reform campaign finance to eliminate big money. He wants to end efforts to put marijuana users in jail. He wants a higher federal minimum wage; single-payer, affordable health care; tighter gun laws; increased unemployment benefits and students relieved from federal student loan debts. He wants children crossing the borders from violence-ravaged countries to be given asylum as refugees.

"I've got a voice. I've got a loud voice," he said. "I'll go to the well of the House during general speeches and I'll make the case. And I'll talk as loud and long as I can and I'll get people in Congress to understand that the American people are way ahead of them on these issues."

smpowers@tribune.com or 407-420-5441.