Buy Photo Jon Selby, left, shakes hands with H&R Block agent Bob Brantley at the H&R offices on Lohman Avenue. Brantley is in his 15th season of helping people with their tax returns. (Photo: Jett Loe / Sun-News)Buy Photo

LAS CRUCES — It's rarely a fun time, even if you are expecting a little cash back from Uncle Sam.

But tax time is officially upon us, and local accountants and tax preparers are warning that this year is already taking an unwelcome — if not unexpected — bite out of many people's wallets.

The penalties for not having health insurance, either through your employer, a private insurance company or BeWellnm — the state's insurance exchange — are increasing and, in many cases, catching some filers unaware.

Buy Photo Johnell Horner, an Enrolled Agent with H&R Block for 26 years, helps Iliana Lugo, visiting with her 2-year-old son Dominique Lugo, with her tax return. (Photo: Jett Loe / Sun-News)

"The penalties are going up," said Jacob Avalos, who with his mother, Bertha Lujan, owns the accounting and tax firm of Lujan & Avalos. "I already did some (returns) and they were saying 'what are you talking about?' and I tell them they are going to owe extra money."

The fees for not carrying health insurance when you file your returns this year are calculated two different ways, as a percentage of your household income or per person. And you pay whichever is higher.

Calculated as a percentage of household income, it will cost you 2.5 percent of your earnings. Per person, $695 per adult and $347.50 per child under age 18 can be levied with a maximum of $2,085.

The fees will be levied and due when you file your federal tax return for the year you didn't have coverage.

That leaves a substantial portion of the state's population facing additional penalties when the tax man comes.

Linda Weeden, the senior director of communication, marketing and outreach for BeWellnm, said the state has made progress in the past two years, but still many residents remain uninsured.

"The last we saw, we started out at almost 21 percent (uninsured) in 2013," Weeden said. "Now we are down to 12.4 percent. That could be people insured by Medicaid, Medicare, any form of insurance."

Roughly 50,000 people signed up in New Mexico since November.

But the increasing penalties, which will continue to grow year over year due to the Affordable Care Act, are catching some by surprise.

"With the ACA, it's always been a concern," said Veronica Ybarra, office manager for H & R Block on Lohman Avenue. "Last year was a little easier. This year the penalties are a bit stiffer."

Last year, filers were on an honor system, and were simply asked if they had been insured, Ybarra said. This year, however, documentation will be required. Employers will have to provide proof of insurance along with standard W-2 forms.

"The employer will send a 1095, B or C, depending on the size of the employer," Ybarra said. "It's an informational document that says, yes or no, if you have insurance."

It is similar to the 1095-A that participants in the state's insurance exchange will recieve. And, this year, the teeth in the Affordable Care Act will have more bite.

"Last year there were a lot more exemptions available for not having insurance," Ybarra said. "People are going to get hit with those penalites harder this year. The way the ACA was written, the penalites are just going to get bigger and bigger."

Of course, there are the usual adjustments, new exemptions and the fact inflation went up a little bit that may ease some of the pain. Additionally, if people joined the state insurance exchange, they will be able to reconcile what they paid with their final bill. In some cases, people overpaid and that will add to a refund amount. In other cases, those who underpaid may have to pony up a few more bucks to get square with the government.

"For the most part it's pretty standard, same old, same old," Ybarra said. "The biggest concern this year is the ACA and how it's affecting people."

Buy Photo A sign advertising income tax preparation help outside the Pro Tax offices on Lohman Avenue. (Photo: Jett Loe / Sun-News)

Jason Gibbs may be reached at 575-541-5451. Follow him on Twitter @fjgwriter

Read or Share this story: http://lcsun.co/1RIchFT