CLEVELAND, Ohio – Ohio Gov. John Kasich spent last week out West, pushing for balanced budgets and heightening speculation about a presidential bid.

The Republican threw a few more logs on the 2016 fire Sunday.

"Options are still on the table. We'll see," Kasich said during a "Fox News Sunday" interview with host Chris Wallace. "Let me tell you, Chris, I love my Buckeye State. I love what we're doing out here. In some respects, what we're doing here – if you listen to some of the rhetoric of the people running for president now, it's interesting how many of them are using these comments about caring for people."

The jab seemed aimed at other Republicans who, like Kasich, have offered a more compassionate, middle-class message. That list includes Jeb Bush and Mitt Romney, two early front-runners who are competing for the GOP's establishment's donor base.

Kasich also noted that other Republican governors have followed his lead in accepting federal dollars to expand Medicaid coverage under the Affordable Care Act.

So, what's Kasich's timetable for deciding on whether to run?

"I'm introducing a budget in another week that will be another significant reform budget, Kasich said. "That's what we do out here. ... What I'm going to do is focus now, I've gotta get this budget going. ... There's plenty of time for me to decide."

He added: "You know what? Ohio is a microcosm of America. And when you're doing things in a state like this, where things are getting better, people are more hopeful, that's an important message to take around the country, whether I run or not."

The appearance was another signal that Kasich is now openly considering another campaign for the White House. His run 15 years ago ended before the 2000 primary season began, and until last week he had shown little enthusiasm for an encore.

While rallying support for a constitutional amendment that would require the federal government to balance its budget, a trip that took Kasich to states such as Wyoming and South Dakota, the governor said he was keeping open his options.

More from Kasich's "Fox News Sunday" segment ...

On President Barack Obama's proposal to raise the capital gains tax: "Raising capital gains taxes ... is just a prescription for economic slowdown. ... You cannot build a little guy up by tearing a big guy down."

On the prospects of constitutional convention to draft a balanced-budget amendment: "Just think about a convention If we would go to a convention, instead of kids focusing on Justin Bieber and Tom Brady and deflated footballs, maybe they'd start thinking about Ben Franklin and Jefferson and Madison and Monroe."

On calling opposition to Common Core education standards "hysteria": "I've asked the Republican governors that have complained about this to tell me where I'm wrong. And guess what? Silence. You know, part of the problem is today is politicians are running to try to get votes. You know what we try to do out here? We went out here trying to solve problems. ... It's local schools, it's local school boards and high standards. I don't know how anybody can disagree with that unless you're running for something."

Kasich's Fox News appearance followed Saturday's Iowa Freedom Summit, a gathering of social conservatives in the 2016 cycle's all-important first caucus state. Kasich did not attend, but other potential presidential candidates, such as Govs. Chris Christie of New Jersey and Scott Walker of Wisconsin, did.

Kasich's moderate messaging on Common Core, Medicaid expansion and immigration places him to the left of many of those who spoke Saturday in Iowa.

"If you said you opposed the president's unconstitutional executive amnesty, show me where you stood up and fought," U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz, a Texas Republican, said at the summit, according to a report from the New York Times. "If you said you oppose Common Core, show me where you stood up and fought."