Topics: economy, Editor's Picks, equal pay, Family, family and medical insurance leave act, Gender, hot dogs, Labor, Labor Day, Labor movement, Minimum wage, paid family leave, Poverty, sick leave, Unions, women, Work, Workers' Rights, Politics News

Happy Labor Day, everyone. Thank you, unions and the American labor movement! And thank you, Grover Cleveland, for being a cynical strikebreaker who thought he could appease angry workers and stay in office by signing off on a pro-labor holiday. Cleveland didn’t win reelection, but his transparent bid for public favor gave us a day off to eat hot dogs with our extended families and reflect on the current status of the American worker.

So how are we doing? How’s the Republican-led House of Representatives faring on worker issues? (Spoiler: Womp womp.)

Women still don’t have equal pay.

Women, on average, earn less than their male peers. Even in the same jobs. Even for the same hours worked. Even when they have the same level of education. According to a 2003 analysis from the Government Accountability Office, the pay gap persists between men and women even when factoring in part-time work and women taking time off to have children or care for other family members. “Even after accounting for key factors that affect earnings, our model could not explain all of the difference in earnings between men and women,” according to the report.

And a breakdown of median weekly salaries from the Bureau of Labor Statistics reveals that women earn less than men in all but seven of the 600 listed occupations that the government has data on. A male high school teacher makes, on average, $1,050 a week. His female colleague earns, on average, 93 percent of that. A male physician makes, on average, $2,099 a week. His female colleague earns, on average, 67 percent of that.

So what’s the mystery ingredient to explain the otherwise unexplainable and persistent gap in wages? The Department of Labor has a theory:

Decades of research shows a gender gap in pay even after factors like the kind of work performed and qualifications (education and experience) are taken into account. These studies consistently conclude that discrimination is the best explanation of the remaining difference in pay. Economists generally attribute about 40 percent of the pay gap to discrimination — making about 60 percent explained by differences between workers or their jobs.

And far from being equal in its unequalness, the pay gap is worse for women of color and LGBTQ women. African-American women who work full-time year round earn 64 cents on the dollar; Latina women earn 54 cents on the dollar. These losses add up, amounting to thousands and thousands of dollars over a lifetime.

Women have more tools than ever at their disposal to challenge this kind of discrimination, but are still playing catch-up when it comes to ensuring they receive equal pay for equal work. Part of changing this involves a really sweeping cultural overhaul that reevaluates how men and women are valued, both in the labor force and at home. But it would be great if, in the meantime, Congress would implement some of the measures proposed to increase transparency and accountability in rectifying this gap, like the Paycheck Fairness Act, which failed again in 2014 but would have made it illegal for employers to punish workers who share information about their wages. And sharing information about your wages is one way to find out if your wages are grossly unequal.

Minimum wage workers still can’t support themselves on a full-time salary.

More than 25 percent of low-wage workers are single mothers. The minimum wage has been stalled at $7.25 an hour since 2009, meaning that even working full-time, these families are only bringing in $14,500 each year, which is $4,000 below the poverty level for a family with two children. And if you can’t get a full-time schedule (or a reliably full-time schedule), the situation can become even more dire.

Raising the federal minimum wage from $7.25 to a meager $10.10 an hour would boost earnings for 28 million workers, and would help lift millions of women out of poverty. Overall, two out of every three minimum wage workers is a woman, and many of those women are also mothers or the primary caregivers in their households. Despite widespread support across gender and party lines, Republican lawmakers almost uniformly oppose a modest raise to the minimum wage, leaving millions of families in poverty.