The Wichita State baseball team fell to No. 6 TCU 12-5 in game three of a three-game set on Sunday afternoon at Eck Stadium.

Dalton Horton got the win on the mound for TCU. He pitched six innings, allowed one run on two hits and struck out four. Zach Lewis took the loss for Wichita State, allowing eight runs on eight hits in 4.1 innings.

Gunnar Troutwine went 2-for-4 at the plate with a homerun, a double and three RBI. He also scored two runs. Dayton Dugas had two hits in three attempts with a homer and a RBI.

With one out in the third, TCU's Ryan Merrill tripled to right-center field and the next batter, Austen Wade, hit a sacrifice fly to center field to plate the first run of the game and give the Horned Frogs a 1-0 lead.

Evan Skoug's solo homer over the center field wall in the top of the fourth stretched the TCU lead to 2-0.

Troutwine put the Shockers on the board with a solo homerun in the home half of the fourth inning to cut the Horned Frog lead to 2-1.

TCU broke the game open in the fifth inning with six runs on six hits and one error to take an 8-1 lead. A double to left-center by Luken Baker plated three runs for the Horned Frogs in the inning.

In the top of the eighth, two walks and a single to lead-off the inning loaded the bases for TCU before Skoug knocked a RBI single into right field. Then, after Baker reached on a fielder's choice that scored a run, Barzilli plated two more runs with a double that saw the Horned Frogs push their advantage to 12-1.

Dugas cranked a solo homer in the bottom of the eighth to put another run on the board for Wichita State.

Jenista led off the bottom of the ninth for the Shockers with a walk, and after DeBacker singled, Troutwine hit a double to left-center field that plated both Jenista and Debacker. Two batters later, Bohm doubled down the third base line to score the third run of the inning for Wichita State, but the Horned Frogs won the game, 12-5.

The Shockers are next in action on Tuesday night against Oral Roberts at Eck Stadium. First pitch is set for 6:30 p.m.