Could You Be the Next CEO?

CHROs who've moved into CEO roles describe their career paths and the HR strengths that helped move them to the top.

Nigel Travis never planned on a career in human resources. When he was 16 and a slightly unfocused young lad in East London, with vague thoughts of a career in business, he took an aptitude test and was told he was cut out for social work. His dad told him that the business equivalent of social work was what the British call "personnel management," or what the Yanks call "HR."

Travis never planned on reaching the corner office, either. His trajectory abruptly changed after a more-than-two-decade run as a top human resource executive for English brands such as Rolls Royce and finally for Burger King in Miami, when it was owned by a British parent in the 1980s. The then-chief executive officer of the iconic hamburger chain called Travis in, praised his role in turning around the business, and asked him to run Burger King's operations in Europe, the Middle East and Africa.

He balked. In fact, Travis argued with his boss, Barry Gibbons, even after Gibbons told him his people-management skills were what made him a great candidate to run a business unit. "I told him, 'I just want to be the best HR executive I can be,' " says Travis, but Gibbons refused to take no for an answer.

After accepting the post and handling it well, Travis was tapped as a CEO by the pizza-delivery chain Papa John's, and then, in 2008, he was hired to run Dunkin' Brands, the holding company that oversees Dunkin' Donuts as well as Baskin-Robbins ice-cream franchising and generated roughly $750 million in revenue last year.

Travis says rarely a day goes by as CEO of the Canton, Mass.-based firm that he doesn't rely on some of the skills he honed in HR -- listening to his top deputies and encouraging them to come up with solutions rather than barking orders at them. "Too many people think that leading is simply telling people what to do," he says. During his time at Dunkin' Brands, Dunkin' Donuts has become one of the nation's fastest-growing fast-food chains -- expanding its footprint on the West Coast and abroad, and winning kudos for its marketing savvy.

The critical plot twist in Travis' story -- his move from human resources into the CEO's chair -- stands out because it is still so rare. In recent years, it's a short list of CHROs who've moved to the very top of the organizational chart -- most famously, Mary Barra at General Motors and Anne Mulcahy, now retired after running Xerox in the 2000s.

However, also in recent years, management experts have begun asking a question with increasing frequency and volume: Why aren't more CHROs perceived and even groomed as future CEOs? They note that the role of a human resource leader has changed drastically over the last two decades, moving away from managing benefits and pay, and more heavily into business strategy and frequent consultations with the CEO -- largely because of the new emphasis on developing talent. Yet CEOs and selection committees haven't always been quick to acknowledge this expertise when there is an opening at the top.

The issue took on all-new prominence in December when the Harvard Business Review published an article titled, simply, "Why Chief Human Resource Officers Make Great CEOs." The authors -- Dave Ulrich, the Rensis Likert Professor at the University of Michigan's Ross School of Business and a management consultant, and Ellie Filler, a senior client partner in the Swiss office of Korn Ferry, the executive recruiting firm -- say the article was not the one they were expecting to write when they began their research.

In fact, the initial idea was simply to look at the growing role of CHROs inside the corridors of corporate power and map the qualities of high-performing HR executives. To do that, Filler and Ulrich compared CHRO salaries and career-assessment results -- looking at traits around leadership style, intellect and emotional intelligence -- to other key management roles such as chief financial, operating, marketing and technology officers, and to CEOs.

The researchers were shocked to learn how closely the traits of highly successful CHROs matched those of the CEOs in their survey.

"When the data came out the way that it did, we flipped out . . . it was quite amazing to see," Filler says. For one thing, after CEOs, only corporate COOs received higher salaries than the top HR leaders -- who, on average, earned annual base pay of $574,000, which was about 33 percent more than that of chief marketing officers.

But even more important was the match in leadership skills between CHROs and the CEOs they work with. "CEOs must have skills to meet financial, customer and operational requirements," Ulrich says. "The differentiator of effective CEOs in globally changing business conditions comes from their ability to manage organization issues around talent, leadership and culture."

In other words, the ideal corporate leader is one who understands the traditional guideposts of profit-and-loss statements, yet also knows how to get the most out of people -- the skills that also define a best-in-class CHRO. Filler says that's because growing the bottom line today is more a matter of productivity than finding new markets. "The only way that a company can grow," she says, "is by getting more out of its people."

An "Emotional Consigliere"

Ulrich notes that, while CHROs are increasingly becoming what he calls "emotional consiglieres" to the top corporate leaders, and are thus getting a lot more face time with the CEO, that alone doesn't automatically make for a CEO candidate.

"Since successful CEOs match skills of CHROs, we believe that CHROs who know financial, customer and operational requirements may be qualified to lead companies," he says. "This does not mean that all CHROs would be qualified to be a CEO . . . ."

Ulrich stresses that the paper's key finding -- that top human resource executives make for great CEOs -- comes with a powerful qualifier: Some experience in other key business areas, such as marketing or finance, is really essential before a CHRO starts measuring the drapes in the corner office.

Even so, one of the broader implications of Ulrich's and Filler's research is the notion -- supported by their case study of several CEOs -- that there's been a shift inside the C-suite toward so-called "softer" leadership skills; that mastery of the numbers or other technical aspects of the business still matters, but is just part of the foundation.

Lisa Weber, who was a human resource executive at PaineWebber and elsewhere before becoming the CHRO at New York-based MetLife Inc., says she's not sure why she initially turned down a chance to become president of its Individual Business division, which is 45 percent of the insurance giant's business. Maybe, she recalls, she was just "plain scared," but her boss talked her into the job six months later. "I didn't offer it to you because of your financial or technical experience," he told her. "I'm offering it to you because of your leadership."

Weber, who ran the unit until 2008 and today is an executive adviser at New York-based Deloitte, says her own narrative gives her a fresh perspective on the qualities needed to become a C-suite leader. Rather than obsessing over whether they are "qualified," rising HR leaders should ask, "Where do I add the most value? Because that's what I should be doing," she says.

Weber also represents another important implication of the new research: that the growing status of the CHRO position may ultimately shatter the glass ceiling preventing more female CEOs. Ulrich and Filler note that, within their sample group of the highest-performing CHROs, some 42 percent were female, and that was more than double the next-highest senior position (CMOs, at 16 percent). Indeed, HRE's Top 100 lists of largest companies reflect this trend as well: The 2005 list, for instance, contained the names of 31 female chief HR officers, whereas this year's list shows 49 -- a 58-percent jump in women sitting at the tops of HR organizations, with almost 50 percent of those top 100 HR departments now being led by females.

The most visible example in America today of an HR executive making the leap to CEO is GM's Barra, who was chosen to lead the nation's largest domestic automaker in late 2013 at a moment of great turmoil, as the corporation was dealing with a scandal over faulty ignitions that have been blamed for multiple deaths. That narrative is not unusual: Experts say firms historically have been more likely to look to women and to executives with less-traditional resumes in moments of crisis, when they're looking to make a clean break with the past and possibly not toward candidates groomed by a tainted CEO. The other best-known CHRO-to-CEO story, Xerox's Mulcahy, came on board in 2001, when the iconic copier firm was viewed as being on the brink of Chapter 11 bankruptcy.

In a 2004 interview with a Stanford Graduate School of Business' Insights publication about Xerox's turnaround under her command, Mulcahy sounded the familiar touchstones: how she struggled at first with her perceived lack of grooming for the CEO chair and how her consultative management style paved the way for success.

"When I became CEO, I spent the first 90 days on planes traveling to various offices and listening to anyone who had a perspective on what was wrong with the company," she told the magazine. "I think if you spend as much time listening as talking, that's time well spent."

Newsletter Sign-Up: Benefits

HR Technology

Talent Management

HR Leadership

Inside HR Tech

HRENow

Special Offers

Email Address



Privacy Policy

A Role Transformation

The changing nature of the CHRO role also may mean that these top HR leaders are better suited than before to step into the CEO role. Another article in the Harvard Business Review -- "The New Path to the C-Suite," in 2011, by Harvard business professor Boris Groysberg, and L. Kevin Kelly and Bryan MacDonald of the executive-search firm Heidrick & Struggles -- noted there were "signs of change" in the CHRO's role and possibilities for advancement. Their piece says growing globalization means future HR leaders will need to be culturally astute, adding: "The CHROs of the future will be more likely to have an understanding of commercial models, as well as experience with change management and finding pragmatic solutions to complex issues."

Ravin Jesuthasan, a global practice leader for talent management at the New York-based consultancy Towers Watson, and co-author of the upcoming book Lead the Work: Navigating the World Beyond Employment, says the growing tendency in our tech-based economy to outsource key tasks is going to make HR a bigger element of corporate strategy than it's ever been.

"A world-class CHRO helps the CEO in figuring out which work is best done by different sources," he says. By advising corporate leaders on which critical functions need to be done in-house, and which jobs need to be contracted out, he reasons, the most successful HR executives will become logical candidates for even higher management.

The relatively few recent CHROs who've been tapped for a CEO or business-unit leadership role say they either lacked for broader business experience or even lacked ambition to leave HR, which may explain why so many of them were surprised -- and a little reluctant -- when the idea of a promotion first came up. That was that case when the CEO of Royal Dutch Shell summoned his executive vice president of global human resources, John Hofmeister, in 2005 to talk about a vacancy at the top of Shell's U.S. unit.

"I notice that you didn't put your name on the slate of candidates -- why not?" the Royal Dutch Shell CEO, Jeroen van der Veer, asked him.

"I'm happy in HR," Hofmeister responded. But his boss was convinced that Hofmeister had the right skill set to take over the American business unit, which is based in Houston. Looking back, he notes that he did, in fact, have a solid background from working under the legendary Jack Welch at General Electric in the 1980s, including some time in manufacturing and marketing. He says his time in human resources, which also included stints at Northern Telecom and AlliedSignal, gave him a strong sense of how managing talent is integral to a firm's business strategy.

However, Hofmeister says, his most important trait was his knack for collaboration. He describes his approach to leadership as "providing people the atmosphere and the freedom to achieve what they're capable of achieving -- that it's not about me, it's about the rest of the team, and giving them the sense of freedom and independence to get things done and to support them on their end."

Hofmeister says he was the right choice at the right time because the nature of the business challenges facing Shell in the mid-2000s -- including better integration of marketing and retailing efforts -- hinged so heavily on people management. He left when he hit Shell's mandatory retirement age of 60 for top executives and now runs Citizens for Affordable Energy.

At Dunkin' Brands, Travis says, he's found that, during his seven-year tenure as CEO of the fast-food giant-which has seen rapid franchise growth to 11,300 Dunkin' Donuts shops in 37 nations as well as roughly 7,500 Baskin-Robbins locations around the globe-the biggest quandaries he faces often revolve around personnel. In the last few years, these have included the implementation of the Affordable Care Act as well as upward wage pressures for entry-level workers and honing a strategy for those workers to advance to higher positions.

"Our industry is seen in America as the trainer for the American workforce," he says. The skills needed to succeed in a quick-serve restaurant franchise -- problem-solving and serving customers with both speed and courtesy -- are critical for success in business. He says he believes entry-level jobs should not be maligned but touted to the public as a kind of apprenticeship for success in the wider labor force.

Travis also says people who evaluate future leaders tend to undervalue experience in HR, recalling the early years in his career back in England when he had to let employees go or even deal with the terminally ill. "People think of HR as a 'nice' function," he says, "but HR [leaders] are the ones who have to [deal directly with the people and their challenges, even if it sometimes means] walk[ing] them to the door."

Read also:

Strategies for Stepping Up