Joke of a job. If I were Chauncey Billups, there is no way I would coach the Nuggets. It’s a losing proposition. The main issues on this team are Josh Kroenke and Tim Connelly, who run the front office. The Nuggets need a direction change at the top of the organization chart.

Keith, representing the 303

Kiz: While I would like to see Billups be named president of basketball operations in Denver, I can’t see Kroenke ceding so much power to a rookie executive. But I can see Kroenke giving a proven coach a big say in how the roster is shaped. At age 49, University of Florida coach Billy Donovan has the gray in his hair, the national championships on his résumé and an interest in NBA coaching in his past to make him an intriguing coaching candidate for the Nuggets. If Kroenke wants to make a statement to Denver fans and hire a coach with the name recognition to help recruit free agents, then the Nuggets need to ante up at least $5 million in annual salary to get Donovan’s attention.

Easy fix. Do you believe in sports mechanics? They’re the guys who fix boxing matches and basketball games. If you don’t believe, then please explain how the Washington Generals have lost 10,341 straight games to the Harlem Globetrotters. Could the same mechanics be involved in the upcoming NBA draft?

John, Broomfield

Kiz: We here at Kickin’ It Headquarters don’t put much faith in mechanics, because they never show up during the promised 8 a.m. to noon window, while we gaze at our belly-button lint. But we do believe the NBA draft and all other sporting events in America are controlled by The Matrix, because the great thespian Keanu Reeves has insight into the universe that you and I lack.

Food for thought. Maybe the Rockies should try beer and hot dogs at the training table. It worked for Babe Ruth.

Al, retired postal worker

Kiz: Postage stamps are an endangered species, yet one gave its life to send this advice via snail mail, with dietary instructions written on the outside of the envelope. Which goes to prove: The world went crazy long before the Internet was invented.

Hold your horses. And today’s parting shot is a warning shot to linebacker Von Miller to stop all the boasts about how good the Broncos are going to be in 2015.

If you spend any time in Texas, you will hear Aggie jokes. Denver has its very own. Knuckleheads like Miller are the reason I no longer watch the NFL.

R.V., allergic to pigskin

Mark Kiszla: mkiszla@denverpost.com or twitter.com/markkiszla