Nebraska transfer guard Hannah Tvrdy is eligible to play for the Rams this year after sitting out last season. (Sean Star/Loveland Reporter-Herald)

FORT COLLINS — There are questions for every team before every season, and perhaps the most pressing one for the Colorado State women's basketball team heading into the 2015-16 campaign is how the Rams will fill the void left by their two graduated point guards, AJ Newton and Gritt Ryder.

The two transfers led the Rams to back-to-back regular season Mountain West championships in their only two seasons in Fort Collins, so the bar has been set quite high for the position.

Less than a month away from the season opener, coach Ryun Williams says there's likely to be more than one right answer to the question.

"I think it's going to be by committee," the fourth-year coach said. "We've just got a lot of good players. We've got a lot of different ways we can go at the point. You won't see us just play one kid there. I think we've got a number of kids that can handle some situations from that spot."

There's three players to keep an eye on in forming that committee: senior Keyora Wharry, junior Ellen Nystrom and sophomore Hannah Tvrdy.

Wharry filled in at the point at times early last season as Ryder and Newton were battling injuries, while Nystrom finished second on the team in assists with 3.6 a game.

Nystrom was also the team's top rebounder, so it wasn't like she spent all her time on the perimeter, but it's a position she's plenty familiar having grown up in Europe where players are generally taught a more well-rounded skillset regardless of height (the Swedish native is 6-foot-1).

"I've been playing that all summer, and my whole life, so it's a role I'm used to," Nystrom said "So it's not going to be new, just new with this team. I'm growing into it."

Nystrom also averaged better than three assists a game as a freshman, so creating offense for her teammates has always been one of her strengths. But in terms of being the team's primary ball handler, Williams has already seen Nystrom improve.

"She's getting more comfortable with the ball in her hands," Williams said. "She's got good vision. She's a pretty good playmaker. It's been fun to watch her develop each day in practice at that role."

A transfer from Nebraska who is eligible this season after sitting out last year, Tvrdy certainly seems to have the pedigree of a prototypical point guard having been rated as one of the nation's top prospects at the position coming out of Seward High School (Neb.).

While no one likes going through a whole season of all practice and no games, having Tvrdy sit out as a Division I transfer last season may have been the best thing for the Rams as they try to reshape their backcourt.

"Last year was a huge learning year, and just being able to watch them and how the system works definitely helps a lot, rather than just coming in right away and trying to learn it at the same time (as playing)," Tvrdy said. "It really helped having that time just to get it down."

While the Rams will have to replace plenty of points without Ryder and Newton, who were the team's top two scorers last year with a combined 20.5 points a game, the more difficult task might be trying to replace their leadership.

"That's the thing. Those were two really solid kids in the locker room ," Williams said. "We trusted them on the floor. They were an extension of the coaching staff on the floor. Who's that going to be? That's all stuff that's going to take a while to figure out, or for kids to feel comfortable in their new roles.

"This group has the makeup to be a nice basketball team. We've just got to put the pieces in the right place."

Sean Star: 970-669-5050, sstar@reporter-herald.com or twitter.com/seanvstar