The rhinestones and Stetsons of cowboy couture: While the world's fashionistas flocked to NYC another celebration of style happened MUCH further west

Fashionable crowds, chic parties, and luxury goods -- all in the American west.



Jackson Hole, Wyoming recently played host to the Western Design Conference (WDC), which ran September 5 through September 8. The conference is part of the Jackson Hole Fall Arts Festival, which also began September 5 and continues until September 15.



The conference was hosted by Teton Home and Living Magazine, according to its website . It played host to a number of glamorous events, including a jewelry show and champagne reception, as well as a 'winners circle' art auction and fashion show.



A Design Excellence Awards ceremony was also held at the conference. According to the WDC website, over $22,000 was given in prize money to artists.



Wealthy fashionistas checked out the latest in luxury goods and home decor at the Western Design Conference in Jackson Hole

Fashionistas wore cowboy hats as they attended the Western Design Conference in Jackson Hole, Wyoming

The conference, held in the Snow King Center, included over 115 different exhibitors. Shoppers found thousands of expensive items, including furs and boots. Many visitors were already dressed for the occasion, wearing designer cowboy hats.

Elaborate rhinestone and jewel-encrusted boots, like the ones made by Western Spirit award winner Gauteraux and Company, were on display. According to ABC , boots by Tres Outlaws are among the most expensive, and start around $1,500. Female fans are reported to usually own multiple pairs.



Meredith Lockhart Collections, designed by Meredith Lockhart, also presented women's clothing featuring fabrics like fur and velvet. Lockhart won the Best Artist award for 'art to wear.'



Shoppers checked out at the Western Design Conference, like ones seen here made by Gauteraux and Company

Meredith Lockhart Collections presented luxury Western couture, like the outfit seen here. Designer Meredith Lockhart won Best Artist for 'art to wear'

'Rustic' furniture was also seen at the Western Design Conference. These included chairs and foot stools made with antlers. MacPhail Studio, led by artist Daniel MacPhail, also presented 'Christmas trees' made out of antlers.



Other goods at the Western Design Conference featured Native American elements and imagery. Santos Furniture was one of many companies which presented this aesthetic. The company's website says it has been featured on the TODAY show and the Home and Garden Network.



Wyoming fashionistas still have other opportunities to check out various goods. A third fundraiser, Western Visions , runs through September 22. It raises funds for the National Museum of Wildlife Arts.



Buyers were able to look at furniture made out of antlers, like the 'Christmas tree' made by Dan MacPhail of MacPhail Studios seen in this file photo