"Place is a conceptual starting point that opens up a whole bunch of questions," says architect Nathan Webster, Boye-Christensen's husband and co-founder of NOW-ID, their interdisciplinary dance company that is presenting its third site-specific work uniting Utah and international artists.

Boye-Christensen and Webster joke that they'll finalize the name of the work — is it "Nowhere" or "Now Here" — only after the performance. One promotional tagline:,"Follow NOW-ID to Nowhere," underscores what some artists might consider the tension of working in a place like Utah, which can seem culturally isolated from the arts conversations going on nationally and internationally.

The performance will feature Ballet West's Katherine Lawrence, former Ririe-Woodbury dancers Tara McArthur and TJ Spaur, and University of Utah ballet student Brian Nelson. Music, by Danish composer and musician Jesper Egelund and Icelandic composer Steingrimur Rohloff, will be performed by organist Laura Cutler.

With lighting design and sets, Webster hopes concertgoers will see the music hall in a different light. "It has almost a templelike quality to it," says Boye-Christensen, the former artistic director of Ririe-Woodbury Dance Company. "I like doing something really dynamic in this very limited space" — limited as a performance venue, that is, by its lack of wing space. She adds: "I also like the idea of creating a mapping sensation in the space with the choreography."

And in perhaps the most unusual collaboration, the performance will spotlight Bateman, a sculptor, who will be featured in videos shot along his 1,100-mile trek.

He started the walk on April 28, when his parents dropped him off by the Missouri River in Omaha, Neb., in the place Mormons settlers called Winter Quarters. He expected to walk into Salt Lake City on July 10, he said on a cellphone call last week from Farson, Wyo.

He's making the walk accompanied by his sheepdog, Hannah. He started the trip carrying all his gear in a backpack, but his sister met him at the 400-mile mark with a jogging stroller. That's helped him increase his daily mileage to about 22 miles from 13.

The artist has a GPS app that posts daily mileage updates to his Facebook page, and he publishes daily pictures on his Instagram account (jadambateman). That technology keeps him connected, while it also transforms his walk into something like performance art.

"The act of walking as art is as much the action of the artmaking as it is the product," he writes about the project on his website. "In a literal sense, the act of walking parts the air and makes a negative-sculpture of the space my body occupies over time."

The trip isn't meant to be ironic, he says, but as an agnostic he doesn't consider it faith-promoting, either. He assumes the experience will influence his future artwork. "I want this to be personal and I want it to be about my cultural history as well as my family history," in addition to challenging and claiming the mythology of the West, he says.

At the NOW-ID performance, videos of the landscape Bateman walked through will contrast with the stylized space of Webster's architectural set design. The walk "will represent the idea of travel that gets you somewhere and travel that keeps you in place and literally takes you nowhere," Boye-Christensen says.

She likes the contrast of trained dancers performing with nondancers. "There's an unpretentious, vulnerable authenticity of seeing somebody onstage who is obviously not supposed to be there," she says.

Bateman's generational ties to Utah, and his decision to leave and move back, contrast with Boye-Christensen's and Webster's experience as transplants (he is from Vancouver, B.C.).

"There really is a very fascinating and unique culture here because of that Mormon pioneer history and the relationship to it, the push-and-pull with that culture and those that live amongst it," Webster says. "There's an interesting blend of people that survive and thrive in this atmosphere."

Boye-Christensen was drawn to Salt Lake City in 2002, as associate and then artistic director of Ririe-Woodbury Dance Company. After she stepped down from the dance company, she founded herself anchored here through her marriage to Webster and to NOW-ID, which they founded in 2013. Webster moved to Salt Lake City eight years ago, drawn by an up-and-coming urban area where real estate was still affordable with accessible outdoors recreation. They both credit the extraordinary creative energy of the local artistic community as one of the factors that make them stay.