GOLDEN — Connie Carpenter-Phinney has wanted the USA Pro Challenge to include women’s racing since its inception five years ago, but she’s glad they waited until they were ready and could do it right. And the three-day inaugural Women’s USA Pro Challenge was a huge success.

“I’m so pleased to see this huge crowd like I got to experience for the women,” she said. “The women gave a great show, we’ve got some great talent here. There’s a World Cup going on right now for women’s cycling (in Sweden). You’re not reading about that in the cycling news, you’re reading about this race. Already it’s No. 1 on the list.”

Carpenter-Phinney hopes the attention that comes from the Pro Challenge will benefit all cyclists in Colorado, not just those who race.

PHOTOS: Women’s USA Pro Challenge, Stage 3

“Colorado is a cycling-friendly place,” she said. “It’s not unusual that you have this kind of a fan base because they like to ride bikes, they like to see the people they read about and hear about, they like to admire that level of that ability and aspire to that level. But I think more importantly, it’s important for us in Colorado to keep the roads safe for the kids that are riding. My kids always rode their bikes to school. The bike is for everybody. We need to keep it safe for everybody. That includes our scenic roads as well as our town roads.”

Going for it

After an hour of frantic laps on a 1.5-mile course and averaging almost 24 mph in a lead pack of more than 20 riders, stage winner Coryn Rivera (UnitedHealthcare) made her move onto the downhill two turns from the finish.

“It was a really fast finish,” Rivera said. “I had a feeling that I wanted to be first out of the last corner, just because it was so fast and it was a little off-camber and wanted to take that risk on my own without anyone near me. I shot the second to the last corner and took the last corner on my own and just let it all out.”

Bragging rights

Mara Abbott to the cycling world: Told you so.

Colorado came through just as she knew it would for the first Women’s Pro Challenge.

“It’s just been amazing,” Abbott said. “It’s just been really fun to be able to show off the place I’m most proud of to the world, to show everyone that I’ve raced against on a regular basis. Everyone in the bike world knows how obsessed I am about Colorado because I won’t stop talking about it. To be able to bring them here and then to have these sorts of crowds, it’s almost like a set-up of being able to say, ‘Ha, ha, this is what I’ve been talking about.’ “

Emotional day

A lot of people got emotional seeing the turnout in Golden for the third day of women’s racing. That included women’s racer directory Sean Petty.

“I looked up that hill today and seriously almost, tears came to my eyes, everybody out here for a women’s race,” Petty said. “A lot of work went into this. We came in late on this decision, in April. Breckenridge, Fort Collins and certainly Golden not only stepped up but exceeded our expectations. I knew the women would put on a great, great three days of racing and they did.”

John Meyer: jmeyer@denverpost.com or twitter.com/johnmeyer