FORT WAYNE, Ind. (WANE) Representative Todd Young is one of three candidates running for U.S. Senate representing Indiana. If elected, he said repealing Obamacare would be the first item on his agenda.

Young is originally from Indianapolis and currently lives in Bloomington with his wife and four young children.

“In so many ways, I’m a regular Hoosier who grew up with great parents who told me if I dream big, if I worked hard, I could do anything in life,” Young said.

According to Young, that motto led him to the U.S. Naval Academy and the Marine Corp. He served as an intelligence officer and was trained in counter-terrorism.

Young then served as representative for Indiana’s 9th district.

“It informs my work on a daily basis. We are in a time of war. It’s an unconventional sort of war against terror, but I would agree we need more people who have worn the uniform, who understand what it means to come up with a genuine military strategy. This president has not put forward a winning strategy to help win that war on terror and keep Americans safe and secure. So, that’s another area where I feel like I can continue that value over in the United States senate,” Young said.

Young said during his time in the district, he’s proud of his work with leading regulatory reform in the republican party, noting the REINS Act, which every republican presidential candidate is running on, his efforts to find ways to finance higher education, repeal a major provision of Obamacare, changing the welfare system in order to encourage churches and non-profit organizations to help the poor and vulnerable opposed to the government.

“It’s one thing to say you’re a conservative, it’s another thing to be able to actually fight and win in Washington, D.C.,” Young said. “I want to go to Washington and the U.S. Senate to actually get things done and not just talk a big game.”

If elected, Young said the first item on the agenda would be to repeal Obamacare.

“Every American deserves access to affordable healthcare, accessible healthcare and we need to make sure that we continue to make advancements to cure diseases and make sure that people stay healthier longer. It also impacts our economy and our economic growth,” Young said. “So, jobs in the economy is the issue along with national security that I hear most from Hoosiers about and healthcare costs are just killing our employers and one of the reasons why we haven’t seen more businesses started and expanding and more good paying jobs aren’t being created. So, I want every Hoosier to have access to a quality education that turns into a good paying job that ultimately leads to a meaningful career in places like Fort Wayne, Indiana.”

Young said if he could use one word to describe himself, it’d be “patriot.”

“I love this country, I love what it stands for, I’m proud of our history, I have been prepared to fight and if necessary, die, to ensure that America remains the greatest, the free-est, the most opportunity-filled country in the wolrd,” Young said.

Young is running against Republican Representative Marlin Stutzman. Former Representative Baron Hill is running for U.S. Senate on the democratic ticket.