CLEVELAND, Ohio - If you have already filed your tax return - and you've got a nice refund coming, and you had health insurance last year, and you got the right tax form from the government with the right information about your health plan -- consider yourself lucky.

If you're not so fortunate, here are some things to keep in mind:

Special enrollment period starts March 15

First, to the uninsured among you: The federal government is giving you one last chance to sign up for a health plan through the Affordable Care Act so you can avoid paying a hefty penalty in 2015.

From March 15 through April 30, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services - part of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services - will hold a special enrollment period just for you. The feds want to keep you from having to pay a fine.

Those who eschewed Obamacare health insurance in 2014 are subject to a fine of $95 per adult or 1 percent of annual income (up to the national average cost of a bronze plan, roughly $2,500), whichever is greater - payable at the time that you file your tax return.

If you choose not to have health insurance in 2015, that penalty goes up significantly, to $325 per adult or 2 percent of annual income; only the amount of income above the tax filing threshold, about $10,000 for an individual, is used to calculate the penalty, according to the Affordable Care Act web site.

Some of you who don't have health insurance may qualify for an exemption, because you don't make enough money to afford insurance, for example.

Not sure if you qualify for an exemption? Going to healthcare.gov/exemptions-tool/#/ should give you some answers.

Need help? Go to www.HealthCare.gov/Taxes or www.IRS.gov if you have questions about your taxes, need to download forms, want to learn more about the fine for not having health insurance, and other information. You can also call the Marketplace Call Center at (800) 318-2596.

Who's eligible to sign up during the special enrollment period? If you live in Ohio, or any other state that uses the federal marketplace for residents to sign up, and if you currently don't have a health plan from the federal marketplace, then you're eligible.

Go to healthcare.gov/get-coverage for more information on finding out your status.

If you sign up for a health plan on March 15, coverage will begin on April 1. If you sign up by April 15, coverage will begin on May 1.

King v. Burwell court case now before Supreme Court

If you're among the millions of people currently getting federal tax credits, or subsidies, to help cover the cost of your insurance premium, you probably have more than a passing interest in King v. Burwell, the lawsuit that has made its way to the U.S. Supreme Court. Opening arguments were held last week in the case, which challenges the legality of subsidies for people in Ohio and 33 other states who buy their health insurance through the federal marketplace.

The court won't hand down a ruling until June, so there will be unending analysis over the next three months on possible outcomes. A ruling against the Obama administration (Burwell is U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell) could do away with subsidies, and weaken the Affordable Care Act.

Tax form woes

Meanwhile, there's another issue that's much more pressing for about 800,000 of you - according to CMS - who signed up for health insurance through the federal marketplace in 2014, and who received an incorrect 1095-A form (which you need for filling out your tax return because it has key information about your health plan).

You probably have been contacted saying that you'll be getting a new form any day now.

At least that's what the government is saying.

If you're still waiting for the right form, then you'll be able to empathize with Kari Petrovic of Shaker Heights.

Petrovic and her husband, Marc, bought silver plans through Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield in 2014 while they were self-employed artists living in Connecticut. The couple and their family moved to Shaker Heights in August after he accepted a teaching job - with health insurance - from the Cleveland Institute of Art.

In January the Petrovics received two wrong 1095-A forms from Access Health CT, the official marketplace for Connecticut.

Even though the government is advising people not to file their tax returns until they have the correct forms, "Nobody is really getting in touch with us," Kari Petrovic said this week. "Access Health CT isn't telling us not to file. Anytime I ask a question, like, 'Were these subsidies paid to Anthem?' nobody really knows. I don't think anyone knows how anything works."

As artists, the Petrovics' income varies wildly. They had paid for their premiums for six months up front, through June. After realizing that their income would be greater than expected - and would disqualify them from getting a subsidy - they reported the change through Access Health CT. They paid back their subsidies last May after their accountant told them that the IRS hadn't issued a directive on how to deal with income changes.

An error on one of the 1095-A forms stems from their attempt to repay the subsidy.

The other faulty 1095-A form stems from an error that Petrovic made (and that Access Health CT couldn't fix or delete) when she originally tried to sign up for a health plan. In essence, the marketplace officials told them not to worry about it since a policy wouldn't be generated from that bad application. To her surprise, however, she received a 1095-A form stating that she had gotten 12 months of subsidies - which she had not, because the policy didn't exist.

After several weeks worth of phone calls to Access Health CT - with Petrovic on hold for an hour during her first attempt - she said she has some hope that their case will be resolved in time for the couple to file their tax return, with the correct forms, by April 15.

If not, they may just go ahead and file anyway -- with the wrong forms - and deal with the IRS later, so as not to jeopardize their daughter's college financial aid.

"I'm stunned at them not being able to do this correctly," she said.