Español FrançaisDepending on whom you listen to, the people of Quebec are living in dark days. Huffington Post bloggers are unanimous: “unbridled” austerity imposed by the Liberal government is destroying hard-won “entitlements” acquired in the past 55 years.

There’s just one problem: Quebec isn’t facing austerity, but fauxsterity. As I’ve previously demonstrated, there have been no spending cuts in Quebec. In fact, the latest official economic update confirms it: spending is set to increase by 1 to 2 percent annually for the next five years. Despite Treasurer Martin Coiteux’s wish to cut government programs, the tendency towards fauxsterity rather than far-reaching reforms will only be reinforced thanks to Liberal tax increases. Indeed, if past trends are any indication, spending is likely to increase even higher than forecast levels.

This won’t be the first time that North America has witnessed fauxsterity. In the United States, the period between 1929 and 1944 was characterized by huge spending and tax increases, alongside a devastated economy. Policy makers should hardly be surprised that economic policies favored by far-right leaders during that same era failed to bring prosperity.

But fauxsterity seems to be back in vogue. After the government-induced housing bubble burst in 2007, Presidents Bush and Obama increased spending to massive levels to “save” the economy they both wrecked.

Obamacare alone includes 20 new or increased taxes. As a result, US labor participation is at its lowest since March 1978; debt has increased by 70 percent since 2009 — its nominal amount more than doubled — employment growth is at its slowest since 1945; and most poverty indicators are going through the roof.

Genuine Austerity Works

If Obama, or indeed any political leader, truly wants to help a faltering economy, he simply has to apply a libertarian’s favorite French expression: laissez-faire, laissez passer. In other words, by applying genuine austerity measures — spending and tax cuts — the economy will recover in no time.