Students and faculty will help University of Missouri Libraries decide what cuts to make in the future to balance the department’s budget after students rejected a library fee this week.

Once fully implemented, the staggered fee increase would have used $13 million from students to add new positions, renovate parts of Ellis Library and increase the collections budget.

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Or, use your facebook account: facebook Need an account? Create one now.

Matt Gaunt, director of advancement with MU Libraries, said lagging state funding and Missouri’s emphasis on keeping tuition costs down contribute to the library’s budget not being in line with its peers. “When your two main revenue streams are trickles there’s only so much you can do to empower any unit,” Gaunt said.

Students voted Monday through Wednesday this week. Of the 7,820 students who voted, 46 percent voted for the fee and 54 percent voted against it. MU Libraries needed 60 percent of votes to approve the fee.

Gaunt said students have contacted him and offered to help advocate for increased library funding. He said even students who voted against the fee because they thought the money should come from someplace else have contacted him this week.

The library proposal called for a $15 per credit hour fee by the 2021-2022 school year. The fee would have been phased in over six years, starting at $5 per credit hour next school year. Once the fee was fully implemented, the library’s revenue would have increased to about $30.7 million. MU Libraries’ revenue for fiscal year 2014 was about $17.7 million.

Library officials will meet with the faculty library committee and a recently created student advisory council to help decide where cuts can be made.

“We will be laying out the details in a very transparent manner of where we are as a library and getting their input,” Gaunt said.

Graduate Professional Council President Hallie Thompson said she has heard mixed reactions from graduate students since the fee failed Wednesday.

“There’s a lot of concern with regard to access to research journals, because that’s possibly one of the easiest areas to cut funding,” Thompson said.