A California chicken plant’s cockroaches infestation is so nasty that Foster Farms had to close again even after being cleaned.

As previously reported by The Inquisitr, Foster Farms was closed last week due to health violations and last year a salmonella outbreak was linked to their products.

Federal health inspectors have been watching Foster Farms closely since it’s possible that antibiotic-resistant salmonella may be spreading from their plant as well as two others located in central California. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says salmonella poisoning has sickened at least 416 people spread out over 23 states.

The chicken plant’s cockroaches infestation has actually been an ongoing problem based upon a letter submitted by the USDA:

“These recent findings of egregious insanitary conditions related to a cockroach infestation in your facility indicate that your establishment is not being operated and maintained in sanitary conditions.”

Unfortunately, cockroaches can carry viruses and bacteria, including salmonella, and spread them into whatever they come into contact with.

Over the last five months Foster Farms have been notified four times that they’ve been infested. But in the fall of 2013 the company claimed they had “submitted and implemented immediate substantive changes to their slaughter and processing to allow for continued operations.” They also claimed the chicken plant’s cockroaches hadn’t affected any of their products.

The interesting part about the laws is that USDA inspectors aren’t allowed to be in place when the chicken plant is actually operating. Some critics have claimed the USDA only took these actions due to the “bad PR,” while others says it’s odd how the federal organization “doesn’t have the power to shut them down when they poison hundreds of people with antibiotic-resistant salmonella.”

In response to all the criticism, Foster Farms says it’s dealing with the chicken plant’s cockroaches problem by voluntarily shutting to clean up and “exercise vigilance.” Although the cleanup was supposedly completed on Saturday the facility isn’t running yet, and production has shifted to other locations.