Topics: From the Wires, News

RIYADH, Saudi Arabia (AP) — U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry met with Gulf Arab officials on Saturday to ease their concerns about warming U.S.-Iranian ties and seek consensus on which Syrian opposition groups should be represented at upcoming peace talks.

Speaking after meeting in Riyadh with foreign ministers from the Gulf Cooperation Council who have sided with Saudi Arabia in its spat with Iran and who back the rebels fighting to overthrow Syrian President Bashar Assad, a key Iranian ally, Kerry and Saudi Foreign Minister Adel al-Jubeir presented a united front.

They said the U.S. and the GCC agreed on the need to confront destabilizing Iranian activities in the region and on an unspecified “understanding” that will allow the U.N.-led Syria negotiations to begin next week as planned.

“Let me assure everybody that the relationship between the United States and the GCC nations is one that is built on mutual interest, on mutual defense and I think there is no doubt whatsoever in the minds of the countries that make up the GCC that the United States will stand with them against any external threat,” Kerry said.

Al-Jubeir denounced Iran for its “hostile and aggressive stance” against Arab nations. But he said he did not believe that Washington would act rashly in dealing with Tehran because of the nuclear deal, which was implemented earlier this month and has given Tehran access to billions in formerly frozen assets.

“‘Overall, the United States is very aware of the mischief that Iran’s nefarious activities can do in the region,” Jubeir said. “I don’t believe the United States is under any illusion as to what type of government Iran is.” He criticized Iran for briefly taking 10 U.S. sailors captive in early January, saying “normal countries do not act like this.”

He also took a swipe at Iran by noting that in the prisoner swap that resulted in the release of four imprisoned Americans in Iran, none of the seven Iranians cleared of charges in the United States opted to return to Iran. It “tells you what a great country Iran is that no one wanted to return to it,” he said.

Kerry avoided such blunt criticism of Iran but stressed that the U.S. shares concerns about Iran’s behavior and will act against it when necessary, including imposing new sanctions, as it did last week in response to Iranian ballistic missile tests.

Shiite-led Iran and Sunni-ruled Saudi Arabia are longtime regional rivals that support opposite sides in the wars in Syria and Yemen. Relations plunged to a new low when Saudi Arabia executed a prominent Shiite opposition cleric earlier this month, drawing outrage from Shiites across the region and igniting mob attacks on Saudi diplomatic missions in Iran.