Try writing down your goals to be more productive in the new year. (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto) Story Highlights Each of us should feel that we have given everything in our power to give.

I believe we are called to be a channel of blessings, not a reservoir of selfishness.

Scroll down to read Bishop Walker's four tips on having a successful 2016.

As we reflect upon this past year there should be an honest assessment of our accomplishments and failures.

Admittedly all of us set admirable goals and are currently lamenting our failure to accomplish everything we set out to do. There seems to be so much to do and so little time to get it done.

We have collectively wondered “where has this year gone?” Finishing each year successfully should not be about completing every resolution we set, rather it should be finishing the year empty.

What I mean is that each of us should feel that we have given everything in our power to give. Great contentment comes when we, like great athletes, leave it all on the field.

Kobe Bryant has chosen to retire from the NBA because he has found contentment in knowing that he has left it all out there and doesn't have anything left to prove. You may not have done everything on your list, but you gave it your best shot.

Finding contentment requires us to come to the realization that we have made a significant contribution to the world.

Ending this year with no regrets is ultimately the goal.

There are many who are ending full of advice to give, gifts to share, opportunities to serve and the list goes on and on. Every moment of our lives is precious when our time is well spent selflessly making the world a better place.

Bishop Joseph Walker III is presiding bishop of Full Gospel Baptist Fellowship International and senior pastor of Mt. Zion Baptist Church in Nashville. (Photo: Submitted)

It’s then that we truly fulfill our purpose for existence.

I’ve often seen my life metaphorically as a pitcher under a fountain. The pitcher has been filled and now it must pour out into 100 cups.

The challenge for me was determining if the goal was filling all the cups or emptying the pitcher. Though my intentions are to fill every cup, I’ve learned that this herculean task is often too much for one “pitcher” or “person” to fulfill.

You can’t go through life with a “boil the ocean” mentality. You have to do what you can do and do it well, trusting that others will assist along the way and do their part.

Can you imagine if we all ended on empty? Not one cup would be neglected.

I believe we are called to be a channel of blessings, not a reservoir of selfishness. I often remind the good folks at Mt. Zion that if God cannot get a blessing through you, He will cease sending blessings to you.

So as you prepare to close out one year and prepare for another, there are a few things I would like to suggest:

Find contentment. When you know you’ve done your best and given your all, you can live with no regrets. Begin with the end in mind. Visualize where you want to be this time next year and work vigorously to achieve it. Set realistic goals. Don’t overdo it. Recognize that you are just one person and it’s best to do a few things very well than do many things horribly. Be intentional about prioritizing. Failure to do so may lead to unnecessary compromises.

Bishop Joseph Walker is presiding bishop of Full Gospel Baptist Fellowship International and senior pastor of Mt. Zion Baptist Church in Nashville.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1OsW8DG