A sharp recalculation of health-care spending contributed to a drastic downward recasting of economic output in the first quarter, to one of worst readings in three decades.

Felue Chang, who is newly insured under an insurance plan through the Affordable Care Act, receives a checkup from Dr. Peria Del Pino-White. Getty Images

The move was partly due to the difficulty interpreting the impact on the economy of the new health-care law, which began to take effect in January. When hard data, first available this month, showed a reduction in revenues for hospitals, doctors and other providers, the Commerce Department revised down its estimates of health spending in a release Wednesday.

Spending on health-care services declined at a 1.4% annualized pace in the first quarter, compared to an earlier estimate of a 9.1% increase. That revision contributed to a revision of gross domestic product to a 2.9% annualized decline from an earlier estimate of a 1% decline.

The revision in the health-care category was the largest in recent memory, said Nicole Mayerhauser, an official that oversees GDP statistics at the Commerce Department’s Bureau of Economic Analysis.

“Trying to initially estimate health care this first quarter was a very unique circumstance because of the rollout of the Affordable Care Act,” she said. “We made an adjustment from our normal methodology…(but) our assumptions ended up being too strong.”

For the first two estimates of any quarter’s GDP, the Commerce Department doesn’t have direct figures on health-care output. Instead it uses wage and employment data to make estimates. Sometimes government economists consider other measures to augment their approximations.

Initially, they considered Medicaid benefit figures and the number of Americans enrolling in coverage made available under the new health-care law. That data showed an increase in Medicaid outlays and that millions of Americans were signing up for healthcare insurance, leading the Commerce Department to forecast an increase for health outlays.

In the initial reading of first-quarter GDP, released in April, the Commerce Department noted this methodology. With more reliable data now available from a Census survey, those early assumptions have essentially been replaced with more reliable figures.

Ms. Mayerhauser said the Commerce Department doesn’t plan to regularly incorporate data related to the Affordable Care Act into its standard methodologies.

The impact of the Affordable Care Act on health-care consumption has been tricky to discern for the government and outside observers.

The new online insurance exchanges that opened Oct. 1 offered coverage that could begin as early as Jan. 1, but many enrollees waited until near the final date for most Americans to buy coverage of March 31 to sign up, meaning they gained coverage around April 1 or later—after the first quarter ended.

Michael Feroli, a J.P. Morgan Chase economist, said spending increases related to the new health-care law that didn’t show up in the first quarter “may ramp up more gradually throughout the year.”

It’s also not been clear how many of the 8 million people who picked plans through the exchanges had previously been uninsured, with some surveys putting the figure as high as 60% but others suggesting a much lower figure of around 30%. A previously insured person buying through an exchange rather than another outlet wouldn’t necessarily cause the amount spent on insurance to change significantly.

Additionally, insurance actuaries and other experts have differed over the extent to which people gaining insurance would have significant pent-up demand for services.

Some people who were suddenly able to get coverage even though they were sick might have put off care until their coverage cards arrived. But many of the plans sold through the exchanges came with lower premiums but relatively high-deductibles for treatment, which have been seen as dissuading some people from going to the doctor or seeking other services.