MIDDLETOWN >> Memorial Day is fast approaching in Middlesex County and the chamber continues to be on the move.

Last week was another busy one full of events and activities. We kicked off the week with our fourth and final special legislative event of 2015 where we welcomed Senate Majority Leader Bob Duff to an event sponsored by Eversource Energy.

I again want to thank Sen. Duff for visiting with our group during this very busy legislative session.

Eversource President of Corporate Citizenship Rodney Powell did a fine job introducing the senator, and we appreciate their support of this important leadership event and their continued support of our chamber.

Advertisement

Chamber Vice President Johanna Bond and I attended the Connecticut Governor’s Conference on Tourism in Hartford on Tuesday along with a number of other chamber members and other tourism stakeholders from around the state.

Tourism is a major economic generator for our region and our state and I am proud that the chamber’s newly created Tourism Committee is off to a real fast start.

State Comptroller Kevin Lembo continued his tour of the chamber divisions last week with stops at Coginchaug Regional High School in Durham for our Durham and Middlefield Division, and Chicago Sam’s in Cromwell for our Cromwell Division.

Comptroller Lembo does a terrific job at these meetings and we appreciate his continuing support.

Johanna and Chamber Controller Nancy Prue joined me on Thursday at the Annual Women in Business Luncheon at the Connecticut Convention Center.

It was a pleasure to join in recognizing all eight deserving women who were recently honored in a special section of the Hartford Business Journal for excellence in their profession.

I again congratulate all of them, and we are especially proud of four of the honorees that are strong partners and supporters of the Middlesex County Chamber of Commerce: Carol Wallace, Chairman, President and CEO, Cooper-Atkins Corp., Kristen Roberts, Vice President of Public Relations and Community Investment, Comcast, Catherine Smith, Commissioner, State Department of Economic & Community Development, and Susan Herbst, President, University of Connecticut.

Thursday evening featured an outstanding grand opening at Red Fox Restaurant and Bar on Smith Street in Middletown. The Red Fox team, led by owner Fico Cecunjanin, put out a delicious spread of food for our group which included Deputy Mayor Bob Santangelo, CBB Chairman Phil Ouellette, and a number of other chamber members and local supporters.

Fico served as head chef at Luce Restaurant for many years before opening The Red Fox, and his family owns a number of other terrific establishments throughout Middlesex County.

The restaurant and the menu both look great and we wish them the best of luck.

Our May Business After Work networking reception was held on Thursday evening at New Britain Stadium and was attended by over 175 chamber members and their guests. It was a great night for baseball and our members enjoyed another fun trip to the stadium.

The Rock Cats leadership team was very gracious and I want to thank Owner Josh Solomon, General Manager Tim Restall and their entire staff for hosting this event and for their support of our chamber.

Finally, on Friday, the Hal Kaplan Middletown Mentor Program Year End Celebration Picnic was held at the Connecticut Valley Hospital picnic grounds.

This event celebrated another successful program year for this important program which provides students of Middletown Public Schools with a valuable role model and trusted friend; a significant element which is often missing from their lives.

I would like to again thank CVH CEO Helene Vartelas and her team for hosting the event which was enjoyed by everyone who attended including mentors, mentees, sponsors and supporters.

Sylvia Webb, schools coordinator for the Hal Kaplan Middletown Mentor Program, did a great job with her remarks as did Mayor Dan Drew.

As always, chamber Staff Liaison Jennifer De Kine did a terrific job with the program and with the event. It was indeed a busy week in Middlesex County.

Last Saturday, May 9, my wife Patty and I attended the Wesleyan University Center for the Arts Feet to the Fire: Riverfront Encounter event at Harbor Park in Middletown.

The event was filled with great music, activities for kids and parents, craft fair vendors, farmers market and a number of food options from local food trucks and other vendors. We enjoyed the event very much and I congratulate the organizers on a job well done.

I attended the Board of Directors meeting for Goodspeed Musicals and the Goodspeed Opera House on Saturday at the opera house. It was a terrific meeting and the Goodspeed team is certainly excited about the current schedule and the upcoming summer season.

Ticket sales are strong and the organization continues to thrive under the leadership of Board President Jef Wolter and Executive Director Michael Gennaro.

This week is also busy beginning with a meeting of the Westfield Division on Tuesday morning at Makiaris Media Services in Middletown.

Middletown Small Business Development Center Counselor Paul Dodge will speak to the division and will update members on the services he provides to the local business community.

The chamber’s May Member Breakfast Meeting, sponsored by TD Bank, is Wednesday at the Crowne Plaza Cromwell. The guest speaker will be Buster Olney of ESPN.

Olney is a senior writer at ESPN The Magazine. He began covering baseball in 1989, as the Nashville Banner’s beat reporter assigned to the Triple-A Nashville Sounds. Later, he covered the San Diego Padres (1993-94), the Baltimore Orioles (‘95-96), the New York Mets (‘97) and the Yankees (‘98-2001).

Olney joined ESPN The Magazine in 2003, after six years at The New York Times, and he’s the author of two books.

“The Last Night of the Yankee Dynasty,” is a Times best-seller, and “How Lucky You Can Be,” about basketball coaching legend Don Meyer, was released in 2011. Olney also contributes to ESPN.com, ESPN Radio, ESPN NEWS, “SportsCenter” and “Baseball Tonight.”

This information is courtesy of Buster’s bio on ESPN.com. We look forward to a great event and I want to offer a special thank you to TD Bank for sponsoring.

Jeff Hubbard, Regional Vice President Commercial Lending Hartford, has been great to work with as we set this breakfast up and I know he looks forward to introducing Buster on Wednesday.

Following the breakfast event, the chamber’s Healthcare Council will host a special workshop, “The Sandwich Generation — Partnering with Caregivers in the Workplace.”

This event will address an issue that is growing in importance for businesses and their employees who are at a point in their lives where they are raising children while simultaneously caring for their aging parents or other family members.

These important life issues can lead to employees being distracted or absent, a loss of productivity and increased turnover. This workshop will be geared toward employers, and this topic will undoubtedly become increasingly important in the near future.

For more information, visit www.middlesexchamber.com.

This Thursday, our Board of Directors will hold its May meeting at Middlesex Hospital. A recent conversation with our partners at ConnectiCare led to the creation of a program for our board meeting that will focus on the Affordable Care Act and its impact on the business community.

Our speaker, Virginia McGarrity, an attorney in Robinson & Cole’s Employee Benefits and Compensation Group, will cover the exchanges, from an individual and employer perspective, and will give an update on what is commonly referred to as the “Cadillac Tax,” scheduled to go into effect in 2018.

This will be an informative presentation for our board which is comprised of many of the top employers in our region.

On Thursday evening, I look forward to attending a retirement celebration for Harry Evert, Senior Vice President, Strategic Planning and Operations at Middlesex Hospital.

Harry has had a long and distinguished career at the hospital and has supported a number of community initiatives throughout his tenure. I look forward to celebrating with him, his family and his colleagues.

The chamber’s Annual Awards Dinner is June at the Crowne Plaza Cromwell. Chamber Chairman Rich Carella recently announced the 2015 recipients of the chamber’s Distinguished Citizen Award.

Each year, the chamber presents this award to individuals who serve as an inspiration to others, and are recognized by the Middlesex community as unselfishly giving his or her time and talent to produce a lasting benefit to the area.

The Distinguished Citizen Committee chose the recipients from a list of over 230 nominees. The 2015 recipients are: Timothy J. Arborio of Cromwell, Teresa J. Opalacz of Durham, and Francis G. Adams Jr. of Old Saybrook.

Once again, our Distinguished Citizen Committee has chosen three outstanding individuals. Our Michael L. Green Award, presented annually to a member of the police or fire community for his or her outstanding service to the community and to the Middlesex County Chamber of Commerce, will be presented to William “Billy” Wimler of Durham.

Billy has been a volunteer firefighter in Durham since 1970. He has been a key part of the town’s emergency response team since he started, and has been a supporter of many community initiatives along the way.

All of these individuals are committed to making Middlesex County a better place to work and live, and we are extremely proud of all of them. We look forward to celebrating with them and their families on June 3.

For more information on chamber events and activities, please visit www.middlesexchamber.com.