Saturday INN Radio, January 3

Names circulating possible Comptroller contenders

More names of possible comptroller candidates are popping up in media reports. Circulating so far are the names of Open The Books (dot) com founder Adam Andrzejewski (ANN-gee-EF-ski), State Representative Jill Tracy and Comptroller Judy Baar Topinka’s chief of staff Nancy Kimme. Andrzejewski tells Illinois Review he has applied for the position. Tracy tells WGEM she’s not sought the position but would be honored to serve. Kimme was suggested by Governor-elect Bruce Rauner to fill the current term that ends January 12th. That’s when Rauner is expected to chose a replacement. Governor Pat Quinn picked Jerry Stermer to fill the post until then.

How long will next Comptroller serve?

With names circulating about who will be the next comptroller of Illinois, another question is how long that person will serve? A ruling from Illinois’ Attorney General indicates current governor Pat Quinn appoints someone to fill Judy Baar Topinka’s current term which ends January 12th. Topinka died last month, a month after she won election to another four-year term as Comptroller. The AG’s ruling say Governor-elect Bruce Rauner will name someone for Topinka’s new term. But, Governor Pat Quinn called for a special session of the General Assembly January 8th to pass a law for a special election for Comptroller in 2016. That’s two years before the term officially ends. However, that special session could also see a different move for a ballot initiative to merge the offices of comptroller and treasurer together, something Topinka said would save the state twelve-million dollars a year.

Hamos: Resigning from rewarding yet difficult job with transition to new administration

With the transition to a new administration she will be resigning. That’s the statement from the outgoing director of the Illinois Department of Healthcare and Family Services, Julie Hamos. In a statement from DHF Hamos says she will depart January 9th, just before Governor-elect Bruce Rauner takes office. Hamos says the rewarding yet difficult job she’s held since 2010 included working with the Affordable Care Act, modernizing technology, and managing the state’s Medicaid budget. Previous reports indicate Hamos lost support for reconfirmation because of cuts to Illinois’ Medicaid system. A spokesperson for Governor-elect Rauner tells Illinois News Network shakeups in state agencies are expected in any transition and the incoming administration won’t get in the habit of commenting on each case.

IL NORML: Lack of incentive for doctors hinders potential medical pot patents

Even while investors wait for the state to reveal the small percentage of approved cultivation centers and dispensaries, patients for medical cannabis are finding it difficult to get their doctor on board the medical pot train. The state is late in issuing permits for cultivation centers. Once issued, cultivation centers can break ground and grow the plant to get it to the state approved dispensaries and then to approved patients. But, will there be much of a consumer base for the medicine? Dan Linn, the executive director of the Illinois Chapter of NORML, tells WMAY Springfield there’s some top-down pressure from the medical community for doctors to not prescribe the drug. Linn says that pressure is enhanced by the regulations in state law that prohibits doctors from getting to cozy with the medical cannabis industry.

Linn says there needs to be a change in perception from the federal government, which can change the Schedule 1 status of marijuana, down to the state and medical community. The state’s latest update indicated only six-hundred patients have been approved for the pilot program while thousands of others have begun applying.

IL NORML: Patients with doctor approval being denied by state for medical pot

Patients with debilitating medical conditions wanting to partake in medical cannabis are finding it difficult to not just get their doctors approval, but also the graces of the state’s pilot program. Dan Linn, the executive director of Illinois’ chapter of the National Organization for the Reformation of Marijuana Laws, tells WMAY Springfield they hear from patients who got their doctors’ permission only to be denied by the state.

Linn says doctors are also feeling pressure from the medical community and a lack of financial incentive to get involved in the taboo industry. The state was expected to issue permits for cultivation and dispensaries before the end of last year but those permits have not yet been issued. A statement to Illinois’ Medical Cannabis Pilot Program website says they are vigorously going through the cultivation center and dispensary applications.

The Illinois News Network is a service of the Illinois Policy Institute.