Lyft plays Whac-a-Mole with regulators nationwide

Photo: Lyft Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 David Estrada is vice president of government relations at Lyft. David Estrada is vice president of government relations at Lyft. Photo: Lyft Lyft plays Whac-a-Mole with regulators nationwide 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

David Estrada persuaded California, Florida and Nevada to legalize self-driving cars two years ago as Google X legal director. Now as Lyft’s vice president of government relations, he needs to work with regulators nationwide — and worldwide starting in 2015 — to create frameworks for Lyft’s on-demand rides by regular people driving their own cars.

Estrada, who’s been at Lyft since January, played a key role in the company’s agreement last week to settle allegations by the district attorneys of San Francisco and Los Angeles that it misled customers and violated state laws.

The prosecutors sued rival Uber, while Lyft agreed to share more information about its background checks, allow regulators to check how its app calculates fares, and not operate at California airports without permits (it has an OK to work at SFO). It also will pay up to $500,000 in civil fines.

The following interview has been edited for length and clarity.

Q: Is your job like a game of Whac-a-Mole as Lyft opens in new cities and encounters fresh backlashes from lawmakers and others?

A: We have 20 government relations professionals dealing with 65 markets, with both city and state ordinances. It will be a busy state legislation sessions in 2015, with hot spots in the big markets like Florida and New York — we’re hoping for a favorable state bill there. California will be very, very busy again; the taxi lobby is strong there.

Q: California will pursue a bill requiring fingerprint background checks and drug/alcohol testing, similar to one that failed to pass this year. Why do you oppose those requirements?

A: We want everyone to sign up to be a Lyft driver. If fingerprinting were added to the process, we’d lose applicants. Most people would sign up for Lyft if they could do it standing at line in the grocery store and spend five minutes and then have Lyft do all the work of background checks, and a driver mentor to meet you and inspect your vehicle and take a ride.

We don’t think fingerprinting increases safety. Our background checks by (private company) Sterling cover all 50 states and they look in every county where you have lived.

We don’t think fingerprinting is needed to verify identities; a driver’s license with photo, combined with the photo shot by the mentor does this. Passengers see these photos before they get into a car; they can verify who is picking them up.

Drug/alcohol testing is completely ineffective for guaranteeing safety. People can prepare for the test, get a clean result and get back on the road; it does nothing to deter drug/alcohol use. It would be another huge deterrent to being a driver because people consider it invasive to their privacy and offensive.

Q: Privacy for ride passengers has been in the news. What safeguards do you offer?

A: Only a very limited group of people at Lyft have access to personally identifiable information on trips. Just people on the customer service team who need to respond to queries, and key executives. Anyone else who needs access goes through a protocol created by the legal department to demonstrate why they need it.

Q: How might self-driving cars impact your business?

A: I wouldn’t be surprised if in the next five years you had little pods of self-driving cars going along defined routes on city streets to pick up and drop off people. We want to get more cars off the road and get people to share rides. That can be part of the solution.

Q: What are Lyft’s long-term goals about reducing car usage?

A: About 80 percent of cars on the road still have just one passenger. Our goals continue to be getting more people in those cars and having fewer cars. Lyft Line (a carpool option) gets us closer. It now accounts for a third of rides in San Francisco, and just launched in New York (it’s also available in Los Angeles).

We also just launched Driver Destination to get us closer to our goal. For instance, drivers going home from San Francisco to the East Bay at the end of the day can enter their home address and pick up someone else going across the bridge.

Q: Lyft said it will expand overseas in 2015. Where do you expect to go? Uber, which is already in most major international cities, has encountered plenty of opposition.

A: We’re in research mode. France wants to be a leader in the sharing economy, for instance, but the taxi drivers don’t feel the same way, and it just banned UberPop (Uber’s nonprofessional service, similar to UberX). Europe is a very difficult regulatory market.

Q: Your drivers are independent contractors. Freelancers account for about a third of the U.S. workforce. Do you see changes coming to provide more protections for people who don’t have the benefits and security of a full-time job?

A: We see it the opposite way. The sharing economy frees workers from being dependent on an employer providing all their benefits. With the Affordable Care Act they can purchase health insurance on their own.

Drivers have a lot of freedoms. Many are students, firefighters, musicians, teachers — they don’t want us to be their employer, they have an employer already or they don’t want one. Lyft helps them do what they want to do, freed from dependency on any one particular employer.

Carolyn Said is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. E-mail: csaid@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @csaid