Florida Blue, the state's largest health insurer, is eliminating 150 jobs across the state this week, The Palm Beach Post confirmed.

That's between 1 percent and 2 percent of its workforce.

"Approximately 150 positions across the state will be impacted this week out of our total workforce of nearly 11,000," company spokesman Paul Kluding said in a statement.

He said he did not have a breakdown by region or department at the Jacksonville-based company.

"The health care industry is undergoing unprecedented change," Kluding said. "In order for organizations to adapt, they must tightly manage costs and look for effective solutions that continue to provide customers with the most affordable health care choices possible."

The company is "taking a close look at our business operations to find ways to help lower the overall cost of doing business, without compromising the level of service and quality of care for our members," Kluding continued. "To do this, we are examining both non-labor and labor costs."

Employees contacted The Post to say they received notice their jobs were ending, and understood others might be notified this week.

Company officials said they are working with affected employees to see whether their skills line up with other openings in the organization and are providing career placement services, he said.

"Loss of positions are not taken lightly," Kluding said.

Florida Blue, the brand name for Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Florida, is the state's oldest health insurer with roots that go back to 1944. It built a base of 4 million policyholders but, like other insurers, has recently faced big changes in the industry including the implementation of the Affordable Care Act.

The Post reported the nonprofit insurer paid its top executive $6.8 million in 2012, and at least 14 officers and directors received more than $1 million each in total compensation, with more than half getting raises of at least $500,000 from 2011.

The newspaper also found executives could gain from future stock deals under a reorganization proposed in 2013. Regulators approved the restructuring to allow more flexibility to engage in mergers and acquisitions but put restrictions on stock sales.

Charles Elmore writes for The Palm Beach Post.