Leading up to Christmas Day, some local teens have continued what's become a tradition of spreading Christmas cheer through music. On the day that Newscenter 11 caught up with the two, they had transformed the car showroom floor at Nelson Hall Chevrolet in Meridian into what some might call an auditorium to present a mini concert. For customers it was a welcomed surprise.

"I was not expecting this at all," said Megan Bishop of Meridian. "We just came to get the oil changed, and they said they're having a concert in the lobby, and we said okay! Ha....ha!"

The musicians are 19-year-old Brittany Brown and her 15-year-old brother Blaine. Brittany is a Quitman High graduate, who now attends Ole Miss, and Blaine attends Calvary Christian School in Meridian.

For at least the past three years their grandmother has had the talented duo perform mini Christmas concerts at some nursing homes, daycare centers and car dealerships in the area.

"I have had them to do this because we have to give back," said the teens' grandmother, Beverly Brown. "Because if God gives you a gift, I mean every child has a gift, it's just that you have to find it."

For many who benefit from the concerts, the duo's gesture is greatly appreciated.

"It means that they're coming to our business, and they want nothing in return," said Steve Hall, who is the general manager of Nelson Hall Chevrolet. "They're just giving, and they're giving Christmas spirit, and that is very, very rare in today's society, and we really appreciate it."

"It was wonderful." said Bishop "It was beautiful. I loved it!"

"I like the flute most," said preschooler Joell Bishop.

"It's a pleasure to be able to spread the Christmas spirit," said Brittany Brown.

"It gives me more confidence," said Blaine Brown.

"I think I'm going to continue this when I get older," said Brittany. "It's actually become like a Christmas tradition. It's hard for me to think about Christmas without thinking about us going around playing for people."

"Brittany also plays the piano, and Blaine also plays the tenor sax," said their grandmother Beverly, "and I'm thinking about getting a guitar so maybe one of these years I can come back and play with them. Ha...ha."