House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy, R-Calif., added his voice Sunday to a growing number of Republicans calling for former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton to turn over her personal email server to an independent third-party arbiter.

McCarthy, appearing on CBS' "Face the Nation," said an arbiter should determine which emails might be related to the House's investigation into the Obama administration's handling of the 2012 terror attack in Benghazi, Libya, that left four Americans dead, including the U.S. ambassador. "We're not interested in her private emails," McCarthy said. "We're not even interested in her emails regarding Russia and the reset, or Syria and [President Bashar al-Assad] and the chemical weapons — only those pertaining to Benghazi."

Asked whether he thought the former secretary of State — and presumed 2016 Democratic presidential candidate — had broken the law, McCarthy, a Republican, said, "I don't know."

"If you were secretary of State, would you set up a server and put it in your own house?" McCarthy responded. "And then ask your top aides only to use that?

"I think she brings a lot of doubt with her own use. But she has the ability to clear this up."

McCarthy's comments come three days after Rep. Trey Gowdy, chairman of the Republican-controlled House Select Committee on Benghazi, officially asked Clinton to turn over the server to a neutral party. House Speaker John A. Boehner also said last week the investigations into Benghazi could not be complete without access to all of the related Clinton emails.

Benghazi is suddenly back in the spotlight after revelations that Clinton used a personal email account during her tenure at the State Department and that she had deleted thousands of what she called personal emails.

Gowdy, R-S.C., has given Clinton until March 27 to answer a subpoena issued for the documents.

The ranking Democrat on the panel, Maryland's Elijah E. Cummings, has argued the investigation is more interested in derailing a potential Clinton presidential run than with addressing any security problems exposed by the 2012 attack.

Related: Gowdy: Benghazi Panel Will Ask Clinton to Appear — Twice The 114th: CQ Roll Call's Guide to the New Congress Get breaking news alerts and more from Roll Call in your inbox or on your iPhone.