"The 21st Century Women's Health Act," new legislation proposed by senior Sen. Patty Murray, D-Wash., looks to honor progress made on behalf of women's reproductive health care, and it proposes to protect those advancements.

In a recent teleconference with Planned Parenthood, Murray discussed the bill, equality, opportunity and women's health.

Cecile Richards, president of Planned Parenthood Federation of America, and Dr. Lauren Kuehl, Planned Parenthood of the Great Northwest's Washington Medical Director, were also a part of the phone conversation as the women discussed the bill, which could advance women's health, improve health outcomes and increase access to reproductive health centers. Also, it would continue a trend of reproductive advisement that has led to the teen pregnancy rate residing at a 40-year low.

National Women's History Month is an astute time for advocates to celebrate the gains women have made in the last 100 years, and it's an appropriate time for policymakers across the nation to continue to push for women's health and rights.

"We applaud Senators Murray, Mikulski, and Boxer for the introduction of the 21st Century Women's Health Act in Congress today. This aptly named bill not only brings women into the 21st century -- it launches us forward," said Cecile Richards, president, Planned Parenthood Federation of America, in a press release.

"At Planned Parenthood, we've seen the progress that comes when women can make their own health care decisions, without politicians standing in the way. Together, through this bill and other efforts, we will keep working to ensure that women across the country have the information and access they need to make decisions about their health care and their futures."

The new legislation looks to build upon the Title X reproductive family program, which has helped to serve confidential primary and preventive health care (annual well-woman exams, lifesaving cancer screenings, contraception and testing and treatment for sexually transmitted infections) to almost 5 million low-income individuals at nearly 4,200 health centers each year. However, no matter how effective the family program is, it's still painfully underfunded and resources are stretched thin.

"Women deserve to be treated with dignity and respect and this bill helps give them the tools they need to lead happy, healthy lives," said Dr. Laurel Kuehl, Planned Parenthood of the Great Northwest's Washington medical director.

"I'm lucky to practice in a state where elected officials understand that it's best when decisions are left between me and my patients. I know that for my colleagues across the country -- things aren't that easy. That's why it is so important that we have champions in Congress like Senator Murray working to expand access to health care instead of standing in the way. From contraception to childbearing, a woman's reproductive well-being is a major part of her health and her economic well-being."

Thanks to the affordable care act, breast and cervical cancer screenings and annual well-being exams have been made accessible. And contraception coverage appears to be easier to reach now more than ever. The legislation promises that women and their families are granted equity across programs, although some insurers are not covering all methods and forms of birth control as required by the ACA. Also, ACA fails to make emergency conception care and education available to women without charge. The pending legislation requests that the ACA provide rape survivor support, better maternal mortality research, improved national reproductive health information and greater access to superior family planning. The proposed legislation would also put a three-year grant in place for nurse practitioners and would boost the number of nurses contributing a lifespan of comprehensive health care.