Kiz: An epic NFL showdown on prime-time television! Tom Brady vs. Peyton, er, Brock Osweiler? Um, that’s not exactly what NBC had in mind. Last week, I asked Osweiler what was more nerve-wracking: Making his first pro start with family watching in Chicago or facing the undefeated Patriots? “I think the first start, just getting that first one under your belt,” Osweiler said. You buying that, Troy? Is Kid Brock ready for what Coach Hoodie and the evil Pats empire have in store for him?

Renck: What I am buying is his confidence. He believes in himself. He carries himself with authority in the huddle, according to teammates. The last thing you need is an energy vampire playing the shoulders-shrugged victim (looking at you, Kyle Orton). The problem is the elements Osweiler can’t control. He is going to see stuff that wasn’t on film. He will hold his own, but it might not be enough.

Kiz: Know what surprised me most about Osweiler wrestling Da Bears? I got the distinct impression the Broncos played looser with him at quarterback. Maybe the troops closed their ranks and rallied around a new starter. Or maybe the Broncos did not have to worry about whether Peyton Manning would perform at 75 percent — or 5 percent — of his normal effectiveness. There was a more all-for-one attitude with the Brockweiler. But I also know this: New England coach Bill Belichick loves to exploit any weakness in a foe. If Oz has flaws, the Patriots will expose them.

Renck: If Osweiler has shown a weakness in his otherwise terrific snapshot, it’s this: He can hold on to the ball too long. Manning was the master, this season notwithstanding, of getting rid of the ball quickly. Osweiler has been sacked eight times in only 51 pass attempts. The Patriots will take away the bootleg and force Osweiler to step up in the pocket. He must go through his progressions quicker and get rid of the ball.

Kiz: The same guys who keep building big hotels on the Las Vegas Strip have established New England as a three-point favorite. If Osweiler commits two turnovers, this could be a blowout victory for the Pats. But if Oz doesn’t let Belichick mess with his mind, the Denver pass rush definitely has a chance to mess with Brady. The Pats have to lose sooner or later. A nothing-to-lose situation does set up well for the Broncos. But, my man, I’ve got to take Brady over Osweiler for the win.

Renck: I like the Broncos’ chances in this game for two reasons: The Buffalo Bills showed what blitzing can do to the Patriots’ revamped offensive line, and Brady is 2-5 in Denver. For the Broncos to win, they need a long punt return or an interception that sets up a short field. The Patriots are vulnerable, but beating them will require near perfection on both sides of the ball.