Gavin Fox as Lionel, Kristian Bruun as Donnie, and Tatiana Maslany as Helena imitating Alison in “Orphan Black” BBC America

“Orphan Black” never skimps on twists, but the penultimate episode of season 3 spiraled itself twistier than a double helix.

A week ahead of the season 3 finale, tonight’s fast-paced “Insolvent Phantom of Tomorrow” gave viewers a lot of reveals, all while doing what the show does best – pulling us farther down the rabbit hole.

The mole who gave up “The Island of Doctor Moreau” secret to Castor wasn’t Rachel or even Shay – it was Gracie. Castor promised her betrayal would help Mark, and they could be together again. Maybe I should have seen this coming; Gracie was looking very serious and almost mournful most of the episode leading up to her apologetic, confessional goodbye call to Cosima.

Hands down, though, the biggest jaw-dropping moment of the episode is when we finally learn that the Castor original is……[drum roll]…..Mrs. S’s mom. WHAT?!?!? As if that weren’t enough of a twist, Mrs. S’s mom, named Kendall Malone, is also the Leda original. She’s a chimera – she absorbed a male twin in the womb when she was formed and has two cell lines. (This really happens and, by many reports, isn’t as rare as once believed.)

Tatiana Maslany as Sarah, Maria Doyle Kennedy as Mrs. S, and Alison Steadman as Kendall Malone in “Orphan Black” BBC America

All of this prompts tons of questions which may or may not get answered next week: Siobhan Sadler is Sarah’s adoptive mom, but is she now also a genetic sister? (And possibly brother? So confusing.) Does Mrs. S herself have genetic material that could potentially be used for a cure? We still don’t know why Siobhan tracked down Sarah and Felix at an orphanage in the first place or what made her run from London. Just how did she initially get involved in all this?

As for our clones, we don’t see Rachel or Krystal this episode. But we do finally see Mark again when he swoops Judas Gracie into a hug. Meanwhile, Rudy is starting to glitch.

A clone-by-clone breakdown of the rest:

SARAH: In London. Traveling with Mrs. S and Felix, she visits Mrs. S’s old stomping grounds, where the three share pints – and a song! – at The Bayonette. Mrs. S has a great voice. Who knew? Early on, courtesy of Mrs. S’s friend Terrance, we learn the meaning of the mysterious “H46239” number — it was a prisoner ID number, from before Britain changed the numbering system in the 1980s. Who is the prisoner? Terrance apparently finds out but is tortured to death by creepy Ferdinand and his creepier bushy-eyebrowed, bald henchman before he can he can pass along what he learned. Or maybe not. What does he whisper to Mrs. S with his final breaths? We have to assume it is the secret Sarah susses out after calling a number she finds in Terrance’s phone. Mrs. S had told Felix and Sarah they are leaving London and to wait for her at the pub. But Sarah is convinced Castor is getting closer which is all the more reason to push on.

Tatiana Maslany as Sarah in “Orphan Black” BBC America

Her investigations eventually lead her to the address of one Kendall Malone, convicted of aggravated homicide in 1981 and paroled in 2007. With Felix standing lookout, Sarah breaks into the Malone residence. Does she plan to kill the Castor original as Felix fears and Mrs S. has vowed to do? She does have a gun. Or does she just want to try to collect some genetic material or maybe talk? An older woman with a knife finds Sarah snooping through the house and thinks she’s a junkie out to rob her. Then, at about the time we learn that this woman is in fact Kendall Malone, Mrs. S comes in, tells Sarah to put down the gun and tells the woman, “Hello, Mother.” (Finding out this lady was Siobhan’s mom was the second time of the night that I yelled at my TV screen in surprise. The first was the Gracie reveal. The third was finding out that Mrs. S’s mom is the both the Castor and Leda originals. Mind blown.) Mrs. S doesn’t back down from her determination to kill the Castor original, even if it is her own mother. But Sarah stops her. “So, if your mom has two cell lines, she’s our original too. We need her. She’s Leda.”

Tatiana Maslany as Helena in “Orphan Black” BBC America

HELENA: Unleashes her inner assassin. She’s been “walking a new path,” trying to set aside her murderous ways — even if she has to be reminded from time to time to, oh, not teach Gemma Hendrix how to gouge out someone’s eyes. She seems truly happy in her new life with the Hendrix family. But she isn’t naive. She knows something is up with “drug dealers and money, money, money, tsk-tsk.” Upon learning Donnie did all this for his family, though, she softens – up until the moment she learns that Jason Kellerman’s henchman took her nitrogen tank. She tells Donnie about her babies, and he promises to get them back. “Alison won’t like this,” Helena says. Donnie responds that he doesn’t care: “It’s a dad decision, for the family, and you’re a part of it now.” But Donnie, unsurprisingly, bumbles through returning the pills, stupidly asking for a refund. After he takes too long, Helena comes to his aid. She is trying – poorly — to impersonate Alison. (She blames her accent on a cold, one of those really nasty ones that, as Donnie says, “messes with your syntax.”) As they are leaving with Helena’s eggs, Pouchy’s niece makes a fatal mistake: she says she knows where Gemma and Oscar go to school. If Alison is the mother hen, Helena is the momma bear ready to turn deadly to her protect her children – or the children of her sisters. “Did you threaten babies?” Helena shoves Donnie out the door with the nitrogen tank. “You should not threaten babies.” She emerges from Pouchy’s covered in blood, wielding what looks to be the paper-cutter blade that threatened Donnie’s nose two episodes back. “I got refund,” she tells him, handing over a huge bag of cash.

COSIMA: Made a mistake. She finally starts to suspect Shay may not be what she seems to be, and that suspicion nearly gets Shay killed. (If we hadn’t seen Shay in the “next time” previews, I’d almost think Delphine killed her anyway. Shay, post-interrogation, knows too much, and Delphine seemed really fond of caressing that razor blade, even after Cosima told her the mole wasn’t Shay.)

ALISON: On the campaign trail. And she now has a freezer full of a LOT of drug money.

Miscellaneous thoughts, factoids and observations:

*This week’s episode-title Eisenhower quote: “As we peer into society’s future, we — you and I, and our government — must avoid the impulse to live only for today, plundering, for our own ease and convenience, the precious resources of tomorrow. We cannot mortgage the material assets of our grandchildren without risking the loss also of their political and spiritual heritage. We want democracy to survive for all generations to come, not to become the insolvent phantom of tomorrow.”

*In genetics, a chimera is an organism with genetically distinct cells. In Greek mythology, the Chimera was a fire-breathing monster usually depicted as part lion, goat and snake. Could this be what Prof. Duncan meant in his clue about “the beast, the cursed”?

*Mrs. S’s mom went to prison for killing John Sadler, with whom Siobhan eloped at a young age. We learned a while back that John died after getting gardening shears through the throat during a drunken fight. But, until tonight, we didn’t know who exactly killed him.

*More dancing clones please! First there was last season’s clone dance party, then Donnie and Alison’s ultra-hilarious twerking scene and now we have Helena delightfully donning goggles and an apron, dancing around the Hendrix garage to “You Baby” by The Turtles. Maybe the Clone Club should start its own dance team.

*One of the envelopes Sarah sees addressed to Kendall Malone has a return address that appears to be from a J. Clement. There is a Jody Lynn Clement who is an art director on the show. Coincidence or sly Easter egg?

NEXT WEEK: The season finale!!