UPDATED, Sept. 12, 2:20 p.m.: | Hawks CEO Steve Koonin announced Friday that Ferry is taking an indefinite leave of absence as GM. Effective immediately coach Mike Budenholzer will take over the basketball operations department.

The Atlanta Hawks controversy took on a new life Thursday, when the Atlanta Journal-Constitution published audio of general manager Danny Ferry’s conference call with other members of the team’s front office. During the June 6 call, Ferry and Hawks management were discussing potential free agent targets, one of whom was Luol Deng.

Now, a little background on one of the latest pro sports scandal (there are a lot these days): Hawks owner Bruce Levenson announced on Sunday that he would sell his interest in the team because of an email he wrote in 2012 that included his theory that the team’s black fans kept white fans away. On Monday, Yahoo Sports’ Adrian Wojnarowski reported that the email only gained noticed because the team was investigating comments made by Ferry in regards to Deng:

“He’s still a young guy overall. He is a good guy overall. But he is not perfect. He’s got some African in him. And I don’t say that in a bad way. But he’s like a guy who would have a nice store out front but sell your counterfeit stuff out of the back.”

Deng responded:

Complete Luol Deng statement pic.twitter.com/FojbVFGRO5 — Ethan J. Skolnick (@EthanJSkolnick) September 9, 2014

But then Minority owner Michael Gearon Jr. chimed in, via a letter to Levenson that was published by WSB-TV:

“We believe these comments by Ferry were far worse than (Donald) Sterling’s because they were not from a private personal conversation — they were in a business environment on a business matter in front of a dozen or more people. If Ferry would make such a slur in a semi-public forum, we can only imagine what he has said in smaller groups or to individuals. … Our advisors tell us there is no other choice but to ask for Ferry’s resignation, and if he refuses, to terminate him for cause under his employment agreement.”

Ferry claimed he was reading a scouting report of Deng that included the comments, and NBA commissioner Adam Silver, who received praise for banning Donald Sterling after his racist comments were made public, took a different stance with Ferry. Silver told USA TODAY Sports’ Sam Amick:

“In my view, those comments, taken alone, do not merit his losing his job. … It’s a question of context … These words, in this context, understanding the full story here, the existence of the scouting report, the fact that he was looking at the scouting report as a reference when he was making these remarks, what I’m saying is – and frankly my opinion — is that this is a team decision in terms of what the appropriate discipline is for their employee. But if I’m being asked my view, I’m saying that, based on what I know about the circumstances, I don’t think it’s a terminable offense.”

But this was before the AJC released the audio of the conference call. Many outside the team believe Ferry’s comments were his own, and not those of a scout that he was simply reading aloud to his coworkers.

Still following me?

Now, since then, Ferry has obviously taken considerable heat for his comments. But those who know Ferry and have worked with him or played alongside him on the court, have offered their support. One of those people is Masai Ujiri, the former Nuggets general manager and now GM of the Toronto Raptors, who first came to know Ferry during Ujiri’s days as a scout.

In an op-ed for Toronto’s Globe & Mail on Thursday, Ujiri urged forgiveness for Ferry: