Far-left comedian Bill Maher has consistently admitted that President Barack Obama “lied” when he promised all Americans they would be able to keep their health insurance plans under Obamacare. Others, however, like DNC Chair Debbie Wasserman Schultz, are apparently not quite ready to admit it.

The two found themselves at odds on HBO’s “Real Time” on Friday as they battled over whether it truly was a “lie.”

“It was a bad week for the president, let’s be honest here,” Maher began. “We’re not like them, we don’t live in the bubble. It was a bad week.”

He also asked his panel whether or not a lie is ever “justified” if it’s for something good, and then speculated as to whether Obamacare would have even passed if the president had been honest about the impact it would have on private insurance.

Wasserman Schultz quickly insisted the president didn’t lie.

“It was not a lie, let’s just be very clear,” she said. “When the president and myself and every other Democrat talked about that if you like your health care you can keep it, that was referring to the overwhelming majority of Americans who had health care…and in fact, what the reality of Obamacare is, not only are they able to keep their health care, but it is very likely going to cost less and have better benefits.”

“Some people can’t,” Maher shot back. “Come on, let’s be honest. Obamacare says basically if you have a really crappy plan, you can’t keep it. That’s the truth.”

He wondered aloud why people would want a “crap” plan, but said the truth is that Obamacare is forcing people off of their plans.

“To me, that is a lie,” Maher added.

Movie director Rob Reiner chimed in and said it doesn’t matter if it was a lie or not and went on a rant about the complexities of Obamacare made worse by Republican opposition.

Later in the discussion, Maher argued the Obamacare lie is Obama’s “no new taxes” moment and a “campaign pledge that didn’t hold up to the complexities of governing.”

Watch the segment via HBO/Mediaite:

(H/T: Mediaite)

–