In a time when Healthcare is such a pressing issue, the FDHA Health Summit will be an important event that our community needs to attend and support. - Thomas W. Dortch, Jr., Chairman, Board of Trustees, The Fulton-DeKalb Hospital Authority

The Fulton-DeKalb Hospital Authority (the Authority) announced details regarding their upcoming 2013 Health Summit on Monday, December 16 at the Hyatt Regency Atlanta. The day is filled with informative speakers, panelists including free on site health screenings. This event is open to the public, the FDHA Health Summit has attracted an array of talented speakers with local, regional and national expertise.

“We’re excited about the 2013 health summit because we are able to connect participants with information and healthcare screenings to promote a healthier greater Atlanta community,” said Lisa Flagg, Chief Executive Officer of the Fulton-DeKalb Hospital Authority. “We are honored to have such an impressive group of thought leaders engaging and talking about today’s issues in healthcare in meaningful ways.”

The one-day Health Summit features a two panels covering the Affordable Care Act and the State of Our Health. Featured speakers and panelists include; Pamela Roshell, PhD, MSW, Regional Director, Region IV Office of the Secretary, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Paul Alphonse, Jr., M.D., President of the Atlanta Medical Association, Lawrence “Dusty” Sanders, Jr., M.D. Associate Dean, Clinical Affairs, Associate Professor of Medicine, Morehouse School of Medicine and President Elect of the National Medical Association, Valerie Montgomery Rice, M.D., Dean and Executive Vice President, Morehouse School of Medicine, DeKalb County Commissioner Larry Johnson, John Haupert, CEO, Grady Health System and many more. Concurrently, there will be over 20 vendors participating including free on-site health screenings.

The event will also take time to honor individuals and organizations with the Healthcare Champions Awards held that evening. The awards recognize outstanding commitment to the delivery of quality healthcare, research, advocacy, and education within the Atlanta community. Award recipients include Mrs. Elizabeth Omilami, President/CEO, Hosea Feed The Hungry and Homeless, Valerie Montgomery Rice, M.D., Dean and Executive Vice President, Morehouse School of Medicine Friends of Disabled Adults and Children (FODAC), CHOICES – Ms. Vanetta Keyes, Monica Parker, M.D., Emory Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center, DeKalb County Commissioner, Larry Johnson and John Eaves, Chairman of the Fulton County Board of Commissioners.

“The Fulton-DeKalb Hospital Authority plays a vital role that expands beyond oversight of Grady Health System into communities benefitting from programming, outreach and support delivered in impactful ways,” said Thomas W. Dortch, Jr., Chairman of the Fulton-DeKalb Hospital Authority. “Through the Authority’s Community Health Grants, the FDHA supports community organizations impacting health by awarding grants that expand grantees ability to serve Fulton and DeKalb County residents with quality healthcare resources. In a time when Healthcare is such a pressing issue, the FDHA Health Summit will be an important event that our community needs to attend and support.”

If you are interested in attending the Health Summit presented by The Fulton-DeKalb Hospital Authority visit https://fdha-health-summit.eventbrite.com or email contact(at)thefdha(dot)org or call 404.334.3680. This is a complimentary event.

About The Fulton-DeKalb Hospital Authority

The Fulton-DeKalb Hospital Authority served as the governing and policy making body for Grady Memorial Hospital, managing its operations until 2008, when it leased the health system facilities to the Grady Memorial Hospital Corporation, a 17 member non-profit Board of Directors charged with administering the health system. Today, the Authority oversees the lease and continues to promote the operations of the Grady Health System. In addition, The Fulton-DeKalb Hospital Authority focuses on promoting the general health of the community and advocating for the indigent residents of Fulton and DeKalb Counties.

For more information about The Fulton-DeKalb Hospital Authority visit http://www.thefdha.org.