The Association of Equipment Manufacturers (AEM) is going after House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Paul Ryan Paul RyanHouse passes resurrected LGBT measure Ryan seeks to put stamp on GOP in Trump era Overnight Finance: Puerto Rico bill clears panel | IRS chief vows to finish term | Bill would require nominees to release tax returns MORE (R-Wis.) in his home state’s largest newspaper as the deadline for extending federal highway funding looms.

Lawmakers are struggling to come up with a way to pay for an extension of the transportation funding measure, which is scheduled to expire on May 31. Ryan has floated the idea of passing a temporary extension to prevent an interruption in infrastructure spending this summer.

AEM President Dennis Slater said in an op-ed that appeared Tuesday in the Milwaukee Journal-Sentinel that the future of federal transportation funding rests with Ryan.

ADVERTISEMENT

“Congress faces a choice in the coming weeks: commit to fixing our roads or settle for more of the same inaction and half-measures that has ravaged Washington now for years,” Slate wrote.

“Thankfully, one of Wisconsin's favorite sons is in a position to make a difference,” he continued. “As chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, U.S. Rep. Paul Ryan (R-Wis.) is in the position to decide whether, in the next few weeks, Congress will step up and tackle one of the biggest long-term fiscal challenges facing our nation, fixing the Highway Trust Fund.”

Lawmakers in both parties have expressed a desire to pass a long-term transportation funding bill this year, but consensus on a way to pay for it has been elusive.

The traditional source of transportation funding has been the 18.4 cents per gallon federal gas tax that was established in the 1930s. The tax has not been increased since 1993, even as cars have become more fuel-efficient in recent years.

The federal government typically spends about $50 billion per year on transportation projects, but the gas tax only brings in $34 billion.

Lawmakers have turned to other areas of the federal budget to close the $16 billion gap, and Ryan and others have begun talking about passing another extension now to prevent a construction shutdown this summer.

AEM’s Slater said Ryan should forgo the extension and find a way to pay for a long-term transportation bill now.

“Ryan has begun to float a short-term extension to buy himself more time to craft comprehensive tax reform legislation — a laudable goal — which he says would account for highway investments,” he wrote. “But the safety of America's roads and bridges shouldn't depend on the fate of tax reform, which faces an arduous path forward on Capitol Hill.

“Another short-term bill will hurt Wisconsin jobs and the economy,” Slater continued. “When Congress returns, we need Ryan and his colleagues to figure out a way to give our state the long-overdue certainty it deserves.”

The equipment manufacturers and other transportation advocates have pushed for a gas tax increase to solve the infrastructure funding problem, but lawmakers have been reluctant to ask drivers to pay more at the pump.

Ryan has been opposed to the idea of the gas tax, said he would prefer to include a transportation funding increase in a broader tax reform package that has stalled on Capitol Hill.

Slater said he still believed the gas tax hike was the way to fix the transportation funding problem for good.

“Ryan has expressed his opposition to raising the gas tax, the most simple and straightforward way to make up for the shortfall in the Highway Trust Fund while also upholding the user fee principle,” he wrote. “We respectfully disagree.

“But the bigger decision ahead of Ryan and his fellow leaders in Congress is more immediate,” he continued. “Ryan, Speaker John Boehner and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell have all previously said they recognize the need for a long-term highway bill. Now is when the proverbial rubber hits the road.”

Transportation Department officials have said that the federal government’s transportation funding will run out in July if lawmakers do not reach an agreement on an extension.