They say if you drop a frog into boiling water, he’ll hop right out, but put that same frog into cold water, and then slowly turn up the heat, he’ll allow himself to be cooked alive. Sometimes I think we’re like that frog, and we get comfortable with where we’re at in life and sit still, while other times we hop right out.

Last year was one of those times we chose not to be “cooked alive” and we voted out Mary Landrieu, who had tirelessly campaigned for the re-election of President Obama, even as he gutted our oil and gas industry (which employs nearly 320,000 in our state) and lobbied Congress to increase energy taxes, not to mention the White House’s de facto moratorium on drilling and exploration, wreaking havoc on our economy.

Like John Bel Edwards, though, Mary Landrieu supports the expansion of the Affordable Care Act, even though over 60 percent of us in Louisiana do not. If you remember, she also supports raising the minimum wage, just like John Bel Edwards does – even though 85 percent of studies since 1990 show that increasing the minimum wage causes companies to cut low-skilled workers, making them more likely to stay unemployed.

And just like Mary Landrieu, John Bel Edwards supports Planned Parenthood 100 percent.

The problem for John Bel Edwards, just like it was for Mary Landrieu, is that Louisiana politics has moved on. The “every man a king” Democrat, or politicians that say one thing among the voters, and another when they are in office, is a tired, worn out template which is indicative of politicians more interested in the next election, than the next generation.

Yet this year, these same folks who voted out Mary Landrieu are now considering voting for John Bel Edwards and going back to the Louisiana of yesterday, and endorsing the old-style, hypocritical, Louisiana populist politics that asks, “What’s in for me?”

Remember Governor Edwin Edwards? He was a populist, and was elected four times as governor because of it. In the meantime, he was lining his own pockets with payments from state contractors and then raised taxes on the people of Louisiana by almost $1 billion to pay for it.

Or how about populist U.S. Representative Bill Jefferson from New Orleans, who accepted $500,000 in bribes while in office, in exchange for his influence in Congress?

Or New Orleans Mayor Ray Nagin who was convicted on 20 counts of bribery, and is now serving 10 years in prison for selling the mayor’s office for his personal gain?

All of these examples share a common denominator: These politicians all claimed to be champions of the people, and defender of the “little guy” or even “conservative” Democrats, in some instances. Instead, though, the people lived under one set of rules, while their elected leaders lived by another. They said one thing, and then did another.

Good intentions are not enough, though. You only need to look around to see what decades of politicians’ good intentions have done to our nation, and our communities. Of course, good intentions can provide a spark to ignite a purpose, launch a plan, and to direct the mind, but they can tell you nothing about the actual outcome – so we must make sure our vote is an informed one.

Huey P. Long made famous the slogan, “Every man a king, but no one wears a crown.” That sounds good, but history has shown that it’s often the populist, well-intentioned politicians, like Mary Landrieu and John Bel Edwards, who end up wearing the crowns – while we get cooked alive, in the meantime.

— Louis R. Avallone lives in Shreveport.

Read or Share this story: http://www.shreveporttimes.com/story/opinion/2015/11/13/every-man-king-john-bel-edwards/75714524/