Print Email Font Resize Font Resize At Broomfield High, students deal with quieter side of grief Two students at school have died since August

SIGNS OF SUPPORT, LOVE: Broomfield High School freshman Trey Jaramillo, right, and Faith McNeill during lunch Wednesday stand next to posters remembering Chad Britton and Mason Wedan and expressing support for the grieving school. See a short video interview with Chad Britton's friend Brock Abeyta at BroomfieldEnterprise.com. (Jeremy Papasso / Boulder Daily Camera) Helping teens after a tragedy The death of a peer can be a tragic event for teens, and parents and other adults can help support them in several ways. Teens may experience reactions such as: • Staying silent about the tragedy or feeling confused about what to say • Wanting time alone • Wanting to spend more time with friends and peers • Crying, yelling, or feeling enraged • Experiencing changes in sleeping and eating patterns • Feeling afraid to ride in or drive a car • Regressing to a younger way of acting, such as fighting more with siblings or wanting to know where parents are at all times. Parents and guardians can help teens by: • Showing compassion • Making yourself available to talk, but do not force them to talk about the death • Acknowledging the tragedy and validating expressions of grief • Relaxing expectations for "performance," such as in school work, sports or chores • Watching for signs of self-destructive behavior • Talking with the school about concerns if your teen's behaviors seem extreme Source: TRU Community Care Grief Services, 303-604-5300 or griefsupport@TruCare.org Things are quiet at Broomfield High School, but the events of the last few months are still raging loudly in some students' minds. Advertisement Each day in the busy halls, students walk by posters signed with messages of support, delivered from high schools as close as Erie and as far away as Basalt. The posters all feature handwritten messages of sympathy and sorrow. "In Our Thoughts," one reads. "Gators support Eagles," reads another. For many students, the colorful posters are the only visible reminders of the rough year Broomfield High has had. In August, sophomore Mason Wedan was killed in a plane crash, which devastated his friends and family. Then, this month, junior Chad Britton was killed after being hit by a car on a street next to the school. Some fellow students witnessed the accident. Another teen, who attends school in Lafayette, was driving the car that struck him. No charges have been filed yet in connection with the accident, according to the district attorney's office. The 1,500-student school organized candlelight vigils and observed moments of silence to remember their fellow students. But since the visible public memorials, students have become quiet about the tragedies. Away from the public mourning, students are working through their grief in different, more private ways. MOST RECENT LOSS: Chad Britton, a junior at Broomfield High, died Nov. 4 after being hit by a car the day before. (Facebook photo) "It's been so quiet around here. It's not that people aren't talking, but there is a lot of private grieving," said principal Ginger Ramsey. Teachers and administrators at Broomfield High said it's important to give students their space, but they won't turn their backs on the silence. It's as important to pick up on what students don't say as what they do say, Ramsey said. No set formula for support When schools face tragedies such as the deaths of Mason and Chad, each school has a range of resources, such as counseling sessions and support from a district-run crisis team. The crisis team sends trained volunteers to help teachers, administrators and students through the counseling and grieving process. REMEMBERED FONDLY: Broomfield High sophomore Mason Wedan, flanked by his mother, Tori Rains-Wedan, and 11-year-old twin brothers, Austin and Hunter. All four, along with Erie real estate lawyer Oliver Frascona, were killed in a plane crash in Erie in August. (Facebook photo) Broomfield High has stepped up its counseling sessions, and has seen many students stop by to talk about what has happened. Though the school follows Boulder Valley School District protocols to make sure students have the counseling help they need, Ramsey said there is no set formula for how to best support teens who either don't want to talk about the tragedy, have never experienced death before, don't know how to process their grief or have shut out their feelings completely. "All we can ask for is that we take care of each other," she said. "It's all still pretty raw, and all we can do is just take care of each other." Some students have been more vocal about their feelings of grief and sadness than others. BALLOON RELEASE FOR MASON: A balloon release on Sept. 4 at Elizabeth Kennedy Stadium in honor of Mason Wedan. (David R. Jennings / Broomfield Enterprise) Brock Abeyta, a junior, had been best friends with Chad since the fifth grade. Abeyta is still working through the knowledge that he will never see his friend again. "The hardest part is not seeing him in the hallway, not making plans for lunch, not seeing the pictures he posted with his girlfriend" on Facebook, he said. Abeyta said the topic of Chad's death is quiet around school, but he and his friends prefer to talk about Chad in smaller, more tight-knit circles. The group used to hang out at the skate park and dare each other to do different stunts, he said. Once, in seventh grade, Chad dared his friend to jump off a pile of bricks. Abeyta took the dare and broke his kneecap, but still looks back fondly at their childhood adventures. "We're all sharing stories, our favorite things about him," he said. Though Abeyta and friends are mourning in private, the tragedy has affected him in more public ways. Abeyta failed several tests at school because of the stress, but he said his teachers supported him by helping him reschedule and retake the exams. Even though students are hesitant to bring up the deaths in the hallways, Abeyta said the unspoken support throughout the school has brought students and teachers together. "People are there for each other," he said. "People are rebounding pretty well, but are still getting over Mason, too." Abeyta said the junior class is starting to understand the heavy sadness that the sophomore class had to endure earlier this year, when Mason died in a plane crash in Erie. Mason was killed in August in a single-engine plane crash in Erie. His mother, Tori Rains-Wedan, and his twin 11-year-old brothers, Austin and Hunter, also died, along with the pilot of the Piper PA-46 plane, prominent Erie real estate lawyer Oliver Frascona. Mason's friends said he gave great hugs and had an jovial attitude that spread to everyone around him. During a memorial in early September, friends cried as they released blue, white and silver balloons into the air before a Broomfield soccer game at the school. "There wasn't a bad side to Mason," said student Aisley McConnell. Providing support during grieving Counselor Gina Malecha said every student processes death in different ways, and it's common for teens to feel unfocused, sad, withdrawn or angry. The school's counselors are available throughout the week in case students need to talk, and many students are still taking advantage of those counseling sessions, she said. It's also common that teens might not want to talk about tragedies right away — or at all. For those students, it's especially important that counselors let teens know they have support, even if they don't want to talk. Students have the option to come into the office to just sit in a quiet space, or ask to take a class period off, as long as they let a teacher or counselor know where they are going. "We want to keep the lines of communication open," she said. BVSD Superintendent Bruce Messinger said schools like Broomfield have gone out of their way to give students their support and attention. "There's so much emotion, and for someone like Ginger (Ramsey,) the school is a family to her," he said. Ramsey said she visited the hospital after Chad was hit by the car, along with other students and family members. Her goal was to provide a friendly ear. "For most of the time I was there, I didn't really do anything. The kids needed to see a face they knew," she said. Ramsey and Malecha said it is important to unobtrusively send a message that the school cares and is a safe place to grieve. It's also a way to keep an eye out for students who might be acting in ways that are beyond the normal scope of typical grieving. Some examples could include signs that teens are using drugs or alcohol or not showing up to school, she said. "We want to help students make good decisions about grieving," Malecha said. Using crisis teams In times of crisis, the district also provides volunteer crisis teams to support the school's existing counselors and teachers. The crisis teams can send in additional counselors for students, and can meet with teachers and staff to find out what special needs the school might have. Kevin Braney, a principal on special assignment for BVSD, said the district has eight crisis teams available for schools when tragedy strikes. Braney facilitates the teams. Each crisis team is made up of five to seven counselors, social workers and psychologists from around the district. In the past few years, the crisis teams have mostly been deployed when high school students die in accidents, he said. When a student dies, "it's always a delicate and fluid situation," he said. The crisis teams are there to help students, but also have another important function: Being there for teachers and staff, who also are grieving while still trying to manage day-to-day business at the school, he said. That's a heavy load for just one staff, he said. "Depending on the number of students who are impacted, the crisis might go beyond the scope of what that school's counselors are able to do at one time." Megan Quinn: 303-410-2649, quinnm@broomfieldenterprise.com or twitter.com/meganquinn2