This is a serious question.

Maybe most politicians lie. But there are all kinds of lies. Most lies are intended to achieve a purpose. Like Obama claiming that people would be able to keep their doctors under ObamaCare. That was a lie, but it was a rational lie. There was a purpose to it. It was going to eventually fall apart, but it was meant to buy time.

But Hillary Clinton has a history of bizarre, crazy lies. Like claiming to have been instrumental in peace in Ireland. Or arriving under sniper fire in Bosnia. These were stupid lies. The sort of stupid lies that a compulsive liar tells. (For those who like flashbacks, William Safire, one of the last conservatives to work at the New York Times, called her just that, and Bill Clinton threatened to fight him.)

Hillary Clinton's email mess was an easily preventable scandal that continued and continues to escalate because she can't stop lying about it. Every lie she tells makes things worse.

On Tuesday, MSNBC’s Andrea Mitchell asked her outright: “Have you been contacted — or your representatives contacted — by the FBI to set up an interview” over her e-mail mess? Clinton gave a flat “no.” Two days later, news broke that the FBI has already interviewed Clinton’s closest confidant, Huma Abedin, and other top aides. And officials close to the probe say Hillary’s to be interviewed in the next few weeks — which means she’s surely been contacted.

Now this is a strategic lie only insofar as Hillary Clinton wanted to tamp down discussion of the subject. But strategically it was terrible because she avoided a confrontation on the subject by putting yet another lie on the record.

That's not a rational calculation.

From the start, Hillary Clinton's policy was to deny everything. And then when the lies fell apart to retreat to a series of lawyerly hedges. This is the worst scandal management strategy possible. It's the behavior of people who want to look guilty. It's an endless round of, "No, I had nothing to do with the fire" followed by "What I meant was that even though the fire was set through a hand that was my own, I had nothing to do with it once it was already burning and could therefore be clearly identified as a fire". This may work in legal forums, but it plays terribly in public. And this is happening in public.

But at this point, Hillary Clinton is just denying everything compulsively even when it makes no sense. The FBI is doing a criminal probe. Denying that was stupid. The FBI will interview her. Denying that is even dumber. It makes no sense. It assumes that her voters have reached the point where they are completely unable to process even the simplest facts.

And while admittedly the country is in pretty bad shape. And there are lots of bubbles and echo chambers. Constantly lying to even your supporters will eventually irritate them. Especially if you don't need to.

Once it was clear that this was happening, Team Clinton no doubt got together on a strategy. Unfortunately for them the strategy was total denial of every minor detail involving the investigation. Did some of those denials work? On a purely strategic level, perhaps. Some Democrats no doubt accepted various hedges that this was not a criminal matter. It never became much of an issue in her campaign. But the sheer mass of them eroded her credibility to nearly nothing. Combine that with Brock accusing the New York Times of a right wing conspiracy, and similar claims being hurled at anyone investigating her, even when they're career Democrats, and Team Clinton starts looking like a bunch of pathologically insane liars whom no one in their right mind would possibly listen to.

That's not a deal killer these days in politics. Little is. But throw in lack of charisma, little appeal and no selling point except being the credible, responsible candidate, and you have a problem.

Exciting and an insane liar can make you popular. Bill Clinton is a reminder of that. Boring and an insane liar is not a winning combination. Lack of credibility and trying to be the credible candidate don't go together.