Navicent to manage Monroe hospital (Photo: Davis, Claire, WMAZ)

A deal for Navicent health to begin managing another Central Georgia hospital awaits approval from the state attorney general. Hospital leaders say they've reached an agreement to manage Monroe County Hospital. Claire Davis spoke with County Commission Chairman Michael Bilderback who says he hopes the joint venture will help keep the hospital's doors open.

Monroe County Hospital sits in a quiet part of Forsyth, serves around 400 - 500 patients a year and has a 25 patient bed capacity.



County Commission Chairman Michael Bilderback says the county has subsidized the hospital over the years and he hopes their new partnership with Navicent Health will eliminate that. “The Affordable Care Act has caused a lot of distress to rural hospitals, ours being one of them,” he said. “We were putting about $300,000 on average. Like I said one year it was 700, one year it was 250,” said Bilderback.



Bilderback says commission has always backed the hospital because the county needs it. “Industry likes to have medical care very close by.

So for us to retain the hospital services it's important for a number of reasons. But economic development is probably one of the largest reasons,” said Bilderback.



He says he hopes to see the employees of Monroe County hospital under the employment umbrella of Navicent, ultimately saving even more money. “Your personnel costs are your greatest costs when you're providing a service,” said Bilderback.

Several patients at the hospital say they’re looking forward to Navicent coming in to help manage the hospital. They say it guarantees medical care in their own backyard.

Monroe County Hospital CEO Kay Floyd says the hospital board is meeting tonight to sign the final contract of the management agreement.

Two years ago, Navicent also reached an agreement to help manage Oconee Regional Hospital in Milledgeville. But Navicent ended the partnership last summer after some physicians and Baldwin County commissioners complained about a loss of local control at the hospital.

(© 2016 WMAZ)