The service counter guy at the hardware store understood what he was looking at as soon as he saw the screw. "This is from some old, special chair," he told my wife when she stopped in on Monday.

Right. A chair with a special story that, I suggest, speaks to some of the core aspects of what can lead a child to a successful life.

My father was a very talented pianist as a child. In his early teens, he soloed with the Madison symphony, playing Gershwin's Concerto in F. He loved piano and he had great potential.

My grandparents ran a corner grocery store near the University of Wisconsin campus. They and their five children lived in a small apartment over the store. This was the mid-1930s, the height of the Depression, so you know they didn't have much.

One afternoon, my father came home from high school, climbed the stairs, and, as he tells the story, nearly fell to the floor. A Steinway grand piano was sitting in the living room.

Can you imagine the sacrifice my grandparents made to get that piano? That's how important their children were to them. That's how much they wanted to do all they could to help their children reach their potential and have a good life.

And those children did have good lives. They graduated from high school. They went to college. They worked, they married, and they were good citizens of communities as big as New York City, as small as Two Rivers. Each in his or her own way did well.

My father's siblings have passed away, but he lives in the Jewish Home in Milwaukee. He's 93. He made his living for decades in Madison as a piano player, teacher and tuner.

Now, he's not very mobile and he gets confused about some things. But Gershwin is still clear to him. He loves to sit and listen to recordings of jazz piano greats such as Oscar Peterson.

Last Wednesday, he and prominent local flutist Rick Aaron played an hour of American songbook greats for about 75 people. They do it once a month and they are lovely sessions.

And that Steinway is the centerpiece of the Borsuk apartment, more than 75 years after it first appeared upstairs from the grocery store.

I heard a very interesting speech Thursday. The Council of the Great City Schools, an organization of leaders of large school districts, was holding its annual fall conference in Milwaukee and the keynote speaker at that day's lunch was David Coleman, president of the College Board, the organization behind the SAT college entrance exams and Advanced Placement classes offered in high schools nationwide.

"We have enough assessments," Coleman said. "We need better opportunities."

Education leaders need to be advocates for giving their students opportunities and for making sure students are prepared to pursue those opportunities and succeed.

Coleman said the College Board had done a study of what mattered in setting a child on a path that rises to success.

The importance of support

The overall answer from kids: What mattered most was having an adult who said to each one, "I believe in you." Coleman told the leaders they needed to make sure every student hears that message.

That's an important charge to those who work in a school. What he didn't say is that it's even better when that message comes from home. I fear — I bet you do, too — that too few children hear that now. And they are not only low-income kids with tough home situations.

My father's Steinway was not just a piano. It was a gateway to a good life for him. It was a statement by his parents about how much they were willing to put their children and opportunity for their children ahead of their own material interests.

The Steinway always has stayed at the center of my father's life. But the original chair — a simple but elegant wood chair — ended up in the basement for many years. Seven years ago, when we were cleaning out the house on Madison's west side where my parents lived for 57 years, we came upon it, scuffed up but worthy of restoration.

We found a shop in Milwaukee where it was refinished, and it was returned to its rightful place in front of the keyboard. But recently, the seat became detached from the frame. It was held on by four screws and the old wood just wasn't holding several of them.

The veteran hardware store guy taught my wife what he called an old carpenter's trick to fix that. (It involved purchasing and paying nothing, but we'll be loyal to that independent, locally owned store.) Tuesday night, she and I fiddled with it. The guy's wisdom paid off.

It's a special old chair, a special old piano. Almost eight decades later, they still play the music of parents telling their child, "We believe in you."

Alan J. Borsuk is senior fellow in law and public policy at Marquette University Law School. Reach him at alan.borsuk@marquette.edu.