A combination of teamwork, grit and a shared goal to raise awareness of hearing loss among veterans helped a dedicated team of Oticon employees to conquer the Tri-State Tough Mudder endurance event

(l-r) Oticon Hearoes Tired, Muddy but Triumphant: Eric Fagan, Brian Wood, Ken Maher, Ruben Carpio, Matthew Shulack, Rafael Moya, Mathias Rem, Shanell Sorell, Dayana Bustamante and Heather Luciani (Photo: PHOTO COURTESY OF OTICON INC. ) Story Highlights Participants to test their mettle with military-style obstacles

Funds raised at the weekend’s event support the Wounded Warrior Project

Hearing loss as a leading disability among veterans

A combination of teamwork, grit and a shared goal to raise awareness of hearing loss among veterans enabled a dedicated team of Oticon employees to conquer the challenges of the 2014 Tri-State Tough Mudder endurance event, held Oct. 11-12 in Englishtown. This is the second year that Oticon has been represented in the event that dares participants to test their mettle with military-style obstacles, rugged terrain, steep inclines and water hazards. Funds raised at this weekend’s event support the Wounded Warrior Project and its mission to assist severely injured veterans. Oticon Hearoes, including a former Marine, hope that their participation also helps to raise awareness of hearing loss as the number-one service-related disability. In addition to a $3,000 donation from Oticon Inc., each Oticon Hearo worked to raise additional funds and awareness through individual sponsorships from friends, family, colleagues, professional partners and others reached through Oticon USA Facebook postings and tweets in the weeks leading up to the challenge.

A test of muscles and determination

The Oticon team trained to conquer the Tough Mudder’s 11-mile rugged terrain of steep inclines, water hazards and 20 to 30 military-style obstacles throughout the summer. Experienced team members from the 2013 challenge coached newcomers, advising them to build both their stamina and determination to meet the demands of obstacles such as the Funky Monkey, a series of monkey bars across a water pit and Walk The Plank, a climb up a 12-foot wooden platform before jumping into cold water below.

“Every member of the team was determined to finish the Tough Mudder and finish strong,” said Oticon Regional Marketing Manager Joe Lugara, who served as team manager. “Our larger goal was to use this popular event as a springboard for a broader outreach that would increase awareness of hearing loss as a leading disability among veterans and motivate support for the Wounded Warriors organization.”

Braving the obstacles as a team

Team members completed the course in just over 5 hours. Muddy and exhausted, they stopped only to celebrate their success before heading home for a well-earned rest.

Team member Shannell Sorrell, clinical scheduler, sales, participated in memory of her grandfather, a Navy veteran. “My grandfather was hearing impaired and wore Oticon hearing aids to help him with his hearing loss,” she said. “I know he would have been proud to see me working to raise awareness for something that meant so much to him and to his life.”

IT-Network Specialist Ruben Carpio, an ex-marine and veteran of last year’s Tough Mudder challenge, reported that the event renewed his appreciation of the courage of disabled veterans. “This was a one day challenge for me,” he explained. “My inspiration is the many Wounded Warriors who bravely face challenges in their life every day.”

More support for wounded warriors

Oticon Hearoes hope that sharing their story will inspire others to support and contribute to the Wounded Warriors Project. Oticon has established a donation site at https://www.eventbrite.com/donate/oticon-hearoes-tom-nelson/1314985#donating

To read more about the Oticon Hearoes and their Tough Mudder challenge, visit the Oticon USA Facebook page at https://www.facebook.com/pages/Oticon-People-First/699266053452350?ref=br_tf.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1xL6EK3