Sen. Ted Cruz, believing that he is the only candidate who can defeat Donald Trump, had some harsh words for Trump and his health care plan, comparing him to socialist Sen. Bernie Sanders.

“On health care, Donald Trump is calling for the same socialized medicine that Bernie Sanders is,” Cruz charged – falsely — during an appearance on Fox News. “Both of them are saying expand Obamacare to put the federal government in charge of every one of our health care, which will inevitably lead to rationing of care and seniors being denied needed care. Those views resonate pretty well with a moderate to liberal audience.”

Trump, in fact, does not call for socialized, government-run health insurance.

Host Megyn Kelly pushed Cruz on his comments regarding Trump’s support for socialized medicine. “Now, he says that bit about the Obamacare line is not true,” said Kelly. “That he doesn’t support it, that he used to be in favor of single-payer health care, he did tell 60 minutes in September that he is going to, quote, take care of everyone health care wise and that the government is going to pay for it.”

Trump has been less than clear about his health care plan. He doesn’t have one on his website. But, it is not accurate for Cruz to say that Trump holds the same position as socialist Sanders. Trump has called for repealing and replacing Obamacare, while also calling for universal coverage, a position that more closely aligns with many Democrats. "I am going to take care of everybody. I don’t care if it costs me votes or not," said Trump in the interview with "60 Minutes."

But Trump also makes clear that, for most, the private sector will be handling their health care, unlike Sanders, who would put everyone on a Medicare-style, government run plan.

Scott Pelley of "60 Minutes" pushed Trump on who would pay for the uninsured population. "The government’s gonna pay for it," said Trump. "But we’re going to save so much money on the other side. But, for most, it’s going to be a private plan and people are going to be able to go out and negotiate great plans with lots of different competition with lots of competitors with great companies and they can have their doctors, they can have plans, they can have everything."

Cruz continued his tirade against Trump’s position on health care, hammering the billionaire businessman and seeking to draw a stark contrast between him and the GOP front-runner. "And so, there’s a real choice on health care," said Cruz. "If you want to see Bernie Sanders-style socialized medicine, Donald Trump is your guy. In his own words he describes himself as very, very liberal on healthcare. On the other hand, if you want to repeal every word of Obamacare, that’s what I will do if I’m elected president, and instead will pass common sense health care reform."

In the days leading up to the South Carolina primary, we are sure to see the gloves come off with more attacks on the GOP front-runner as both he and Cruz vie for the conservative vote in the Palmetto State.