UW nose tackle Arthur Goldberg, shown tackling Iowa running back Jordan Canzeri, will see more action against Auburn. Credit: Rick Wood

By of the

Tampa, Fla. — After supervising Wisconsin's final bowl practice before leaving for Florida, interim head coach Barry Alvarez talked about the importance of getting several key players healthy.

That list included center Dan Voltz (ankle) and right guard Kyle Costigan (foot).

One key member of the defense who will not play against Auburn in the Outback Bowl is fifth-year senior lineman Konrad Zagzebski, who suffered a season-ending knee injury in the Big Ten title game.

Defensive coordinator Dave Aranda knows who he will ask to fill in for Zagzebski, who can play nose tackle or end.

However, he isn't certain the replacements can provide the combination of productivity and leadership of Zagzebski.

"We're going to ask him to bring all of his energy, all of his intensity on the sideline," Aranda said. "That is such a big part of what he brings. He is such a tough guy and such a motivator. We're going to try to get as much of that out of him as we can on the sideline."

Zagzebski is second among the linemen in tackles with 18. He has one sack and two quarterback hurries.

The toughness he provided has been as important as any statistical contribution.

Zagzebski was taken off the field on a stretcher in the opener against LSU after he suffered a blow to his head/neck and the left side of his body went numb.

However, he was back on the field the next week against Western Illinois. He suffered a left-ankle injury at Purdue but was in the starting lineup the next week at Nebraska, though he took himself out after one series against the Cornhuskers because he could not play effectively.

Redshirt junior end Jake Keefer and redshirt sophomore nose tackle Arthur Goldberg will be asked to play more against Auburn than they have in previous games this season. Goldberg leads the linemen in tackles (21). Keefer has six tackles.

"Keefer has got to be able to step up," Aranda said. "Goldberg has got to be able to step up."

Aranda could use Goldberg at nose tackle and shift senior Warren Herring from inside to end in obvious passing situations.

"It is going to be a team effort," Aranda said of replacing Zagzebski. "It is a loss."

Redshirt freshman Chikwe Obasih might also be needed to play more snaps.

"Not only is he a phenomenal player for us, he is a vocal leader on the sideline," redshirt sophomore linebacker Vince Biegel said of Zagzebski. "Not having Zags in the game is a big loss for us."

According to a source, Voltz on Saturday split work with freshman Michael Deiter on the No. 1 line. That was the first time Voltz practiced since the Thursday before the Big Ten title game. Costigan participated fully, but reserve linebacker Leon Jacobs suffered a lower-body injury and left practice early. His status for the bowl game is uncertain.

Pleasant memories: Thursday will be the third time Alvarez faces Auburn in a bowl game.

In the first meeting, Auburn scored two fourth-quarter touchdowns en route to a 28-14 victory in the 2003 Music City Bowl in Nashville, Tenn.

Auburn quarterback Jason Campbell passed for 138 yards and rushed for 67 yards and was named the game MVP and the Tigers' defense recorded 13 tackles for loss and held UW to 58 rushing yards.

Alvarez got payback in his final game as full-time head coach, the 2006 Capital One Bowl in Orlando.

Auburn entered the game ranked No. 7, but No. 21 UW was the superior team from the start. Tailback Brian Calhoun rushed 30 times for 213 yards and a touchdown, quarterback John Stocco passed for 301 yards and two touchdowns and wide receiver Brandon Williams had six catches for a UW bowl-record 173 receiving yards in the 24-10 victory.

"It was one of the better wins," Alvarez said. "That was a very good team that we played.

"And I've said many times since then, that was probably as well as any of my teams ever played. I really thought they played exceptionally well."

New title: No UW player has a closer relationship with Alvarez than redshirt freshman Joe Ferguson, a reserve safety.

Ferguson, a graduate of Madison Memorial High School, is Alvarez's grandson.

"Joe doesn't want anybody to know I'm his grandfather, Alvarez said. "He doesn't want to advertise that and I respect that."

Alvarez enjoyed their interaction during a Christmas dinner before the team left for Florida.

"He came in and he called me coach," Alvarez said. "I thought that was pretty cool. First time. Most of the time it is grandpa."