Soon after flood officials discovered the body of Danny Mike Davis near Fountain Creek in Colorado Springs, his son presided over the funeral in their home state of Texas. Then he boarded a plane for Colorado with some of his siblings and their families.

“We were up there for about three days, trying to get some answers, and some closure and peace about things, because a lot of us had not talked to Dad for several months and were unaware of his status,” said the Rev. Michael Davis, who lives in Midlothian, Texas.

Davis, 54, had become homeless, camping along the creek until he found a place to stay. He had arrived in Colorado about six years earlier, hoping to land a job in computer technology, but he struggled with the emotional pain of divorce and the death of one of his five children.

The family arrived in Colorado with little more than hope.

“We had nothing to go on, just a key to a little storage unit,” Davis said. “It was a total step of faith.”

Before checking into their hotel, they stopped at the homeless camp near the creek where his body was found Sept. 12, 2013.

“Within a few minutes we found two people who knew my dad,” Davis said.

They posted this on Facebook, and more friends of their father commented. “The next morning we were at Dad’s campsite and met all his friends,” Davis said.

Slowly, they pieced together information on his last day alive.

“He’d been at three different Bible studies, including a morning devotional at a coffee shop and going to a pizza shop to meet with the pastor of the First Presbyterian Church of Colorado Springs,” Davis said. “It was great to learn my dad was very at peace with God.”

They also retrieved their father’s belongings from the storage locker: his Bible, some photographs, some Christian worship CDs and a little radio.

“I could tell that even though he was struggling and homeless, he was a happy man who loved the Lord and loved to help people,” Davis said. “My dad was a happy guy who made the best out of whatever situation he found himself in.”

Danny Davis’ mother, Edith, likes to focus on her son’s creative abilities, like how he built a sun room for her house and built the first personal computer she ever owned. She also relies on faith.

“When you know the Lord, you mourn, but you’re not without hope,” she said. “You know you’re going to see your child again. But that doesn’t stop the big ol’ hole in your heart.”

Colleen O’Connor: 303-954-1083, coconnor@denverpost.com or twitter.com/coconnordp