Bon Venture Services printed plenty of bulletins each week — and it had just as many inserts for those bulletins — but it had no one on staff available to combine the two.

“Seems simple, just having someone to put that extra page in our bulletin … but it's something we really needed as a company that doesn't have a machine to do that work,” said Mary Beth Piazza, a human resource professional at Bon Venture Services.

The Flanders-based church publication company turned to Employment Horizons, which helped facilitate the hiring of an individual with a disability for the job. And it returned to the organization for another two part-time employees when it expanded the operation.

“They're great at the job,” Piazza said. “And around here their special need isn't even a consideration. They've become just another part of the team.”

For a small business that doesn't have a big HR department — or, in some cases, an HR department at all — it's crucial to have organizations that ease any potential misgivings involved with hiring individuals with disabilities.

But it's those uncertainties that these organizations hope to preemptively erase.

And so groups, such as Employment Horizons in Cedar Knolls, are both promoting a message and giving small business owners a hands-on experience with hiring from this untapped labor pool.

“Through (our job sampling) program, individuals with disabilities come in a business with a job coach and start doing work as if they were hired, with the understanding that they're not employed yet,” said Lisa Montalbano, business development manager of Employment Horizons.

Grants from foundations pay that person's wage while they do that job sample, which can last for multiple weeks. Then business owners can decide for themselves whether the individual fits the job.

Montalbano said her organization does around 80 placements annually during better years, half of which are with small businesses.

Besides the effect of a slow-to-rebound economy, there's still much misinformation and vagueness about this population that lingers among business owners that Montalbano's organization is having to confront to improve that rate.

She explained that even saying “individuals with disabilities” can be somewhat imprecise, given that the definition of a disability has broadened over the years.

The Equal Employment Opportunities Commission issued revisions to that definition back in 2011. The new provisions may allow former cancer patients whose illnesses are in remission to claim a disability as well as those who cope with hearing loss by wearing a hearing aid.

And there's all manner of physical disabilities and other cognitive disabilities, between someone who needs a hearing aid and those with the most severe developmental or intellectual disabilities.

Taken as a whole, individuals with disabilities are a population with enough college degrees and professional certifications to recommend them in a job market.

But one group that's especially at risk to be left out of the employment equation is persons with autism.

According to a 2012 study in “Pediatrics,” only about half of young adults with autism had a job during the first six years after high school. Overall, they faced a greater than 50 percent chance of being unemployed or not attending college when compared to those with other disabilities.

Peter Bell, CEO and president of Eden Autism Services in Princeton, said his organization has made it a goal for its young adults to have them in paying jobs by the time they graduate high school.

And there's a few perks to hiring these individuals that he wants others to know.

“They have need for sameness as part of the diagnosis, so they don't mind repetitive tasks in the workplace, whereas an individual who doesn't have autism may get bored with a repetitive task quickly,” Bell said. “That's a valuable skill.”

A new area of employment that Bell said is ramping up in popularity for these individuals is testing software code.

“That's because they have a tendency to be extremely detail-oriented, so they can find errors in code more readily than people who perhaps don't have autism,” Bell said. “That area has been popular for developing job opportunities for this population.”

Bell added that hiring any individual with a disability seems to have a halo effect on employee morale.

“It makes the employer seem more human when they figure out a way to have an individual with disabilities work side-by-side with colleagues without disabilities,” he said.

Leigh Visual Imaging, a printing and photography company that has been involved for 15 years with Eden, has found that true. It has two men with autism from Eden who do janitorial work for the small Princeton business.

“They're just a joy to have around,” said Janice Ford, senior customer service specialist at Leigh Visual Imaging.

She added: “We're a small company, and we've found fellow employees respond very positively to the fact that they are working here and our customers as well.

“And we've even had some customers that have then contacted Eden themselves to (outsource) some office work and cleaning.”

Barbara Otto said there's a definite public relations benefit to hiring individuals with disabilities. That's one of the many benefits she'll tout as principal of Think Beyond the Label, a public-private partnership that delivers information, outreach and resources to businesses on a national level.

“You have to be aware of reflecting the market you're (selling to),” she said, “One in five Americans has some form of disability, so, between family and friends, that's a trillion-dollar marketplace that you are making yourself appealing to.”

And Otto said companies should be quick to avoid a common misconception about the bottom line, especially small business that survive on thin margins.

“It's really key for us to speak about worries like health care costs going up,” she said. “With the Affordable Care Act, there's no discrimination for people with pre-existing conditions, so a small business can't be charged more for hiring an individual with a disability.”

That was a huge barrier for many small businesses, Otto said. Even still, it was historically the smaller businesses that hired individuals with disabilities.

“These were employers who hired who they knew,” Bell said. “And large competitors shied away from it for a long time.”

Moving forward, Bell pretty well summarized the message all of these organizations have for businesses still apprehensive about this sort of hiring activity:

“The goal is to have them understand this as good business practice, not as something that's just about charity.

“It's about doing the right thing — the right thing for their business.”

E-mail to: brettj@njbiz.com

On Twitter: @reporterbrett

Rules of special engagement

Whether you’re hiring someone with a physical or mental disability or you’re just working alongside an individual with a disability, it’s good to know some basic etiquette rules.

Suzanne Robitaille, founder of the news and media platform abledbody.com, shared some of her expertise with NJBIZ:

1 Say hello

“Treat the person as any other individual, not someone who needs pity or special treatment. If you can, orient yourself to their specific needs.”

2 Refer to the person first

“In conversation, say, ‘the person who is deaf’ instead of saying, ‘the deaf person.’”

3 Use everyday expressions

“It’s completely acceptable to say things like ‘It was good to see you’ and ‘See you soon’ to a person who is blind.”

4 Ask first

“Don’t touch a wheelchair user’s chair or grab a visually impaired person’s arm without asking if they want assistance first. Let a person who is visually impaired take your arm, not the other way around.”

5 Give cues

“Wave your hands to get the attention of a person who is deaf. You also can facilitate a conversation with a person who is blind by giving verbal cues and asking questions.”

6 Be considerate

“Sit down so you can meet a person who uses a wheelchair at eye level. Give someone with a speech impairment extra time to finish a sentence — don’t do it for them.”

7 Don’t be shy

“Offer your handshake to a person with a limb impairment; he or she may shake your hand differently. Or ask to take notes at a meeting for a person who is deaf.”

8 Think logistically

“Mobility-impaired people are prone to slips and falls, so keep floors clear when possible. Make a note of accessible routes.”

9 Get the facts first

“Someone who at first may seem drunk or disorderly may in fact have a disability that causes involuntary body movements and slurred speech, such as cerebral palsy.”

10 Encourage participation

“Like anyone else, a person with a disability is more likely to succeed at work if he or she is socially involved. Most likely, he or she can tell you what accommodations will be necessary to make the situation work.”

Hiring (and firing)

Once you hire an employee with a disability, you can never fire them — so say regulations.

Barbara Otto is tired of hearing that myth.

“A job is a job,” she said. “If someone can’t perform the job they’ve been hired for, they can’t claim that you have to keep someone around if you’ve done everything you can to reasonably accommodate them.”

Employers can fire workers with disabilities under one of the following three conditions: