A group of business leaders, including the Affiliated Chambers of Commerce of Greater Springfield, wrote a letter to the federal government in support of Gov. Charlie Baker's request for flexibility in implementing aspects the Affordable Care Act.

Their letter comes on the heels of a letter from a health care advocacy group opposing Baker's request.

Jeffrey Ciuffreda, executive director of the Affiliated Chambers of Commerce of Greater Springfield, said when the state implemented its own health care reform under then-governor Mitt Romney in 2006, officials put a lot of work into accomplishing the same universal coverage goals laid out in the Affordable Care Act. "A lot of what the ACA intended to do had already been done, and quite frankly we think at a higher level here in Massachusetts," Ciuffreda said.

"To cover 50 states, they were looking for a bar that would fit somewhere in the middle," Ciuffreda said. "In this case, Massachusetts was so far above that bar...they're being forced down into the middle."

Both changes that Baker asked for relate to provisions of the national health care law that affect small business. One issue relates to so-called "ratings factors." Massachusetts currently requires insurers to use 11 factors when deciding the cost of the plan – things like age, industry, or the size of the group insured by the plan. The Affordable Care Act would limit that to four factors, which would increase costs for some businesses and lower costs for others. Business groups say it would limit small business' ability to form cooperatives to negotiate with insurers or to lower costs by offering wellness plans.

Ciuffreda said the Massachusetts rating factor rules allow for more fine-tuning of insurance rates because more factors are considered.

Gov. Deval Patrick asked for a waiver from the provision, but the request was denied. Instead, the state was given three years to transition to complying with the law, with full compliance by 2016.

Baker asked the federal government to extend that transition period indefinitely and let Massachusetts continue to use all its rating factors.

"Decreased use of the rating factors has already led to significant premium swings that have disproportionately affected small businesses," Baker wrote in his April 27 letter to U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services Sylvia Burwell. "The eventual elimination of the rating factors...will lead to further disruption and instability in the marketplace."

Baker also asked the federal government to allow Massachusetts to continue to define a small business as one to 50 employees, rather than expanding the definition to businesses with up to 99 workers.

Baker met with Burwell in Washington on Wednesday to discuss the request. Baker said he spent an hour with Burwell. "We walked through a lot of issues, including the issues around the ACA waiver," Baker told reporters. "I'm not going to prejudge what the outcome here will be, but I feel we got a very fair hearing from her."

The coalition of business groups, organized by an association representing health insurance plans, includes several regional chambers of commerce and trade groups representing insurers, retailers, health plan underwriters and businesses. The group argued in its letter that Massachusetts already successfully implemented universal health care coverage. The state was able to help individuals pay lower premiums by merging the markets for individuals and small business. They said those benefits to individuals could be undone if costs rise too much for small business.

"Today, much of our state's success is threatened if we are forced to adopt ACA provisions that will increase health care costs in our unique state market," they wrote. "Without the needed flexibility, small businesses will suffer and a discussion of demerging the market is likely to ensue in our state legislature, with demerging these markets likely to harm individuals far greater than granting flexibility to the provisions the Governor requested and that we seek."

But not everyone in the state agrees. On May 8, Amy Whitcomb Slemmer, executive director of the liberal health care advocacy group Health Care for All, wrote to Burwell urging her to reject Baker's request.

"Our state-specific rating factors are discriminatory and unfair, and result in unwarranted premium rate increases to individuals and many small businesses," Whitcomb Slemmer wrote. "The artificial surcharges and discounts tilt the playing field in the wrong direction."

She argued that, for example, an adjustment for group size that gives a health insurance discount to larger small businesses results in higher costs for smaller businesses and individuals. The same applies to the discount for group purchasing cooperatives. Those are both factors that would no longer be allowed under the Affordable Care Act.

"Granting Massachusetts an indefinite extension of the transitional rating rules will set a bad precedent for other states nationwide as ACA implementation moves forward," she wrote.