Yazidi children searching for clothes in Derike, Syria (AP File Photo)

(CNSNews.com) - The State Department's declaration that Islamic State terrorists are committing genocide against Christians and Shia Muslims "is significant," because "it reflects the gravity of the situation there" and it helps build "a strong moral case" against the terrorists, White House spokesman Josh Earnest said on Thursday.



Earnest said the designation means the United States will assist in collecting evidence of atrocities for indepedent investigators. But he indicated it won't change an already "robust" U.S. military strategy.

Earnest noted that even before Thursday's genocide declaration, President Obama has directed the military to protect religious minorities:



"And that's because we acknowledged, even without a formal announcement from the State Department, that religious minorities in Iraq and Syria were being targeted in ISIL. And that was an affront on all people of faith, or an affront to all people of faith.



"And the president ordered action to try to stop it. And those actions will continue unabated and that they would continue whether or not there was announcement and a pretty powerful speech from the Secretary of State today or not."



Earnest said President Obama will continue to rely on the advice of his military commanders to defeat ISIL:



"The president has talked on a number of occasions about how this is deeply troubling and is an affront to every person of faith. That is why the president has ordered military actions against ISIL in Iraq and in Syria.



"In some cases, there have been military actions that have been ordered specifically to protect religious minorities. So there is certainly the example of Mount Sinjar, which we've cited here frequently, that there were Yazidis who were trapped on that mountain. ISIL fighters had them cornered and...were vowing to slaughter them.



"There's also a less prominent example of this, but an important one nonetheless, that there was -- there were ISIL fighters that were carrying out a siege in the Iraqi town of Amirli, where there are an estimated 15,000 Turkmen Shia, surrounded by ISIL fighters.



"And again, the United States took military action to break that siege. So, the United States has, on the orders of the commander in chief, taken steps to try to protect religious minorities in that region of the world from being the victims of violence at the hands of ISIL."



Speaking on Thursday, the congressionally mandated deadline, Secretary of State John Kerry said, "My purpose of appearing before you today is to assert that in my judgment, [ISIS] is responsible for genocide against groups in areas under its control, including Yazidis, Christians, and Shia Muslims."



Kerry declared that ISIS "is genocidal by self-proclamation, by ideology, and by its actions, in what is says, what it believes, and what it does. [ISIS] is also responsible for crimes against humanity and ethnic cleansing directed at these same groups and in some cases also Sunni Muslims, Kurds, and other minorities."



Earnest on Thursday said the Interntional Criminal Court is expected to lead the genocide investigation. "And the United States would be supportive of that effort" by collecting, documenting, preserving and analyzing evidence of atrocities. "And the United States will do all we can to ensure that perpetrators of these atrocities are held to account and bought to justice," he added.



A reporter asked Earnest if the genocide declaration means the Obama administration will be more inclined to "stop mass atrocities when you can."



"Degrading and ultimately destroying ISIL is the best way for us to prevent them carrying out these kinds of atrocities," Earnest replied. "It's not the only way, but it is the most effective way for us to definitively ensure that these terrorists aren't terrorizing religious minorities just because of their religious views.



"What we've also acknowledged is that there is, at the root of all of this, a political problem that needs to be addressed..."



Another reporter asked Earnest: "[W]hen you talk about cooperating with the independent investigations on the ground, I can envision a scenario in which maybe that means having American troops spend more time on the ground to collect evidence of atrocities...But I'm not hearing you say that. So I'm trying to get at whether there is any concrete change here, and I heard you say in response to a bunch of my colleagues, basically, no."



"Well, I don't know if there will be additional requests that are made of U.S. military personnel to be involved in this effort" Earnest responded. "You can check with the Department of Defense about that. Obviously, there are a bunch resources that we can bring to bear on this, and you know, we will be supportive, strongly supportive, of an independent, international effort to hold those accountable for carrying out atrocities like we see in Iraq and in Syria."



The conservative Family Research COuncil has said that the word "genocide" alone won't stop the suffering of Christians, but "it will certainly go a long way to sparking a series of mostly non-military actions that can bring help and hope to our Christian brothers and sisters who are suffering for nothing more than being identified as followers of Jesus Christ."



Back up words with action



In a statement released on Thursday, FRC President Tony Perkins said the Obama administration was right to call the atrocities genocide:



"Now words need to be backed up with actions so that the international community not only speaks with one voice but works to isolate ISIS and those facilitating their reign of terror.



"Additionally, we call upon Christians to support those non-governmental organizations that are working to provide sanctuary and relief to our brothers and sisters in Christ as well as other religious minorities," Perkins said.



The FRC, in partnership with other groups, has designated Sunday, April 17, as a day to "Stand with the Persecuted" in churches around the nation.