WASHINGTON, D.C. – The Cleveland Clinic's recent news that it would soon cut staff, seeking to save $330 million, brought immediate reaction: This is what happens under Obamacare.

This was the sentiment in Tennessee, too, when Vanderbilt University's medical center announced cuts.

And certain elements were true, say health care and hospital analysts who note how changes in the way hospital get paid under the Affordable Care Act will affect their bottom line. But they say the criticism, voiced by commentators and scores of other critics of health-care reform, lacked context or failed to explain how other forces – including a U.S. Supreme Court ruling and decisions made in Washington, Columbus and other state capitals since the act passed – are playing a direct role in the hospitals' worries. It so happens that all of these forces are coming together now, they say.



The Plain Dealer asked the Cleveland Clinic and health care policy analysts to break down the parts of the act that affect hospital revenues in order to better understand the factors at play. Those parts are:

MEDICARE REIMBURSEMENTS: Medicare is the federal health insurance program that pays for people age 65 and older. It was passed in 1965 and retirees signed up starting the next year. Money comes from premiums that retirees pay, and from payroll taxes that most working Americans pay. Concern about the program's financial viability arises regularly because the elderly population is rising and the cost of medical care generally outpaces inflation and wage growth.

That's partly why the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, or CMS, sets limits on what it will pay, just as private insurers negotiate the amounts they will pay doctors and hospitals for office visits, surgeries and outpatient procedures. This is an ongoing battle, with CMS constantly saying it needs to contain costs -- sometimes goaded by Congress to do so and sometimes doing it on its own.

But health care providers say every year that they are not paid enough. And they sometimes say they will have to cut services or stop accepting seniors as new patients if this continues.

The Affordable Care Act, or ACA, championed by President Barack Obama and passed by congressional Democrats in 2010, demanded new cuts: $716 billion over ten years. Some of these were tied to premiums that CMS paid to private insurers managing what was effectively a Medicare privatization project, called Medicare Advantage. But other Medicare cuts in the ACA were specifically for hospitals.

These included federal payments linked to hospitals' performance. Under the ACA, hospitals with an excessive number of preventable patient readmissions were to be penalized. Those penalties were up to 1 percent of hospitals' Medicare payments in 2013, and will be 2 percent this year and 3 percent in 2014.

The effect on the Cleveland Clinic has not been that severe, thanks to its lower readmission rate. It lost over $1 million last year – 0.74 percent of its Medicare total – but only 0.33 percent this year, cutting the losses in half, according to a Plain Dealer review in August.

But the ACA also cut what are known as Medicare's Disproportionate Share Payments, or DSH, starting in 2014. These are payments given to hospitals that treat a high number of uninsured patients, or what is known as charity care. Hospital associations accepted the cuts because they believed the ACA would expand insurance coverage to non-elderly patients.

"All of a sudden you'd have millions of people with an insurer behind them paying their bills, so they would recoup some of their losses from reduced payment rates through the fact that a lot of their previously uncompensated care patients were now insured," said John Graves, an assistant professor specializing in health economics and policy at Vanderbilt University's School of Medicine.

The DSH cuts nationwide came to $22 billion over ten years, according to the American Association of Medical Colleges and the Commonwealth Fund.

From the White House perspective, the ACA-related cuts actually helped Medicare. Through cost-cutting and the elimination of waste, fraud and abuse, the Medicare Trust Fund – the account that holds the taxes and premiums before paying providers – gained 12 years of solvency, CMS projected initially. Medicare trustees later pared that back to eight years.

And, the White House says, seniors already see more of their prescription drug costs and preventive exams covered, thanks to other portions of the ACA.

Eileen Sheil, the Cleveland Clinic's executive director of corporate communications, did not have specific figures available for the Clinic's loss of DSH money. But she said the loss was among the factors in the decision to cut costs and pare staff through attrition.

The Ohio Hospital Association estimates that statewide, the Medicare and Medicaid reductions will come to $7.4 billion over ten years.

If the ACA's decade-long Medicare DSH cuts nationally seem severe, the American Hospital Association says it might help to note: Congress has done a lot more cutting since the ACA passed. And there has been little if any political outcry.

"There have been about $95 billion of other Medicare cuts enacted since the ACA, the most recent being the sequester, that have caused a hit to hospital finances," said Caroline Steinberg, vice president for trends analysis at the American Hospital Association.

Budget sequestration, or automatic cuts that started this year under a bipartisan agreement by Congress in 2011, took away $45 billion, she said. That's more than double the ACA's DSH cuts.

And a budget deal that Congress made last New Year's Eve will cut another $35.3 billion, the association said.

The cuts "just keep coming," Steinberg said.

MEDICAID: The major thrust behind health reform was the desire for millions more Americans to gain better access to medical care. Doctors' offices and hospitals would see their paying-patient rosters grow. They would not have to write off as much bad debt from patients who could not pay their bills. And patients would not have to worry about bankruptcy, or simply avoid getting care, if they got injured or sick.

One way this was supposed to occur, starting in 2014, was through expanded insurance coverage for those now uninsured. They could buy policies on the new insurance exchanges that are now enrolling people – with widely reported technical glitches so far -- for January coverage, and many could get government subsidies to help cover premiums, depending on their incomes.

Many of the poorest Americans, particularly women with minor children at home, could already qualify for Medicaid, a joint federal-state program that shares the cost of covering people with low incomes. Medicaid had its limits, but the Affordable Care Act was supposed to expand them.

That is, the ACA would open Medicaid to people with slightly higher incomes, up to 138 percent of the poverty level. Those earning more would be directed to the insurance exchanges and might qualify for subsidies if their family incomes were less than 400 percent of the poverty rate.

States normally share the costs of Medicaid. They worried about the added expense if they expanded enrollment. So under the ACA, the federal government agreed to pay all the new Medicaid costs through 2016, and 90 percent thereafter.

This was a powerful incentive for hospitals. They could get more paying patients (with the government as the payer). It was a big part of the logic behind accepting lower Medicare DSH payments.

And it was the reason the ACA cut a parallel DSH program under Medicaid, whose DSH money flows first to states before redistribution to hospitals. The Medicaid DSH cuts are supposed to total $18 billion from 2014 to 2020. Some $500 million of that will be cut in 2014 and $600 million in 2015, according to a final rule CMS announced Sept. 13.

To ACA supporters, this and the Medicare DSH cuts sounded like a fair tradeoff: Less money for uncompensated care in exchange for more patients whose bills would actually be paid.

But the U.S. Supreme Court in 2012 threw water on those plans. While the court upheld the ACA's provision requiring most Americans to get insurance or face a fine (a tax, as Chief Justice John Roberts put it), it also held that states were not obligated to expand their Medicaid programs.

State lawmakers in places with Republican legislative majorities, such as Ohio and Tennessee, said they worried that the federal government would someday shirk its obligation and make the states pay a bigger share for the expanded Medicaid programs. They said their states could not afford that.

So they have refused to expand Medicaid.

And for many hospitals including the Cleveland Clinic, that poses a problem. Ohio will have an estimated 275,000 fewer residents on Medicaid than projected, the Cleveland Clinic's Sheil noted.



"Most of the problems that we have been seeing do relate to the Medicaid expansion that has not panned out as planned," said Steinberg, of the American Hospital Association.

Put simply, the tradeoff -- more patients who would go on Medicaid and stop qualifying as charity care or bad-debt cases, and less money needed (and provided) for that latter care -- is not happening in Ohio and other states that refuse to expand Medicaid. Because of reluctant state legislatures, Medicaid will not grow as the ACA anticipated.

"The important thing to remember is the reaction the hospitals are having in particular has to do with uncompensated care, and that's interacting a bit with the Supreme Court decision on Medicaid expansion," said Vanderbilt's Graves.

Hospitals expected to gain thousands of new paying patients – through newly enrolled exchange clients and expanded Medicaid – to make up for the Medicaid and Medicare DSH cuts. Roughly 20 to 30 percent of their uncompensated care money is being cut, Graves said.

"Which is a significant amount, particularly for safety net hospitals," Graves said. "Hospitals across the country, in particular in non-expansion states, are going to have to make that up somehow. That's what we're seeing at the Cleveland Clinic and elsewhere."

Figures from the Cleveland Clinic's IRS filings illuminate this. In 2011, $1.7 billion of its revenue came from Medicare and Medicaid, according to the Clinic's Form 990, the annual filing required of tax exempt organizations. That was 28 percent of its total revenue in 2011, the most recent year for which a filing was publicly available.

Sheil said the Medicare and Medicaid portion of revenue will total $2 billion on the 2012 IRS form, which will be filed later this year.

The Clinic has many moving parts, with an international presence in Abu Dhubi; acquisitions, mergers and partnerships with an array of smaller hospitals, and changes and consolidations in some of its other centers and practices. It says it aims to improve health-care delivery amid multiple changes in the industry, some driven by the ACA and some modeled by the ACA's architects on the Clinic's existing methods.



When asked in a telephone interview how much of the $330 million in announced cuts can be attributed to the ACA, Sheil said about half. That cannot be verified independently without access to extensive records. But if Graves, the Vanderbilt professor, is correct -- if some hospitals need to make up for 20 percent reductions in Medicare and Medicaid payments because of factors already mentioned -- then the Cleveland Clinic's IRS filings suggest Sheil's statement is credible.

A cut of 20 percent of the Clinic's $2 billion in Medicare and Medicaid revenue would come to $400 million. Such a large figure assumes that no new patients would be gained, and the Cleveland Clinic does not claim that. But the numbers demonstrate, at very least, the dependent relationship between the federal programs and hospitals, even sprawling ones like the Cleveland Clinic.



UNPAID BILLS: Americans who decide to buy their insurance on the exchanges have a number of choices, just as they do when they buy insurance through a broker. They cannot be turned down for preexisting conditions and their out-of-pocket costs are capped in even the lowest-cost or stingiest policies at around $6,000.

But whether they buy such a policy or go with a more deluxe plan that has better coverage is up to them and their finances.

There are four tiers of coverage, and the federal subsidies are pegged to costs in the second-lowest tier (a "silver" plan, in the color-coded, metallurgical lingo of the exchanges). In practical terms, that means one buyer might choose the lowest-level plan (bronze), with higher co-payments or deductibles and subsequently lower premiums. Or a buyer might choose a gold or platinum plan, with extensive coverage but higher premiums. Each buyer must make his or her own calculation and decide what is or isn't affordable after subsidies are factored in.

This poses a challenge for hospitals: What if most people choose plans that still leave them obligated for several thousand dollars in co-payments and deductibles?

That is already the trend in the employer-provided insurance market, with rising deductibles fairly common, according to surveys by the Kaiser Family Foundation. Data from the Ohio Hospital Association's most recently available survey on this shows hospitals in the state reporting a collective $645 million in bad debt in 2010. They reported providing another $1.1 billion that year in charity care.

Sheil, of the Cleveland Clinic, mentioned the bad-debt trend when discussing the growing responsibility of patients to pick up some of their health care costs.

The industry's worry now?

That some patients who buy bronze or silver plans will leave the hospital owing several thousand dollars that might never be recovered. In the past, those DSH funds from Medicare and Medicaid helped make up the difference. But those funds are being cut.

The bad debt problem from high-deductible or high-co-pay patients is actually not new, and it explains why many doctor's offices and emergency rooms push hard to collect the money immediately when a patient shows up for care.



"The bad debt has increased over the years," said John Palmer, spokesman for the Ohio Hospital Association.

Asked about the fear that bad debt will expand even though more patients will be insured, Megan Neuburger, a senior director at Fitch Ratings who analyzes the industry, said, "That makes a lot of sense."

"I think typically a third of a hospital's bad debt is made up of people who have some level of insurance," Neuburger said. "It's been a growing issue with the growth of these high-deductible health plans, which has been a trend in the last couple years."

Neither the Obama administration nor analysts who study health care say they know how many or what percentage of buyers will purchase exchange plans with thousand-or-more-dollar out-of-pocket requirements. But analysts say they think it will be high, since many of these buyers do not currently have insurance and affordability has often been a factor.

"That certainly is a trend that pre-dated the ACA, but if anything I would say the ACA jumps on that trend, in that the exchange plans have pretty substantial cost sharing," said Graves.

Said Sheil, of the Cleveland Clinic, "There are private and public insurers who are paying less."

Asked whether policies under the ACA will pay hospitals enough, she said, "I think that's what hospitals are still trying to figure out." And amid that uncertainty even as the ACA's primary provisions are about to kick in, she said, "Hospitals are saying, 'Okay, that train has left the station. We need to start doing things."

As for whether it is fair to blame the ACA on these trends collectively, Palmer, of the Ohio Hospital Association, noted that they are not new. He said, "The changes through the ACA are just a little more intense."

Any of these trends could change.



Governors in states including Tennessee, for example, are exploring whether the federal government will allow them to try the Arkansas model. Arkansas in September got federal permission to enroll otherwise-Medicaid-eligible people in private policies through its exchange. Ohio Gov. John Kasich, a Republican, plans to ask the state Controlling Board later this month for authority to spend federal money to expand Medicaid in the state.



And the problem of bad debt from the newly insured could prove to be relative. Fitch Ratings ran the numbers and explained in a recent research note:

"Bad hospital debt expense could drop, given the assumption that a certain amount of people signing up for coverage in the exchange were previously uninsured." Fitch cited Congressional Budget Office estimates of 13 million newly insured in 2014 through both the exchanges and Medicaid.

Some will assuredly leave a portion of their bills unpaid when they use that new coverage. But considering that many used to have no coverage, it still could still be a net plus to hospitals. Said Fitch, which reports on financial markets and credit, not political policy:

"As enrollment increases, hospitals' ability to reduce bad debt will also increase and that would clearly be a credit positive."