Topics: Climate Change, Full Stop, Global Warming, Keystone XL, University of Virginia, Sustainability News, Life News

This article originally appeared in Full Stop

If you want to see an expression of pure despair, ask a college freshman to parse Rachel Carson’s rhetorical choices at 8:00 in the morning. That’s what I’m doing this semester for a composition class I’m teaching at the University of Virginia. The course is called “Representing Climate Change,” and our collective goal is to discover and deploy effective methods of talking and writing about our looming environmental crisis. The task is daunting. Climate change is at once really easy and really hard to write about. It’s easy because there is so much to say, and hard because progress toward a solution is so slow.

But what do I know about the fossil fuel industry? I study literature. I am not a scientist. My specialties are agrarian novels and Modernist aesthetics, not cloud formation or sea ice. When making arguments, I have to trust the vast majority of scientists who agree that humans are changing the climate, that the changes will have huge and unpleasant effects, and that we should really get our act together and fix the problem. The scientists’ job is to perform and publish the research that supports these claims. My job — and my students’ job — starts where peer review ends: we need to make scientific evidence digestible and believable to a general audience. Since solving climate change requires mass engagement, how we talk about the problem matters as much as the science that confirms its urgency.

Few scientists are interested in this public communication project, with notable exceptions. Climatologist Michael Mann, author of the famous “hockey stick” climate model, recently penned an op-ed about the importance of speaking out as a scientist. Peter Kareiva, chief scientist for The Nature Conservancy, has been calling for a “new environmentalism” with a more positive, collaborative tone. And James Hansen, former head of NASA’s Goddard Institute, has long been outspoken about the climate crisis. He threw the Keystone XL controversy into the national spotlight by calling the proposed pipeline “game over for the planet.”

And that’s just it: Hansen’s phrase is what galvanized action, perhaps more than the science behind it. Words have just as much force as ideas; in fact, the two are inextricable. Scientists might occasionally make verbal magic, but writers have to do it all the time. It should be no surprise that Bill McKibben, the founder of 350.org and the country’s most outspoken climate activist, began his career not as a scientist but as a New Yorker writer.

Most people in the English department think of teaching writing as grunt work. We would rather be gushing about Milton’s meter or Woolf’s rhythms than explaining how to write academic arguments. But teaching basic composition skills has its benefits. Learning to write also means learning to think critically, and it is exciting to participate in that Ur-goal of a college education while thinking through an urgent contemporary issue. And because composition is a requirement for graduation, my writing class is much more diverse in terms of race, gender, and culture than most English classes here, which tend to be dominated by white women. My composition classes are geographically diverse, too. I have the usual contingent of Northern Virginians and out-of-staters, plus several students from Appalachian coal country in the west and the Tidewater in the east — both regions that continue to face serious threats from climate change and the fossil fuel industry.

My students are trying to figure out how their writing can contribute to the climate conversation. One tactic they love is finger pointing. In class discussion and in their papers, I come across a lot of “greedy corporations” and “soulless” oil companies and “people who just don’t care.” But is blame rhetorically effective? How should we use it? Working answers: sometimes, and its usefulness depends on the audience.

On the one hand, blaming big companies for climate change can come off as reactionary, strident, and disingenuous. After all, every individual has a carbon footprint and therefore contributes to climate change, even if she takes the bus and buys organic eggs. Who are we to blame companies for providing the consumer goods that we demand? I am part of the problem: I drive a car, fly to conferences, buy cheap clothes at Target. Who am I to point a finger at the oil, airline, and garment industries?

One of my students last semester came from a small town in the mountains of southwest Virginia; she sometimes apologized for her “hick accent.” Her father worked for the car parts manufacturing plant that employed much of the region: how could she blame the industry that kept her family warm and fed? And yet she recognized the urgency of mitigating climate change and wanted to take action.

For people like her, and for people acutely aware of their own complicity in the climate problem, allocating blame probably isn’t the best strategy. Instead, writers need to find a new tone — perhaps the one that Kareiva advocates in his talk “Failed Metaphors and a New Environmentalism for the 21st Century.” Kareiva claims — correctly, I think — that the current environmental message is overwhelmingly negative (“corporations are bad! Climate change is bad!”). He says the tide of public opinion will only turn when we can transform the message into a positive one: how can we work with companies to create a sustainable future? What good have we already accomplished? How might climate consciousness lead to economic prosperity? Removing the specter of blame would let a broader spectrum of people see how environmentalism could buoy their interests, not hurt them.