Buy Photo A young boy got a triceratops face-painting during last year's Harvest Homecoming, which is a popular for young families and those looking for food and fun. (Photo: The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

Taking “Hot Rod Harvest” as its theme, the Harvest Homecoming Festival will officially kick off its 48th year on Oct. 3. That means a parade, carnival rides, four days of booths and food and hundreds of thousands of visitors flooding into New Albany.

Things officially kick off on Oct. 3 with a parade, and Booth Days will run Oct. 8 through 11. The approximately 200 booths offering arts and crafts, food, political candidates, adoptable animals and much more, attract 400,000 to 600,000 visitors each year according to organizer estimates.

What started as a three-day pumpkin festival has evolved into a massive event, with activities tied to the festival dotted throughout the area and starting even before the Oct. 3 opening ceremony.

The Ohio River Greenway 5K Run/Walk and the Culbertson Mansion Coffin Races were held Saturday, and a bicycle tour in Starlight heads out from the Forest Discovery Center Sunday.

Over the years Harvest Homecoming events and activities have come and gone. “The event’s kind of evolved,” said Jeff Cummins, Harvest Homecoming president. “Some events come and others go away. We don’t do a balloon glow anymore. No-tap bowling was an event we resurrected a couple of years ago and we have a revitalized golf scramble.”

“Last year we added the Pumpkin Chunking,” he said. “This year we have more teams, both youth and adult.”

The Pumpkin Chunking competition, Oct. 6 at Purdue’s Charlestown Road campus, will see competitors using trebuchets to fire 5- to 16-pound pumpkins. Using gravity, in the form of falling weights, the devices will launch their melon missiles at a target up to 125 yards away.

Some events are just for fun, like the Baby Crawl and Big Wheel Race, while Who Wants to Be a College Student? Will award up to $1,800 in scholarship money to some lucky Floyd County residents.

The Harvest Homecoming Parade is considered by most to be the official launch of Harvest Homecoming, drawing thousands to watch the parade make its way from New Albany High School to downtown New Albany.

“The parade’s always been a big deal,” said New Albany Mayor Jeff Gahan, a life-long resident of the city. “Even when I went away to college I would come back for Harvest Homecoming.”

After the parade the New Albany Restaurant and Bar Association will be hosting Biers on Parade until 6 p.m. in the Farmers Market Pavilion at Bank and Market Streets. Local food, beer and wine will be featured, including Donum Dei Brewery, Floyd County Brewing Co. and the New Albanian Brewing Co.

River City Winery will sell wine, and food will be available from Feast BBQ, Big Four Burgers + Beer, and The Exchange. Proceeds benefit NARBA and charities selected by Harvest Homecoming.

In keeping with the hot rod theme, a car show will be held October 10 on the New Albany Riverfront. Any type of stock, classic, show or racecar, antique vehicle, truck or motorcycle is welcome.

A number of events geared to children are clustered on Oct. 10, including a Big Wheel race, children’s tractor pull, baby crawl, and Petite Little Miss, Little Master and Little Miss pageants. Kids’ Day in the Tent offers hands-on activities for kids through sixth grade, accompanied by an adult.

Fiesta carnival rides run Oct.3 – 11 with hours varying from day to day and ride-all-day passes available for $15 through the Oct. 7.

Food is always a big part of Booth Days, drawing some people in for the doughnuts or caramel apples, others go for the fresh-grilled corn on the cob or chicken and dumplings.

“Typically (visitors) have their favorite foods,” said Jeff Cummins, Harvest Homecoming president. “Pork chop sandwiches, rolled oysters, cobblers, chicken and noodles. Everybody has their favorites they go to as soon as we open.

The doughnut booth manned by the Masonic Lodge is arguably the most popular, with long lines forming even before they open each day. Those that don’t want to wait for booth days for their doughnut fix can get an early taste during the parade. “They set up out front that day,” Cummins said. “The parade runs right past the lodge.”

“For me, Harvest Homecoming is obviously a community kind of thing,” Cummins said. “Some people argue against it, some just love it. But it’s a good atmosphere for everybody. You can’t say that too much anymore.”

“I’ve been around the state, to all the burgs and all the villes,” said Gahan. “They ask about Harvest Homecoming and what makes it work. I always say I’m not sure exactly how it works, but I know it has a lot to do with the enthusiasm of the volunteers.”

HARVEST HOMECOMING EVENTS

Various locations. Visit www.harvesthomecoming.com for a full schedule of events, activities and venue information.

Sunday: Harvest Homecoming Idol open auditions, 2 p.m., New Albany Production House, 1736 E Main St.

Monday: Who Wants to be a College Student? 7 p.m. at New Albany H.S. auditorium

Oct. 3-11: Carnival rides open

Oct. 3: Harvest Homecoming Parade, noon

Oct. 3: Biers on Parade, 1-6 p.m.

Oct. 5: Kids’ dog show, 5:30 p.m.

Oct. 6: Pumpkin Chunking Competition, 4-7 p.m., Purdue College of Technology, 3000 Technology Ave.

Oct. 8-11: Craft and Food Booths open

Oct. 9: Business Luncheon, 11 a.m.

Oct. 9: Harvest Homecoming Idol 12 semifinalists, 7 p.m.

Oct. 9: Friday Night on the Riverfront

Oct. 10: Big Wheel Race, 10 a.m.

Oct. 10: Harvest Homecoming Open Car Show, 9 a.m. – 3 p.m.

Oct. 10: Kids’ Day in the Tent, noon – 3 p.m .

Oct. 10: Harvest Homecoming Idol five finalists, 6 – 7:30 p.m.

Oct. 10: Saturday Night on the Riverfront

Oct. 11: Closing Ceremonies and prize drawings, 4:15 p.m.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1KCfe5k