Altru introduces option for employer health plans

Altru Health System announced Friday it will introduce a health insurance option for group purchasers in the region later this year.

Altru is working with Medica, a Minneapolis-based health insurer, to create an accountable care organization for employers in northeast North Dakota and northwest Minnesota. The organizations are expecting to launch the ACO, named Altru & You with Medica, in the third quarter of 2016.

"An employer can look to an ACO model to acquire their insurance with their employees, and the objective of that would be to manage the health of the population of that group with incentives built in," Altru Chief Financial Officer Dwight Thompson said.

Medica spokesman Greg Bury said ACOs tend to be less costly because it includes a smaller provider network. Altru & You with Medica includes access to a network of 560 providers, according to a news release.

Bury said information sharing tends to be more efficient in an ACO model.

"Medica and Altru will work together to have a little better handle on what each member needs," he said.

ACOs have proliferated since they were included in the Affordable Care Act as a way to reduce costs and improve quality, according to a May report from Leavitt Partners and the National Business Group on Health. As of January 2015, an estimated 23.5 million Americans received care from 744 ACOs across the country, according to that report.

"It aligns the incentives better between the patients, the insurance company and the provider by everybody working for a healthier patient," he said. "It's not just a matter of increasing copays and deductibles. It's a matter of having healthier people, getting care more timely in the right setting."

The Altru & You with Medica ACO will include access to the Mayo Clinic Care Network, discounted health coaching sessions, an online patient portal for members to access their medical records and communicate with providers and other features. It also will allow members to see any primary or specialty care provider in the Altru network without a referral, according to a news release.

Thompson expects several thousand people to be enrolled in the ACO by the end of the year.

"We think that employers are looking to do this a better way," he said.