Topics: brokered convention, Donald Trump, Elections 2016, GOP primary, Paul Ryan, Republican National Convention, RNC, Ted Cruz, The Republican Party, News, Politics News

On Thursday, Speaker of the House Paul Ryan posted a video to YouTube. The video, which was set to stirring music, showed Ryan saying this in a speech:

“What really bothers me the most about politics these days is this notion of identity politics: that we’re going to win an election by dividing people, rather than inspiring people on our common humanity and our common ideals and our common culture on the things that should unify us. We all want to be prosperous. We all want to be healthy. We want everybody to succeed. We want people to reach their potential in their lives. Now, liberals and conservatives are going to disagree with one another on that. No problem. That’s what this is all about. So let’s have a battle of ideas. Let’s have a contest of whose ideas are better and why our ideas are better.”

Ryan staffers denied that the video was some sort of political campaign ad, so let’s give them the benefit of the doubt on that. The video wasn’t an ad. It was just a regular video with the look, feel, music can’t-we-all-get-along tone of a general election presidential campaign ad that was released just as speculation about Ryan’s prospects in the 2016 campaign have been rapidly escalating.

Besides all that, nothing to see here.

Obviously, Ryan knew what he was doing. He has played a curious role throughout the deranged GOP primary, popping up now and then to give vaguely worded criticisms of one Donald Trump comment or another, and then receding into the background. But in the past week, as the chances of a brokered Republican convention have spiked, Ryan’s name has kept popping up.

The scenario is simple enough: the Republicans get to Cleveland, Donald Trump can’t get a majority of delegates to back him, and instead of going with runner-up Ted Cruz—who, unlike Ryan, has actually been winning lots of votes and primaries—the party installs Ryan as its savior for November. Ryan then presumably sails across America, uniting the people behind his cheerful conservative vision.

Of course, as with everything about Republican politics, this has relatively little to do with substance. Despite Ryan’s gee-whiz persona, he’s the most right-wing House Speaker in decades, with a well-documented devotion to Ayn Rand and a long history of pushing extreme economic proposals.