Led by Japan’s SoftBank Corp., Asian-Pacific companies are taking out big loans this year, in part to pay for acquisitions, as issuing bonds has become more expensive.

The value of syndicated loans in Asia Pacific so far this year has reached US$460.50 billion, an 8% increase from the same period last year, according to Thomson Reuters LPC.

The biggest of these—the largest ever by a Japanese company—was a yen-denominated loan equivalent to US$20 billion that mobile-phone giant SoftBank secured two weeks ago, according to Dealogic, a data provider. The company said it will use the money to pay off bridge loans and other debt it took out last year to fund its US$21.6 billion buyout Sprint Nextel Corp.

“The markets are seeing very strong deal flow at the moment,” said Atul Sodhi, Crédit Agricole SA’s head of loan syndication for the Asian-Pacific region and chairman of the Asia-Pacific Loan Market Association, which promotes growth and liquidity in the market.

Other major companies have also tapped the market. Hutchison Port Holdings, the Singapore-listed port operator owned by billionaire Li Ka-shing, borrowed US$3.6 billion to refinance debt, while Australia’s Origin Energy Ltd. landed a loan for 5.4 billion Australian dollars (US$5.1 billion), also for refinancing. And India’s Reliance Industries Ltd. borrowed US$1.75 billion from 19 banks, including Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd. and Crédit Agricole.

Hutchison Port declined to comment. Origin Energy couldn’t be reached for comment and Reliance Industries couldn’t immediately comment.

Around 32% of the total money loaned this year was intended for refinancing, while paying for acquisitions accounted for around 9%, data from Thomson Reuters showed.

“In addition to refinancing, which traditionally makes up a large portion of syndicated loan volume in the region, acquisition financing has also driven activity in the lending market the last couple of years,” said Siong Ooi, head of leveraged-finance loans for the Asian-Pacific region at Bank of America Merrill Lynch.

Bank of China Ltd. and seven other banks, for example, have loaned US$4 billion to Shuanghui International Holdings Ltd. to back its US$7.1 billion purchase of Smithfield Foods Inc., people familiar with the situation said Wednesday. That loan is currently in syndication, meaning the lenders are offering pieces of it to other banks to spread the risk.

The surge in bank lending has come as bond issuance in the region has declined. The U.S. Federal Reserve’s signal in late May that it intended to soon begin winding down its monetary stimulus sent bond yields higher, making loans more attractive.

Based on the five-year London Interbank Offered Rate, the rate banks charge one another for loans, a blue-chip company could get a five-year loan for about 3% per year. The average yield of an Asian bond on Wednesday was 4.61%, according to the J.P. Morgan Asia Credit Investment Grade Index, up from 3.62% in early January.

Bonds issued in dollars, yen or euros in Asia, excluding Japan, between May 1 and Wednesday totaled US$45.4 billion, a decline of 10% from the same period a year earlier, according to Dealogic.

Many of the loans are five years in duration, an increase from three years previously. That appeals to borrowers because it eliminates the need for them to refinance as soon, potentially at a higher cost.

“The competitive pricing and longer tenor [duration] being offered in the loan market nowadays attract many companies to tap funds through loans rather than bonds,” said Anup Kuruvilla, managing director of loan syndicate for Asia Pacific at Royal Bank of Scotland.

Bank of America’s Mr. Ooi noted, though, that many companies are structuring loans with various durations, to give themselves flexibility to return to the bond market when conditions improve.

Hutchison Port, for example, originally planned to tap the bond market before deciding on the loan, people familiar with the situation said. It chose to structure its US$3.6 billion loan in one-year, three-year and five-year tranches, meaning it could refinance elsewhere as the tranches mature, the people said.



–Fiona Law in Hong Kong contributed to this article.