This week, in what has become one of his semi-official annual duties as President, Barack Obama filled out his college-basketball brackets in taped segments for ESPN. The network aired Obama’s picks for the men’s tournament on Wednesday, and will show his women’s picks on Thursday. “Baracketology,” as ESPN has named the exercise, is, for the President’s admirers, another example of Obama’s deft use of popular culture to connect with his fellow-citizens and advance policy goals. Last year, for instance, he encouraged young people to sign up for health insurance under the Affordable Care Act. On Wednesday, he talked about a White House initiative, It’s On Us, to bring attention to the problem of sexual assaults on college campuses.

For his critics, meanwhile, this annual event is evidence of Obama’s disregard for his more serious duties. Last year at this time, Fox News ran the banner “ OBAMA PICKS NCAA BRACKET WHILE PUTIN DECLARES CRIMEA AS PART OF RUSSIA ”—the idea being that the President’s ten minutes on ESPN were an example of Nero fiddling (in this case, with his five-twelve upset picks) while Rome burned. This year, on Twitter, there has been more of the same, with people wondering how the President has time for brackets but can’t disarm Iran, defeat ISIS , etc. (Liberals, meanwhile, have complained that his picks are too conservative—too few upsets, with the heavy favorite, Kentucky, pegged to win it all.) All this, of course, is familiar bunk: partisan pundits are often torn between claiming that an opposition President is doing too much work or else too little, depending on the issue. Obama’s interest in sports has been, to the right, what George W. Bush’s brush-clearing was to the left—annoying mostly because of the qualities of the person who is doing it.

President Obama’s status as a genuine, “SportsCenter”-watching fan has been one of the defining characteristics of his public persona. When he fills out his bracket, he offers enough commentary about a team or particular player to remind viewers that he knows what he’s talking about—ready, this year, to praise both the greatness of Kentucky and the defensive toughness of the mostly unknown University at Buffalo (Obama’s upset special). Coming from the Fan-in-Chief, Obama’s comments on sports during his years in the White House have carried special weight. When another famous sports fan, Richard Nixon, was President, he used to call the coach of the Washington Redskins, badgering him with unsolicited, and mostly unheeded, advice. But, when Obama talks about sports, people listen. He is credited, at least in part, with pushing college football to adopt a playoff system, and last year hosted a summit on concussions at which he said that schools needed to do more to protect their players.

Last March, Obama used his bracket segment to comment on the wider state of college sports. After being asked by ESPN’s Andy Katz about the large number of so-called one-and-done players, who leave college after their freshman year for the pros, he said, “I don’t begrudge young people, if they’ve got an opportunity to look after their family, to go ahead and get an N.B.A. contract and then go back to school, hopefully, and get their degree.” He continued, “But, for a lot of the average kids who are not going to be able to get a pro career, are those schools making sure that they’re actually getting a good education, that they’re actually getting a degree, that, if they get injured, their scholarships stick with them? Those are the kinds of things that I’d like to see the N.C.A.A. address.”

Obama was not calling for radical reform of the N.C.A.A.’s amateur model; he didn’t say, as many others have argued, that men’s basketball players, for instance, should be treated as employees and paid some fair share of the millions of dollars that March Madness generates every year. But it was notable that, during what is essentially a celebration of college sports, he took a moment to be critical of its administration. Largely, he was calling for reforms that had already been under discussion. In January, a consortium of schools that is made up of the five major athletic conferences (the A.C.C., the Big 12, the Big Ten, the S.E.C., and the PAC -12), acting independently of the N.C.A.A., voted to allow its members to supplement the value of athletic scholarships with a “cost of attendance” stipend. It also passed a rule guaranteeing athletic scholarships for four years, regardless of a student’s athletic performance. (These rules, for now, only cover the five major conferences, and do not extend to many of the smaller schools in this year’s tournament.)

Yet, despite this incremental progress, the past year has been a troubling and fractious one for college sports. Last year’s men’s championship team, the University of Connecticut, was coming off a postseason ban because of years of single-digit graduation rates; its star player, Shabazz Napier, told reporters that he often didn’t have enough money while in school to pay for food. Syracuse is currently serving a self-imposed postseason ban for its own academic improprieties. The N.C.A.A. is currently investigating twenty schools, including the University of North Carolina (this year’s No. 4 seed in the West), for academic misconduct, which calls into question the very value of the athletic scholarships that the N.C.A.A. touts as, essentially, priceless. And, in August, a federal judge named Claudia Wilken challenged the entire amateur model, ruling that the N.C.A.A. had been artificially restraining trade by capping what schools could pay their student athletes in revenue sports like football and men’s basketball. Oral arguments in the N.C.A.A.’s appeal began this week.

When Obama told Andy Katz this week, “I am in favor of the N.C.A.A. changing the rules,” it seemed, after such a year, that he was about to announce further demands for reform. But it turned out that the President wasn’t talking about academic priorities or economic fairness. He was talking about the shot clock. College games, he argued, should be more like those in the pros, with a shorter short clock and, therefore, more possessions and more offense. He’s right, but this, in political terms, is a decidedly small ask.

Perhaps, however, it is unrealistic to have expected much more. March Madness is, for better and worse, one of the things that passes for common culture in America. Sometimes even the President of the United States just wants to be a fan and fill out a bracket.