For a few weeks I've been carrying around and dipping into a slim purple volume called "How to Age."

If it were slimmer, it might be even better, because British journalist Anne Karpf takes up a lot of pages bemoaning ageism, embroidering the problem without much urgency about moving past it.

New York Times readers had a sampler of this in Karpf's Jan. 4 Sunday Review essay, which near its end spoke aspirationally of "the emerging age-acceptance movement." I hope she's right about that.

The book is part of Picador's "School of Life" series, "dedicated to exploring life's big questions." Karpf's way of doing this is to serve up a sampler of ideas that may or may not work for you. About halfway through the paperback, this method started to speak to me, when she discussed the 19th century social shift from venerating elders to dismissing them as basically useless.

She cites an expert on this transition, the historian Thomas Cole:

"The emerging idea that humans were perfectible brought with it a belief that the precariousness of life could be eradicated, and that human limits need no longer apply. Old age became a disease, a pathology demanding professional expertise, if not custodial care. What got lost, Cole suggests, was any framework that made sense — morally, spiritually or metaphysically — of growing old."

Without this cultural framework, Karpf suggests, it's up to each of us to build our own. She's not about to supply her readers with a blueprint, but her book is studded with clues like this one:

"Those who urge us to fight ageing are, in effect, inviting us to stop growing and developing. In so doing, they're depriving us of the opportunity to carry out and successfully complete the task of being alive and human. Individually and collectively we're being infantilized: we should insist on the right to grow up."

REFRESHER COURSE

A new survey out from AARP polled 1,200 Americans aged 34 to 75, and found that brain health was very much on the minds of 93 percent of them.

Trouble is, their actual knowledge of how to keep their cognitive functions functioning was clocked at way lower numbers. Here's a rundown of what research has shown to be effective, along with the level of awareness the study found.

-- Learning something new: Some 50 percent believed brain games work — evidence for this is mixed — while only 9 percent knew about the proven strategy of taking a class.

-- Managing stress: Only 38 percent knew this one.

-- Eating right: Only 58 percent knew the value of nutrition.

-- Being social: The least well-known factor, at 18 percent.

-- Keeping fit: At this point in the research, it appears that moving your body is the most productive way to maintain your brain; only 44 percent knew this one.

STAYING POSITIVE

The International Conference on Positive Aging that caused a stir in Sarasota almost a year ago may have sailed off into the sunset, but its spunky little sister in Charlotte County will be back for an encore.

This year's Positive Aging Symposium will be held from 8:30 a.m. to 2 p.m. Feb. 13 at the Port Charlotte Beach Complex on Harbor Boulevard.

The symposium is open to everyone, but aimed at those seeking the keys to a healthy and fulfilling life after 50. This year's topics are "Get it Together: Legally Speaking," "Keep it Together: Healthy Mind," and "Better Together: Getting Connected." The $10 ticket also buys you a boxed lunch.

Sponsors are the United Way of Charlotte County, Friendship Centers, AARP, the Area Agency on Aging and Charlotte County government. Reserve a seat by sending a check to the United Way, 17831 Murdock Circle, Unit A, Port Charlotte, FL 33948. Parking will be free for participants.