Click photo to enlarge «

1

»

Last August, after 36 years of living in Boulder, I moved to Tel Aviv with my family and started a job teaching 8th grade English. Now, after several months here I thought I would share some observations and comparisons between life here in Israel and life in the Boulder.

In conversation, Israelis are very direct. When they speak, it's short and sweet. Some say this is because there are fewer actual words in Hebrew; with fewer words in your lexicon, it's harder to beat around the bush. Also, everyday activities from ordering coffee to shopping for hardware is done with a push and a bit of attitude. There is a Hebrew saying that goes, "He who waits and smiles ends up a mamzer." Don't ask what a mamzer is; just assume it's not good.

People here have an intense love-hate relationship with United States. On the one hand, they totally envy life in America. They watch "Modern Family" and "Pretty Little Liars," they want the worry free life of big houses, endless shopping, and trips to Yellowstone. On the flip side, all that high living makes Israelis feel that Americans, and American Jews in particular, are insulated and unaware of what it's like to live in the "real" world. Americans don't live in a region with more conflict zones than a Risk board; so people here get frustrated when Americans try to tell Israelis what is right.

Advertisement

Finally, a camaraderie does exist here that I feel doesn't exist in the States. There is a feeling that we are all in this together. I suspect a key reason for this is universal military service. Every Jewish Israeli has gone through the same grueling three years (two for women) and this common experience creates an underlying social bond. In America, a programmer from Boulder has no common experience with a truck driver from Lakewood; they lead totally separate lives and seem to care very little about each other. In Israel, everyone, both rich and poor, have served so while the nation is quite socially stratified, its impossible to live your whole life in a socio-economic bubble full of clones of yourself.

Church and State

I know a lot of my fellow Jews in Boulder are pretty pro-Zionist but watching a westernized country try to effectively manage a state religion is fascinating and often humorous. The unpredictable instances where implementation problems consistently are riveting. Here are a few examples manifested in recent headlines:

"High Court Rejects 400 Shekel Daily Fine for Woman Who Refuses to Circumcise Son";

"Teen Told She Can't Join Birthright (a free program that sends Jewish teens to Israel) without DNA Test";

"Supreme Court Rejects Citizens' Request To Change Nationality From 'Jewish' To 'Israeli' (Google this one...it's fascinating)

Eventually the paradox of trying to believe in democracy and Zionism becomes tough to endure. Even my father, a life-long Zionist who survived the Nazis and came to Israel after the war, conceded to me a few weeks ago that the current system simply doesn't work; and in the end, Israel should, like the rest of the Western world, separate Church and State.

Learning in the Levant

Compared to the plush school where I taught in BVSD, my school in Israel is more like a hardware store: functional but sterile. Teachers roam between several classrooms so there is a lack of TLC given to rooms that don't really belong to anyone. Rooms don't have couches and bookshelves and goofy educational posters of kittens. Orly, a terrific woman with whom I teach English, managed to commandeer her own room, and it is a Ferrari in a sea of Buicks. She called me in when it was completed and said, "Look, like in America."

Having no set classrooms has another interesting effect. There is much more socializing and staff camaraderie because teachers eat, grade, and relax together in the teachers' lounge: very different from the crickets and cobwebs in many Colorado schools' lounges where teachers often prefer to eat and gab in cliques in their classrooms. It's also interesting that, unlike in the States, all principals here in Israel still spend several hours a week teaching in the classroom. I think this not only keeps principals a bit more grounded in the daily slog but also seems to create a very amicable rapport between teachers and administrators.

Strangest of all, Israeli schools are separated by religion. Jewish schools for Jews, Arab schools for Arabs. When I suggested to some of my middle school students that maybe it would be better for everybody if Jews and Arabs went to school together they just about lost a kidney. I made them write a paper about it.

Endless Summer

Every day here it breaks 60 degrees so my family and I are always outdoors. I find this to be the absolutely best aspect of living in Israel. My son is a rambunctious 3 year old who tends to go stir crazy in the house, so the option of immediate outdoor activities is a lifesaver. I can't even count how many painful Saturdays I spent in Boulder during the frigid winter trying fruitlessly to entertain my son at Target or Home Depot. Here, winter weekends are full of beach days on the Mediterranean, hikes in the green hills of Samaria and exploring the warrens of the Old City of Jerusalem.

Will we come back to Boulder? Truthfully, I am quite happy here with a rewarding job, smiling children, and lots of sunny days. But I also miss my family, my friend Elena, snowy mountains and most importantly, my dog. Whatever happens, I hope implanting the Israeli seed in our children has made them attached to this perky little country and will draw them back in the coming years.

In the end, nothing heightens appreciation of life in Boulder more than not being there. So live it up Boulderites; post those Instagram powder shots... I can take it. While you and your dog are hiking Sanitas (again), I will be out here working on getting Jews and Arabs to go to school together.

Ayal Korczak, a longtime Boulder resident and former BVSD teacher moved to Tel Aviv last August with his family. He teaches English at a middle school there.