PR Web

Lansdale, PA (PRWEB) June 17, 2014

Consolidated Services Group (CSG), a technology-driven, clinically-based medical claims management provider, today announced an agreement to provide CURE Auto Insurance with medical claims management services and technology.

Under the agreement, CURE Auto Insurance will utilize CSG's proprietary medlogix® technology for medical bill review services and pre-certification services, including document management, data capture, and rule creation. CURE will also utilize CSG for independent medical exams, peer reviews, field case management services and medical bill negotiation.

Additionally, CURE Auto Insurance policyholders will access the company's CHN PPO network. A division of Consolidated Services Group, Inc. , CHN PPO is a leading preferred provider organization serving the northeastern United States with a premier, URAC-accredited network of over 145,000 health care providers.

"We are excited to partner with CURE Auto Insurance ," said Michael A. Morrone , CSG founder and president. "By providing services and technology for efficiently managing medical claims costs, we can help support CURE's mission of offering affordable auto insurance to drivers in New Jersey and Pennsylvania ."

The services included in the agreement are part of CSG's comprehensive medical claims management solution. They facilitate compliance with New Jersey automobile insurance regulations, which require notification of planned medical procedures, diagnostic tests and other services. CSG medical professionals and panel providers review treatment plans to ensure claimants receive an appropriate level of medical care consistent with clinical guidelines. CSG's proprietary programs and technology integrate over 30 years of personal injury protection (PIP) and auto injury claims expertise.

"We look forward to working with Consolidated Services Group ," said Eric Poe , chief operating officer of CURE Auto Insurance . "CSG's expert medical staff, robust provider network and exceptional support staff will help ensure CURE claimants return to the best possible state of health proficiently and cost effectively."

###

About Consolidated Services Group (CSG)

Consolidated Services Group (CSG) is a technology-driven, clinically-based medical claims management provider specializing in managed care, utilization review and bill review services. CSG offers a complete, integrated solution, including seamless collaboration through our proprietary medlogix® technology; recommendations from highly qualified medical professionals; and access to a nationwide network of premier health care providers through select PPO affiliates. CSG's powerful mix of medical expertise, proven processes and innovative technology delivers a more efficient, disciplined insurance claims process. The result is reduced severity, lower expenses and increased productivity for the auto insurance and workers' compensation insurance carriers; third party administrators (TPAs); and government entities we serve. Visit http://www.csg-inc.net to learn more.

About CHN

CHN PPO, a division of Consolidated Services Group, Inc. (CSG), is a leading preferred provider organization serving the northeastern United States with a premier, URAC-accredited network of over 145,000 health care providers. For 25 years, CHN has provided PPO networks for insurance carriers, TPAs, joint insurance funds, counties, municipalities and school boards. Through our parent company, CSG, we provide a complete, integrated medical claims solution, including seamless collaboration through our proprietary medlogix® technology; clinically-based recommendations through our highly skilled medical staff; and access to a nationwide network of premier health care providers. CSG's powerful mix of medical expertise, proven processes and innovative technology delivers a more efficient, disciplined insurance claims process. The result is reduced severity, lower overhead and increased productivity for the clients we serve. Visit http://www.chn.com to learn more.

Read the full story at http://www.prweb.com/releases/2014/06/prweb11943902.htm