Pin this on Pinterest Email this story

Janelle Monáe, Wondaland Records boss lady, gave an outstanding performance on NBC’s The TODAY Show Friday (Aug. 14). She turned the crowd up with her versatile catalogue ranging from her first single “Tightrope” to her latest track “Yoga.” However, the show’s anchor wasn’t feeling her set list when Monáe added a message about police brutality at the end of her performance of “Hell You Talmbout”–an empowering track that speaks to the #BlackLivesMatter Movement.



“Yes Lord! God bless America! God bless all the lost lives to police brutality. We want White America to know that we stand tall today,” she said. “We want Black America to know we stand tall today. We will not be silenced…”

In this case, the always poised “Q.U.E.E.N” singer was silenced, as the camera cut away from her and the anchor tried to talk over her.

dang @TODAYshow, just couldn’t let her finish, huh? love ya @JanelleMonae! #BlackLivesMatter cc: @deray @Nettaaaaaaaa pic.twitter.com/QeGhY5lQGJ — marla york. (@theseMYtweetz) August 14, 2015

During this past week, Janelle has been traveling the tri-state area in support of the Wondaland collective’s new EP, “The Eephus,” appearing on shows like the Power 105.1’s The Breakfast Club and Hot 97’s Ebro In The Morning Show and even peacefully protesting in Times Square. During both visits–The Breakfast Club in particular–Monáe freely spoke out on race relations and became teary eyed while speaking. In regards to the newly released “Hell You Talmbout” she said:

“This song is a vessel. It carries the unbearable anguish of millions. We recorded it to channel the pain, fear, and trauma caused by the ongoing slaughter of our brothers and sisters,” she said. “We recorded it to challenge the indifference, disregard, and negligence of all who remain quiet about this issue. Silence is our enemy. Sound is our weapon. They say a question lives forever until it gets the answer it deserves… Won’t you say their names?”

Watch her full performance below.