A panel discussion on jobs and housing in Long Beach on Monday, Dec. 9 quickly turned into a call to action directed at city officials and the public to support policies that proponents say would improve working and living conditions in the city.

The panel drew a crowd of about 100 people, many of whom were college students and faculty, to an auditorium at Long Beach City College’s Liberal Arts Campus. The event began with a speech by Jose Landino, a 29-year Long Beach resident and hotel worker who last year helped organize the successful campaign to pass Measure N, also known as the living-wage measure.

The measure, which passed by more than 64 percent of the vote, requires that hotels with 100 rooms or more pay their workers at least $13 an hour, offer sick leave and impose a mandatory 2-percent annual pay raise. The measure, driven by hotel union UNITE (formerly the union of Needletrades, Industrial and Textile Employees) HERE (Hotel Employees and Restaurant Employees International Union) Local 11, however, stipulates that the wage mandates be voided if any of the hotels agree to unionize.

Earlier this year, two Hyatt hotels in downtown Long Beach were the first to form a union after the measure’s passage.

Now, three city ordinances related to employees working at concessionaires for the Long Beach Airport and the Long Beach Convention Center have come forward.

On Tuesday, Dec. 10, the City Council unanimously approved a worker retention ordinance, which requires that contractors at both public facilities retain employees if a new contract is approved, and a labor peace agreement, allowing workers the right to unionize while agreeing to no labor disputes, boycotts or walkouts.

Another proposal, which is on the agenda for the Dec. 17 Council meeting, is a living-wage ordinance, mandating the same requirements at Measure N, including the $13 minimum wage, for all employees working at Airport and Convention Center concessionaires. Fourth District Councilmember Patrick O’Donnell, Vice Mayor Robert Garcia and 7th District Councilmember James Johnson introduced the item.

“We don’t need to be scared to organize,” said Landino, who left the panel discussion immediately after speaking through a Spanish-to-English translator. “There are all kinds of people supporting us. We just need to take that first step… Si se puede! (Yes we can!)”

Moderator Darick Simpson, executive director of the Long Beach Community Action Partnership, asked his own questions and those from the audience during the panel discussion, which was sponsored by 15 community groups, including Housing Long Beach, the Legal Aid Foundation of Los Angeles and the Long Beach Coalition for Good Jobs and a Healthy Community.

Other than Landino, panelists included: Derek Smith, political director for UNITE HERE Local 11; Peter Dreier, distinguished professor of politics and chair of the Urban & Environmental Policy Department at Occidental College; and Roya Babazadeh, director of enforcement operations for the City of Los Angeles Housing and Community Development Department. Jan Breidenbach, former executive director of the Southern California Association of Non-Profit Housing and a public-policy professor at USC, was invited as a panelist but was unable to attend.

Dreier, a published author who once worked as a housing director for the Boston redevelopment authority, said that, contrary to statements from business organizations such as the Chamber of Commerce, there is no evidence that passing policies to raise the minimum wage or forcing developers to protect or add affordable-housing stock would hurt the economy.

In fact, he said evidence indicates that such policies would improve the overall economy since they would enable low-income families to spend more money at local businesses and improve the standard of living.

“Affordable housing and higher wages are good for everybody,” Dreier said. “They’re good for the economy. They’re good for the workers. They’re good for the neighborhood to maintain the property, and they’re good for the businesses because the businesses will prosper. So it’s a win-win.”

Dreier added that 81 percent of Americans in a national poll indicated that they believe individuals who work full time should not live below the poverty line.

“What was once a radical idea has now become common sense,” he said. “If you work full time you should not live in poverty. That means that we need to have minimum wage roughly at $10.50 an hour. We also know that there are some cities that have a much higher cost of living.”

Dreier pointed out that cities such as Long Beach are able to impose higher wages on certain industries that can only be located in the city and benefit from a captured market. He gave an example of a city near Seattle, Washington, where the biggest employer is the airport and voters just raised the minimum wage to $15 an hour.

“People said this will ruin the economy and the town, but it’s unlikely that the Seattle airport is going to move to Mexico or China,” Dreier said. “You can say the same things about a lot of these industries that are pretty sticky.”

Smith noted that no hotels have closed up shop because of the passage of Measure N, adding that the worst that has happened is some hotels have discontinued rooms to skirt around the 100-room requirement. “I don’t think that hurt the city of Long Beach,” he said.

After the panel discussion, Nikole Cababa, community organizer for the Los Angeles Alliance for a New Economy, or LAANE, a group that worked with UNITE HERE to campaign for Measure N, said that the living-wage ordinance is critical to make sure public facilities protect sustainable jobs.

“If there’s any development that takes our taxpayer dollars, we want to make sure that there’s benefits to revenue for the community,” she said. “It’s our money, so we want to make sure good jobs are attached to that.”

Kerry Gallagher, executive director of Housing Long Beach, said the affordable-housing advocacy group and others are calling on the City to include three main city-policy proposals in Long Beach’s Housing Element, a State-mandated planning document that sets guidelines for housing development for the next eight years.

Those proposals include a citywide inclusionary or mixed-income housing ordinance that would require developers to set aside 10 percent of all new apartments and condominiums as affordable, a commercial linkage fee that would secure funds for affordable housing through fees on commercial developers and a rent-escrow or rent-trust account program in which residents living in “substandard units” are allowed to pay their rent to the City where it’s held in an account until provisions are fixed.

According to Gallagher, the Council is expected to vote on the Housing Element at its Jan. 7 meeting. The Council has until February to approve the document.

“Because we continue to lose money for affordable housing and because we don’t have any policies that require affordable housing here in Long Beach, we could easily go the next eight years with no new affordable-housing development, and we are not okay with that,” she said. “We know that our workers and our families are elderly and are students who deserve to live in a quality place that they can afford.”

Dreier and other speakers implored the audience to take action and “push” politicians to make changes. He said that in recent weeks groups have been organizing all across the country, including protests on Black Friday, in which people demanded improved conditions for Wal-Mart workers and demonstrations supporting higher wages for fast-food employees.

“It is not impossible to win big dreams or win big victories when people organize,” Dreier said. “Long Beach is a city that … is sort of invisible because it’s often in the shadow of LA, but in most states Long Beach would be the biggest city in the state … You can win big things here, and I hope you do.” ß