Sen. John Hoeven John HoevenSenate panel approves funding boost for TSA Overnight Energy: Senate Dems block energy, water bill a third time Bison declared national mammal MORE (R-N.D.) offered an amendment Thursday that would defund a pending Environmental Protection Agency water rule, but quickly withdrew it after a fellow Republican warned it could hurt a crucial bill.

During the Senate Appropriations markup of the fiscal 2016 energy and water funding bill, Sen. Lamar Alexander Lamar AlexanderSenate backs equal pay for female soccer players Overnight Healthcare: Momentum on mental health? | Zika bills head to conference | Only 10 ObamaCare co-ops left Overnight Regulation: GOP slams new Obama education rules MORE (R-Tenn.) said the amendment could prevent the bill's passage.

“Last year, when this amendment came up, it resulted in problems within the committee,” said Alexander, who advised Hoeven to propose it on the Senate floor or in another form.

ADVERTISEMENT

“EPA has gone beyond the statutory authority it has,” Hoeven said about the pending rule. “For our farmers and ranchers, this is a huge problem.”

Hoeven agreed to withdraw the amendment under the assumption it would gain support at some other point in the appropriations process.

The EPA is expected to release a final rule soon that would redefine which ponds, wetlands, streams and other waterways are covered by the Clean Water Act. Republicans, however, contend the rule would be a massive land grab.

Senate Republicans are considering an authorization bill that would block the rule and give the EPA specific instructions for rewriting it. The House voted last week to stop the implementation of the rule.

While the Army Corps of Engineers, funded in the energy and water bill, is working with the EPA on the rule, the agency is not funded through this measure.

Republicans could propose defunding the water rule in another amendment to the bill that funds the EPA and Department of Interior later on.

Before the amendment process began Thursday, the committee approved the bill, reporting it out of committee to the floor.