The owner of a jewelry store that was burglarized gave NBC4 an inside look into the damage thieves caused at the Long Beach shop. Ted Chen reports for NBC4 News at at 5 p.m. Friday, July 3, 2015. (Published Friday, July 3, 2015)

Thieves crashed a stolen pickup into a jewelry store before ramming into a nearby video game shop Friday morning in a smash-and-grab rampage caught on at least one store's security camera system.

A red pickup was seized after the heists and two people were later taken into custody when police searching for a dark-colored vehicle, which was likely the getaway car, witnessed three men burglarizing a Sprint Store at Westminster Center. Two men were apprehended and a third ran into a nearby neighborhood, Westminster police said.

Officers found the men in possession of about $25,000 worth of stolen items, likely merchandise taken during the thefts, police said.

The smash-and-grab crime spree began just after 2 a..m. when officers responded to a Long Beach jewelry store in the 4600 block of Los Coyotes Diagonal. About 15 to 20 Long Beach police officers arrived, some less than a minute after the getaway, the store's owner of 24 years said.

Thieves Crash Pickup Into Stores

Four thieves crash a pickup into at least two stores in smash-and-grab heists in Long Beach. Ted Chen reports for the NBC4 News at Noon on Friday July 3, 2015. (Published Friday, July 3, 2015)

A witness in a nearby camper called police, she said.

New digital color cameras installed about a month ago captured the rampage "clear as day" inside the store, said owner Janis Krantz. The pickup crashed through a glass door, window and security gate before three men sneaked through the side of the gate as a female driver waited outside.

"One was smashing all the cases, the others had trash bags grabbing what they could," said Krantz. "They did more damage to showcases than they got merchandise.

"Things were strewn all over the place. They missed a lot. They were just grabbing what they could grab. Very sloppy."

Store Owner Describes Smash and Grab

A jewelry store owner says she was sickened by what she saw on security camera video that shows thieves in a pickup crashing into her business before "grabbing everything they could." Toni Guinyard reports Friday July 3, 2015. (Published Friday, July 3, 2015)

Most of the store's highest-value items were locked away in a different area, Krantz said. They hastily grabbed items, including some made of cubic zirconia -- a low-cost colorless crystal similar in appearance to diamonds.

"I was really sick," Krantz said. "You work hard to get a business going. I love what I do. It's like a personal assault to have things smashed and destroyed."

Strips of carpet were torn from the floor where the pickup slid to a stop.

About 30 minutes later, police received another report of red pickup slamming into a Game Stop in the 400 block of West Anaheim Street in Long Beach. Merchandise also was stolen from the video game store.

Southern California Crimes Caught on Camera

The pickup was recovered about two blocks away from the Game Stop.

The two men taken into custody in Westminster are believed to be connected to the Long Beach crimes. Authorities are still searching for the third man and female driver.