Medical billing software developer Craneware has reported strong first-half revenue and profit growth on the back of new contract wins in the US healthcare market.



The Edinburgh-headquartered company, which develops and sells billing and audit software to US healthcare companies, said first-half revenues are up five per cent to $21.1 million (£12.7 million) and pre-tax profits rose six per cent to $4.79 million (£2.9 million).



Interim results for the six months to December 31, 2013 show earnings before interest and costs were up six per cent to $5.7 million (3.4 million), and Craneware ended the first-half with $30.6 million (£18.4 million) in cash, up seven per cent on last year.



Craneware said around a quarter of all US hospitals now use its billing and audit software products in what is a $2.8 trillion a year US healthcare market, with “Revenue Cycle IT Spend” last year reported at $3.1 billion.



The US continues to be a “growing market” with 40 million more people in the US joining healthcare through the Affordable Healthcare Act.



Craneware said 80 per cent of annual recurring revenues are derived from its Annuity SaaS (software as a service) Model, typically contracted in multi-year deals of five years or more.



Its “gateway” software product InSight Audit has seen “good growth”, and Craneware said it continues to invest in two other gateway products - Chargemaster Toolkit and Pharmacy Chargelink – which will provide “alternative channels to market”.



The company said visible revenues to full-year 2016 are £114.4 million, up from $109.5 million at the 2013 year end to June 30.



AIM-listed Craneware is proposing 5.7p interim dividend, which is up 10 per cent on the 5.2p interim dividend last year.



Commenting on the first-half performance, Craneware co-founder and chief executive, Keith Neilson, said: “Craneware remains at the forefront of providing solutions to US healthcare providers so they can achieve the revenue integrity required to support improved patient care and outcomes.



“We have seen a continued increase in sales during the period, to progressively larger hospital groups.



“The US Healthcare market seems to be settling as strategies are developing to support the need for change and deal with the uncertainties of the Affordable Care Act.



“With a strong product suite, clear strategic direction and high levels of revenue visibility, we are confident of continued future growth.”