In the end, the flap over a new marketing logo for St. Joseph County is not the stuff of huge controversy.

But it shines a spotlight on the curiously contradictory spending priorities of certain county leaders.

The dispute pits Republican commissioners Andy Kostielney and Deb Fleming, who recently voted to hire a firm to initiate the marketing task, against Democratic commissioner Dave Thomas, who voted no.

Thomas, citing declining property tax revenue starting next year, says the county should be working hard to reduce spending.

Kostielney and Fleming see the logo as an investment in an economic development initiative.

That investment will cost the county $8,000, initially. In the first phase of the logo project, South Bend-based Site Enhancement Services will use that money to hire another company to design the logo. But the price tag could climb with a second, yet-to-be-approved phase. This “implementation” phase could include making and installing the new signage for county buildings.

The price tag for Phase Two could be between $40,000 and $80,000.

Thomas said that rather than paying professionals to do this job, the county should mine the marketing talents of employees in its parks department or airport, or establish a committee made up of different county government departments. The group could come up with a design or follow the example of the city of South Bend, which recently held a public competition to design its new flag.

That idea sounds reasonable, and certainly worth exploring before pulling out the checkbook. Especially given the questionable role of a new logo in boosting economic development. Of course, it’s not a huge amount of money that’s being discussed, but it is taxpayer money, and you might expect that Kostielney and Fleming would have voted no, given their attention to cost-cutting in the recent past.

Just last year, Fleming and Kostielney supported a controversial and ultimately unsuccessful plan to consolidate precincts for this year’s elections. Democrats attacked the plan as politically motivated and emails revealed that talk of saving money morphed into opportunities for all three commissioners to change their district boundaries to ensure re-election. But both Fleming and Kostielney pointed to the nearly $150,000 in cost savings. That plan was scrapped in favor of an election precinct consolidation plan that will close no voting sites and will save perhaps less than $10,000.

It would be natural to assume that elected officials willing to wade into the sensitive matter of where people cast their votes, all to ultimately save about $10,000, might balk at spending money to design a more attractive logo. And that they’d want to spend less time and money on that logo — and more on the county’s real challenges.