Folks interested in understanding proposed Colorado Care Amendment 69 attended Monday night's Logan County Citizens' Oversight Committee meeting. Supporters of this ballot measure, Katy Kohner and Elaine Branjord, traveled from Fort Colllins to present an overview. They believe that because so many Coloradoans remain uninsured or unable to afford health care even with insurance, and on behalf of families, businesses, providers and the state economy, Colorado needs to proactively address the problems and change the way health care is financed. The Affordable Care Act encourages state innovation and Amendment 69, for some, appears to meet that need.

In a nutshell, to pay for this coverage, all Coloradoans will be assessed an additional payroll tax based on 10 percent of their income. All Colorado employers will be required to contribute 2/3 of the tax and employees will pay the other 1/3. As a savings to employers, the medical portion of workers compensation premium would be eliminated. Individuals who are self-employed will pay 10 percent of their income.

Those qualifying for Medicaid will not pay anything.

Retirees receiving Medicare will pay up to 10 percent depending on their income. If they have a Medicare supplement they can keep it; however, they will still be required to pay the Colorado Cares tax as well.

Advertisement

If approved, Colorado Care will provide every resident with lifelong health care coverage with no deductibles or co-pays for designated primary and preventive care. Other co-pays may be waived according to financial needs.

Colorado Care will contract with medical providers - doctors, hospitals, pharmacies. Reimbursement rates are projected to be higher than Medicare and Medicaid.

Estimated savings to the City of Sterling employees' health insurance is approximately $1.25 million.

Those supporting this proposed amendment see the value in saving a lot of money compared to what they are paying now in insurance premiums, deductibles and co-pays with better coverage.

Jill Distel, owner of local business AgTech, said they do not provide healthcare for their employees. She asked, "Why is this an employers' responsibility?" Also, she said, if this were approved, why would she stay in business as their payroll would increase 6.67 percent?

Others think the devil is in the details and that Colorado Care presents a simplistic view of complex healthcare issues.

More information and a complete wording of the 12-page proposed amendment can be read on the website: www.ColoradoCare.org.