BEGIN TRANSCRIPT

RUSH: Here's Jim in Jacksonville, Florida, as we head back to the phones. Great to have you with us. Hello.

CALLER: Greetings, Rush. My concern is about unintended social consequences of the Obama No Care Act. (sic) Think about it. There's supplements for having a lower income. Will people be prevented from getting married just like they do with welfare? Will there be an incentive not to be married or to get divorced? You'll get incentives on the Obamacare side.

RUSH: You know, you are very shrewd, Jim, because there is a story we had, it might have been late last week, that people are divorcing in order to afford Obamacare. It is busting up families. Obamacare is going to increase the divorce rate.

CALLER: I think it will. You'll consider quitting your job get welfare, tax incentives, and Obamacare incentives along with tax incentives.

RUSH: Jim, I just have to ask you a question, though. What do you have against divorce? What business is it of yours? Do you realize...? Who says marriage is all that great, anyway? Who says that marriage does all that much for society? What's the big deal about people getting divorce? What is your animus against marriage and divorce? What the hell do you care?

CALLER: Well, I think it's a very important issue when it comes to children involved.

RUSH: Yeah?

CALLER: Children brought up in a marriage between a husband and wife are definitely statistically, everything, are shown to be more stable and brought up properly. It's just divorce is a deteriorating factor of America society as immoral.

RUSH: See? Now, Jim, that's okay in Jacksonville, but you go to Washington or New York and you just became a bigot.

CALLER: That's true. They don't have 84-degree temperatures like we do right now, either.

RUSH: (laughing) Is it that warm where you are, too?

CALLER: I'm looking at my thermometer, 84 degrees, sunshine.

RUSH: It's amazing. This is one of those days where when you're in south Florida you get really smug, because the only part of the country where it's livable. Jim's got it. I was being facetious with Jim on the marriage and divorce business.