EDITOR'S NOTE: Cold case stories highlight an unsolved crime every month as part of an effort by the Greater Peoria Area CrimeStoppers and Peoria police to solicit fresh information on dormant investigations.



PEORIA — The last moments of Mario McGee's young life unfolded in one of the most terrifying, heartwrenching ways possible — at the hands of men who burst into his home in the middle of the night, with his own mother watching.



His death was the first homicide of 2009, an apparent culmination of a series of gunfire incidents that followed the 19-year-old over several days, though his father now says he believes the young man was not targeted for anything that he had done.



"No one was after him personally," Marcus McGee Sr. said in a recent interview from the family's new home in Kentucky. "He was more of a sacrificial lamb."



The father claims he and other family members have a general sense of who raided their home at 703 E. Corrington Ave. early on the Saturday morning of Feb. 7, 2009. They may have been after something other than the Woodruff High School graduate's life, but they took it, nonetheless.



That knowledge, combined with the fact that Mario McGee's murder remains unsolved, amounts to "torture," the elder McGee said.



"We know what we know, but under the law, there's nothing that can be done at this time," he said.



Authorities are highlighting the homicide this month as part of a push to gather new information on cold cases through Greater Peoria Area CrimeStoppers. Anyone with knowledge of Mario McGee's death is urged to call 673-9000 or text an anonymous tip to 274637 with "GPCS" at the beginning of the message.



Mario McGee had reported being shot at as recently as the Thursday night before the slaying. Authorities learned of the killing from his distraught mother.



She woke early that morning to sounds of shattering glass and a struggle in her kitchen. Two men had broken into the home before 5:50 a.m. One had Mario McGee pinned to the floor, the other grabbed the mother and started beating her.



Mario McGee's last words included a plea for his mother's safety.



He was shot in the head as he lay on the floor. His mother's life was spared.



Just as he tried to protect his mother in his final moments, his son also worked in his daily life to provide for others, Marcus McGee Sr. said.



"Marcus flocked to the unfortunate. He was the kind of guy who would give — he would give everything he had," the father said. "He was a giver, a lover, and he would do anything in his power to help those in need."



That very willingness to help people in need may have contributed to the situation that lead to his death, Marcus McGee Sr. added.



Detective Shawn Curry with the Peoria Police Department said it wasn't clear whether the assailants escaped with anything from the house, but muddy footprints in Mario McGee's bedroom indicate the men searched at least part of the house before fleeing.



"What type of person would do this to another human being in front of their mother?" Curry asked. "The demented people who did this have forfeited their right to walk free, and we need to take that right from them."



Matt Buedel can be reached at 686-3154 or mbuedel@pjstar.com. Follow him on Twitter @JournoBuedel.