RAISE YOUR VOICE: Share your own opinion online at dallasnews.com/sendletters. Sign up for Sounding Off or submit a guest column (and include your full name and contact information) by visiting dallasnews.com/voices.

During the recent primary runoff election, about 4.5 percent of registered voters cast a ballot. How should this issue be addressed?

Jean Rose, Irving: Political scientists find: 1. that most citizens are badly informed about policy and issues; 2. citizens appear to make systematic mistakes about the most basic issues in economics, political science and sociology; 3. people who would fail Economics 101 should not be required to make decisions about economic policy; and 4. people who tend to abstain from voting are more ignorant than people who vote. Forcing them to vote would lead to a more ignorant pool of voters, which leads to political candidates who reflect voters’ misconceptions. The end result is bad public policy. We have enough of that already.

Nancey Tresler, Irving: Every time there is an election and I see voter turnout numbers like these, I wonder what it will take for the vast majority of Americans to vote. It is possible that what is happening is that we have become victims of our own success. In the U.S., we are totally secure that soldiers will not be storming down our streets no matter who wins our elections. We certainly don’t have to worry that we will lose our property or our lives if we don’t show up at the polls. However, with the passage of Obamacare, and more recently, the IRS and Benghazi scandals, people are starting to wake up and are slowly coming to realize that who we elect is critically important to the nation. For myself, after making hundreds of phone calls, writing letters and going door-to-door to encourage voter turnout during the most recent primary and runoff, I refuse to become discouraged. I believe people will become involved in increasing numbers once they see good, reliable, scandal-free government that is relevant to their lives. We just have to get the right people into office and then hold them to their promises or turn them out and start over.

Tony Koste, Valley Ranch: The voter apathy situation is deplorable. It has gotten so bad that I think, perhaps, it should be illegal to not vote. Levy a fine or tax on those eligible to vote but do not. Perhaps we would get candidates who better represented the general population and their interests if they had to be elected by the general population rather than by a fanatical few. However, if the general population does not care about government, how their tax dollars are spent or if their sons and daughters lose lives and limbs in wars based on lies, then “let them eat cake.” Voting for their favorite couple on Dancing With the Stars and voting for their favorite singer on American Idol is so much more fun and important that voting a democratically elected representational government.

Butch Murden, Irving: Continuous election creates voter apathy. Mudslinging instead of addressing issues creates voter apathy. Lack of quality candidates creates voter apathy and continuous robo-calls are frustrating.

Xan Alexander, Irving: I think the problem with voter turnout for primary elections is that most people don’t know when to vote or what they are voting for. I didn’t even know that we were supposed to be voting until after it was too late. I wanted to be more actively involved with voting this year, but I didn’t know anything about the when and where for this one. It almost seems like the politicians don’t want the general public to vote in the smaller elections, otherwise they’d make a bigger deal about when and where to vote.

Mike Voirin, Irving: I am all for encouraging more people to take part in our elections. I would like to see voting to be allowed over a full week to allow for the difficulty in getting away from a job, and allow voting on Saturday and Sunday. At some point, we’ll progress to being able to swipe our driver’s license into our computer and voting electronically, which would encourage many more to vote In the end, the people that care and want to vote, usually do. It is because people really don’t care and don’t see a material difference in the candidates that they don’t show up at the polls. What is the difference in voting for one rich guy that is supported by big unions or another rich guy that is supported by big business? They both play golf at the same country club and do not relate to the common man.

Mike Ragsdale, Irving: I believe voter apathy occurs because the current crop of candidates have failed to inspire us with either: their vision, or their ability to lead. As to vision, 54 years ago JFK challenged us to boldly go to explore new frontiers both here and on the moon. As a nation, we accepted and realized that vision on time and on budget. Under subsequent administrations, we accepted challenges to lead the free world in other endeavors. Many of the current candidates urge us to retreat to “fortress Texas,” build higher fences and ready our guns to defend against immigrants and an intrusive federal government. Many voters would prefer not to “run, hide, and be afraid.” As to leadership, candidates ask us not only to oust the incumbents, but to denigrate those incumbents’ experience in balancing budgets and reconciling differing views to give us laws that promote fundamental fairness and tolerance. Further, the candidates offer little in support of their own leadership abilities, preferring to cast their opponents as both criminal and immoral. Can we really be surprised that these messages resonate with less than five percent of the electorate?

Lanni Fish, Irving: It’s a sad commentary on the times. There’s an epidemic of apathy in our country these days, and maybe we need to get to the bottom of what has caused that. Could it be that there’s just no one running that generates any excitement and enthusiasm in the voters? Maybe it’s because there’s so much, uh, shall we say “creative management” of the voting process that people just don’t think it matters much anymore? Clean up the voting process. Let everyone who is eligible to vote do so. Allow no one who is not eligible to enter the poll booth. It should be incumbent upon the voter to provide proof of their eligibility and identity. That’s not too much to ask. And please, don’t trot out some feeble senior citizen who can’t drive and make them the poster child for justifying throwing the polls open to anyone and everyone, no ID required. Demonstrate upholding the standards by helping that person get an ID. Then — please Lord — present some candidates who really deserve to hold the office, who are qualified and proven, who have the education, the wisdom and certainly the experience to conduct the office. Let that happen, and people will happily turn out to vote.

Mike Howard, Irving: Low voter turnout in Irving is nothing new. Put wine and beer on the ballot or a pay increase for the City Council and be prepared to stand in line to cast your vote. What is not needed is for groups and parties to troll neighborhoods to sign up scores of additionally uninformed potential voters. While there is no one template to inspire or shame folks to participate in the electoral process, there is always one thing that will cause individuals to make a concerted effort to go vote. And that is to ensure there is an issue or candidate on the ballot that will “kick their cat” or “butcher their sacred cow” if passed or elected. When someone has a personal investment in the process (cat or cow), they will participate.

Wes Pyfer, Irving: There is nothing you can do about apathy and ignorance. You can lead a horse to water, but you cannot make him drink. The other really sad thing is that the 95 percent that did not bother to vote will be the first to criticize their newly elected officials.

Michael McPhail, Irving: It’s time for Texas to abandon run-off elections altogether. Run-offs are undemocratic and serve largely to drive down voter turnout. At the very least, we should set a lower threshold for winning the nomination outright. For example, if the highest vote getting candidate gets at least 40 percent of the vote, then she/he should be declared the winner.

Sharon Baugh, Irving: I don’t have the magic solution to get voters to the polls but I can’t help but think that if voters really believed that their vote counted, they might be more inspired to make the effort. The way that districts are gerrymandered now and the unlimited contribution of corporate funds only makes me wonder how many voters feel that any given election has already been predetermined — regardless of how they might vote.

Doug Griffith, Irving: Exercising one’s right to vote is a matter of choice. Since I vote in every election, I don’t see voter turnout and participation in elections as an issue. Given the less than 5 percent turnout in Dallas County for the most recent election, my vote had more than 20 times the impact it would have if those eligible had cast their vote. I am very disappointed that such a large percentage of eligible voters do not take advantage of the opportunity to exercise their right, and I think its their responsibility to participate in one of the greatest freedoms known to man. The overwhelming volume of media attention and advertisements, mass mailings that fill my mailbox and the barrage of candidate telephone calls prior to an election provide more than adequate notice that an election is being held. I visit our local library frequently, which is also a polling location, so voting is very convenient and simply a matter of having the correct documentation and identification required to vote.

Emma Petty, Irving: It is sad that 4.5 percent of the voting public will make decisions that affect 100 percent of the population. The people have become too busy/lazy to take the time to help plan the future of our country. What is this telling the young people: it’s not important to vote?

Nell Anne Hunt, Irving: I don’t know the answer to this, but I do ask people when they complain, “Did you vote?” and if they reply “No, it wouldn’t make a difference,” I tell them “Don’ complain if you did not vote.” Early voting hours do not provide times during the week after work hours. I believe more people might stop to vote on their way home from work if the polls did not close at 5 p.m. Also, the new ID law disenfranchises many senior citizens. More qualified candidates and less disgusting mailers and television ads would keep many people from throwing up their hands on the whole system.

Lee Swann, Irving: Apathy abounds. I voted, and have voted ever since I became eligible to vote, and I am 79 years old. Do my selections always win? No, but the fact that I did vote, gives me the liberty to complain, or comment on, all elections. If one does not vote; they have no voice in what transpires. Polls are open 7 a.m. to 7 p.m., so there is ample time to go the polls, and vote.

There is also absentee voting available, as well as early voting. If “they” ever make voting by mail available, the apathetic ones will say they have no stamps. The issue is simple: people just do not care about their rights or their country; save for us veterans who served to insure their rights to not vote. What a pity!