Health insurance marketplaces across the country – including Healthcare.gov – are open for business as of November 15! The Affordable Care Enrollment Technical Assistance Center (ACE TA Center) works with Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program grantees and providers to help diverse clients get enrolled in health coverage, and has these recommendations for clients:

Stay Covered. If you enrolled in a Qualified Health Plan (QHP) last year, you still need to log into the Marketplace before December 15, 2014 because:

Some 2014 plans will not continue in 2015. If you don’t choose a new plan, your insurer will select one for you – and it may not cover medications, providers or benefits you need. Your healthcare provider can help you find the best plan. The ACE TA Center’s Plan Selection Worksheet can help.

If you don’t choose a new plan, your insurer will select one for you – and it may not cover medications, providers or benefits you need. Your healthcare provider can help you find the best plan. The ACE TA Center’s Plan Selection Worksheet can help. Plans change, people change. New plans are available for 2015. Also, your plan’s coverage for providers or medications may have changed. Your needs may have changed, too. Explore 2015 plan options now.

New plans are available for 2015. Also, your plan’s coverage for providers or medications may have changed. Your needs may have changed, too. Explore 2015 plan options now. Shop around, and get enrolled by December 15 to avoid a gap in coverage. If you change plans make sure you get enrolled – and make sure your first monthly premium is paid- by December 15, 2014 for plans beginning January 1, 2015.

Make sure you get the right financial support. Even if you qualified for help last year, the Marketplace needs to re-determine your eligibility for 2015 cost savings. For this to happen, you must authorize collection of tax data from the IRS. See what financial support you qualify for .

Get Covered. Open enrollment continues through February 15, 2015. You can preview plans and prices before you apply, fill out an application, and enroll in a 2015 plan that meets your needs and fits your budget. Talk with your health care provider or start exploring plan options today.

Are you a case manager or enrollment assister working with diverse clients?