When the Broncos run

Suddenly, the Broncos are the 2000 Rams with Marshall Faulk and the Greatest Show on Turf. Perhaps that’s a little exaggeration. The run game has shown big signs of life lately. In their past two games, Denver has run for 312 yards. It gained 358 yards on the ground in its first five games. The Colts give up 124.9 yards rushing per game, fifth-most in the NFL. Edge: Broncos

When the Colts run

Derek Wolfe won AFC defensive player of the week for his run-stuffing prowess, and the rest of the defense held its own as well. Denver held Eddie Lacy to 38 yards rushing Sunday and averages giving up 89.3 yards per game on the ground, the fourth-lowest in the NFL. Frank Gore is the Colts’ bell cow with 516 yards rushing. He’s consistent and powerful, but Gore has a bit of a fumbling issue with three this season. Edge: Broncos

When the Broncos pass

The Sheriff, Peyton Manning, put on a show Sunday against Green Bay, throwing for a season-high 340 yards, 168 of them to receiver Demaryius Thomas. For the first time all season, a complete performance came because of chemistry from Manning, the offensive line and the receivers. Colts cornerback Vontae Davis, brother of Vernon Davis, is one of the best cover guys in the AFC. Edge: Broncos

When the Colts pass

Andrew Luck played a terrible first three quarters against Carolina on Monday but looked like a new quarterback in overtime. Colts receiver T.Y. Hilton is battling a foot injury, and secondary receivers Andre Johnson and Donte Moncrief have failed to make the impact the team thought they would. The Broncos have given up only 171.9 yards per game in the air. The ballhawks in the secondary make every QB think twice before throwing. Edge: Broncos

Special teams

Denver’s Brandon McManus has been one of the league’s best kickers this season, but his counterpart, Adam Vinatieri, is one of the best kickers of all time. Vinatieri is 9-for-11 on the season. McManus is 18-for-19. Colts punter Pat McAfee has a 45.2 net punt average, second-best in the NFL. The Broncos haven’t been hurt by big returns this season, but they haven’t produced any, either. Colts punt returner Griff Whalen muffed a punt Sunday against New Orleans. He was also the center for the botched fake punt attempt against the Patriots on Oct 18. Edge: Broncos

Three things to watch

Turnovers, takeaways. The Broncos are tied for second in turnover margin in the NFL with a plus-5 mark, despite quarterback Peyton Manning’s 11 interceptions. The Colts are tied for the second-worst margin at minus-9. Indy quarterback Andrew Luck leads the NFL with 12 interceptions. If the stats tell the truth, there should be opportunities for the Broncos to get turnovers Sunday. The Broncos need to make sure they take care of the football, as they have for the majority of the season.

Block out the noise. All season, the Broncos have played like underdogs with a chip on their shoulders. They were called the worst undefeated team before Sunday when they beat Green Bay. Now, there aren’t many questioning the Broncos. The Colts, on the other hand, are in turmoil. They are 3-5 and just fired their offensive coordinator, and Luck is having the worst season of his career. It’s a perfect storm for a Denver win, but a dangerous road game nonetheless.

The Comeback Kid. The fourth quarter always is the key to winning football games, but this week it holds a special value. Luck is known for his improbable comebacks. The 26-year-old QB has 10 fourth-quarter comebacks and 13 game-winning drives through his 3½ NFL seasons. He almost pulled off another one Sunday against Carolina. The Broncos will be smart to never let their guard down even if they have a big lead. Luck has the talent and guts to pull a rabbit out of a hat late.