CORRECTED

Land of Lincoln Health soon will end enrollment for new individual members, hitting a self-imposed cap to stave off the fate of its nonprofit peers that have collapsed nationwide.

Chicago-based Land of Lincoln, a federally funded co-op created under the Affordable Care Act, announced in October that it planned to limit enrollment to 70,000 total members for all of 2016. The co-op stopped accepting new small-business enrollees in late November. It plans to stop accepting new individual members in the coming weeks.

Existing individual and small-group members still can re-enroll in plans. Large businesses are not part of the cap and can sign up year-round. In fact, Land of Lincoln hopes to expand in the large-group market. Their health care costs are better-known than potentially very sick people who buy plans and are new to the co-op.

“We're just really trying to be good stewards of our balance sheet to make sure we're able to serve Illinoisans going forward,” said Dan Yunker, who is transitioning from Land of Lincoln CEO to a seat on the board.

Land of Lincoln President Jason Montrie will add interim CEO to his title on Dec. 31. Yunker also is president and CEO of the hospital trade group Metropolitan Chicago Healthcare Council, which is merging with the Illinois Hospital Association, a leading Naperville-based lobbying group. He'll then become executive vice president of the new organization.

The co-op announced in October that it would severely limit enrollment on the federal exchange HealthCare.gov to survive long term. It leaves individuals and small businesses that buy plans on the online marketplace with fewer options, but also could potentially save Land of Lincoln from closing up shop altogether.

More than half of the co-ops, created to create competition on the exchange and lower prices, across the country have folded or plan to for various financial reasons. Land of Lincoln lost $25.8 million in the first six months of this year, according to its most recent financial statement. The co-op ended 2014 with a $17.7 million loss.

Land of Lincoln had more than 55,000 customers in October, including individuals and businesses. As it nears its cap, it's not clear how many enrollees are returning or are new customers, Yunker said.

The third year of enrollment on the exchange began Nov. 1. Dec. 15 was the original deadline to sign up for health insurance coverage that begins on Jan. 1. Because of high demand, the Obama administration extended it to 11:59 p.m. PST on Dec. 17.

This report has been changed to reflect the new deadline for enrollment.