Toni:

Tonight I learned on the news that United Healthcare is leaving Obamacare in most states and I believe Texas is one of them. My concern is that I have Medicare and Care Improvement Plus, my Medicare Advantage Plan; a UHC company is my Medicare provider. Do I still have insurance for Medicare or what? What should I do? Thanks, Bonnie from Alvin, TX

Oh My Bonnie:

You are not the only one to call me Wednesday night as the news was talking about UHC leaving Obamacare in most states in 2017.

America needs to realize that Obamacare [aka Affordable Care Act] has nothing to do with Medicare. These government programs are totally separate.

United Healthcare’s Medicare Advantage Plans and AARP’s Medicare Supplement which is underwritten by UHC are not affected by this decision and will continue with no problems.

Medicare beneficiaries need to not worry at this time because Medicare is already a national health insurance program. When one turns 65 and enrolls in Medicare, they cannot enroll in Obamacare. The Medicare rules are totally different from Obamacare rules.

Obamacare health insurance plans apply to individuals and group health insurance policies for Americans under 65 and who are not yet eligible for Medicare.

Let’s discuss a few of the myths and facts about how Obamacare is affecting Medicare:

1) Seniors on Medicare must buy more health insurance to comply with Obamacare. False. Huge misunderstanding about the individual mandate which is a key provision of the Affordable Care Act, aka Obamacare, which requires people who are uninsured to buy coverage or pay a penalty. Guess what? Medicare is health insurance, so Medicare beneficiaries do not need to buy anything during Obamacare open enrollment that starts Nov. 15th of every year. Seniors on Medicare can change their plans during Medicare’s open enrollment from Oct. 15th to Dec. 7th of every year. Satisfied with your Medicare Advantage plan, Medicare prescription drug plan or your Medicare supplement you do not have to do anything.

2) Medicare beneficiaries will not be able to see their current doctors. False. Nothing in Obamacare aka ACA changes which doctors Medicare patients can see. Hospitals, doctors, and other types of healthcare providers make routine business decisions and may choose to not accept “Medicare assignment.” No master switch has flipped requiring those on Medicare to leave their current doctor and choose new ones.

3) Medicare premiums are rising. Partially true. Medicare premiums change every year and have increased significantly this year due to the economy, but because there was not a cost of living increase for Social Security checks in 2016, those who’s income was $85,000 or less as an individual or $170,000 or less as a couple, did not receive a Part B premium increase. Their Medicare Part B remained at $104.90 for 2016 due to a hold harmless agreement with Social Security because of no COLA increase in their 2016 Social Security check.

4) The Part D “Donut Hole” is going away? True … Affordable Care Act or Obamacare is slowly closing the “Donut Hole” between now and the year 2020. Don’t know why it is taking so long! What is an unknown is if Part D premiums will go up when the “Donut Hole” is eliminated. We will have to wait to see!

Toni King, author of the new Medicare Survival Guide®, a simple guide that puts Medicare in “people” terms now on sale at www.tonisays.com. Email questions about Medicare or Social Security or to schedule a workshop to www.tonisays.com/ask-toni or call 832/519-TONI (8664).