ALLENTOWN, Pa. (AP) - When Manuel Cruz sees the face of his 2-year-old boy, smiling and laughing, it helps him endure everything he’s lost - a grandson, a daughter and a mother.

Cruz went through unimaginable grief and recurring nightmares after losing his entire family in the 2011 natural gas explosion that rocked his former Allentown neighborhood. His family, friends, church and therapists helped him through the roughest of times, but the birth of his son two years ago was his best medicine.

“I thank God every day for everything he has given me,” Cruz said recently from his home in southern Georgia. “My baby has helped me so much in my recovery. Lo quiero muchisimo (I love him so much).”

The Feb. 9, 2011, explosion and fire leveled eight row homes on the 500 block of North 13th Street, damaged dozens of others in the surrounding neighborhood and killed five people. Cruz lost his 16-year-old daughter, Katherine; 4-month-old grandson, Matthew Manuel Vega; and 69-year-old mother, Ofelia Ben. He also lost the home he was proud to call his own.

The couple next door - William Hall, 79, and his wife, Beatrice, 74 - also died.

“They were good, caring and loving people,” their son, Mark, told The Morning Call in 2013.

Cruz and Hall filed wrongful death lawsuits against UGI, which supplies gas to much of the Lehigh Valley. The company traced the explosion to an 83-year-old cast-iron pipe that cracked, sending gas into the Halls’ home. A spark, perhaps from a light switch or an appliance, ignited the gas.

Mark Hall resolved his lawsuit for an undisclosed amount. Cruz, who was at work as a truck driver at the time of the blast, settled on behalf of his grandson, but the lawsuit on behalf of his daughter and mother remain active, court records show.

As a result of the explosion, the state Public Utility Commission ordered UGI to replace all of its cast-iron pipes by 2027. In 2012, the company launched a $1.2 billion replacement program and says it is on track to meet the deadline.

Five years after the blast, the block looks much the same as it did after crews hauled away the rubble. In an empty lot where homes once stood, five white crosses bear the names of those who died.

The blast changed the street, the neighborhood and even those who survived it.

Of the five families who lost their homes to the raging fire, one of them moved out of the state and the others relocated to other parts of the Lehigh Valley. Some didn’t want to talk about it, saying it’s tough to rehash that night.

Antonio Arroyo, who lost his rented home at 530 N. 13th St., said he plans to move to Florida once his daughter gets her nursing degree.

He, his wife, his daughter and grandchild moved from place to place after the explosion, using money from a settlement the surviving residents reached with UGI to pay for meals and clothing for his family. The stress of the explosion and subsequent legal battles led to health problems that included high blood pressure and a heart attack, he said.

“I was inside my house during the explosion and it almost felt like I was sitting inside a speaker when the bass hits,” said Arroyo, who still lives in Allentown. “All you can feel is the air and the impact.”

Story Continues →