Tomah VA Medical Center had rates of opiate prescriptions “at considerable variance” with the norm, a VA inspector general’s report found. (Photo: Center for Investigative Reporting)

The Veterans Administration cannot investigate itself.

There are a lot of big questions that remain around the Tomah VA clinic, where chief of staff Dr. David Houlihan prescribed opiates to veterans at such high rates that the vets called the place "Candy Land" and him the "Candy Man." But one thing that seems to have been clearly demonstrated is that the VA's internal Office of the Inspector General failed the clinic's patients — and its obligation to serve the public interest. After a lengthy investigation that found opiate prescriptions at "considerable variance" from other clinics that raised "potentially serious concerns," the inspectors found no wrongdoing and recommended no action.

That was a failure. The seriousness of the issue was made abundantly, tragically clear last summer, when Marine veteran Jason Simcakoski of Stevens Point died of an overdose while in the clinic's care.

Story: Whistleblower: Tomah VA site sit-in ends with no meeting

Story:Baldwin's handling of VA report 'frustrating' for widow

Story:Baldwin fires aide over Tomah VA report

The investigation was completed in secret, and its failure to recommend action would have been a secret, too. But one lawmaker, U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin of Wisconsin, responding to a constituent's concern, made an open records request and got the report in August.

And what did Baldwin do then? Not much, it appears.

Buy Photo U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin (Photo: Daily Herald Media)

Her office gave the report to Ryan Honl, the former VA employee and whistleblower who had been agitating for action on the matter. (Honl on Tuesday staged a 10-hour sit-in at the Tomah clinic to draw attention to the need for changes there.) But Baldwin did not apparently take any action to re-open an investigation, to call for accountability for Houlihan, or simply to ask why the clinic's extremely steep increase in opiate prescriptions, even though it was noted within the report, did not rise to the level of any further action.

This was a failure of Baldwin's. In her op-ed last weekend, she wrote that she "take(s) full responsibility for any mistakes we made." But there are still some big, unanswered questions.

She has fired a top aide who was involved in the case, but she declined to comment on it. Reports of that firing say the aide, Marquette Baylor, was offered a severance deal that requires her not to discuss it, either.

And Baldwin hasn't said whether she actually read the report herself.

Column:Tammy Baldwin: We can do better for Wisconsin veterans

Editorial: Tomah VA wrongdoing betrays our veterans: Our View

Buy Photo Ryan Honl staged a sit-in protest Tuesday at the Tomah Veterans Affairs Medical Center. (Photo: Megan McCormick/Gannett Central Wisconsin Media)

To be clear, Baldwin did not run the investigation that found no cause for action. The problems within the VA bureaucracy — and not just at Tomah — appear to have been very deep and systematic. All that will take time to sort out.

For now, Houlihan has been removed from the job and a new investigation launched. This is promising, and we sincerely hope the attention now being paid to this issue by the public and by elected officials will spur actual changes. Baldwin's voice will be part of that movement.

But Baldwin's office also failed to act on information only she had. We have a right to expect a full explanation and accountability for that, too.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1CAZxYL