JERSEY CITY - The city is leading the state in providing access to healthcare through the Affordable Care Act, with 10 percent of the state's ACA enrollees being Jersey City residents, and city officials are crediting its aggressive outreach for those figures.

To date, 222,640 New Jerseyans now have healthcare coverage, which includes approximately 22,000 Jersey City residents.

"Our outreach has been aggressive and we've worked to reach every community in the city, in the places they work, live and recreate," Jersey City Mayor Steve Fulop said. "We've partnered with community leaders and local non-profits, hired bilingual staff, and really made a strong push to enroll as many residents as possible with healthcare coverage as this benefits not only the individual but the entire community."

At the kickoff of the Affordable Care Act in October of 2013, approximately 55,000 Jersey City residents, nearly 20 percent, were without healthcare coverage. The ACA, which was passed in 2010, mandates that everyone have insurance coverage or pay a penalty.

Now 17 months later, the city has assisted 22,000 residents in receiving healthcare coverage, which is more than any other city in New Jersey. Numbers for other larges cities in New Jersey were not available.

"The numbers make it clear -- there is a real need for quality, affordable healthcare across the state and the Affordable Care Act, and strong local leadership like Mayor Fulop's is making coverage possible for hundreds of thousands in New Jersey," said U.S. Health and Human Services Regional Director Jackie Cornell-Bechelli.

Jersey City officials credit a number of strategies, including a mobile navigator program through a $400,000 federal grant that hired four bilingual counselors to visit businesses, community groups, and local non-profits to enroll residents using tablets.

Only six federal grants were allocated in New Jersey, and Jersey City is the only municipality with a bilingual, mobile model.

Jersey City has been recognized as a national leader in registering residents for the Affordable Care Act, with four senior Obama Administration officials visiting Jersey City since the program's inception in 2013.

In January, Katherine Archuleta, director of the U.S. Office of Personnel Management and the highest-ranking Latina in Obama's administration, attended an event with Fulop and leaders of the Latino community to further outreach within that population.

Last February, former U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius spoke at City Hall and cited Jersey City as a model for local governments to encourage more residents to register for healthcare coverage through the Affordable Care Act.

U.S. Labor Secretary Thomas Perez and U.S. Transportation Secretary Anthony Foxx have also visited Jersey City to promote enrollment in the healthcare program.

Since open enrollment began on Nov. 15, 2013, more than 10 million Americans selected a plan or were automatically re-enrolled through the HealthCare.gov platform, including 222,640 in New Jersey. Yesterday, Feb. 15, was the deadline and end of open enrollment for the 2015 Health Insurance Marketplaces.