Caliche freshman Kayla Zink wins Class 1A girls 100-meter dash state title

Click photo to enlarge «

1

2

3

»





On Saturday, though, the Buffaloes' freshman, who was spectator through the first two days of the Colorado state track and field championships at Jeffco Stadium in Lakewood, did something that her big sis and mom didn't do.





She won the Class 1A girls 100-meter dash state title.





“I was so nervous that I thought I was going to get sick,” said Zink, who crossed the line at 12.88 seconds, shattering her pervious personal best of 13.23 seconds. “Ever since I was little, the 100-meter dash was the race I always wanted to win. My mom ran in it and Jenna ran it, but she was a triple jump state champion. They have their track pictures up on the walls (wall of fame) and I was like “I have to get up on that wall.'"





Kayla should have no issue carving out a spot of her own after this weekend as she added a third-place finish in the Class 1A 200-meter dash, and a fourth-place finish in the 400-meter dash on Saturday in addition to her championship.





Advertisement “It was amazing what she did (Saturday),” said Caliche head coach Dave Huss about Zink's performance.“To be able to come into state and have that kind of a day, as a freshman, is something that she'll never forget.”





Sophomore Jaedyn Lambrecht, who took fourth in the triple jump on Friday, added a third-place finish in the 100-meter hurdles on Saturday.





Peetz freshman Cody Wilson hands the baton to senior Corbin Heller during the Class 1A boys 4X400-meter relay final on Saturday. The Bulldogs ran a personal record time and finished seventh. (David Wilson/Journal-Advocate) Lambrecht clipped a hurdle and fell in the 100-meter hurdles in the Buffaloes league meet a week before state and, while Huss said he was confident that Lambrecht was going to be a contender on Saturday, he did admit he was a bit nervous watching her run.





“I was nervous because of the last time she ran and fell at league. She and I had talked about it a little bit and one night, when we ran the hurdles at practice, I asked her 'What went through her head when you crossed the hurdle?'" Huss said. "I wanted to get it out in the open so she wouldn't have any reservations about falling again. She looked at me and said “nothing” and we left it at that. And then (Saturday), after the race, I asked how she felt and she said ‘When I got to that second to last hurdle, I thought about falling. But once I cleared it, I was good.'”





Lambrecht ended up running a personal best time of 17.07 seconds in the final.





To end the day for the Buffaloes, senior Eric Etl, who made his fourth and final visit as a prep athlete to Jeffco Stadium over the weekend, finished in 10th-place in the Class 1A boys 1,600-meter run. “Eric is a four-time state qualifier and four-time placer, so he has had a pheonomenal career,” Huss said. “He's a good kid, good athlete, and one of those kids you hate to see graduate and have to leave the program.”





Peetz





Relay races have been the Peetz track and field team's signature events this season, especially on the boys' side as all four relay teams qualified for the Colorado state track and field championships.





This past weekend at the state meet, though, was a mixed bag for the Bulldogs.





On Friday, Peetz had its boys' 4X800-meter relay team set a school record and reached the podium with a sixth-place finish, but also had a disqualification in the boys' 4X200-meter relay after a failed hand-off.





As for Saturday, the Bulldogs' boys' 4X100-meter relay team was disqualified, this time for a hand-off that was outside of the designated zone.





“I think it was a little bit of youth, baseball (missed time from track), and adrenaline all mixed together,” said Peetz head coach Scott Sorenson about the hand-off miscues. “It was the handoffs that got us. The steps were the same, but they maybe took off a little too early or just ran faster today, because it was the state championships, and missed the exchange.”





The Peetz boys' 4X400-meter relay team ofTre Lewis, Cody Wilson, Bradey Holtz and Corbin Heller were the No. 2 seed prior to the event, but literally ran into some bad luck of their own in the finals. The team posted a new personal record time on Saturday, but so did many of their opponents, which made the Bulldogs have to settle for a seventh-place finish.





“We cut two seconds off our best time in the boys 4X400-meter relay, but it just happened to end up being a seventh place finish down here (at state),” Sorenson said. “I'm proud of them. You ask kids to run the best they have all season at state and that's what they did.”





Sophomore Angelica Clowdis backed up her sixth-place finish in the Class 1A girls' pole vault final on Thursday with a fourth-place finish — she was the No. 8 seed prior to the event — in the Class 1A girls' long jump final on Saturday.





Overall, it was a successful weekend for Peetz as it reached the podium in six events over the weekend: girls 800-meter sprint medley, triple jump, pole vault, long jump, boys 4X800-meter relay and boys 4X400-meter relay.





The Bulldogs will graduate key members from this year's team as they lose five state qualifiers: Morgan Burns, Melissa Schumacher, Fiscus, Karnik and Heller, who was a member of three of the Peetz boys' four relay teams.





Despite the heavy loss, Sorenson said he is excited about what his team can do next year as it returns Cody Wilson, Angelica Clowdis, Cole White, Casey Barrett, Bradey Holtz, Whitney Christian and Tre Lewis, all of whom were state qualifiers this season.





“We got young kids, some freshmen coming up, that have been pretty fast and I think our boys' 4X200-meter and 4X800-meter relay teams will at least be back to state next year,” Sorenson said. “In the boys' 4X100-meter relay, we lose one senior (Karnik) who was our anchor, but if we get our hand-offs down, we should have a chance to be back here in all our relays.”





Fleming





Sophomore Neil Lovell was the only Fleming athlete to compete on Saturday, the final day of the Colorado state track and field championships held at Jeffco Stadium in Lakewood, after the Wildcats knocked out most of their finals through the first two days of the Colorado state track and field championships.





Lovell finished in 12th-place in the Class 1A boys 1,600-meter run final, posting a time of 5:04.67.

The 100-meter dash is a special race to Caliche sprinter Kayla Zink. Her mother, Stacy, was a second-place finisher at state when she ran the event in high school. Her older sister, Jenna, who is a two-time triple jump champion for Caliche, finished fourth at last year's state meet in the 100-meter dash, as well.