“The cost of remaining uninsured is rising,” said Peter V. Lee, the executive director of the California insurance exchange. “A family of four earning $70,000 a year could pay close to $1,000 in their taxes if they remain uninsured in 2015.”

Federal officials, however, have authorized more than 30 types of exemptions from the penalty for not having insurance. One is for low-income people who live in states that did not expand Medicaid. Another is available to people who would have to pay premiums that amount to more than 8 percent of their household income. The government will also allow a variety of hardship exemptions.

The complexity has left some consumers baffled. Administration officials said they have received hundreds of queries to their call centers from people worried about the potential tax penalties. Questions about the penalties, and how people can qualify for an exemption, have come up in just about every one of the 300 interviews that health care officials have conducted in radio and television programs in the last several months, they said.

“They are contacting the call center: What is the fee? What are the exemptions?” said Lori Lodes, the spokeswoman for the Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services. “For some people, it’s just starting to click when they fill out their taxes, so they are starting to ask those questions.”

Jodi A. Ray, the director of a large network of insurance counselors based at the University of South Florida in Tampa, said that “people are more concerned about being hit with penalties” this year.

That may be in part because of the partnerships that White House officials forged with tax preparation companies like H&R Block and Intuit, which makes the popular TurboTax software. Both companies are flagging the potential for penalties to their customers.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Lee said the subject was common in California, especially among insurance agents and community groups.

“People are walking in their doors because they got sent there by H&R Block or a tax adviser who told them, ‘You got a penalty for 2014, but you can avoid it next year,’ ” Mr. Lee said.

This year’s health insurance enrollment has been free of the technical failures that marred the opening of HealthCare.gov in late 2013. As a result, senior White House officials have not been forced to manage the day-to-day sign-up efforts as they did then. Inside the West Wing, the enrollment is being handled by Kristie Canegallo, a deputy chief of staff for Mr. Obama.

When the current sign-up period began in November, there were 6.7 million people with coverage through the exchanges. The administration’s goal is to have at least 9.1 million people enrolled and paying premiums by the end of this year. Enrollment is likely to exceed that goal, but to fall short of the Congressional Budget Office’s projection of 12 million people for 2015.

Since Nov. 15, more than 10 million people have selected health plans or been automatically re-enrolled through the federal and state exchanges, and a final surge is expected over the weekend. Experience suggests that at least 10 percent of those who sign up will not pay their share of premiums and may have their coverage canceled in coming months.

Anne Dunkelberg, the director of the health program at the Center for Public Policy Priorities in Texas, said the difference for people using HealthCare.gov this year compared with last year was “like night and day.” No longer stymied by technical problems, she said, “consumers can focus on the complexities of selecting a plan and entering the right information in an application.”

Last year the White House enlisted sports and movie stars and other celebrities in its pitch for the health plan. This year marketing has been more low-key, often featuring testimonials from patients who like their coverage.

Lisa Stein, a vice president at Seedco, a nonprofit group that works with local partners to enroll people through the exchanges in Georgia, Maryland, New York and Tennessee, said the second enrollment period had gone far more smoothly than the first.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Last year we were building the ship and sailing it at the same time,” Ms. Stein said. “Having some experience, some data and some time to do analysis and planning really allowed us to go out there like gangbusters this time.”

Ms. Stein said that one area that had seen a major increase in enrollment over the last few months was Gwinnett County, Ga., where community groups worked with Seedco to sign up Vietnamese and Hispanic immigrants, gay men and lesbians, and patients at hospitals.

Insurance companies also say signing up people was easier this time. “The open enrollment process went very well,” said Dr. J. Mario Molina, the chief executive of Molina Healthcare, a Long Beach, Calif., for-profit insurer that has traditionally focused on low-income customers. “It’s been smooth sailing as far as we’re concerned.”

Still, there are some issues. Ms. Dunkelberg said that in many of the 254 counties in Texas, especially in sprawling rural areas, consumers had difficulty finding experts who could help them compare and select health plans.