Topics: anti-government, Charles Murray, Conservatism, federalism, Jeb Bush, The Bell Curve, The Republican Party, News, Politics News

One of the more interesting recent comments by the current crop of Republican presidential candidates has to be Dr. Ben Carson’s last weekend on Fox News, in which he condemned the very concept of judicial review as set forth in the famous 1803 case of Marbury vs Madison. (Of course he was asked whether the executive branch should enforce laws the Supreme Court deems unconstitutional, as if that were a perfectly reasonable question. So it’s not entirely his fault.) Still, this isn’t the kind of thing you hear from presidential candidates every day:

“We need to get into a discussion of this because it has changed from the original intent.”

Actually, 1803 was pretty close to the “origin” of the constitution. One of the parties in Marbury vs Madison was even one of its originators. So second-guessing judicial review a couple of centuries later on the basis of original intent is fairly absurd. But it is in keeping with a certain far-right belief, which has held for decades that the courts are “legislating” from the bench. This goes back to an earlier time when the Supreme Court was in the hands of a liberal majority that was “legislating” that bigots stop discriminating against racial and ethnic minorities, which the right has always felt was an infringement on their freedom (or of their state’s rights at the very least).

Phyllis Schlafly’s Eagle Forum described it this way:

In 1953, newly-elected President Dwight Eisenhower appointed Earl Warren to be the Chief Justice of the United States. This nomination proved to be the first shot fired in a judicial/constitutional revolution which continues today. As Robert Bork has stated, “[The Warren Court] stands first and alone as a legislator of policy, whether the document it purported to apply was the Constitution or a statute. Other Courts had certainly made policy that was not theirs to make, but the Warren Court so far surpassed the others as to be different in kind.” The Warren Court (1953-1969) fueled the Culture War into an inferno and then placed the federal judiciary squarely in the white-hot center of the conflagration. “Impeach Earl Warren” signs exploded like rockets across the nation as Americans began to realize what was happening. But the courts and the Constitution have remained at the center of our culture conflict, and much of the Warren Court’s legacy remains intact.

Carson may be taking this to an extreme but it doesn’t come out of nowhere. It’s only surprising to the extent that he and the rest of the fringe haven’t noticed that the courts have been successfully packed by conservatives and centrists during the last 30 years; his argument doesn’t quite have the same salience it had back in the day. Moreover, he doesn’t seem to have heard about the latest front in the right’s legal revolution: suing bureaucrats over federal regulations.

It’s important to note here that the right’s loathing of the federal government is actually quite narrowly focused on certain areas of interest. They are fully behind the neoconservatives’ imperial project — flag waving and martial strutting are fundamental to American conservatism. (Small government is a very imprecise term; they have no problem with a big military and police apparatus. In fact, those bureaucracies have a blank check.) But within that narrow anti-government focus of low taxes is their extreme hostility to government regulations.

So now we see the conservative movement — which, not for nothing, has historically regarded the profession of “trial lawyer” as something only slightly above “mafia hitman” in terms of social disapprobation — considering the idea of flooding the courts with frivolous suits. But perhaps an even more remarkable feature of this plan is that it’s being floated by none other than the man who brought us the racist right wing tract “The Bell Curve,” Charles Murray.

Murray has a new book coming out that is poised to take the conservative and libertarian world by storm. It’s called “By the People: Rebuilding Liberty Without Permission,” and in it Murray proclaims, “the government cannot enforce its mountain of laws and regulations without voluntary compliance.” His book proposes to create “a private-sector counterweight that pulls back the curtain and exposes the Wizard’s weakness.” The private sector counterweight, in this case, will be a billionaire-funded institution that will bankroll thousands of lawsuits against the government, which Murray fatuously names “The Madison Institute.”