WASHINGTON — The Congressional Budget Office on Monday significantly lowered its estimate of the cost of providing health insurance coverage to millions of Americans under the Affordable Care Act.

Douglas W. Elmendorf, the director of the budget office, said the changes resulted from many factors, including a general “slowdown in the growth of health care costs” and lower projections of insurance premiums that are subsidized by the federal government.

In March 2010, when President Obama signed the health care law, the Congressional Budget Office estimated that the expansion of coverage would cost the federal government $710 billion in the fiscal years 2015 through 2019, Mr. Elmendorf said.

“The newest projections indicate that those provisions will cost $571 billion over that same period, a reduction of 20 percent,” he said. The Affordable Care Act not only subsidized the purchase of private insurance, but also authorized a major expansion of Medicaid, the federal-state program for low-income people.

The Supreme Court ruled in 2012 that the expansion of Medicaid was optional for states, not required, as Democrats in Congress had intended. Nearly two dozen states have yet to expand eligibility. And in states that did expand Medicaid, projections of federal Medicaid spending per beneficiary are lower than expected, the budget office said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The new estimates may help Democrats trying to preserve the Affordable Care Act in the face of fierce criticism from Republicans, who control Congress and maintain that the law will contribute to explosive health spending.

On the other hand, several factors cited by the budget office may not be politically popular. For example, it said that a new excise tax on high-premium insurance, which takes effect in 2018, would generate substantial new revenue for the government — $149 billion in the first eight years. And it predicted that the number of people with employer-sponsored insurance would be lower than it would otherwise have been in the absence of the law.

The Obama administration has been reluctant to provide detailed estimates of the cost of the Affordable Care Act, often relying on estimates by the Congressional Budget Office. Mr. Elmendorf estimated that the federal subsidies for private insurance purchased through public exchanges would total nearly $1.1 trillion from 2016 to 2025, while the federal government would spend $920 billion on Medicaid and the Children’s Health Insurance Program in those years as a result of the law.

The subsidies in that 10-year period include $909 billion in tax credits and $147 billion to reduce deductibles and other out-of-pocket costs for low-income people.

As a result of the health care law, Mr. Elmendorf said, Medicaid enrollment increased last year by eight million people — six million who became newly eligible and two million who were previously eligible but not enrolled.

For 2015 and beyond, he said, “roughly 70 percent of the people who will receive Medicaid coverage because of the Affordable Care Act will be newly eligible for the program.” The federal government will pay 90 percent to 100 percent of Medicaid costs for the newly eligible group, compared with an average of 57 percent for other beneficiaries.

The Obama administration said that 7.3 million people had bought private insurance through the exchanges and paid their share of premiums last year. The budget office predicts that this number will climb to 12 million in 2015 and will reach 25 million in 2017. About three-fourths of those subscribers are expected to receive federal subsidies, the budget office said.

That estimate underlines the importance of a case in front of the Supreme Court this term in which critics of the law are challenging subsidies paid to low- and moderate-income people in states that refused to establish their own exchanges.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The subsidies will cost the government less than originally expected, but are still substantial, the budget office said. “Subsidies in the exchanges are projected to average about $5,000 per subsidized enrollee from 2016 through 2018 and to reach almost $8,000 in 2025,” Mr. Elmendorf said.

All told, the budget office said, the coverage provisions of the health care law will have a gross cost of nearly $2 trillion over the next 10 years, partly offset by $643 billion in new revenues and penalty payments. The law will reduce the number of uninsured by 27 million people, it said, but 31 million people will still be uninsured in 2025, the end of the projection period.

Of those expected to lack health insurance in 2025, the budget office predicted 30 percent would be unauthorized immigrants, 10 percent would be ineligible for Medicaid because they live in states that did not expand coverage, and the rest would have access to public or private insurance but opt not to enroll.