Many within the healthcare industry breathed a collective sigh of relief when one of the Affordable Care Act’s (ACA’s) most controversial provisions—the Cadillac Tax—was recently delayed until 2020.

The delay, however, has resulted in a great deal of confusion as to what changes were made to the law; what employers, unions, insurers, and governments (affected entities) should do now to prepare; and what the future might hold for the Cadillac Tax.

The Cadillac Tax: for and against

The purpose of the Cadillac Tax was to stem the rising tide of healthcare costs by discouraging the provision of overly rich benefit packages. The Cadillac Tax does this by placing a 40% tax on the dollar value of coverage exceeding $10,200 for individuals and $27,500 for other coverage.

Proponents have argued that this tax will discourage the provision of overly rich benefit packages that lead to price insensitivity and cause healthcare consumers to demand more and more expensive services.

However, critics argue that the Cadillac Tax does not effectively address this issue because it will affect far more modest plans and will result in affected entities discontinuing many important services that lead to efficient care in order to avoid the thresholds.

Of particular significance, the Cadillac Tax thresholds are indexed for inflation based on the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers (CPI–U), which is a statistical metric developed to monitor the change in the price of a set list of products for urban consumers. This creates an issue for affected entities because the cost of healthcare has traditionally risen much faster than CPI-U so if the trend continues, the Cadillac Tax will eventually affect all plans.

The legislation

The legislation delaying the Cadillac Tax made certain permanent changes that affected entities will welcome. Of particular note, the legislation makes the Cadillac Tax penalties tax deductible. This particular change is welcome news as many affected entities have argued that if ever touched by the Cadillac Tax they would need to drop benefits because of the difficulty in justifying a payment that will grow in amount every year because of the indexing of the thresholds and will provide no additional benefit to beneficiaries or tax benefits to the affected entity.

Additionally, the legislation requires that the U.S. Comptroller General and the National Association of Insurance Commissioners conduct a study on whether the Cadillac Tax uses appropriate standards in determining age and gender adjustments to the thresholds. Thus, it is possible that these recommendations may form the basis for additional legislative changes.

Next: What the delay means