Yvette Cormier walked into the women’s locker room of a Planet Fitness location in Midland, Michigan and claimed she saw a man changing in there. She alerted the front desk of the gym.

It was then that Cormier discovered Planet Fitness has a “no-judgment” policy that allows those who consider themselves to be transgendered to use the locker room of their choice. While no one was apparently confronted that day, a local man who considers himself a woman told the media that he was a guest at the gym that day and used the women’s locker room.

When Cormier later complained to the Planet Fitness corporate office and told other female members of the Midland location about the locker room policy and what happened to her, her membership was cancelled.

A Planet Fitness spokesman told CNN that Cormier’s actions were “inappropriate and disruptive.” In rebuttal, Cormier said: “I didn’t go out to specifically bash a transgender person that day. I was taken aback by the situation. This is about me and how I felt unsafe.”

But it’s not about her, as her concerns about safety and privacy are apparently second to a Planet Fitness policy embracing the LGBT agenda. People can use locker rooms based on the gender they think they are at that moment. A unisex changing area is not a compromise at least one local transgender activist is willing to accept. Charin Davenport told MLive.com: “I don’t think anyone should require me to use [a unisex locker room]. I use the facility that I am comfortable with.”

Planet Fitness seems to feel the same way. And Cormier will have to find herself a new gym.

Project 21 member Bishop Council Nedd II, the rector of St. Alban’s Anglican Church in central Pennsylvania and the archbishop of Abu Dhabi, says people shouldn’t have to be confronted with such gender-bending surprises when they go to work out. Those who are offended by Planet Fitness’s embrace of the LGBT agenda over the rest of society, he suggests, should show the gym chain how they feel by taking their business elsewhere: