by

By Peggy Carroll

Rodney Frelinghuysen (R-11th Dist.), a member of the House of Representatives since 1995, has announced he will seek his 12th term this year.

If re-elected, he will surpass the 22 years that his father, the late Peter H.B. Frelinghuysen, held the same position.

Rodney Frelinghuysen, whose district encompasses 54 municipalities in Essex, Morris, Passaic and Sussex Countries, is the only New Jersey member serving on the House Appropriations Committees.

He also is the first representative from the state to serve as chairman of the House Defense Appropriations Committee.

A veteran of Vietnam War, he has said his experience gave him an understanding of the young men and women serving in the military, and also of their families.

As committee chairman, he said, “I work every day to protect America. support men and women and in uniform, provide strong oversight of President Obama’s defense and intelligence budgets, while looking out for New Jersey’s priorities.”

In announcing his re-election campaign, Frelinghuysen said his approach to public service is straightforward.

“I fight every day for New Jersey families small businesses, veterans and seniors and work to change the way business is done in Washington,” he said.

Frelinghuysen, who turns 70 this month, comes from a family that has been immersed in politics and public service for generations. He is the fifth of his family to serve in Congress, starting with an ancestor who served in the Senate in the 1790s. His father served from 1953 to 1975.

Frelinghuysen’s personal political history began with his election to the Morris County board of freeholders, where he served from 1974 to 1983, when he was elected to the state Assembly.

He is being challenged in the June 7, 2016, GOP primary by Rick Van Glahn, a home improvement contractor, who has adopted the slogan, “the only conservative choice.”

Van Glahn lost to Frelinghuysen in the 2014 primary. Frelinghuysen has been endorsed by the Republican organizations in all four counties in his district.

Van Glahn, a Denville resident, promises that if elected he will fight to reduce spending and reduce the national debt. He also says he will seek to de-fund Obamacare and to impose term limits.

Frelinghuysen rarely has had a serious challenge. In the last primary contest with Van Glahn, he won 66 percent of the vote. Nor has he had much trouble defeating Democratic challengers in his heavily Republican district.

Two Democrats met this week’s deadline for submitting nominating petitions: Lee Ann Brogowski , a Parsippany resident whose campaign slogan is “Power to All of the People,” and West Orange resident Joseph M. Wenzel, the candidate favored by the Essex and Passaic county committees.

The Morris County Democratic Committee will hold its convention on Thursday, April 7, 2016.