Every year at the holidays, millions of Americans partake in a whole parallel tradition: avoiding the “crazy uncle,” that one exhausting relative who treats every event as a chance to assault you with their fringe political ideas, hector you about your life, infuriatingly question your values. Whole articles now offer strategies on how to handle this character when the family sits down around the table. (And this has truly been a banner year for crazy uncles—several of whom seem to be dominating the presidential race.)

But wait: What’s so bad about crazy uncles? Who said the holidays need to be as boring as a George Pataki rally?

Story Continued Below

We’re guessing that if you’re reading this—if you’re reading Politico over the Thanksgiving holiday—you’re not so worried about the crazy uncle problem. In fact, you might even enjoy getting into the game a little yourself.

Yes, it’s time to be the crazy uncle for a change. Obviously not every crazy uncle is created equal. The best kind of crazy depends who you’re sitting next to. The key thing is to identify your target, plop down in the right seat and make someone else’s Thanksgiving one for the books.

Here’s Politico’s play-by-play guide to making your Thanksgiving inflammatory, memorable and just plain yuuuuge.

***

Target: Your niece who goes to Brown

Opening move: Show up precisely, militarily on time, carrying a generous gift of wild game. Preferably just shot. Preferably by you. (Power move: Rent a pick-up truck and park it on the lawn, or on anything growing.)

Cocktail hour: Drink American beer, straight from the can. Inquire, innocently: “So … anyone here still believe in evolution?” Use the ensuing silence to demand loudly that dinner be served with “extra gluten.”

Dinner: It’s showtime. Happily chime out “trigger warning!” whenever a dish containing meat passes your niece. When someone responds in shock, joke that you thought this was a “safe space.” When someone responds in shock to that, mutter something about microaggressions. If the campaign comes up, refer to male candidates by surnames, but talk about “Hillary” and “Carly.” Parry the inevitable complaints about holiday radio or excessive commercialism by complaining loudly about the “War on Christmas.” Deliberately confuse lines from the Bible with articles in the Constitution. If terrorism hasn’t come up by pumpkin pie time, just observe how at least Bush kept us safe.

Optional power move: On the way out, suggest a book for her book club. Hand her God, Guns, Grits and Gravy by Mike Huckabee, littered with post-it notes.

***

Target: Your Tea Partier cousin

Pregame: Keep everyone waiting at least an hour. Be clear it was because you needed to let the fruit fly trapped in your Prius escape on its own timeframe.

Cocktail hour: Wave off any commercial beverage. Serve your own wine, fermented from grapes that fell to the ground. Wait until someone is drinking a name-brand soda to bring up the many studies connecting it to cancer.

Dinnertime: In lieu of grace, ask everyone around the table if instead they’d all take a moment to confront their white privilege. Ask your cousin to go first. (Especially strong move if your cousin is the only white person at the table.) As the turkey is brought forth, mention your gratitude for our government’s thoughtful regulation of the poultry industry. Mention that without Native Americans, Middle Easterners and Europe, there would be no such thing as cranberry sauce. For no reason, mention the Federal Reserve fondly. Find a way to bring up politics, then refer dismissively to voters “crazy enough” to support Ted Cruz. Within 90 seconds, also announce you’re embarrassed to be an American because its people are so intolerant of other’s viewpoints.

After dinner: Wait until a crucial moment of the football game, then rise from your chair, turn off the television, and lecture the surprised children present that if 9/11 taught us anything, it’s that “violence is not the answer.”

Power play: Insist on a moment of silence for “God’s servant, Jimmy Carter.”

***

Target: Family friend who works for the New York Times

Upon arrival: Cross the doorstep already delivering a long, preferably pointless anecdote from the Rush Limbaugh repeat you were listening to in the car. Under your arm, carry a manila folder filled with wrinkled papers, which you wave at the friend and whisper mysteriously, “For later.”

Cocktail hour: Any sentence you utter that does not include the phrase “lamestream media” or “I read online someplace” is a sentence wasted. Turn the conversation quickly to cover-ups. The topic is irrelevant: The real goals of Obamacare, the climate change lie, the Kennedy assassination, or any “untold” story that the Times has already covered more than the Yankees.

Dinner: Bide your time, arching your eyebrows knowingly at all the “facts” being bandied about. If you must say something, offer some quiet praise for Ben Carson for exposing the lie about the Egyptian pyramids. When everyone’s attention is finally elsewhere, pull out your manila folder and hand it over with one word: “Benghazi.” When the reporter changes the topic, fakes grave injury and/or bolts for the door, shake your head sadly and say, “We always knew.”

Postgame option: If at any point a newscast comes on television, utter loudly, “That’s just what they want you to believe.”

***

Target: Your investment banker son-in-law

Arrival: Forget the Prius. That’s for posers. You’re late because you had to walk 2 miles from the nearest bus stop. (Uber is a corporate scam.) You shrug off your cardigan to reveal a “Feel the Bern” sticker on your T-shirt. Pretend not to notice that you’re the only one wearing a T-shirt to Thanksgiving. Do not smile.

Cocktail hour: The watchword here is “rigged.” Anyone drinking Bacardi rum? Well, that’s a company that ripped off the Cuban people and rigged the game for the imperialists. Did someone mention Cuba? Oh, right, you did. Exhaustively praise the Cuban health care system.

Dinnertime: If the turkey’s a Butterball, offer a long litany of the company’s crimes against the people. Look to your son-in-law and whisper: “Tell them.” Casually insert references to “the 1 Percenters” into unrelated discussions about the vegetable dishes, especially if they include slivered almonds, or are served with a special fork. Refuse to eat all the food on your plate. Ask for a bag so you can give the rest to “the people who really deserve it.” Forget to leave with the bag.

After dinner: Wait, did the kids really just start playing a game… and it’s Monopoly? Yes! After denouncing the children as “corporate shills,” and explaining “shills,” advise them they might as well just hand all their money to your son-in-law now, because that’s where it’s going to end up anyway.

***

Target: Your brother-in-law, the loyal Jeb! donor

Arrival: Emerge from a black stretch limousine with gold trim, undercarriage lights, license plate reading: NUMBER 1.

Cocktail hour: Bring your own wine, from your private vineyard—the greatest vineyard in the world. It puts Napa to shame, OK? Offer some to your Bush-loving brother-in-law, who is a teetotaler, and also the host. When he says no, pour the wine into his glass anyway. Say: “Maybe this’ll give you some energy.” Refer to him constantly by an emasculating nickname (Mr. Snooze, Four Percent, Hot Pants). Get the kids onboard with this early.

Dinner: Your over-the-top opinion is required on everything. The cranberry sauce is not good; it’s “fantastic.” The stuffing isn’t just bad; it’s “a total disaster.” Spice up your anecdotes with absurd claims. The White House was named after Betty White. You were the inspiration for the Terminator. If nobody takes the bait, quickly ratchet them up: Many leading rabbis have privately told you that Moses was a “really big Christian.” When anyone objects, deny you just said that, then repeat it as fact as soon as your brother-in-law tries to speak again.

After dinner: Turn the largest available TV to the football game and spend all your time alternately praising Tom Brady (who is not playing) and blasting every other player as a “no-talent loser.” Elbow the kids away from the Monopoly table to show them “how the game is really played.” Start with the Teamsters (you) skimming 10 percent of all rent on the hotels or else “there’s going to be some really ugly accidents.” Hand the 13-year-old banker a $50 under the table. When he notices it’s real, tell him, “There’s more where that came from, OK?” Regardless of actual results, declare victory.



Matt Latimer is a former speechwriter for President George W. Bush. He is currently a co-partner in Javelin, a literary agency and communications firm based in Alexandria, and contributing editor at Politico Magazine.