David Pickett (Photo: Submitted )

In 2007, global consulting firm PricewaterhouseCoopers, or PwC, saw the need to establish its presence in Nashville's health care market. In 2010, David Pickett moved here from Birmingham, Ala., to spearhead that effort. Since then, the firm has grown from three people to about 130 employees, says Pickett, PwC's managing partner for its Nashville office.

PwC has more resources than ever, Pickett says, especially after its recent acquisitions of Booze & Co. and Diamond Management & Technology Consultants. Pickett spoke with Tennessean reporter Shelley DuBois about why he was attracted to the health care industry and how he and his colleagues are trying to predict the future of reimbursement.

How did you get into the health care space?

I started with PwC in our Birmingham office 26 years ago and we did a lot of health care out of that office. I also was intrigued by health insurers and payors as well as the changes that were happening on the provider side. I credit some of this to my brother, who was a health care executive and told me what was going on in that environment.

See, many people who learn about the chaos of the environment would run from it. What was attractive about it?

Well, I think, at PwC, we have the ability to help our clients through that change. That's probably the main thing that made me not run from it but run to it.

PwC is a global company. Here in Nashville, we think of ourselves as health care thought leaders. Do your colleagues across the world really see the city that way?

Yes, they do. I think when you look at the number of investor-owned health care entities here, they're not only in the acute provider space but all over the continuum of health care. With the innovation and the margins they're able to achieve, the whole country sits up and looks at what's going on in Nashville and says, "What can we do to get on board with those trends?"

Since the industry is growing so much, lots of people from different sectors want to get into health care. Does anything surprise them?

Yeah, I think that new entrants into the health care space are taken aback a little bit about the regulatory environment. Most industries have some kind of regulatory control. But the health care industry has a lot of regulations that they may or may not be used to.

What about your industry veteran clients, what are some of their concerns?

They talk about the uncertainty, they talk about the impact of the public exchanges and where the reimbursement rates are going on that. They talk a lot about whether certain states have expanded Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act. They are very concerned about that. One of the things PwC does a great job of is trying to help them model where future reimbursements are going and how to react to that.

Where are future reimbursement models going? I'd love to know.

Well, if I had that answer, I'd probably be out sipping martinis on somebody's yacht. But overall, we've all said — and the government has said — the current cost trends are unsustainable in the future. You've got a $2.8 trillion industry, and I think everybody is looking to be more efficient. I don't know where the reimbursement trends are going exactly, but it's apparent that we're going to have to do more with less.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1vNxZfj