BRIDGEGATE lawyer wants gov’s cell phone -- NORCROSS hits Prieto -- PORT AUTHORITY in talks to end Pulaski probe

By Matt Friedman (mfriedman@politico.com; @mattfriedmannj)

Happy Friday!

Story Continued Below

QUOTE OF THE DAY: “You people are obsessed with stupid stuff.” — Gov. Christie when asked by reporters about his wife’s “eye roll,” which he insisted was not, in fact, an eye roll. “I’ve seen the eye roll for 32 years. That was not an eye roll.” (Christie dodged a question about how he felt about Trump’s remark on Clinton playing the “woman card.”)

HAPPY BIRTHDAY: Rep. Rodney Frelinghuysen, Assemblyman Arthur Barclay

WHERE’S CHRISTIE? Co-hosting WFAN’s “Boomer & Carton Show” this morning, then delivering remarks on prisoner reentry at the Greater Newark Conservancy in the afternoon.

POLL OF THE DAY: Gov. Christie’s favorability rating is at a record low 26 percent, according to a Rutgers-Eagleton poll http://politi.co/1N3HrH9. Also, more polls on Booker and Menendez from Morning Consult here http://bit.ly/1XXwpnm

NEWS

YOU USED TO TEXT ME ON MY CELL PHONE — “Bridgegate defense lawyer: 'I want the governor's phone',” by NJ Advance Media’s Tim Darragh: “Defense lawyers in the George Washington Bridge case said in court Thursday that information given to them only recently shows the prosecution of the case continues to be ‘fundamentally unfair.’ Defense subpoenas served last month to Gibson Dunn & Crutcher, which represents the New Jersey governor's office, should produce new documents, and perhaps other evidence to bolster the defendants' case, said defense lawyer Michael Baldassare. ‘I want the governor's phone,’ Baldassare told reporters after the approximately 90-minute hearing before U.S. District Judge Susan D. Wigenton. Baldassare, representing former Port Authority of New York and New Jersey Deputy Executive Director Bill Baroni, grabbed a reporter's cell phone to emphasize that he wants physical possession of Gov. Chris Christie's phone to see if it contains evidence to help his case. Baldassare also said he wants the cell phones of former Christie Chief of Staff Regina Egea and spokesman Michael Drewniak, and the phones of any other Christie staffers that were turned over to Gibson Dunn.” http://bit.ly/1N3Juel

THAT ENDLESS SKYWAY — “Port Authority in talks with SEC about settling Pulaski inquiry,” by POLITICO’s Ryan Hutchins: “The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey is trying to reach a deal with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission to end an investigation of statements the agency made in bond documents. A settlement with the financial regulator could mean the Port will avoid being sued over financial disclosures involving the $1.8 billion Pulaski Skyway project and other nearby infrastructure work. ‘Discussions have been initiated between the Port Authority and the staff of the SEC regarding a potential resolution of the investigation,’ the Port disclosed in a bond offering document released on Thursday.” http://politi.co/1qZFGAv

ATLANTIC CITY — “Atlantic City, America’s worst-rated town, stares at default,” by The Wall Street Journal’s Timothy W. Martin and Heather Gillers: “Atlantic City has so little money left that it could miss a $1.8 million bond payment due Sunday, a step that would make it the first New Jersey municipality to default on debt since the Great Depression. The Jersey Shore gambling destination has endured years of strain as a third of its casinos shut down. But now its cash levels are low enough that bankruptcy is a possibility for the 39,000-population city, according to Mayor Don Guardian. ‘We’re down to a couple million dollars on any given day,’ the mayor said in an interview. Once prized as a vacation destination because of its giant casinos and boardwalk, Atlantic City is in this position because of a declining economy and mounting debt. Its predicament is more severe than most distressed U.S. municipalities because it has the worst credit rating of any American city.” http://on.wsj.com/1WWJ6Aj

WHERE’S THEIR CUT? — "Port Authority officials take issue with Newark’s $10M Uber deal," by POLITICO's Dana Rubinstein: “The chairman of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey doesn't approve of a recent deal Newark Mayor Ras Baraka hammered out with Uber. Following Thursday's Port Authority board meeting, chairman John Degnan said he doesn't think Newark has the right to ‘charge for the ability to use Uber or Lyft or other ride-sharing companies at Newark Airport.’ ... Degnan made his remarks the day after Baraka unveiled more details about his city's agreement to allow Uber drivers access to Terminals B and C at Newark airport, which sits on land the Port Authority leases from the city. Under the terms of Baraka's deal with the San Francisco-based car-hail giant, Uber agreed to pay Newark $10 million over ten years to access airport customers. … ‘I think our position is that the laws of New York and New Jersey, as well as the lease between the Port Authority and the city of Newark, don’t permit that,’ said the Port's executive director, Pat Foye. It's not clear what happens next.” http://politi.co/1STXU32

—Today is Rob Duffey’s last day as policy and communications director for New Jersey Working Families. Duffey is moving to Berlin…. I mean BerlinRosen Public Affairs, to be part of the firm’s new national labor & economy team.

TTF — "Could Democrats cut a deal on state tax deduction for charitable contributions," by NJ Spotlight's John Reitmeyer: “Republican lawmakers have tried in vain for roughly a decade to convince Democrats who control the state Legislature to create a new tax break for New Jersey residents who make charitable contributions. But this year Democrats in the Senate are taking a second look at the issue, offering new hope to the GOP sponsors who want to see New Jersey added to the list of states that permit charitable donations to be deducted from state income taxes just as they can deduct contributions from federal taxes. Whether the tax break can make it out of the Legislature this year is still unclear. It will depend largely on how talks progress over the next few weeks on a series of proposed tax-policy changes, including an increase of the state gas tax that Democrats are seeking to bring in more money for New Jersey’s going-broke Transportation Trust Fund.” http://bit.ly/1WWKO4T

—In a screed against Christie over gun control, a Huffington Post blogger offers one potential news nugget, saying Democrats in New Jersey plan yet another gun control push this spring. No details on that. http://huff.to/1WWL4Ro

IF ONLY THERE WAS A PROJECT ALREADY UNDERWAY — “Feds to hold North Jersey hearing on Gateway tunnel project,” by The Record’s Christopher Maag: “The Federal Railroad Administration will hold its first public hearings in May on the long-stalled Gateway project to dig a new train tunnel under the Hudson River. The hearings are intended to get public comment about the scope of the project’s environmental review, a necessary first step that is required for the tunnel to gain federal approval for construction to begin. The review will be conducted by the rail administration and NJ Transit. Anthony Foxx, the U.S. Secretary of Transportation, has added to speed up the review process so that construction can begin as soon as possible.A new tunnel must be built before the existing one fails, which could happen any time in the next 19 years, say officials at Amtrak, which owns the tunnel.” http://bit.ly/1N3I2sv

THE CHRONICLES OF OMNIA — “Will Horizon penalize N.J. doctors for not telling patients about new health plans?” by NJ Advance Media’s Susan K. Livio: “New Jersey's oldest physician organization has lashed out against Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey, the state's largest health insurance company, for requiring doctors to explain how patients enrolled in discount plans can save more money by using a preferred network of doctors. If doctors don't discuss ‘the cost sharing implications’ of using ‘Tier 1 or 2’ doctors and hospitals with their patients who are enrolled in Horizon's OMNIA plans, they’ ‘may be subject to consequences, up to and including termination from Horizon BCBSNJ's networks’ according to a newsletter Horizon sent doctors last month.” http://bit.ly/1VWQiwX

LIKE RICE ON WHITE HAIR — “Rice says Norcross is ‘less than a man’’ by PolitickerNJ’s Max Pizarro: “Royally irritated state Senator Ronald L. Rice (D-28) today chastised South Jersey power broker George Norcross III for intruding into Statehouse politics, upbraiding the boss for buttonholing Bergen leadership to discuss taking out Speaker Vincent Prieto (D-32) … ‘I have a real problem with George,’ the Newark senator told PolitickerNJ. ‘The last time he said hello to me I let him know how I feel, and I intend to tell him again the next time I see him. ‘George, you’re a very wealthy guy, but you’re not going to use your influence to push people around.” http://bit.ly/1N3IuHc

OBAMACARE — “Could N.J. lose one of its Obamacare insurers?” by NJ Advance Media’s Kathleen O’Brien: “Insurance giant UnitedHealthcare roiled the political landscape recently when it revealed it will stop selling policies through the federal government website in all but "a handful" of states. Such policies - in most cases heavily subsided - are a cornerstone of the Affordable Care Act, now in its third full year. UnitedHealthCare has declined to say whether it will remain in New Jersey's ACA marketplace, where it operates under the name of a subsidiary, Oxford Health. State insurance regulators in 26 other states have stated they've been notified by United that it will be pulling out of their marketplaces in 2017. Officials in New York, Nevada and Virginia say the company will be staying in their states. The N.J. Department of Banking and Insurance has not responded to inquiries about United's intentions.” http://bit.ly/1T81hgs

SHOCKED - SHOCKED! — “Cops 'shocked' over officer's racial slurs in 'nanny-cam' video,” by NJ Advance Media’s Bill Wichert: “On the morning of June 21, 2013, Millburn Detectives Collin McMillan and Andrew DelRusso and other township police officers responded to a residence where an African-American man had attacked a woman during a home invasion and fled the scene. A ‘nanny-cam’ video in the house captured McMillan using racial slurs about the assailant on three occasions. While speaking with DelRusso at one point, McMillan referred to the attacker as a ‘monkey’ and said the case would take precedence over his other cases. DelRusso then replied, ‘Yup.’ … DelRusso said he first heard the slur when he recently viewed the video, saying the remark was ‘completely shocking.’” http://bit.ly/1T8229j

YOU WON’T BELIEVE WHAT WEEDMAN WAS ARRESTED FOR — “'NJ Weedman' facing pot charges, 9 others arrested at Joint,” by Keith Brown for NJ.com: “Ed ‘NJ Weedman’ Forchion … who opened the restaurant and sanctuary last year, faces 10 charges of marijuana possession and distribution, as well as distribution of drug paraphernalia, maintaining a narcotics nuisance, and for having booby traps in a manufacturing or distribution facility.” http://bit.ly/1T82oN7

—How the man in charge of Medicare plans to win back doctors' hearts and minds. In an exclusive interview for POLITICO's new 'Pulse Check' podcast, CMS acting head Andy Slavitt dishes on the Obama administration's dramatic changes to physician payment and talks about how rising drug prices are health care's latest major challenge — and an opportunity. To listen to the full interview and ensure you don’t miss upcoming ‘Pulse Check’ episodes, subscribe to the podcast on iTunes. http://apple.co/1YTVD60

GEORGE III — “Norcross slaps away at Prieto over Atlantic City takeover bill,” by PolitickerNJ’s Max Pizarro: “Swarmed by criticism over his alleged role in pushing for a leadership takedown of Assembly Speaker Vincent Prieto (D-32), South Jersey Democratic leader George Norcross III struck back today and called on Prieto to back down. ‘I’m interested in protecting the livelihoods of Atlantic City and Southern New Jersey,’ Norcross told PolitickerNJ. ‘I’m very disappointed that Speaker Prieto seems bent on forcing Atlantic City into financial collapse and bankruptcy. ‘It’s apparent that he doesn’t have 41 votes to pass his bill that he announced four weeks ago,’ Norcross added. … Norcross wouldn’t directly address Charles Stile’s story in which Bergen County Democratic Chairman Lou Stellato said the South Jersey boss asked him if he would support dumping Prieto in exchange for Assemblywoman Valerie Vainieri Huttle (D-37). But two South Jersey sources contend that Stellato floated the name of Assemblyman Gary Schaer (D-36) as a possible Prieto replacement.” http://bit.ly/1T86Z27

—New Jersey is the third most similar state to the rest of the country, trailing only Illionois and New York, according to 538. That’s right, Sarah Palin — we’re “real America.” http://53eig.ht/1N3JieV

SANDY RECOVERY — “New Jersey congressman, citing fraud, calls on congress to investigate FEMA,” by The New York Times’ “A representative from New Jersey called on Thursday for a congressional investigation into the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s flood insurance program, alleging that wrongdoing by the agency had prevented thousands of victims of Hurricane Sandy from receiving the payouts they were entitled to in order to rebuild. The representative, Tom MacArthur, shared new revelations from whistle-blowers that the agency’s process to re-examine insurance claims from the devastating storm — after allegations of fraud arose last year — had itself been plagued by fraud. Representative MacArthur, a Republican serving the Third Congressional District, said he had been provided three affidavits outlining accusations of impropriety from several whistle-blowers who had worked on a review process set up by FEMA last year to take a renewed look at flood insurance claims after revelations that engineers assessing damage had altered their reports. ‘I have seen doctored engineering reports with my own eyes,’ he said.” http://nyti.ms/1WWLp6v

—“Congressional candidates in S.J. argue over political ties” http://bit.ly/1WWLA1G

ENERGY — "Amid state’s refusal to comply, groups chart a path toward Clean Power Plan," by POLITICO's David Giambusso: “Despite assurances from the Christie administration that it has no intention of complying with the federal Clean Power Plan, the state-appointed Clean Air Council nonetheless spent Thursday hearing from industry and advocacy experts on how best to comply with the emissions regulations. Created in 1954, the council, whose members are largely appointed by the governor, advises the state Department of Environmental Protection on air pollution-related issues. Even though Gov. Chris Christie insists New Jersey will not comply with the plan, the state will be forced to adhere to it if the regulation is upheld by the U.S. Supreme Court, where it remains in a state of limbo.” http://politi.co/1XXywr3

EVERYONE’S FAVORITE BISTATE AGENCY — “Port Authority leaders blame N.J. lawmakers for delay in reforms; call Uber-Newark deal illegal,” by The Record’s Christopher Maag: “The agency’s leaders were especially critical of Democratic lawmakers in New Jersey, who have refused to pass long-stalled legislation to reform the Port Authority in the wake of the George Washington Bride lane closure scandal. New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo already has signed a law overhauling the agency’s leadership structure. But the Democrats who control the New Jersey legislature have refused to pass the same law, primarily because it includes no language forcing Port Authority leaders to appear for hearings … As a bi-state agency, the Port Authority needs identical legislation in both states before the reforms can become binding. John Degnan, the port’s chairman and a Christie appointee, accused the Democrats of holding up important changes for trivial reasons. ‘I think it’s gilding the lily to hold up the entire reform for that minor provision,’ said Port Authority Chairman John Degnan, who was appointed by Gov. Christie, a Republican.” http://bit.ly/1qZFHUT

STATE TO MANDATE THEY’RE ALL MADE OUT OF TICKY-TACKY — “Tiny house trend hits the statehouse,” by POLITICO’s Matt Friedman: “New Jersey legislators are getting in on the tiny-house trend, with two bills that would have the state assist in the building of tiny homes for the homeless or to combat climate change. State Sen. Raymond Lesniak on Monday introduced legislation (S2110) that would direct the state to seek charitable or federal grants for a “Tiny Home Pilot Program” in three parts of the state. Lesniak, a Democrat from Union County, first introduced the bill in December 2014, attracting a substantial amount of media attention. But in that version, the state would have provided $5 million to jump-start the program. “But the state doesn’t have the money for that, so we’re directing the HMFA [New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency] to seek private funding or federal grants to see if that could boost the development of these homes that would be affordable for many types of people who can’t afford any type of housing in New Jersey,” Lesniak said. Assemblywoman Pamela Lampitt in January introduced legislation (A1471) modeled on Lesniak’s, but with the aim of combating climate change instead of poverty. Lampitt’s bill would appropriate the $5 million from the general fund.” http://politi.co/1T88a1k

SCUTARI — “Linden court held hearings without prosecutor, defense attorney, lawsuit claims,” by NJ Advance Media’s Tom Haydon: “During the litigation over [former municipal court judge Louis] DiLeo's lawsuit, an email from then Linden court administrator Elizabeth Gavigan to the mayor said that then municipal prosecutor, state Senator Nicholas Scutari (D-Union), routinely left court before the docket was completed. Scutari denies leaving court sessions early. ‘I always completely finished the prosecutor's duties before I left,’ Scutari said. ‘We never left until our duties were over.’” http://bit.ly/1WWJoHt

WHY ARE THEY IGNORING THE URGENT NEED FOR FLIGHTS TO COLUMBIA, SC? — “JetBlue adding more flights from Newark to Florida after airport change,” by NJ Advance Media’s Craig McCarthy: “JetBlue is the first airline to take advantage of Newark airport's new federal reclassification, announcing Thursday it will add six more flights a day from the Garden State to the Sunshine State. Starting in the fall, the airline said it will increase its daily roundtrip options to Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood International Airport, Orlando International Airport, Tampa International Airport, Palm Beach International Airport and Fort Myers' Southwest Florida International Airport.” http://bit.ly/1T82Zyv

A LITTLE LATE FOR THAT — “County executive calls for audit of nonprofit amid corruption probe,” by Cristina Rojas for NJ.com: ”Mercer County Executive Brian Hughes is calling for an audit into The Friends of Mercer County Park, addressing for the first time on Thursday the state attorney general's investigation into the nonprofit. ‘I will ensure the Mercer County Park Commission and all entities related to our park system uphold the ethical standards that are hallmarks of my administration and that are expected by the taxpayers of this great county,’ he said.” http://bit.ly/1WWJK0E

HIGHLAND PARK — “N.J. school district seeks to lead in transgender equality,” by NJ Advance Media’s Spencer Kent: “The borough has never been afraid to take a stand for progressive values, even if it meant making a little noise, said Darcie Cimarusti, president of the Highland Park Board of Education. Which is why Cimarusti and other officials and experts were not afraid to say that the state has not gone nearly far enough in addressing transgender and gender diverse equality with statewide policy.” http://bit.ly/1T81sIR

ALL OUR BASES STILL BELONG TO US — “Armed Services Committee approves defense bill without base closures,” by The Burlington County Times’ David Levinsky: “Lawmakers in Congress approved a $610 billion defense policy bill early Thursday that would once again block the Pentagon from moving forward with its request to begin preparations for a new round of base closures … New Jersey Reps. Tom MacArthur, R-3rd of Toms River, and Donald Norcross, D-1st of Camden, teamed on the BRAC language to protect Joint Base McGuire-Dix-Lakehurst, New Jersey's second-largest employer.” http://bit.ly/1WWKkf0

MENACE II SOUTH JERSEY — “Pinelands fires: A menace and a necessity,” by The Philadelphia Inquirer’s Rita Giordano: “Fire is a fact of life in the Pine Barrens, 1.1 million acres of prized forestland reaching from lower central Jersey into the southern part of the state. The flames pose a threat, particularly as development as crept up to the woods, but they're also an integral part of the Pinelands' natural ecosystem process. And spring, with higher temperatures, longer days, wind, and dry conditions, is historically a prime time for wildfires.” http://bit.ly/1WWK5Rg

BEARS URGED TO PROTECT PORRIDGE — “Black bears awaken; state reminds residents to secure garbage,” by The New Jersey Herald: “With black bears emerging from winter dens, the state Department of Environmental Protection's Division of Fish and Wildlife reminds residents of basic precautions this spring to reduce the potential of encounters. It is illegal to intentionally feed black bears in New Jersey and punishable by a fine of up to $1,000. A more common problem is unintentional bear feeding by homeowners who unknowingly make household trash, pet foods and other food sources easily available for bears to find and eat.” http://bit.ly/1WWKvXM

IF HE DID IT — “Kids ruling at Burlington County Courthouse: Harry Potter 'not guilty' of murder,” by The Burlington County Times’ Rose Krebs: “In keeping with tradition, the young visitors were treated to a mock trial performed by law clerks and court staff, in full costume, as the highlight of the day. This year’s case featured the Ministry of Magic v. Harry Potter, with the young wizard on trial for the murder of his longtime arch nemesis, Lord Voldemort. Potter contended that the killing was a matter of self-defense during the two wizards’ final duel. The ministry argued that it was always Potter’s intent to kill Voldemort and that he should not have taken matters into his own hands, but rather let Voldemort be captured and have justice be done for his prior bad acts.” http://bit.ly/1SUhRXg

MORE NEWS

—“Christie sending all motor vehicle employees to customer service training” http://bit.ly/1qZFalV

—"Federal agency gives approval for new nuclear reactor in Salem County” http://politi.co/1rm1NBr

—“State could force 5 more towns to reassess properties” http://bit.ly/1WWIURA

— "With 12 days until Atlantic City coffers run dry, Christie pushes Prieto” http://politi.co/1STXABm

—“Bergen County Executive James Tedesco unveils $545M budget” http://bit.ly/1N3K7o9

—“Battle pits union against union in Jersey City” http://bit.ly/1N3HJOa

—“N.J. university adding new nursing school amid spike in demand” http://bit.ly/1T82JPW

-Want to make an impact? POLITICO New Jersey has a variety of multi-platform solutions available to reach and activate the most influential people in the Garden State. Have a petition you want signed? A cause you’re promoting? Share your message with our influential readers to increase awareness and drive action. Contact Chris Falls to find out how: cfalls@politico.com.

FOR MORE political and policy news from New Jersey, check out Politico New Jersey’s home page: http://politi.co/1JiYTDg

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook: http://politi.co/1phAeAC … New York Playbook: http://politi.co/1ON8bqW ... Florida Playbook: http://politi.co/1JDm23W ... New Jersey Playbook: http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook: http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v ... Illinois Playbook: http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook: http://politi.co/1N8zdJU and our friends at POLITICO Brussels Playbook: http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... All our policy and political tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX

NOW AVAILABLE: HARD TO ACCESS CAMPAIGN DETAILS - POLITICO Pro, POLITICO’s premium solution for policy professionals offers Campaign Pro. Get breaking news and analysis about this season’s unconventional presidential race, as well as developments about this year’s most competitive House, Senate and gubernatorial races. You’ll also have access to the Campaign Pro Race Dashboard, giving you all of the facts about specific races in one, convenient place. The dashboard provides campaign details such as: current consultant rosters, the latest polling numbers and race summaries written by Pro’s Campaign Pro reporters. Beyond the 2016 cycle, you’ll continue to receive coverage that provides you with a behind-the-curtain look at potential races, including insight about candidate/consulting firm partnerships forming behind the scenes, and about all fundraising efforts. Request your Campaign Pro demo today.