Imagine being the shareholder of a publicly traded biotech company whose management and board were considering the economic merits of a truly awesome project involving a new drug.

Unlike most pharmaceutical and biotech products, which require billions of investment up front before revenues come rolling in, this peculiar product would require the firm only to put up monthly production costs of 10 cents for every dollar of revenue that will come in the same month. This is because the drug has already been developed by someone else, and this firm bought the patent on it some years ago.

The drug has been found to be so effective that its approval by the Food and Drug Administration is virtually a sure thing. Furthermore, there will be a solid market for the product as far as the eye can see.

Even if this product were on the market for only, say, 20 years, the metrics by which modern business firms evaluate such deals — the net present value and the internal rate of return — would be truly stunning. In fact, the internal rate of return on the deal would be infinitely large. Infinity, as our daughter explained to me when she was 7, is a number so large that only God knows it. Naturally, the longer the period during which the new drug would be on the market, the more awesome the return on it would be.

Alas, the current C.E.O. just does not like to give the people from whom the previous C.E.O. bought the patent the satisfaction of having invented a great drug, and therefore rejects the deal. A deferential executive management committee and board go along.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

As a shareholder, how would you feel about that decision? Wouldn’t you sue both management and the board?

As you ruminate about the answer, let your mind go to another context. Make the imaginary company a state, its C.E.O. the governor, its directors the state legislature, and its shareholders the state’s citizens.

Photo

Under the Affordable Care Act of 2010, the federal government has offered the state the following deal: If the state expands Medicaid coverage to cover every eligible adult under 65 with an income up to 138 percent of the poverty line, the federal government will cover the entire cost for the next two years and 90 percent of the cost thereafter. (This formula does not apply to immigrants who have been in the United States for less than five years or who are in the country illegally, and to Medicaid beneficiaries who were already eligible for that program before the Affordable Care Act.)

You will notice that, from the state’s perspective, this deal is pretty much the same as the hypothetical biotech deal I have described above.

If the governor and the legislature refuse to accept the federal deal — as 24 states have so far — they in effect vote against one of the most fantastic cash-flow deals ever offered them. (The Urban Institute and Jonathan Cohn of The New Republic recently wrote about the billions of dollars that these states have left on the table.)

And it gets worse. The state’s citizens are paying taxes to the federal government to help cover the federal payments made to other states who do accept the new deal, but the state gets nothing in return. In states that accept the deal, possibly millions of poor citizens will get insurance coverage they now lack. Furthermore, doctors, hospitals and other providers of health care in the state would see their revenues increase and thus could offer more jobs to residents of the state.

As just one example, Gov. Rick Perry of Texas and his state legislature are among those who have made the decision to reject the Medicaid expansion. With 24 percent of the population uninsured at any one time, Texas has the highest uninsured rate in the country. True, as the Urban Institute study cited above shows, the deal would require Texas to invest $5.7 billion of state money during the decade from 2012 to 2022. But in return Texas would receive $65.6 billion of federal money, of which Texas hospitals would receive $34.3 billion, undoubtedly leading them to hire many more Texans.

Mr. Perry has never been a C.E.O., and it’s interesting to note that a different governor, Rick Scott of Florida, who once was C.E.O. of the Hospital Corporation of America, eventually decided to accept the Medicaid deal, although the state legislature did not go along. Mr. Perry, asserting that Medicaid is “a broken system,” has said that expanding it is “like putting 1,000 more people on the Titanic when you knew what was going to happen.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Some governors and other Republicans have expressed fear that, in the end, the federal government will just renege on the deal now being offered, leaving the states to pick up the entire tab of the Medicaid expansion. There actually is no historical precedent for this in Medicaid. But according to a federal document addressing frequently asked questions about the Affordable Care Act, states are free to drop out of the Medicaid expansion if they choose to.

In short, this economist is puzzled by the thinking among the leaders of the 24 states who have refused to accept the highly profitable deal offered them under the Affordable Care Act (23 states have accepted the deal; three are still debating it).

Straight economic theory makes me wonder how long these states’ citizens and the powerful lobbies of doctors and hospitals will sit by idly watching this behavior. My prediction is that these politically powerful interest groups will ultimately prevail and get the deal done.