Republicans optimistic about 2014 House races in New York Six incumbents strong, 2 more seats possible, party faithful told













Photo: Michael P. Farrell Image 1 of / 4 Caption Close Image 1 of 4 Ed Cox speaks after being renomited as the New York State Republican Party chairman during a state Republican Party meeting at the Desmond Hotel on Tuesday Sept. 24, 2013 in Colonie, N.Y. (Michael P. Farrell/Times Union) less Ed Cox speaks after being renomited as the New York State Republican Party chairman during a state Republican Party meeting at the Desmond Hotel on Tuesday Sept. 24, 2013 in Colonie, N.Y. (Michael P. ... more Photo: Michael P. Farrell Image 2 of 4 Ed Cox ,left, during his renomination as the New York State Republican Party chairman during a state Republican Party meeting at the Desmond Hotel on Tuesday Sept. 24, 2013 in Colonie, N.Y. (Michael P. Farrell/Times Union) less Ed Cox ,left, during his renomination as the New York State Republican Party chairman during a state Republican Party meeting at the Desmond Hotel on Tuesday Sept. 24, 2013 in Colonie, N.Y. (Michael P. ... more Photo: Michael P. Farrell Image 3 of 4 The New York State Republican Party held their state organizational meeting at the Desmond Hotel on Tuesday Sept. 24, 2013 in Colonie, N.Y. (Michael P. Farrell/Times Union) The New York State Republican Party held their state organizational meeting at the Desmond Hotel on Tuesday Sept. 24, 2013 in Colonie, N.Y. (Michael P. Farrell/Times Union) Photo: Michael P. Farrell Image 4 of 4 Ed Cox ,left, enters the conference room after his renomination as the New York State Republican Party chairman during a state Republican Party meeting at the Desmond Hotel on Tuesday Sept. 24, 2013 in Colonie, N.Y. (Michael P. Farrell/Times Union) less Ed Cox ,left, enters the conference room after his renomination as the New York State Republican Party chairman during a state Republican Party meeting at the Desmond Hotel on Tuesday Sept. 24, 2013 in Colonie, ... more Photo: Michael P. Farrell Republicans optimistic about 2014 House races in New York 1 / 4 Back to Gallery

Colonie

The top Republican national campaign leader said he was optimistic his party would once again pick up congressional seats in New York and promised to support Rep. Chris Gibson, R-Kinderhook, against a challenge from a wealthy investor.

Oregon Rep. Greg Walden, chairman of the National Republican Congressional Committee, predicted the GOP's six House incumbents would be re-elected and promised strong challengers to Long Island Rep. Tim Bishop as well as Rep. Bill Owens, a Plattsburgh Democrat whose district includes Warren County and northern Saratoga County.

"I'd rather be us than them, especially in 2014. The sixth year of a president's term does not bode well for the president's party, historically," he said. He said the implementation of the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, would fuel the party's efforts.

Walden called Gibson an "incredible American patriot" and a "blue collar" congressman, promising to work in "partnership" as he faces a well-heeled challenger.

Late Sunday, Democrat Sean Eldridge — the founder of a local investment firm and husband of Facebook co-founder Chris Hughes — announced his campaign. Walden said Eldridge, 27, "doesn't have a very deep resume, but has a very big checkbook" that amounts to "a nuclear arsenal in the political world."

More Information

"He's going to do everything he can to get his name out there and spend his money to buy a seat," Walden said.

Eldridge's spokesman Morgan Hook touted his candidate's record.

"As an investor, Sean has helped grow more than a dozen small businesses and created jobs in our region, and as an activist, he's fought to protect women's health and Planned Parenthood and worked to reduce the influence of money and special interests in politics," Hook said.

Walden was greeted warmly by members of the Republican State Committee who gathered at the Desmond Hotel and Conference Center for their biennial reorganization.

While Walden mentioned candidates either announced or in the wings, the GOP has struggled to recruit state-level candidates. The party has no apparent challenger to Democratic Gov. Andrew Cuomo, who Chairman Ed Cox said has embraced many Republican policies.

Michael Garcia, a former federal prosecutor who is defending the state Senate against a Cuomo-sponsored anti-corruption panel, sung the party's praises during a keynote address but later told reporters he was "not a candidate."

But he also didn't rule out a run, and Cox heaped him with praise.

"He's a very thoughtful individual who really cares about New York state," Cox said.

vielkind@timesunion.com • 518-454-5081 • @JimmyVielkind