Two men are challenging U.S. Rep. Tom Graves in the May 24 Republican primary for the 14th District Congressional seat.

The district covers Floyd and the 11 other counties in Northwest Georgia.

There is no Democratic candidate, so the winner will be unopposed in the Nov. 8 general election.

Mickey Tuck, of Silver Creek, is an electrician at Gildan Yarns in Cedar­town. Other than an unsuccessful run for the Floyd commission in the early 1990s, he has no previous political experience. And he said that’s exactly why voters should send him to Washington, D.C., next year.

“Tom has been up there too long and made too many friends there,” Tuck said. “He’s working for the special interests and the lobbyists, not the people of the 14th District.”

Allan Levene said he’s self-employed with investment income, and he wants to take a shot at getting his plan to fix the economy through Congress. He lives in Kenne­saw but said he will move to Rome if he wins. If he loses, he’ll move to Tennessee and run there.

“If you’ve been in office for six or seven years and you haven’t done what you said you wanted to do, you should get out and let someone else give it a go,” Levene said.

Graves, of Ranger, is a former state legislator who was first elected in 2010 to fill the seat vacated by now-governor Nathan Deal. He’s easily won re-elections, running as a “pro-life, pro-gun, tax-cutting constitutional conservative,” and said he wants to continue in that mold.

“My overall goal is to expand freedoms for all of the 14th District and guarantee everyone can pursue their American Dream,” he said.

Graves sits on the House Appropriations Committee, and he said his goal is to be “a new breed of appropriator,” who saves money rather than spends it.

Targeted for cuts are the incentives for states to adopt Common Core educational standards — even though Georgia is one of those states.

“The federal government should ease out of the role of education and leave it to the states and local communities,” Graves said.

He also points with pride to his legislation to defund Obamacare — the Affordable Care Act — and another piece that freezes congressional pay. So far, the Republican-controlled Congress has failed to pass anything to weaken the ACA, but the freeze, initiated last year, will remain intact this year.

For Tuck, that’s not good enough. He said Graves talks like a conservative, but fails to follow through.

As an example, Tuck said, Graves opposed Planned Parenthood, illegal immigration and the Export-Import Bank, which is a federally backed credit agency for foreign buyers of U.S. goods. But the congressman voted to fund them all in the latest omnibus spending bill.

“The people of the 14th District are noticing it’s all smoke and mirrors,” Tuck said.

If elected, he said he would be the conservative lawmaker Graves purports to be — even to voting against the whole spending bill if it contains money to enable Planned Parenthood operations.

“Yes. I would,” Tuck said. “It brought some good things to Georgia, but there was more bad in that bill than good.”

Levene said there are many smaller issues, but he wants to first devote all his energy to protecting the United States from what he contends is an imminent collapse of the global economy.

“Everything is money-driven,” he said, so the answer is a simple change of the tax code — eliminating corporate taxes on profits from items manufactured in the country. That would bring back the factory jobs lost to foreign countries in recent years, he said, and strengthen the dollar.

“The U.S. was strong when we did our own manufacturing and the world revolved around the dollar,” Levene said. “It’s not difficult to fix, but Graves and the others down there are not interested. You have to think outside the box. Otherwise, you become part of the establishment, and look where that got us.”

His plan for the tax-code tweak is why Levene says it does not matter what state he runs for office in.

“Congress isn’t about Northwest Georgia issues; you have local and state governments for that. It’s about national issues. When you go to D.C., everyone goes into the same building,” he said.

For his part, Graves said he can focus on both national and local issues — and does.

He has a laundry list of goals, ranging from solving the debt crisis and transforming the healthcare system to strengthening the military. But he said he also has three teen children and a wife who teaches school in Gordon County.

“My family still lives there. I still live there. I come home every week,” Graves said. “If I’m not a citizen-legislator, I’m not being a good dad. I’m at all the ball games, the soccer, the track meets. We go to church in Calhoun. When I’m not in D.C., I’m out in the community.”