OAKLAND, Calif., March 26, 2015 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- The Integrated Healthcare Association (IHA) today announced that its Board of Directors will appoint Jeffrey Rideout, MD, as president and CEO effective May 11, 2015. Earlier this year, Rideout's predecessor, Tom Williams, DrPH, transitioned to Stanford Health Care after ten years at IHA.

Dr. Rideout is currently the senior medical advisor for Covered California, the California Health Insurance Exchange, supporting clinical quality, network management, and delivery system reform related to the 1.1 million Californians enrolled through the exchange. Covered California is the largest state based exchange in the country and accounts for nearly 20% of the total state and federal based exchange enrollment in the nation.

"Jeff is a proven leader with a compelling vision and the ability to execute while bringing people together," said David Joyner, IHA Board Chair and Hill Physicians Medical Group chief operating officer. "He is very well respected in the fields of technology, medicine, quality improvement and new business ventures, and is an excellent fit with this high profile role."

In addition to his clinical and executive background, Rideout has significant direct experience advising and consulting in venture capital, private equity and early stage companies in the healthcare IT and healthcare services sector, and formerly held executive roles at Trizetto (now a Cognizant company), and Cisco Systems. He is currently a healthcare advisor to GE Ventures, and was formerly president and CEO of Blue Shield of California Foundation, and chief medical officer at Blue Shield of California. He holds academic appointments with Stanford University as Consulting Professor, Department of Health Research and Policy, and the University of California, Berkeley Haas School of Business.

"Healthcare is going through historic changes, including a significant shift to value-based payments. Given IHA's role in developing and managing one of the nation's largest value-based performance programs and its trusted partner and convener reputation in California, IHA is uniquely positioned to drive positive change for consumers, patients and the industry participants that serve them. IHA's members represent many of the leading plans, hospitals, physician organizations, academic systems, and pharmaceutical and technology suppliers in the nation, offering a very unique and comprehensive platform to test and scale innovation," said Dr. Rideout.

Having served on the IHA Board of Directors for the past five years, a smooth transition is expected. "Jeff is exactly what IHA needs to position the organization for success in the new healthcare environment created by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA)," Joyner added. "I look forward to working with him as IHA enters its next chapter of growth and innovation."

About the Integrated Healthcare Association

The Integrated Healthcare Association (IHA) is a nonprofit multi-stakeholder leadership group that promotes healthcare quality improvement, accountability and affordability for the benefit of all Californians. IHA has over a decade of experience leading regional and statewide performance measurement and incentive programs, and serving as an incubator for pilot programs and demonstration projects. As a regional healthcare improvement collaborative, IHA convenes diverse, cross-sector organizations to collaborate on challenging healthcare issues. For more information, please visit: www.IHA.org.

Media Contact: Cindy R. Ernst (510) 208-1743 cernst@iha.org