PALO ALTO, Calif., Sept. 10, 2013 /PRNewswire/ -- SurveyMonkey, the world's leading provider of web-based survey solutions, now offers HIPAA (Health Insurance Portability & Accountability Act) compliant features for all Platinum customers at no extra cost. This will allow U.S. healthcare providers to collect sensitive patient information online safely and easily.

SurveyMonkey's upgraded features were designed to address new Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) rules that went in to effect on March 26 with a compliance deadline of September 23, including heightened financial penalties for organizations out of compliance. Healthcare customers can now HIPAA-enable their online surveys in time to meet the compliance deadline for these new rules.

Additionally, SurveyMonkey has developed a business associate agreement (BAA) that contains the provisions required by HIPAA*, making it simple and secure for covered entities to use SurveyMonkey's powerful tools to gather insights and make better decisions. Having access to HIPAA-compliant online surveys means that covered entities can now improve their level of care and become more efficient by collecting patient feedback and registration information through the web, email or mobile devices.

"With more than a quarter of a million healthcare customers, healthcare professionals are some of our most prolific subscribers. When they requested an easy, low-cost way to HIPAA-enable their online surveys, we took action," said Will Aldrich, Vice President of Product at SurveyMonkey. "With the assistance of security consultants and health information privacy experts, we are ensuring SurveyMonkey safeguards are up to speed with HIPAA's specialized and stringent requirements, so healthcare customers can rest assured knowing they can operate in full compliance."

SurveyMonkey will help covered entities meet their HIPAA obligations with:

The ability to easily enter into a Business Associate Agreement (BAA) with SurveyMonkey—a step which is required of vendors or subcontractors who work with information protected by HIPAA

Administrative, physical and technical safeguards consistent with HIPAA requirements

Alert messages to remind customers of their HIPAA obligations and warn them when they perform sensitive operations on protected health information

Logs of account activity

30-minute session timeouts for idled accounts for added security

The flexibility to negotiate a custom BAA for a nominal cost to fit more specialized compliance requirements

Under the security of HIPAA compliance, covered entities can gain insights via SurveyMonkey in a variety of ways, including collecting patient feedback data, registration information, and Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems (CAHPS) surveys. Healthcare providers can also perform research with methodologically sound questions from the SurveyMonkey Question Bank and gather data on mobile devices, such as smartphones and tablets.

About SurveyMonkey

SurveyMonkey is the world's leading provider of web-based survey solutions, with more than 2 million survey responses every day. SurveyMonkey has revolutionized the way people give and take feedback, making it accessible, easy and affordable for everyone. The company was founded in 1999 with a focus on helping people make better decisions, and has built technology based on over 10 years of experience in survey methodology and web development. Customers include 99% of the Fortune 500, academic institutions, organizations and neighborhood soccer leagues everywhere.

The company has over 250 employees throughout the United States and Europe, with headquarters in Palo Alto, CA. For more information, visit www.surveymonkey.com.

*Includes the HITECH Act and related rules made by the DHHS

SOURCE SurveyMonkey