ACTUALLY, OBAMA'S SUCCESSFUL PRESIDENCY IN DESTROYING U.S. CONSTITUTION

By Frosty Wooldridge

July 1, 2014

NewsWithViews.com

Hundreds of E-mails overwhelmed my inbox last week after writing: “I think we are seeing a failed presidency” quoted from TV commentator Brit Hume.

“On the contrary,” said one reader. “Obama is succeeding to destroy our Constitution faster than any president in history. He lies, he fails to enforce our borders, he spies on us, he gives amnesty to anyone crossing our borders illegally, he’s dismantling our military, we’re the laughing stock of the Middle East, he landed his Obamacare onto our heads and he disregards our veterans with his fiasco with the Veteran’s Administration.”

None of the replies sounded too happy. All felt a sense of helplessness.

Let’s review how Obama destroys America faster than you can eat a Snickers candy bar.

He sealed all his records from high school, college and law school so no one can discover his grades or how he gained admission to Columbia and Harvard. We know he faired poorly in school with substandard grades, yet commanded some the most prestigious and expensive schools in the nation. While smoking a lot of dope and doing drugs in college, he somehow gathered tens of thousands of dollars to pay for tuition to those expensive schools.

We know he carries a bogus Social Security number given to a dead man long before Obama grew gain one on his own. He continues to hide its and his origins. Which means, he hides a whole lot more behind his sealed records.

Somehow, he backdated his draft card showing that he never registered in the first place. But someone covered for him just like his Social Security card number from Connecticut—a place he never visited or lived.

As president, he oversaw and covered up the entire Benghazi embassy deaths. He continues the cover-up in 2014. Only historians will expose him.

He pushed Obamacare without any idea if it would work or how long it would work. In the end, it will collapse our health care systems.

He sent the IRS after American citizens he didn’t like, which could be a 21st century witch-hunt to frighten anyone who disagrees with him.

Obama oversaw the National Security Agency turn its guns and sniping power onto American citizens.

For the record, he continues to allow tens of thousands of illegal migrant men, women and children to cross over America’s borders without challenge. The latest surge of 52,000 unaccompanied children could see another 50,000 behind them. A country without borders becomes a destination, not a country.

Obama usurps the U.S. Constitution by ignoring. Some very good experts say he could be impeached on 12 infractions against the Constitution that he committed thus far.

During his five years and six months of reign, he managed to take our country from $12 trillion in national debt to $18 trillion in national debt. He jumped food stamp receivers from 36 million to 48 million. He’s turning America into a welfare state.

Our second President Adams said, “There are two ways to conquer a country: by the sword and by debt.”

Obama must be laughing at what he’s doing to our country.

Finally, he hired eight Muslim aides to assist him with national decisions in the White House. What’s the problem? A Muslim cannot and does not abide by anything other than the Koran. The Koran and its followers do not and will not support a Constitutional Republic or any form of female rights or religious rights or human rights. He continues to import tens of thousands of Muslims into America.

He succeeded in making the United States the laughing stock of Russia, Iraq and Afghanistan.



Subscribe to NewsWithViews Daily E-Mail Alerts!





When you add up all of Obama’s successes, he’s a very successful president in destroying our country. You can only hope and pray for two years and six months to pass as quickly as possible. In the meantime, he continues with enormous power to destroy our nation from within. He’s doing a bang-up job. I’m sure Allah applauds Obama.

[Join me, Frosty Wooldridge, with Dave Chaffin, host of the Morning Zone at 650 AM, www.KGAB.com, Cheyenne, Wyoming every Monday 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m., as we discuss my latest commentaries on www.NewsWithViews.com about issues facing America. You may stream the show on your computer. You may call in at: 1-888-503-6500.]