As we wrap up California’s open enrollment period for Covered California this month, more people may soon be eligible for health care coverage in Solano County. Thanks to a unanimous decision by the County Medical Services Program (CMSP) governing board back in June, CMSP will begin to expand their eligibility criteria as early as the beginning of next year.

CMSP was established in 1983 in order to help California counties deal with their new role as health care providers for their communities. Previously, it was the job of the state to provide health care. Currently, the CMSP provides health care to residents in 35 rural counties in the state of California with populations of 300,000 or less.

Traditionally, in order to be eligible for CMSP, you must be a legal resident, between the ages of 19 to 64, making less than

200 percent of the Federal Poverty Level (FPL). For a single-person household, that translates into making about $23,540 annually, or about $48,500 annually for a family of four. In addition, a person cannot qualify for other federal health care programs, such as Medi-Cal. If one meets all of the eligibility requirements for CMSP, in most cases, there will be no cost to the patient

Since the passage of the Affordable Care Act in 2013, participation in CMSP declined significantly as more people became eligible for Medi-Cal and Covered California. This led to a $225 million surplus for CMSP. As a result of this surplus, CMSP’s governing board voted unanimously in June to expand eligibility for the program up to 300 percent FPL. This translates to roughly $35,310 annually for a single person or about $72,750 annually for a family of four and removes the requirement that participants have some type of legal status.

According to program consultant Lee Kemper in an interview with The Sacramento Bee, this policy change could increase access to potentially thousands of individuals, especially those that are undocumented.

CMSP works similarly to other health-coverage programs in that patients must stay within network or risk paying high fees. Benefits include physician services, physical therapy, emergency services, dental services, pharmaceutical services, and occupation therapy, among many others. A full list of services that are offered as well as those CMSP does not cover can be found at www.cmspcounties.org/benefits/medical_benefits_listing.html.

Programs like those offered by CMSP are important for the health of communities across the state, including the more than 2 million undocumented immigrants living in California. By broadening health care access to this population, members of our communities will be less likely to use unnecessary and costly emergency services and will have better access to lifesaving preventative care. Policy changes like those made by CMSP bring peace of mind to people who have struggled to get affordable health care. These changes can help people live longer, healthier lives, ultimately help them to positively impact their communities.

If you are interested in receiving health care coverage from CMSP, fill out an application at www.cmspcounties.org/pdf_files/forms/CMSP210-1207.pdf and mail it to Solano County Health & Social Services,

275 Beck Ave., Fairfield, CA 94533 or fax it to 553-5408. You can also visit any community health center in Solano County to help you sign up.

Naomi Movshovich is a Project Intern at the Community Clinic Consortium, a partner of Solano Coalition for Better Health.