Some of Hillary Clinton’s former aides and strategists have lobbied against Obamacare, a law she is enthusiastically embracing on the campaign trail.Daniel Acker/Bloomberg

Topline:

A GOP strategist behind the “Young Guns” phenomenon is trying his hand at a different kind of agenda-setting.

John Murray, a top aide to former House Majority Leader Eric Cantor (R-Va.) and leader of the YG Network, is heading up a new communications and public affairs arm at the lobby firm Monument Policy Group. He is advising trade groups like the International Franchise Association and American Gaming Association on long-term strategy and how to sell their message not just to lawmakers on Capitol Hill, but to the public.

Murray sees his role as more a strategist than a traditional lobbyist, and says that being part of Cantor’s staff prepared him for the juggling act of interacting with the media, other lawmakers and outside groups to form a cohesive message.

“It’s one part legislative, one part communications…how do you construct the worldview in which you’re able to bring all those pieces together in a coherent way? That’s the essence of the kind of work we’re doing now and seek to do more of,” he said.

Have more staff moves or lobbying tips? Email me at Catherine.Ho@washpost.com

Headlines

Top Hillary Clinton advisers, fundraisers lobbied against Affordable Care Act: On the campaign trail, Clinton has been lauding the Affordable Care Act as one of the greatest accomplishments of Obama’s presidency. Meanwhile, her campaign has been relying on a team of strategists and fundraisers, many of whom have spent years as consultants or lobbyists for business interests working to obstruct the health care law, reports Lee Fang in The Intercept.

Airline lobbyists and consumer advocates poised to duke it out over FAA bill: The House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee this week is expected to consider the FAA reauthorization bill, and various special interests will be pushing to include their amendments, reports Christopher Elliott in The Post. A trade group for online travel agencies and reservations systems is lobbying for a congressional commission to study the state of air competition, contenting that recent airline mergers have left consumers with only four large domestic carriers. And airlines are looking to modernize air traffic control, favoring reform over privatization.

Lobbying’s top 50: A group of 50 companies and trade groups spent a quarter of all money spent on federal advocacy in 2015, about $714 million, reports Megan Wilson in The Hill. They include Amazon, Boeing, Exxon Mobil, Blue Cross Blue Shield and Lockheed Martin. Amazon and the Grocery Manufacturers Association reported the biggest percentage increases in lobbying spending in 2015: Amazon by 91 percent and the trade group by 83 percent. Amazon declined to elaborate on its advocacy but the company has been lobbying the FAA as the agency looks to regulate drones. The Grocery Manufacturers Association has been taking more aggressive stances on the labeling of genetically modified food.

Departing lawmakers leave few clues on job prospects: Twenty-two House members have announced they will be leaving office at the end of the session, and many are now getting calls about potential jobs on K Street, reports Billy House in Bloomberg. By law, legislators must file disclosures with the House when conflicts arise as they negotiate new jobs, but government watchdog groups say there is almost no such disclosure.

Comings and goings

Lobbyist Lucy Calautti, former chief of staff for former Sen. Byron Dorgan (D-ND), has launched Dakota Strategies, a lobby firm based in Washington and Sarasota, Fla.

Frank Keating, the former governor of Oklahoma, has joined Holland & Knight. Keating was formerly the president and CEO of the American Bankers Association.

Jacqueline “Jackie” Baratian has joined Alston & Bird from Aetna, where she was vice president and chief Medicaid compliance officer.

New lobbying contracts

Dish Network has hired Heather Podesta + Partners to lobby on issues relating to satellite broadband, wireless competition and spectrum management, and video marketplace competition and merger and acquisition activity in the pay-TV industry.

Biotechnology Innovation Organization (BIO) has hired Roberti White to lobby on issues involving the Federal, Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, including legislation and regulations affecting drugs and biologics, and issues involving reimbursement for biological products under the Medicare and Medicaid programs.

Artists Rights Society has hired Sentinel Worldwide to lobby on the ART Act regarding artists’ resale royalties.

American Association for Justice has hired Waxman Strategies to lobby on issues related to protecting the ability of consumers and injured parties to bring claims and class actions.

Technology Integration Group has hired Thompson Coburn to lobby on implementation of the National Defense Authorization Act.

KIND Management Inc. has hired Glover Park Group to lobby on agriculture, nutrition and FDA issues.

Angel Capital Association has hired Eris Group to lobby on angel investment tax credits and exemptions and the HALOS Act.

Lincoln Clean Energy has hired Capitol Tax Partners to lobby on energy tax incentives.

Mobile Workforce Coalition has hired MultiState Associates Inc. to lobby on the Mobile Workforce State Tax Simplification Act of 2015.

Ziff Investors Partnership has hired Skadden to lobby on income, estate and gift tax matters.