Daryl Metcalfe: Bluntly honest boat-rocker or power-hungry zealot?

Butler County state representative, known for criticizing the left and the right, finds himself the target of anonymous website and 'robocall' attack ads.

HARRISBURG — For 15 years as a Pennsylvania lawmaker, state Rep. Daryl Metcalfe has lived and governed by four strict dictates:

•To hell with anyone who does not adhere to those beliefs or the teachings of his Reformed Baptist faith.

"What I read in Scriptures drives me in life," Metcalfe said.

In Metcalfe's view, homosexuality and gay marriage are affronts to God, mass transit is a shuttle for welfare recipients, state tax increases are anathema, and the U.S. government is so contemptible that FBI and ATF agents should be jailed for enforcing federal gun laws in Pennsylvania.

"Me being in office is not as much a job as it is a mission," Metcalfe said in a recent interview.

That self-described mission used to make this Butler County legislator a pariah in the Republican caucus room and Capitol hallways.

Not any more.

Metcalfe, 50, has been amassing power in recent years as the Legislature, like the Congress, drifts to the political right. He ran unsuccessfully for lieutenant governor in 2010, drawing tea party attention. This year, Metcalfe flexed his new-found might by publicly ripping fellow Republicans like Gov. Tom Corbett for seeking gasoline tax and fee hikes to pay for transportation upgrades, and for possibly accepting federal Affordable Care Act money for a type of Medicaid expansion.

"If I had been his lieutenant governor," Metcalfe said of Corbett, "he'd be facing me in the primary."

Blunt threats and fervent opinions. That's Metcalfe's style. But the pugnacious lawmaker with the graying buzz cut and creased jowls may have pushed his criticisms too far.

Metcalfe has been targeted by an anonymous website — therealdarylmetcalfe.com — that purports to expose him as a zealot and a spendthrift wearing a Burger King crown. The website and critical "robocalls" have targeted voters in Cranberry Township, Metcalfe's fast-growing and increasingly affluent community about 20 miles north of Pittsburgh.

The website — registered to a run-down Harrisburg apartment near the Capitol — appears to be an attack by political insiders intent on quieting him. Metcalfe has made so many enemies over the years that he doesn't know if the attacks are coming from the left or the right — and no one is claiming credit.

The website calls press-savvy Metcalfe, who in 2008 publicly renounced an unsolicited award from a Ku Klux Klan group, a hate-filled, egotistical politician. It takes him to task for collecting an $83,802 annual salary and charging taxpayers $230,906 for his legally entitled "per diems" — meals and other job-related expenses — since 2010.

"We see a lot of questionable per diems on days when Daryl was supposedly in Harrisburg on 'committee business,' but was also conveniently speaking at press events at the same time, whether it was to bash gays, immigrants, gay immigrants, organized labor, or stand up for your right to own a howitzer," the website states.