By Chris Butler

Kentucky’s new tea party-backed governor has not yet addressed the pending creation of a $350 million statewide municipal broadband project that many tea party supporters — as well as private Internet service providers — want killed. But a spokesperson says he might soon.

Republican Gov. Matt Bevin took the oath of office last month and has spent most of his time since then appointing cabinet members and writing a state budget, said Jim Waters, president of the Bluegrass Institute.

Bevin’s representatives have so far declined to comment on KentuckyWired, and spokeswoman Jessica Ditto had no immediate answers for Watchdog.org this week.

“Our folks are carefully evaluating everything, and the earliest I will be able to give public comment is later next week,” Ditto said in an email.

Bevin ran on a platform of reducing the size of government and has pledged to dismantle the state’s health insurance exchange under Obamacare — although he has said friendlier things about the health law’s Medicaid expansion, to the dismay of some conservatives.

They’re expecting more on state-owned broadband.

“I’ve talked with many folks in Kentucky’s tea party movement who see KentuckyWired for what it is,” Waters said. “It’s a big government boondoggle. The tea party folks definitely oppose this whole idea and understand this is something the private sector should do — not government.”

Related: New government broadband could put Kentucky taxpayers at risk

Members of the state’s Kentucky Telecom Association are patrolling the halls of the Capitol in Frankfort, warning legislators that KentuckyWired will cost their industry $26 million a year in lost state contracts, according to the group’s president, Tyler Campbell.

“I am unaware of what Gov. Bevin’s specific position on the KentuckyWired project is,” Campbell said, adding his organization is trying to set up meetings to discuss the matter with members of Bevin’s cabinet. “We are still in the process of coordinating that meeting.”

Former Democratic Gov. Steve Beshear signed KentuckyWired into law last fall. Construction hasn’t started yet.

KentuckyWired will cost federal taxpayers $20 million and state residents another $30 million. On top of that, $300 million in bond money— $230 million in tax exempt senior revenue bonds and $57 million of taxable senior revenue bonds — will pay for the rest, according to Moody’s. The Australian-based Macquarie Group will design, develop and operate Kentucky Wired for 30 years. The commonwealth will own the network and will provide at least 1,100 government facilities in the state with broadband service.

State officials have not said what Macquarie would get in return for its services, and company officials declined to speak on the record. But it’s not hard to figure out that Macquarie will benefit financially, Campbell said.

State officials contend that KentuckyWired won’t directly compete with private Internet service providers for broadband customers.

But Kentucky Telecom’s Campbell said that in some areas of the state, “this is just a pure duplication of the excess fiber capacity that we already have.”