'A burden we can take up for them'

More than 100 people gathered at Boulder's Glen Huntington Bandshell for a Saturday morning memorial service for more than 20 homeless people who have died in Boulder during the past year.

Ceremony participants and onlookers included homeless-issues activists and volunteers and staffers of community organizations working with the homeless — as well as a number who said they formerly were,, or currently are, without homes of their own.

"People matter," said Dee Dee Sease, a member of the staff of The Bridge House, the agency that sponsored what's become an annual memorial event.

"Just because they're homeless doesn't mean they're not human," said Sease, who along with her husband, Eric, was homeless when she moved to Boulder in 2011, got a job and housing with the assistance of the Bridge House where she now works.

During Saturday's memorial service, Sease read aloud the names of 24 homeless people who died in Boulder during the past 12 months, including eight who died outdoors.

Also recognized was Gene Culbertson, the founder of the START Homeless Day Resource Center in Boulder, who died in August.

Several homeless people stepped forward to share anecdotes about the departed and comments about the situations that they and others have found themselves in.

Richard "Popeye" Vincent, who said he's been homeless for four years but has found that "there are a lot of caring people out there," encouraged the memorial attendees: "If you can help a brother or sister out," such as by providing at least temporary shelter from the elements as winter temperatures dip below freezing levels, "please do so."

Leroy Fariasc, who said he's been homeless for 15 years but was attending his first memorial service for those who died, said that "I knew many of them" but that he was there particularly for one, Cynthia Rouilard, because she and Fariasc had been engaged to be married before she was stricken with a fatal bout of pneumonia.

Isabel McDevitt, Bridge House's executive director, said she didn't look on Saturday's remembrance of the 24 deceased Boulder homeless persons "as a closing.

"I look at this at a beginning," McDevitt said, with the resolve "that we don't want to be here in 2015" to mark the passings of dozens more homeless persons.

The Rev. Roger Wolsey, who directs the Wesley Foundation at the University of Colorado at Boulder, said that some say that "homeless people are scary and dangerous," but "it seems to me that being homeless is what's scary and dangerous."

The leading cause of homelessness, Wolsey said, is a lack of affordable housing, but "we can step forward and make that happen."

Said Pastor Daniel Rutty of the Reverence Movement: "Many of us here today are not homeless," but homelessness "is a burden we can take up for them."

Rutty thanked the volunteers and organizations represented at Saturday's memorial service "for taking a piece of that cross" upon themselves.

The city of Boulder's Human Relations Commission was another sponsor of the service, and City Council member Lisa Morzel read a proclamation, declaring Saturday to be National Homeless Person Memorial Day in Boulder.

"We wish peace for their souls in eternity," Morzel said, adding that the holiday season offers and opportunity to affirm and renew commitments to end homelessness.

Homeless advocate Joy Redstone said that while "not all deaths are preventable," more can be done to save at least some people's lives. She urged the service-goers to help the community "find the compassion and the commitment to bring year-round shelter to Boulder."

At the conclusion of the hour-long service, Redstone said: "I can't help but hope that we're not here next year."

John Fryar: 303-684-5211, jfryar@times-call.com or twitter.com/jfryartc