Hillary Clinton Hillary Rodham ClintonWhy superdelegates shouldn't support Sanders Young Turks host offers million for Trump, Sanders debate An all-female ticket? Not in 2016 MORE on Tuesday said pending cybersecurity legislation in Congress does not go far enough to increase coordination between the government and the private sector.

Clinton — the frontrunner for the Democratic presidential nomination — called recent online hacks of private business and the U.S. government's Office of Personnel Management "a serious threat."

ADVERTISEMENT

"It is a serious threat to our commercial interests, to our intelligence interests, to our strategic interests," she told reporters in Iowa during a rare question-and-answer session. "We have been trying to get a good plan going forward. We are making a little bit of progress on that in the Congress. It's, for me, not enough. It doesn't go far enough to try to have better coordination between the public and the private sector."

She did not elaborate on ideas to strengthen legislation working its way through Congress.

Clinton recently said China is "trying to hack into everything." On Tuesday, she also accused Russia, North Korea and Iran of either directly or indirectly sponsoring hacking. She warned of terrorists acquiring the capability as well.

In response to the recent hack of millions of records in the OPM, Clinton suggested the government's cumbersome procurement policies could be at fault.

"And we need to accelerate our efforts to protect government information," she said. "And by that I mean that we have very cumbersome procurement and bureaucratic obstacles within the federal government to moving us into the 21st century."

She said many of those obstacles were seen with the shaky rollout of HealthCare.gov.

"Because trying to get a contract, trying to work within the constraints of the government — the Congress and the executive branch must work together to clear the way for the use of the best technology we can both to store and collect as well as protect our information," she said.