"The court expresses no view on the merits of the cases.” So said the United States Supreme Court as it unanimously sent a group of cases challenging the Affordable Care Act’s contraception mandate back to the lower courts. The practical outcome of that decision may prove to be a boon to religious liberty, but a Supreme Court with only eight justices has the potential to create a great deal of problems going forward.

The death of Justice Antonin Scalia, who was perhaps the most conservative justice at the time of his passing, has left the High Court with four Republican appointees and four Democratic appointees. Ideologically, the court is split down the middle and therefore unable to break a number of judicial stalemates, such as a recent organized-labor case where a lower court decision forces all California teachers to pay union dues. The result is a situation where such deadlocks are making the Supreme Court increasingly unable to adequately fulfill its constitutional responsibilities.

This is no accident. Republicans in Congress have made no secret of their desire to delay filling the court vacancy until a new president is elected. While the rationale for doing so is hotly debated, in practical terms, there’s an awful lot of uncertainty inherent to that approach.

Donald Trump, the presumptive GOP presidential nominee, recently released a list of possible judicial appointments that is being praised in conservative circles, but Trump’s mercurial nature raises legitimate doubts about how seriously he takes this responsibility. In addition, even reliably conservative presidents have nominated justices whose record on the court is not ideologically consistent with that of the president who nominated them. There’s no guarantee that a justice nominated after the 2016 vote would render opinions any more acceptable to Republican congressional leaders than Merrick Garland, President Obama’s nominee that Republicans refuse to even consider.

But there is a principle at stake here that transcends partisan politics. The legislative, executive, and judicial branches of the federal government were intended to provide a system of checks and balances, so it’s more than a little unsettling to see one branch of government so contemptuous of another that they’re willing to effectively sideline the judiciary for an entire year. Surely Congress has a responsibility to at least give the president’s nominee a fair hearing. The Supreme Court may not always issue decisions with which Congress, republicans, or even this newspaper will agree, but the court's constitutional authority deserves more respect than it is currently being afforded.