School Calls Strip Search Of 15 Year Old Girl “Respectful”

Children’s advocacy groups are outraged about the molestation that occurred, as well as the reaction from officials in the school system.

(ANTIMEDIA) After being suspected of possessing and selling drugs, a 15-year-old girl in Quebec, Canada was strip-searched by school officials at the Neufchâtel High School. There was nothing illegal found during the search, but the girl was absolutely traumatized by the incident.

The school is entirely unapologetic, and insists that the procedure was done “respectfully,” as if you could possibly force someone to remove their clothes against their will in a respectful manner.

Quebec Education Minister Yves Bolduc made a statement defending the school this week. Bolduc said that it is perfectly fine to strip search students if they are suspected of holding drugs, so long as the procedure is done respectfully and “by the book.”



official MintPress sponsor official MintPress sponsor

“It is permitted to do strip searches, on one condition: it must be very respectful. There are reasons for which we can be obliged to conduct searches. What’s important is that we respect the law and respect the framework that was put in place (for searching students) and respect the person,” Bolduc said in a statement this week.

However, children’s advocacy groups are outraged about the molestation that occurred, as well as the reaction from officials in the school system.

“It was completely, completely wrong to say that it’s OK to force a teenager to get nude just because the principal thinks that maybe she has some drugs on her. And I would have thought that the minister would stop this and say it’s wrong. But no, no, he said it’s good and there’s no problem with this,” Jean-François Roberge of The Coalition Avenir said.

John Vibes is an author, researcher and investigative journalist who takes a special interest in the counter culture and the drug war. In addition to his writing and activist work he is also the owner of a successful music promotion company. In 2013, he became one of the organizers of the Free Your Mind Conference, which features top caliber speakers and whistle-blowers from all over the world. You can contact him and stay connected to his work at his Facebook page. You can find his 65 chapter Book entitled “Alchemy of the Timeless Renaissance” at bookpatch.com.

This article (School Calls Strip Search of 15 Year Old Girl “Respectful”) is free and open source. You have permission to republish this article under a Creative Commons license with attribution to the author and TheAntiMedia.org.