Rick Palacio beat back a challenge from campaign consultant Dave Sabados to win a third term as Colorado Democratic Party chairman in a race that attracted national attention.

Palacio won after one round of balloting during the Democrats’ reorganizational meeting Saturday at the downtown Denver Marriott. With 468 Democrats voting, Palacio received 248 votes to Sabados’ 182 votes. Former congressional candidate Vic Meyers received 38 votes. In other words, Palacio received 53 percent of the vote, Sabados 39 percent and Meyers 8 percent.

There was plenty of talk afterward about uniting to win in 2016.

“I look forward to leading a united and forward looking Democratic Party and vow to work with Democrats in all corners of our state as we reelect Sen. Michael Bennet and regain our majority in the state Senate,” Palacio said.

“I’m proud of moving the conversation forward and giving a voice to many activists who have felt ignored,” Sabados said. “These conversations are healthy for the party and have helped us take a serious look at what needs to be done for 2015 and 2016. I believe our party will have a renewed focus on building county party infrastructure and working with local candidates.”

The race received national attention after Palacio announced Thursday night that the make-up of the committee that was going to do the voting did not meet party requirements for gender equality and he needed to appoint 46 more men. Sabados accused him of trying to stack the deck, but Palacio pointed out the rule has been in place since the 1970s. He also appointed Sabados and Meyers to the committee.

“I also hope we will reform party rules that have been ambiguous so we can more forward and focus on winning elections again,” Sabados said Sunday.

Republicans, who have their own testy race for party chair, were delighted to see the other guys in the news for once. Their election is March 14.

@AlanSalazarCO I'm just glad you guys are the ones fighting for once. :) @lynn_bartels @RickPalacio — Kelly Maher (@okmaher) February 28, 2015

Palacio acknowledged his opponents during the party’s annual Jefferson Jackson dinner later that Saturday, which featured awards, a keynote speech from U.S. Al Franken of Minnesota and plenty of lawmakers, lobbyists, Denver City Council candidates and other elected officials.