Brazil’s Marta (C) in action against against Young Boys goalkeeper Paolo Collaviti (L) and Young Boys Stephane Chapuisat (back) during a charity soccer match between BSC Young Boys and Friends and Ronaldo, Zidane and Friends at Stade de Suisse in Bern, Switzerland on March 4. European Pressphoto Agency

MANILA, the Philippines—An annual charity football match held in Switzerland has raised $190,000 to help survivors of Typhoon Haiyan, the deadliest storm ever to ravage the Philippines.

Now in its 11th year, the Match Against Poverty, which is supported by the United Nations Development Program, or UNDP, raises funds to support development projects around the world. This year, the U.N. body said 80% of the proceeds from ticket sales, broadcast rights, and event sponsorship would go toward supporting livelihood and community development projects for the survivors of Haiyan, which ripped through the central Philippines last November.

Held March 4 in Bern, the match pitted a team of football, superstars – including Zinadine Zidane of France and Brazil’s Ronaldo Luis Nazario de Lima, more popularly known as Ronaldo – against the Bern professional club, BSC Young Boys and Friends. The sporting event drew 21,000 fans.

The match ended 8-6 in favor of the UNDP team, which also included football legends Luís Figo of Portugal, Fernando Hierro of Spain, Paolo Maldini of Italy, and Marta Vieira da Silva, a UNDP Goodwill Ambassador and five-time FIFA women’s World Player.

“We are proud that UNDP’s 11th Match Against Poverty provided an opportunity for the public to support the affected Filipino communities and help them rebuild their lives after the devastation caused by Haiyan,” Maurice Dewulf, UNDP country director for the Philippines, said in a statement announcing the result of the fund-raising football game.

The Match Against Poverty also received a donation of $24,000 from Japanese company Sony and is supported by FIFA and the Union of European Football Associations, or UEFA.

Ten other matches were held prior to the Bern game. They were played in Basel, Madrid, Düsseldorf, Marseille, Málaga, Lisbon, Fez, Athens, Hamburg and Porto Alegre.

In past years proceeds from the charity matches have contributed to efforts to ease poverty in 29 developing countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America, according to the UNDP.