Maybe you too have been up since 5:22 (or thereabouts), when the cold front blew through Dallas riding loud gusts of 45 miles per hour. If not, you’ll certainly take note of the front’s arrival upon stepping outside this morning: It’s chilly and only going to get colder as the day wears on, with our first freeze of the fall expected tonight — and right on time too.

“Funny how that works out sometimes,” says meteorologist Ted Ryan in the National Weather Service’s Fort Worth office. The NWS has issued a freeze warning for tonight, so act appropriately with this list of cold-weather refreshments, including a new-found favorite, the Earl Grey Hot Toddy.

Those of us with outdoor plans today have 25-35 mph winds to look forward to, with wind chills approaching the 30s. And this is why God invented the Stanley Growler. “They’ll slowly diminish during the afternoon hours,” says Ryan, “but won’t come down till sunset.”

At one point this morning, Oncor reported around 4,000 outages in Dallas-Fort Worth. By 7:15 it had dropped to around 2,500, with repairs guesstimated to be wrapped by 9:30 (but you know how that goes …)

Tomorrow it’ll just be cool — lower 50s, followed by another round of lower 30s. Says Ryan, “Looks like this is the end of the growing season,” though, clearly, that depends on what you’re growing and where.

It’s worth nothing: Our freeze might be right on time, but the 30s are late — mighty late, looking at this chart:

“We really haven’t been cold yet,” says Ryan. “This is out first real shot of winter.”

And it’ll stick around till, oh, Tuesday, when we’re back around 60. And on Thursday it’ll be more spring than fall, with highs in the upper 60s and a pretty decent shot at daylong rain. But come Thursday night and Friday morning and all through next weekend, winter will return — like, actual winter. A former ball-playing TV weatherman even told the viewing audience last night that one model shows snow on the horizon for next weekend. But Ryan says to tap those breaks.

“You get out in that extended range, and five to 10 degrees makes a huge difference in the forecast models,” he says. “But this far out, and at this time of the year, don’t expect the models to accurate. But it will definitely be cold Friday through Sunday of next week. It’ll definitely feel like Christmas is around the corner. But anybody who wants to stand out in line for those Black Friday deals, the weather’s not looking so great — cold and rain.”