Judge Judy won’t rule on House Speaker John Boehner’s lawsuit against President Obama.

The tough-talking TV judiciary told Politico she had no comment, after Sen. Harry Reid blasted Boehner’s suit as something not even worthy of her time.

“This is a phony trial that will come up. It’s a show trial. It’s what Republicans want. I guess that’s what they want, but if that’s really what they want, they should go talk to Judge Judy,” he said Monday on the Senate floor.

“I think she would throw this case out in a half a second. The United States Congress is no place for inane, politically motivated litigation. I think Judge Judy would agree.”

But she won't say if she does agree.

Who me? Judge Judy won’t comment on Sen. Reid’s claim that the TV judge would throw out House Speaker Boehner’s lawsuit against Obama. (CBS)

Boehner (R-Ohio) has said he will sue the President, challenging Obama’s executive action in delaying the employer mandate in the Affordable Care Act.

Reid dragged the TV judge into the debate, even though it’s not clear where she falls on the political spectrum.

She doesn’t flaunt her political stripes and there is no record of political contributions under her name, Judge Judith Sheindlin.

The tough-as-nails judge did admit in 2013 that she has been let down after having “high hopes” when Obama was elected.

Some love from the bench. Obama looked cozy with Judith Sheindlin, host of 'Judge Judy,' at a gala dinner in Los Angeles in May. (BRENDAN SMIALOWSKI/AFP/Getty Images)

“Things of late haven’t been going so well”, she said in a Larry King interview, complaining of “mediocre politicians … people I wouldn’t let do mundane things in my house. Somehow they get elected to higher office.”

But this May she was spotted getting friendly with Obama at a USC Shoah Foundation dinner in Los Angeles

“Who doesn’t love ‘Judge Judy’?” the President said about the infamous lady of the bench at the fundraising gala, according to The New York Times.

The White House previously expressed it was “disappointing” that Boehner was proceeding with plans to file suit, calling it a “waste time and taxpayer dollars on a political stunt.”

“Republican leaders in Congress are playing Washington politics rather than working with the President on behalf of hardworking Americans. As the President said today, he is doing his job — lawsuit or not — and it’s time Republicans in Congress did theirs.”