March 15, 2014 at 9:51 AM

Weather: In the 50s, and a little rainy. National Weather Service forecast.

Legal haze for medical pot: The list is long of what lawmakers in Olympia didn’t do this session. On the list? The Legislature failed to agree on regulations for medical marijuana, and Westerrn Washington’s federal prosecutor now says all dispensaries are illegal and violators could be prosecuted according to priorities outlined by the Justice Department. Read reporter Bob Young’s account of what officials say may be next.

“Jonathan Livingston Seagull” author on the mend: Recuperating from the severe injuries he suffered in a 2012 plane crash, author Richard Bach has returned to his two great passions: writing and flying his beloved seaplane, Puff. As reporter Jennifer Sullivan writes, “From the moment he awoke from a coma at Seattle’s Harborview Medical Center, Bach was insistent on resuming his life on Orcas — a life of writing, flying and stretches of solitude.”

Health-insurance signups in Seattle, Des Moines: The Urban League of Metropolitan Seattle co-hosting a health-insurance signup at the Miller Community Center. The event, which allows people to sign up or just learn more about the plans on the state’s online marketplace, Washington Healthplanfinder, will run from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. at the community center, 330 19th Ave. E., in Seattle. A similar signup is being held today n Des Moines, on the Highline Community College campus, also from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. Read more about what you’ll need to bring if you go. Under the Affordable Care Act, March 31 is the deadline for getting coverage and to avoid penalties for being uninsured.

Sounders play at home: Sounders FC’s match at CenturyLink Field against Toronto features U.S. Soccer stars Clint Dempsey and Michael Bradley. Reporter Joshua Mayers previews the 1:30 p.m. match and explains why these soccer titans matter to the league as a whole. Says Sounders coach Sigi Schmid: “… years down the line people are going to look back on 2013 with Clint’s return and 2014 with Bradley coming back as maybe a time-point when the league changed a little bit in its direction.” The game will air here on Channel 13 and nationally on NBC Sports Network. Stations from Canada, France and England will also broadcast the game.

Most-read stories on seattletimes.com:

Memo light:

See more Comics & Games

//