Nearly 1 million New Yorkers are without health insurance, a new analysis by city Controller Scott Stringer found.

Despite a push to get more people enrolled under Obamacare, there are still 962,805 uninsured city residents — 11.4% of the population, according to 2014 census data.

That’s down from 14.8% in 2010 — but the number remains much higher in heavily immigrant neighborhoods.

“When you have a million people without health insurance in a city as large as New York, I think there are real consequences both for the city and families,” Stringer said.

The worst rate in the city is in Sunnyside and Woodside in Queens, where 22.5% of people don’t have health care coverage.

That’s followed by the Queens neighborhoods of Jackson Heights and Elmhurst and Corona, and Bushwick in Brooklyn, where at least 22% of the residents lack insurance.

Many legal immigrants don’t have coverage because they don’t have information about signing up or don’t realize they quality, while undocumented immigrants are ineligible for most plans under the federal law. In Sunnyside and Woodside, where insurance stats are the worst, 57% of the population is foreign-born.

In addition, some young people have opted not to pay for insurance they don’t think they need.

“These are populations that we have to do a better job of breaking through to,” Stringer said. “Young people haven’t really had an opportunity to think about the consequences of health care, so signing up is perhaps not one of their priorities. And we have to get to our immigrant population.”

The lowest uninsured rates in the city are found in the Upper East and Upper West Sides, where 4% lack coverage, and in Tottenville in Staten Island, where the number is 4.5%.

Health insurance plans under Obamacare opened for enrollment at the beginning of this month, and the enrollment period lasts through the end of January.

Claudia Calhoon, director of health advocacy at the New York Immigration Coalition, said some in immigrant neighborhoods haven’t received information on how to sign up, while others can’t afford the premiums they have to pay for the plans they qualify for.

“The information continues not to reach some of these immigrant communities,” she said. “Affordability is a huge issue.”