4647338

Netroots Nation, the annual conference of ultra-left-wing activists, had two Democratic Party presidential candidates in attendance at their event in Phoenix, Ariz., this year… And shouted them both off stage.

Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders and former Maryland Gov. Martin O’Malley participated separately in a candidate discussion moderated by journalist and illegal alien Jose Antonio Vargas. Both speakers were interrupted by shouting protesters from the #BlackLivesMatter movement and were unable to continue.

O’Malley was being interrupted by protesters and, after pleas from the stage and event organizers, was allowed to continue. He went on to say, “I know, I know…Let me talk a little bit…Black lives matter, white lives matter, all lives matter,” which the crowd did not appreciate. The chants and boos got louder and the candidate left the stage.

O'Malley gaffes with this crowd: "Black lives matter, white lives matter, all lives matter." Huge groans and boos. #NN15 — daveweigel (@daveweigel) July 18, 2015

O'Malley just said #AllLivesMatter which means he just doesn't get it. #NN15 — Emily Epstein White (@EmEps) July 18, 2015

O'Malley time on stage has basically been shut down by #blacklivesmatter demonstrators at #nn15 pic.twitter.com/3B5jLHQ1kr — Chris Moody (@moody) July 18, 2015

Lol Martin OMalley disrupted by protesters chanting "what side are you on" #nn15 https://t.co/a3BsiyPgfc — el Sooper ن (@SooperMexican) July 18, 2015

Next came Bernie Sanders, a self-described socialist and favorite of the far left. It did not start well and went downhill from there.

Sanders, a long-time advocate against “income inequality,” attempted to make opening remarks on the subject, but was shouted down by the same protesters. He replied, “Black lives of course matter. But I have spent 50 years of my life fighting for civil rights and if you don’t want me to be here, that’s OK. I will answer your question but I’d like to speak for a couple of minutes, I was told…”

Never able to speak for any amount of time, Sanders soon left the stage long before his discussion was scheduled to end.

This Sanders/#NN15 event is a fascinating clash between social democratic class politics and new left identity politics. — daveweigel (@daveweigel) July 18, 2015

Bernie Sanders refusing to address white supremacy. Where's the courage? #nn15 — Hairo Cortes (@HCortes96) July 18, 2015

Bernie Sanders tries out some "immigrants hurt our jobs" rhetoric at #nn15, and then he gets booed loudly. That's nice to hear. — Barry Deutsch (@barrydeutsch) July 18, 2015

Bernie Sanders touts Obamacare at #nn15. People shout, "We can't afford that!" — Chris Moody (@moody) July 18, 2015

Hillary Clinton, who appeared at the conference the last time she ran for president in 2007, skipped the event.