The Rev. Samuel Rodriguez, president of the National Hispanic Christian Leadership Conference, recently offered up a passionate rebuke of politicians who defend Planned Parenthood, explaining why he believes Christian voters must not support these individuals.

In fact, Rodriguez, author of the new book ”Be Light,” called it “morally reprehensible” for Bible-believers to stand behind candidates who openly defend the controversial women’s health care organization.

“I want to speak to every single African American, Latino, and Ango Christ follower who believes in biblical orthodoxy — how can we justify supporting anything — be it Republican or Democrat — that in any way, form or shape defends Planned Parenthood?” Rodriguez told The Church Boys podcast. “How can we justify supporting any political candidate that defends Planned Parenthood?”

And he wasn’t done there. The preacher went on to call such a prospect “morally reprehensible,” saying that it is a “contradiction to our commitment to Christ and scripture.”

“Any Christian who would support a candidate who defends Planned Parenthood really needs to seek scripture,” he continued. “You need to repent, because there’s culpability in what takes place in this nation as it pertains to the abortion industry if you dare support a candidate who supports Planned Parenthood.”

Listen to these comments below:

Rodriguez, who is known for routinely and passionately addressing social and political issues like immigration and the death penalty, explained that the pro-life position is incredibly important in his life and ministry.

“I am so pro-life that it permeates everything I do,” he said.

With that in mind, Rodriguez also spoke out against the stances of candidates like Democratic presidential contender Bernie Sanders, who recently said that he supports no restrictions on abortion.

“I get scared when people say there should be no limits — you’re kidding me,” Rodriguez said. “You’re about to kill a human being who’s about to come out of the womb. I can’t justify it. It makes absolutely no sense.”

In an earlier portion of the interview, which was previously published to TheBlaze, Rodriguez candidly attributed Donald Trump’s rise to become the presumptive GOP presidential nominee as a mass reaction to the cultural dynamic that has been at play over the past eight years — one that has been characterized by what he described as a “hesitant angst building up.”

Listen to Rodriguez at the 57:00-minute mark below:

“The consequence of the earthquake is Donald Trump,” he said, noting that societal reverberations have resulted from frustration over big government, impediments to religious liberty and political correctness “on steroids.” ”It’s an interesting thing, because it’s Christian populism.”

Rodriguez continued, further describing the cultural changes that have unfolded, “In a matter of 7 and a half years, America has been redefined culturally, morally — in so many ways even economically [with] this thing called Obamacare.”

–

Follow the author of this story on Twitter and Facebook and check out his new book “The Armageddon Code: One Journalist’s Quest for End-Times Answers”:

Follow @BillyHallowell