From left, art students Lia Stango and Lauren Springstead, and teachers Melissa Penna and Joseph. Begonia (Photo: COURTESY SOUTHERN REGIONAL SCHOOLS)

The High School and Middle School FCCLA (Family, Career and Community Leaders of America) chapter recently traveled to Cherry Hill to participate in the Spring Leadership Conference with over 750 students from districts throughout New Jersey. During the conference, students had the opportunity to compete with their individual projects as well as attend a variety of conference workshops focused on developing leadership skills.

High School Advisor Julie Yonney-Kriebel, announced the awards at the high school level. Gold Medals were awarded to Danielle Ardolina (Career Investigations), Anna Kitzler (Toys That Teach) and two gold medals for Amanda D’Agostino (Luncheon Menu Wrap and Storybook Ethics).

Silver Medals were awarded to Kelsey Jacobson (Focus on Children), Devan Kraft (Fashion Construction) and Michelle Curley (Luncheon Menu Wrap).

Bronze medals were awarded to Devan Kraft (Fashion Construction) and Gianna Intile (Windows of Fashion). Two of these students, Danielle Ardolina and Kelsey Jacobson will be competing at the National competition in July.

Middle School Advisor Susan Stinson, announced the awards her students received. A silver medal was awarded to Shay’la Duca (Fashion Construction - Business Attire). Bronze medals were awarded to Arielle Rosko (Cake Decorating Junior Division), Alexis Rosko (Luncheon Menu Junior Division) and Chelsea Olender (Fashion Construction – Eveningwear).

High school art show opens with induction into National Art Honor Society

The Southern Regional High School Art Department, under the direction of teachers Joseph Begonia and Melissa Penna, premiered their annual art show at the Long Beach Island Foundation of the Arts and Sciences in Loveladies on April 15. Senior students Lauren Springstead and Lia Stango opened the show and led the induction of 22 students into the Southern Regional High School Art Honor Society.

The evening marked the grand opening of the new exhibit, featuring a sampling of student art work representing all the different art courses offered at Southern.

The pieces will remain on display at the Foundation until April 30.

Seniors are

off to Florida

The Class of 2015 Senior Class Trip is a highlight of the year for the class. Advisors Jennifer Abbato and Michael Jinks have organized the trip for 322 students and 22 chaperones. They will spend four days in Disney World. The class leaves after school today and will return on Monday.

Senior athlete signs with Drexel U.

Southern Regional High School senior athlete Mary Conroy signed her letter of commitment to Drexel University to continue her education and Field Hockey career. Mary plans on majoring in Nursing.

Varsity Boys’ Volleyball Team wins tournament

Southern Regional High School Boys’ Volleyball won the 2015 Hillsborough Raider Invitational Tournament. The Rams defeated East Brunswick in the Finals under Coach Eric Maxwell. Junior athlete Liam Maxwell was named Tournament MVP..

Freshman Boys Volleyball Team wins tournament

The Southern Regional High School Freshman Boys’ Volleyball Freshmen Team won the Bloomfield Invitational Tournament. It is the second consecutive year that the Rams Freshman team has won the tournament under Coach Paul Lovas.

Boys Baseball Team wins in fundraiser game

The Southern Regional High School Baseball Team defeated Mater Dei 12-5 in the POAC "Strike Out Autism" game at Central Regional. Senior pitcher Zach Mason was named Game MVP. Great win for the Rams but more importantly the team played for a great cause. All money raised from the event was donated to the “Strike Out Autism” cause.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1yX5hx5