(Photo: WKRN)

NASHVILLE, Tenn. (WKRN) – The hundreds of thousands of Tennesseans without health care were the focus late Tuesday of a task force set up by House Speaker Beth Harwell.

It has an ambitious schedule with a June deadline to come up with something.

“We are going in with the best intentions. We obviously know there is a need for this, but June is going to be very early,” said Rep. Roger Kane (R), who is a member of the task force.

In a cramped Capitol Hill conference room, it was the first meeting of Speaker Harwell’s health care task force.

Members listened to top officials from Tennessee’s Medicaid program TennCare outline the estimated two-to-four hundred low-income Tennesseans who fall into what’s called the coverage gap, those who for a variety of reasons don’t have medical insurance and those who would have been helped by Governor Bill Haslam’s failed Insure Tennessee program last year.

“We have a lot of uninsured, and if you look at the overall Affordable Care Act, this was the other part that was supposed to make this seamless,” said Rep. Karen Kamper (D).

When suddenly announced two weeks ago, Speaker Harwell cited gradually fazed in pilot health care programs with triggers to stop if they cost too much.

Cost with too many people on such programs was often a concern of the four republicans on the five person task force.

“What can we do to insure that as we move forward that we don’t run into those kind of issues,” said Rep Matthew Hill (R).

A state senator not on the committee who is also a physician spoke of another kind of cost–federal money from Obamacare ready to be used for a program the task force might come up with that currently is left on the table.

“It’s money that was taken from Tennesseans by the reduction in the Medicare payments, looking at ways to responsibly get that money back. It’s about 1.1 to 1.3 billion a year,” said Dr. Richard Briggs, a Republican State Senator.

It’s a high stakes matter here. A lot of people without healthcare in Tennessee and this small group faces a very large task in doing something about it.

The task force is scheduled to meet again Wednesday morning with a target date of reporting back with plan by mid-June.