WASHINGTON - State Rep. Alan Seabaugh, R-Shreveport, has decided not to run for the U.S. Senate in 2014 and instead will back U.S. Rep. Bill Cassidy, R-Baton Rouge.

In a statement Sunday, Seabaugh said Cassidy, in both his tenure in the Louisiana State Senate and the House of Representatives, has been "if not quite a staunch hard-line conservative, at least a solid Republican vote."

"In recent weeks, Bill Cassidy has proven something to me and fellow conservatives," Seabaugh said. "He stood with those of us who care about the future of this country by not giving in to President Obama and the liberal big spenders in Congress. This particular stand was important to me, as a conservative."

He was referring to Cassidy's decision to support fellow House Republicans who demanded delays, or defunding of the Affordable Care Act as part of a spending deal. It precipitated a 16-day partial government shutdown last month.

Later, Cassidy voted against a spending measure negotiated by Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev., and Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., which won enough GOP votes to pass and end the shutdown without Obama administration concessions on the Affordable Care Act.

Seabaugh called on Louisiana Republicans to unite behind Cassidy and his effort to unseat three-term incumbent, Democrat Mary Landrieu.

Seabaugh said he received a lot of encouragement to run, but decided that "another Republican entering the race "would serve only to divide Republicans and conservatives" when the goal should be "working together" to defeat Sen. Landrieu.

Despite Seabaugh's move, Cassidy still has GOP competition. Rob Maness, an Entergy official and former Air Force colonel, has won the endorsement of the Senate Conservatives Fund, which contends Cassidy isn't conservative enough. It is helping raise money for his under-dog campaign.





The Senate Conservatives Fund is a super PAC that raises money for conservative candidates. It has become known for supporting candidates challenging incumbent GOP senators in primaries, as well as candidates running against Republicans like Cassidy who are favored by the party establishment.

But Seabaugh, had he run, would have been a more formidable fund-raiser than Maness because he's already well known among Louisiana conservatives.