Buy Photo Nikhilesh (right) and Anvitha Satish, of Fishers, celebrate Father’s Day 2012. (Photo: Chet Strange/The Star File Photo)Buy Photo

My son was troubled.

“I’ve been thinking a lot about you dying,” he told me. “I don’t like doing that.”

It was a bad time. The father of one of his friends — a guy he’d been playing ball with for years — just had died of a heart attack. The father of another friend, another teammate, was in the middle of a successful battle with cancer.

Both men were younger than I am.

It also was one of those transition times in the father-child relationship.

When they were young, my children thought of their father as indestructible, someone who made them feel safe even when they confronted things new and strange. They loved to cling to my neck and rest on my shoulder blades when we were in a pool or a lake as I swam breaststroke. They called it “riding the bus.”

One rainy day when my daughter was maybe a year old, I sat with her under the overhang of our porch as we watched a storm roll in. I held her on my lap and saw her eyes widen as the thunder cracked and the lightning blazed. She settled back against my chest and watched, fascinated, as havoc danced across the sky.

Another time, when we all had traveled to California for a wedding, I hiked with my son, who was maybe 2 at the time, to a bluff overlooking the Pacific Ocean. Part of the way I carried him on my shoulders — “riding up high,” my children called it — and part of the way we walked hand-in-hand.

As we stood at the lip of the bluff, he watched, transfixed, as the waves rolled in. He stared out at the ocean’s vast expanse and the distant spot where sky and water seem to become one.

“Big. Big. Big,” he said.

Time flows, though, just like water.

Children grow. And their parents grow older.

My son loves baseball. When he first discovered his passion for the game, I would throw pitch after pitch to him and applaud every time he hit the ball with a clean thwack.

Now, though, he throws harder than I do — and I can’t pitch hard enough to make the practice worthwhile for him. When we play catch, he knows my arm will tire a good two to three hours before his does.

Last summer, I went with my daughter on a trip to Spain. She speaks Spanish. I don’t.

While we were there, she discovered there are things she knows that her father does not. That there were problems she could solve that I could not. That there were times when she had to lead and her father had to defer.

To her.

The cliché about fatherhood is that Dad is always supposed to be this strong, all-knowing figure — “Father Knows Best” and all that.

The reality is something different. The responsibilities of being a father shift over time.

We fathers start out trying to show our children life’s possibilities and make them feel secure enough to explore them. We hold them tight as the lightning dances and the waves pound the shore.

As our children grow and we grow older, we end up teaching them, often without realizing it, about life’s limits. They see our limbs weaken and discover there are things we fathers just do not know.

The thread we dads hope runs through all this is an understanding that moments matter. Moments build lives of meaning, the lives we want.

Spend them wisely.

That night, when my son told me that thinking about my death, however distant, troubled him, I put my hand on his shoulder.

I told him that, if I do my job right as a father, there always will be two places he and his sister will be able to find me even after I’ve breathed my last.

My son smiled.

“In our heads and in our hearts,” he said.

I nodded and told him I loved him and his sister — and that I was proud of them.

I love you and I’m proud of you — such a simple thing for a father to say, but it’s a message that matters.

A message that never grows old.

Krull is director of Franklin College’s Pulliam School of Journalism, host of “No Limits” on WFYI (90.1 FM) in Indianapolis and publisher of TheStatehouseFile.com.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1MVXKQW