If we don’t have our health, we don’t have much, but having our health is getting so expensive in this country that it’s threatening everything else.

Smart people have spent a lot of time and energy trying to figure out ways to hold the line on rising health care costs, from insurance premiums to ambulance calls to emergency room visits.

One effort we should all be cheering for is taking shape right now at Baylor, Scott & White. Another is inside of ambulances in Plano. Both are models of the kinds of changes to health care that we need to be successful.

In 2014, Baylor shaved 7 percent or $14 million off the cost of providing health care to its employees by initiating an innovative program that focuses more care on the highest risk employees.

Now the hospital system has become one of several hundred programs around the country selected to expand a focused, coordinated care approach into the Medicare population it serves.

The program created under the Affordable Care Act is important because it attempts to single out the highest-risk patients in the Medicare population and get them preventive care that can help hold down their health care costs.

People who are unable to manage their own health care, for any number of reasons, end up raising the price for all of us. Emergency rooms and ambulances become the doctor’s office at enormous cost.

In the program Baylor is entering this year, the hospital will assign a single nurse to specific Medicare patients to help manage their care in ways that multiple doctors could never do. Imagine a patient with obesity, heart disease and diabetes who takes a half-dozen pills a day. If a nurse was able to track that person’s health and push that person to maintain better daily habits, the entire system of care would benefit.

Under the program, Baylor will track more than 30 variables, including outcomes and costs. Any savings realized through the program are shared with health care providers as an incentive to participate. A portion of savings is also returned to taxpayers.

The program isn’t without risk to the hospital. If, in its third year in the program, Baylor spends more than Medicare budgets for its pool of patients, the hospital must pay the difference to the taxpayer.

In Plano and other cities, meanwhile, paramedics are beginning to visit people with chronic conditions in hopes of monitoring and managing their care to lower calls to 911 and visits to the ER. This sort of program is becoming more common in this region and across the country in large part to help check costs associated with caring for high-risk patients.

We need programs like these to work, and we need ideas for more like them. No single, magical plan will solve our nation’s problem with rising health care costs. It’s probably too much to hope that we can ever steeply reduce the cost of health care, but we must slow the pace of growth for that cost or the price we pay as a society will be far too high.