Progressives and liberals cheered last week when the RAND Corporation released its study showing a significant increase in the number of Americans with health insurance. Supporters of the Affordable Care Act crowed that Republicans were totally wrong about the law. (Boom!) But is more coverage in and of itself really a sign of success? To me, it rings quite hollow in light of evidence of increasing premium costs next to increasing deductibles (a combination which translates to significant out-of-pocket increases) and zero evidence of improved health.

First of all, let's acknowledge the increase in coverage is far less than the Obama administration promised (we were told to expect 32 million new insureds by 2019) and, second, that an increase is hardly a surprise. The law both subsidizes health insurance (anything government subsidizes, we get more of) and penalizes lack of coverage, meaning you've got both carrot and stick going on. So, duh, yes, coverage increased. I don't think any Republicans are surprised by this. We dislike Obamacare because of what it is doing to costs, not because we think having health insurance is a bad thing.



[STUDY: Obamacare Hasn't Solved Health Care Disparities]

More surprising to those of us on the anti-Obamacare side was what RAND revealed about where people are getting coverage. Many conservatives, myself included, have predicted that the Affordable Care Act will bring about the end of employer-provided health insurance, pushing more people into government-sponsored or individual-market plans.

But the RAND results showed the biggest increase in insureds was in the employer-sponsored bucket. RAND extrapolates from their admittedly small sample that more than 9 million previously uninsured people are newly covered by employer-sponsored plans, versus an increase of 6.5 million on the subsidized side (Medicaid) and 4.1 million in the individual marketplaces (also subsidized in some cases).

President of the American Health Policy Institute Tevi Troy says that it's just too soon to judge employers' responses to the Affordable Care Act. "We just don't know what employers are going to do yet," Troy says when looking at the RAND results. "They are reevaluating their options from top to bottom, and I think it's fair to say that big changes are coming to employer-sponsored care. What form those changes will take remains the big question."



[GALLERY: Political Cartoons on Obamacare]

My own prediction is that the data will change over time because it will take a few years for increasing premium costs to force small employers into that hard choice of whether they will continue providing coverage. Large employers, of course, don’t have a choice under the Affordable Care Act, but I can’t imagine a scenario where most small employers to whom the mandate doesn't apply don’t get out of the business of providing highly-regulated, costly health-insurance.

What the RAND study and the resulting coverage and commentary doesn't bring up is whether the Affordable Care Act is having an adverse impact on the economy or improving health outcomes – something that is frequently left out of so-called health care debates (which are really about health insurance, not care).

So it's important to view the RAND data through the lens of this fact: Every newly-insured employee represents thousands of dollars in new costs to employers. This will impact bottom lines, salaries and wages, hiring and job creation.



[READ: Pharma Wants to Hide Continuing Medical Education Payments to Doctors]

And why aren't health outcomes part of the political commentary around the RAND results? Maybe because having health insurance may not necessarily have a net positive outcome on your actual health. This may be counterintuitive, but it's true. Academics have been debating this point fiercely for decades.

I was part of a panel debate on a public affairs cable television show last week where my own example of my own insurance costs (currently $750 a month versus $250 a month for a similar, $10,000 deductible, plan, pre-Obamacare) was dismissed as anecdotal. Fair enough. But the case for increasing the number of Americans with health insurance coverage was also, largely, anecdotal. Heart-wrenching stories about people without health insurance – not evidence about actual health – fueled the campaign for the Affordable Care Act.