Few Coloradans, until recently, would have thought that Donald Trump and Bernie Sanders have a good chance of knocking off Jeb Bush and Hillary Clinton in the Colorado presidential caucuses on March 1, 2016.

But history makes it clear that maverick and nontraditional candidates in both political parties have done well at winning presidential caucuses in Colorado in recent years. For instance, Barack Obama, an insurgent outsider challenging the mainstream Hillary Clinton, easily won Colorado’s Democratic caucuses seven years ago.

It is early in the nominating process, and we need to remember that Herman Cain and Michele Bachmann were leading in Republican polls at the start of the 2012 Republican primaries and caucuses (Mitt Romney won the nomination). But the Jeb Bush and Hillary Clinton campaigns are off to underwhelming starts and, like many Americans, Coloradans are uncomfortable with the idea of another Bush or Clinton in the White House.

At the early stages of presidential elections, many voters often show a preference for non-traditional, independent and maverick candidates. Such voters go for presidential candidates who “tell it like it is,” who “aren’t going to be bought,” and who will “shake things up.”

The fact that neither Trump nor Sanders are “card-carrying” members of their respective political parties is a major part of their appeal. The two men offer distinct and different policies for restless Americans. Trump is not a traditional Republican, and Sanders calls himself a socialist.

Let’s look at Colorado’s recent role in the presidential nomination process. What kinds of candidates have won primaries and caucuses in our state lately? What does that tell us about the prospects for 2016?

1992 — Colorado held its “first-ever” presidential primary. It was scheduled early, right after Iowa and New Hampshire. Previously, Colorado held caucuses to send uninstructed delegates to the parties’ national conventions.

Incumbent Republican president George H.W. Bush ran for re-election. Opposing him for the GOP nomination was conservative commentator Pat Buchanan. Republican primary voters in Colorado went solidly for the elder Bush. Several weeks later, Buchanan ended his campaign.

In this instance, Colorado Republicans went for the establishment candidate.

The Democratic race was exciting. Three candidates — Arkansas Gov. Bill Clinton, U.S. Sen. Paul Tsongas from Massachusetts, and former California Gov. Jerry Brown — were campaigning hard for Colorado’s vote. The surprise winner was Jerry Brown, with Clinton second.

Brown’s ideas were so alternative that he was jokingly referred to as Governor Moonbeam. In this case, Colorado went strongly for the outsider and insurgent.

1996 — Bill Clinton was the incumbent president and did not have credible opposition. On the Republican side, U.S. Sen. Bob Dole of Kansas ran against a host of GOP opponents, including U.S. Sen. Lamar Alexander of Tennessee. Dole won Colorado handily in 1996, and Alexander dropped out of the race the next day. Dole eventually became the GOP nominee.

Once again, Colorado Republicans went for a moderate and middle-of-the-road candidate when voting in a presidential primary.

2000 — Democrat Al Gore and Republican George W. Bush won their respective Colorado primaries. In each case, the winner was the establishment candidate.

2004 — Colorado abandoned the presidential primary and went back to presidential caucuses. George W. Bush was the incumbent president, so there was no Republican contest. The leading Democratic candidates to oppose Bush were Vermont Gov. Howard Dean and U.S. Sen. John Kerry of Massachusetts.

Dean ran an impressive outsider campaign prior to the Iowa caucuses. Kerry, the more establishment candidate, mortgaged his home in Boston and spent all the money in Iowa, where he won a surprise victory. When Kerry followed up his big win in Iowa by triumphing in the New Hampshire primary, the news media declared the race over and Kerry the Democratic Party nominee.

Thus, Colorado’s Democratic presidential caucuses in 2004 were meaningless, as the nominee had already been decided.

2008 — Colorado made an important change by adopting the “Iowa-style” presidential caucuses. Instead of voting for delegates to upcoming party conventions, caucus-goers voted directly for their chosen candidate for the party’s presidential nomination. As a result, Colorado’s caucuses produced both a Democratic Party winner and a Republican Party winner.

In the Republican caucuses, former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney defeated U.S. Sen. John McCain of Arizona. The GOP caucuses were exciting, however, because as the evening began, neither Romney nor McCain had gained the nomination.

While Colorado Republicans were voting for Romney, however, many other states that night were choosing McCain. The next morning, the news media declared McCain the Republican nominee. But Colorado Republicans had voted for the man with a more conservative and outsider image: Romney.

The race was even closer on the Democratic side in Colorado. Hillary Clinton, wife of the former president, was competing against Obama, a liberal challenger. The Colorado Democratic caucuses went for Obama, helping to propel him to eventual victory in a long and hard-fought Democratic nomination race.

Many observers thought Colorado would have voted for Hillary Clinton rather than Obama if there had been a primary instead of a caucus. Primaries, with high voter turnouts, tend to be dominated by moderate voters, who favored Hillary Clinton. Caucuses, however, have low turnouts and are dominated by liberal voters, who favored Obama.

Lesson learned. Hillary Clinton, as a moderate, could have great difficulty winning the Colorado Democratic presidential caucuses in 2016. With their strong tilt toward more liberal candidates, Colorado’s 2016 Democratic caucuses could easily go for a strong left winger such as Vermont U.S. Sen. Bernie Sanders.

2012 — Obama, the incumbent president, was unopposed. On the Republican side, Romney was the leading candidate but was challenged by a number of opponents, most of them right-wing social conservatives strongly opposed to abortion and gay rights.

Rick Santorum, a former U.S. senator from Pennsylvania who was a strong abortion opponent, upset Romney in the 2012 Republican caucuses in Colorado. Santorum’s victory in Colorado helped keep his campaign alive for several more weeks, at which time Romney finally secured the nomination.

Lesson learned. With low voter turnout, Republican presidential caucuses in Colorado tend to favor highly conservative GOP candidates for president. In 2016, Colorado’s highly conservative Republican caucuses could prove a challenge for a more moderate candidate such as Jeb Bush.

So, Colorado’s March 1 presidential caucuses could be consequential.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.