The Florida Legislature has left Tallahassee because, despite a Republican governor and overwhelming Republican majorities in both houses, they can't seem to agree on a budget.

The legislature actually only has one job as far as the state constitution is concerned – it has to meet 60 days each year in order to pass a balanced budget. This year, it didn't.

Here's why – and what's at stake.

What is the battle about?

It all comes down to Medicaid expansion. Right now, Medicaid is only available in Florida for adults far below the federal poverty level, with a more generous sliding scale for children. Part of the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, calls for states to offer it to individuals and families who earn up to a third more than poverty level. But the Supreme Court said the federal government couldn't force states to participate.

What does this have to do with Florida's budget?

The Florida Senate proposed an $80 billion budget that would include a version of Medicaid expansion more in keeping with the largely Republican legislature's free market ideals. If the feds accept the Senate's program, Florida stands to gain more than $60 billion over the next decade to fund it.

The Florida House wants nothing to do with Medicaid expansion – or the federal dollars that come with it -- and its budget is set at $76 billion. That $4 billion difference has created the impasse.

Why does the Senate want to expand Medicaid?

The Senate would offer a program through private insurers. Recipients would pay a small premium and prove they are employed or going to school. If the federal government accepts the program – a pretty big "if" – then the state would receive billions in federal money over the next decade. Some 800,000 Floridians would gain access to health care. A study by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and the Urban Institute, both of which support Obamacare, found that if Florida does not expand Medicaid, it will lose out on $66.1 billion over the next decade.

So why not set up a program that brings tax money back to Florida?

There's no such thing as free money. The federal government would pay for the entire program for the first three years, with the state picking up a little more of the cost each year afterward. In 10 years, the state would be responsible for 10 percent of the cost, where it would max out. That may be a small percentage of the total cost, but it's still new spending. And that means new taxes or cuts to other programs.

Don't poor people get free health care at hospitals anyway?

There's no such thing as free health care. Hospitals that treat many low-income people who can't pay medical bills get paid for their services through a program called the Low Income Pool, or LIP.

So what's LIP got to do with it?

The LIP program, in place since 2006, matches local tax dollars that are used to pay hospitals that treat the poor. Last year, the feds matched $1.3 billion. But a year ago, they told Florida the LIP program would have to change. The House initially included the usual LIP funding in its budget anyway, but the feds linked LIP funding to Medicaid expansion. Just before they left Tallahassee early, House leaders offered the Senate a budget with $200 million in hospital funding – still far lower than the billions in LIP money. The Senate did not appear to take that proposal seriously.

What if we lose LIP?

The couple billion dollars lost would devastate hospitals – according to hospitals. But Gov. Rick Scott isn't so sure, and created a Commission on Healthcare and Hospital Funding. "The commission will examine how taxpayer money supports hospitals, health care and insurance plans in Florida and what health care outcomes those entities provide for Floridians in return," Scott said. The group will look at hospital funding over the next few weeks to see just how much money Florida needs to refund hospitals for charity work.

So we don't have a budget. What now?

It has to happen by July 1. And that means all legislators will probably be back in Tallahassee in June, when the in-fighting over Medicaid and LIP will resume. On Thursday, Senate President Andy Gardiner proposed a special session June 1-20. So far, there has been no response from the House or the governor.

What happens if they can't agree by July 1?

The state government shuts down. The state budget funds schools, universities, hospitals – even federal programs like Medicaid and Medicare are administered through the state. Many agencies could operate on reserves in the short term, though for just how long is hard to say because this has never happened before.

So, did lawmakers just waste 60 days doing nothing?

No. This year, they passed more than 200 laws. Many were resolutions or technical fixes to laws already on the books, but there were some significant changes, such as a waiting period for abortions and the legalization of 64-ounce bottles of beer. So, progress. Sort of.

dsweeney@sunsentinel.com, 954-356-4605 or Twitter @Daniel_Sweeney