Transcript for Candy Crush Saga Has Women Spending Big Bucks

And the "heat index." Candy crush saga, the online gaming sensation, with millions of fans. But for some, it's too much. It becomes addiction. Abc's reena ninan takes a look. Reporter: It's becoming an addiction many are fighting hard to break. I was hooked right away. Reporter: Mary can't stop playing candy crush. She's so into it, she's on level -- 245. And it's taken me a year to get there. Reporter: It's simple. You swipe the candy in any direction to match and crush three or more of the same pieces. 45 million people play candy crush each month. It's free to download and play. You're given five lives per game. But you can pay to purchase additional ones. With over 400 levels, some players are indulging on all that candy and draining their wallets. My husband told me our itunes total. Like, you have to stop. Reporter: A sweet deal for the british creators for the game, king. They are said to be reeling in $636,000 each day. 231 million per year. And they say women aged 25 to 55 are their most loyal customers. Every time you reach a certain level, you get a sense of satisfaction. Like listening to music, which is soothing, as we're playing it. We hear a male voice giving us the positive reinforcement. Reporter: This woman finds it impossible to step away from the game. I was on vacation in cancun. And I find myself leaving the pool to go back to the room. And I was sit there. And I'd be playing candy crush, trying to get to the next level. Reporter: Is this sweet tooth game as addictive as gambling? Waiting for the payoff. That's the same thing that happens with gambling. Reporter: But the game's creators say 70% of their users finish the game without spending a dime. For "good morning america," reena ninan, abc news, new york. All right. Let's bring in chief health and medical editor, dr. Richard besser for more on this. Why is this as addicting as gambling? Yeah. That's a big question. The thing that grabs me is this is so attractive to women. Most internet gaming problems you'll see in men. And boys. Right. Here, whether it's the voice or the colors or the look or the fact that it's not so violent. You're seeing women hooked on this. And increasing, we heard 25 to 55 years old, are their most loyal customers. 45 million people play this game every month? It's incredible. One of the big questions is, is it a true addiction? The psychiatrists, psychologists, this is on the list of diseases they're looking at to se say, is it an addiction. They have all of the properties. People lying about the amount of time they're spending on this. Affecting relationships and work and others. What is it about this one game, I guess? I think it's not violent, like the games that guys play. Unless you consider smashing candy and killing calories to be a form of violence. I do, actually. Like word with friends. Alec baldwin g booted off an airport because he didn't stop playing word with friends. Why isn't that game as addictive? My son showed me this game. He says someone else put it on his phone. Exactly. Yeah. The first levels are really, really easy. And then, they get you. You have to pay $1 or wait some time to play it again. And people are paying the dollars. All right. Beware. Yeah. I can't keep these things on my phone. Yeah.

This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.