When the Broncos run:

Consistency has been the problem in Denver’s running game this season. Ronnie Hillman and C.J. Anderson combined for 18 carries and 62 yards against Pittsburgh last week. Those numbers aren’t terrible, but with the Broncos up big in the first half, that’s the time to run the ball well and they couldn’t do it. Brock Osweiler threw 44 passes, way too many. Cincinnati has the NFL’s fifth-best run defense — led by tough-to-block tackle Geno Atkins, who is having a great year.

Edge: Bengals

When the Bengals run:

Denver, which has the best run defense in the league, held Pittsburgh tailback DeAngelo Williams to 26 yards on 14 carries. The expected return of safety T.J. Ward from an injury should make Denver’s defense even better. Cincinnati plays two tailbacks, Jeremy Hill and Giovani Bernard, but neither has contributed much on the ground this year.

Edge: Broncos

When the Broncos pass:

Osweiler looked like a Pro Bowl quarterback during the first half of the Pittsburgh game, accounting for four touchdowns. But in the second half, he was only 7-of-26 passing for 82 yards and an interception. Emmanuel Sanders’ performance helped produce the offense’s big first half. The Broncos need that type of production for four quarters. Bengals safety Reggie Nelson leads the NFL with eight interceptions and cornerback Adam Jones is playing the best football of his career.

Edge: Bengals

When the Bengals pass:

For the first time in six starts, Osweiler will have more experience than the opponent’s starting QB. Cincinnati’s AJ McCarron will be making only his second start — and he could be without Tyler Eifert, who leads NFL tight ends with 12 touchdowns. Denver’s pass defense had a rough outing at Pittsburgh but should bounce back Monday.

Edge: Broncos

Special teams:

Adam Jones is more than a veteran cornerback. He also is the Bengals’ best specialist. Jones is averaging 11.2 yards per punt return and is a threat to score every time he touches the ball. Broncos punter Britton Colquitt has struggled most of the season, giving opponents great field position at the worst time. Colquitt’s average of 43.6 yards per attempt is fifth-worst among NFL punters. Cincinnati’s Mike Nugent and Denver’s Brandon McManus have been solid place- kickers all season.

Edge: Bengals

Who steps up?

Last week at Pittsburgh, it was Emmanuel Sanders with a career-high 181 yards receiving for the Broncos. But most of his production came during the first half, and there wasn’t anyone to help carry the load. It can’t all be on Brock Osweiler. Sanders, Demaryius Thomas, Vernon Davis, C.J. Anderson and Ronnie Hillman all need to step up and contribute to get the Denver offense playing better. Monday’s game in Denver probably will be decided by which team has the most playmakers step up and contribute.

Play four quarters

The Broncos looked like a Super Bowl team in the first half of the Pittsburgh game, but for the third consecutive week laid an egg in the second half. They have been outscored 36-0 in the second half of the past three games, losing two. Coach Gary Kubiak says he will make different halftime adjustments, but it’s about the players on the field. The offense can’t take its foot off the pedal and expect the defense to bail it out.

Mission on D: Stop A.J.

Pittsburgh wide receivers burned Denver’s secondary. Poor tackling and penalties hurt the Broncos’ coverage. The big threat this week is Cincinnati star A.J. Green, a 6-foot-4, 207-pound wide receiver who ranks sixth in the NFL in yards receiving. Denver cornerback Aqib Talib probably will draw the bulk of the snaps against Green. Tyler Eifert, Cincinnati’s Pro Bowl tight end, may not be able to play because of a concussion.

Bengals at Broncos: 6:30 p.m. Monday; ESPN, KTVD-20; 850 AM, 94.1 FM, 103.5 FM