It was quiet and peaceful in McCandless on Monday night.

That's how residents want to keep it, and largely why they spoke up against plans for a Walmart Supercenter to be built.

More than 100 people packed a township zoning meeting, leaving standing room only inside the main room, with latecomers forced to listen outside the door.

"I read that Walmart has publicly stated they will not move into a community where they are not welcome," one resident said at the microphone.

VIDEO: Watch Bofta Yimam's report from McCandless

Some residents unleashed their frustration at township leaders during the meeting, including major concerns about traffic congestion. They joined together against the move that would allow a 150,000-square-foot Walmart Supercenter to be built on Blazier Drive, replacing a retail site where Trader Horn and a former Bally's fitness center are located.

Despite a traffic impact study with about $3 million in improvements, and 300 mostly full-time jobs, the overall sentiment inside the tense meeting did not waver.

Residents feel the township is failing them by considering Walmart. The planning commission has approved the plans for the store.

"We're here for the very first time, we've listened to stuff and you can't possibly comprehend everything that's been said here tonight," a resident said from the crowd, asking township leaders to post the information online.

The potential site fills a gap in store coverage of the Pittsburgh area, and customers are asking for a store in this part of town, said Bill Wertz, communications director for Walmart east.

Reporter: "Residents have made it very clear that you're not welcome. Will you still move in?"

Wertz: "It sounds like a few people are upset."

Reporter: "More than a few. There's more than 100 people in there."

Wertz: "Well, not all of them are speaking against Walmart. But you're right, there are a vocal group of people here tonight who are upset about something. I'm not sure what it is. It seems something to do with traffic."

Residents are also worried about noise, flooding and the possibility of Walmart being open 24 hours a day, seven days a week. A 24/7 site is a factor that the town ordinance happens to allow.

Walmart said it hopes to continue with the plans and start construction by next summer. Residents hope the township will consider their concerns before moving forward.