Students will be able to learn CPR and other lifesaving techniques during one of four summer camps offered at SLCC’s T.H. Harris campus in Opelousas this summer. (Photo: Gannett file photo)

Spots are still available for South Louisiana Community College’s camps this summer at three of its campuses, including the T.H. Harris campus in Opelousas.

The summer camps involve four different subjects — engineering, cardiopulmonary resuscitation, manufacturing and creating video games.

In the STEMtastic Camp, campers will take an adventure into the world of science, technology, engineering and math. They will learn basic engineering practices to create solutions to brainteasers presented to them. In this five-day camp, students will design a new project each day and learn how it relates to everyday and real-world experiences. They will work with a range of materials, from household products like straws to batteries and computer programs.

Sessions will be offered at the T.H. Harris Campus June 1-5. This program is for students going to sixth through eighth grade.

The Game-Maker Camp will allow campers to design their own video games. They will learn the basics of video game design and use computer software to create 2D and 3D interactive experiences. They also will learn to create and control backgrounds and characters.

This camp, for students entering ninth and 10th grade, will be offered at the T.H. Harris Campus in Opelousas June 22-26.

The Life Saver Camp is for those students looking to become babysitters or work in healthcare. Campers will learn basic first aid and CPR. At the conclusion of camp, students will earn a certified CPR card from the American Heart Association. They will participate in sessions led by healthcare professionals including X-ray techs, surgical techs, RNs, LPNs, and more.

This camp will be offered at the T.H. Harris Campus June 8-12. It is open to students in grades nine through 12.

In the Do-It-Yourself Camp, students will experiment with different areas of manufacturing and engage in hands-on projects. This camp features a combination of manufacturing and construction skills, including welding, automotive, electrician, industrial electronics, HVAC, drafting, diesel powered equipment, and machinist.

Sutdents may attend this camp at the T.H. Harris Campus June 15-19.

Each camp is one week in duration and lasts from 8 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. The cost is $105 per camper and includes a T-shirt and snacks. Each of the camps also will hold sessions at other SLCC campuses in New Iberia and Lafayette.

For more information about any of these camps, email camp coordinator Liz Jeffery at Elizabeth.jeffery@solacc.edu. Registration for these summer camps is online at registration.xenegrade.com/solacc.

Read or Share this story: http://www.dailyworld.com/story/news/local/2015/05/12/creative-camps-coming-slcc-summer/27203855/