Coach Jamie Self has helped build the program at Glendale Preparatory Academy from the ground up during the last eight year, starting even before the academy had a high school squad.

That patient process resulted in a 2012 state title in the Canyon Athletic Association for charter schools and playoff berths the last two years since moving up to Arizona Interscholastic Association competition.

"We started in sixth and seventh grade with eight-man middle school football," Self said. "You get a chance to build a program instead of just having football as an activity. That's what's been fun for me."

Now the Griffins coach believes his team has a chance to make the next step - into the semifinals of the AIA's eight-man football league, Division VI.

Self knows it won't be easy. Bagdad, Gilbert Christian, Mogollon and Pima have owned the final four spots in the last two seasons.

And none of the four schools seem particularly ripe for the picking. Glendale Prep should learn where it stands in early October after its bye week.

Bagdad comes in Oct. 2 for Homecoming. Valley Lutheran, another playoff team hoping for a breakthrough, hosts the Griffins the next week.

"We have Bagdad coming in for Homecoming this year. There's a sincere belief that we can compete with them. That comes from having eight seniors that understand the system and understand what we're up against," Self said.

And in 8-man football, eight seniors covers most of your starting lineup. Kris Rapeta is the anchor of both lines.

Jacob Thompson recovered from injury and will start at tailback and defensive end. Graduated Miles Maddox was a 2,00-yard speedy back. Rapeta said Thompson is "a truck."

Daniel Lauer is a tight end/cornerback, Austin Postoy is a center/defensive end. Tyler Moonberry concentrates on linebacker and Tyler Zehrung is a rush end.

Lauer said the playoff berths gave the Griffins confidence, particularly with only three seniors last year. Plus, the players know where to go and where their teammates will be.

"We've grown a lot and seen what works in this league. I've known these guys for five years. Over the years, we've become a really good team."

It showed in a 60-20 zero week thrashing of Anthem Prep Aug. 21. And seniors weren't the only ones getting in on the fun.

Junior quarterback/linebacker Joey Balkisoon hit Lauer for an 80-yard touchdown and also led the Griffins with 10 tackles.

Junior defensive end Zach Hendricks added six tackles and a sack. J.J. Self picked up 110 yards on four carries and added five tackles.

Glendale Prep does it by sticking to a simple power running game that used to be all over 8-man ball but is being replaced at more schools by the spread.

Self said with a veteran team they can add more reads and options. But the theme is to play physical football with an approach that also utilizes the prep school's brainpower.

To emphasize that, Self often wears the team's motto on his shirt - Tough, Smart, Competitive.

"We're not going to be the biggest, strongest or fastest team so we have to be tough in that regard. We're going to have a lot of adversity before us," Self said. "We have a focus on knowledge and academics - how do we take that knowledge and use it on the field. If we're not going to be the fastest, for instance, then let's learn technique that cuts down steps."

There's fewer obstacles than a couple years ago. Last year was the first with weight training and on-campus athletic facilities came in about two years ago.

But Glendale Prep will never be confused with a football factory. It's a close-knit academic community that's learning to play some good football and pass on the tradition.

Rapeta talked about continuing the legacy left to him Tuesday, as he spotted the ball for the Griffins' middle school game.

"When I started as a sophomore we had some really big guys for seniors. They really started it, that aggression that we keep up all the time," Rapeta said. "When I go to college these guys are going to be looking up to me and thinking about how I hit people and how the seniors led them."