Nurse practitioners expand access to health care services, especially in rural areas

Tara Wolfe and Jacob Richards hold their 11-week-old twin sons Kevin and Issac during a check-up for their cold-like symptoms on Tuesday, Feb 3, 2015, at Valley Community Health Center in Northwood, N.D. (Logan Werlinger/Grand Forks Herald)

Family Nurse Practitioner, Bobbi Solberg, checks on Kevin Richards with his mother, Tara Wolfe, on Tuesday, Feb 3, 2015, at Valley Community Health Center in Northwood, N.D. (Logan Werlinger/Grand Forks Herald)

Family Nurse Practitioner, Bobbi Solberg, checks on 11-week-old Isaac Richards on Tuesday, Feb 3, 2015, at Valley Community Health Center in Northwood, N.D. (Logan Werlinger/Grand Forks Herald)

In more than 17 years of working as a nurse practitioner in the healthcare system in Langdon, N.D., Gwen Witzel has seen a number of physicians who practiced there for a while, then moved on.

Until 2011, in order to prescribe medications for her patients, she had to have a collaborative agreement with a physician.

"In my practice, physicians came and went multiple times, which would leave me needing to find another physician to sign the collaborative agreement document," she said.

The agreement required the physician to be available to the NP once every three months but did not require the physician to have patient contact or to review medical records.

At one point, she asked a physician 180 miles away to sign the document.

In 2011, North Dakota legislators lifted that requirement and gave "prescriptive authority" to NPs who are licensed to practice in the state. (Minnesota took the same step, effective Jan. 1 of this year. South Dakota has not.)

That action opened the door for NPs to provide more care — particularly primary care services — to more patients, especially in rural areas where the NP may be the only health care provider in town.

"The elimination of the collaborative agreement has freed NPs to practice to the fullest extent of our license without being dependent upon another profession ...," Witzel said in an email to the Herald.

Nationwide concerns about the shortage of primary care providers can be alleviated by NPs, Witzel said.

"We have seen NP-run clinics filling this void in North Dakota," she said. For example, at a satellite clinic in Walhalla, "a nurse practitioner runs the clinic and serves as the community's primary care provider."

Others are doing the same in McClusky and Turtle Lake, she said.

Not enough providers

The change in requirements has also benefitted patients who need services in areas of medicine where there aren't enough providers to meet demand, including psychiatry and certain specialties.

It has paved the way for some NPs to open their own private practice clinics, for example, in Minot, Watford City, Washburn, Bismarck and Fargo.

NPs have earned a master's or doctoral degree which allows them to assess, diagnose and treat acute and chronic health conditions and prescribe medications for patients of all ages, Witzel said.

They work collaboratively with other members of the health care team, based on the needs of their patients.

In Elgin, N.D., Carey Rivinius, president of the North Dakota Nurse Practitioners Association, also practices in a setting where physicians are not always on hand.

"In the past, we've had (doctors) who don't live here, and came a couple days a week," said Rivinius, who has practiced as an NP in Elgin since 2008. Before that, she was working as a charge nurse there when she decided to go on for advanced certification.

"I knew there was a need for an NP here," she said. "I always had that goal in mind, even in high school."

She is among three nurse practitioners at Jacobson Memorial Hospital Care Center, which is also served by a physician who lives in town, she said.

The need for local health care services is evident when Rivinius considers her elderly patients.

"We're an hour and 15 minutes — 85 miles — from Bismarck," she said. "There are elderly people who don't drive and, for some, it's harder to drive."

The ability to write prescriptions without a collaborative agreement with a physician "definitely helps our ability to function," she said. "It helps this facility.

"I think they'd be in quite a predicament if not for the (NPs') ability to practice independently."

Under the old rules, NPs who wanted to open their own private practice clinic may not have been able to, if the physician or the physician's employer viewed the clinic as unwanted competition, she said.

The goals of the Affordable Care Act — expanding access to health care and reducing the cost of health care — "can be accomplished by using nurse practitioners," Rivinius said.

Increasing demand

"As the Affordable Care Act continues to roll out, we know that more people are going to be insured and more people are going to seek health care services," said Chris Harsell, a nurse practitioner with the Valley Community Health Center, which operates medical clinics in Grand Forks, Northwood and Larimore and a dental clinic in Grand Forks.

"We'll need more providers to help with that," she said.

Valley Community Health Center clinics, staffed primarily by NPs, "provide high-quality primary health care to everyone regardless of their ability to pay," Harsell said.

In 2013, April Warren, a nurse practitioner, opened a private practice in mental health in Minot with Lacey Cornelisen, a licensed independent clinical social worker.

Their practice, Serenity Health Solutions, serves 350 patients and is growing, said Warren, who worked for five years with a psychiatrist in Minot before opening her private practice.

Demand for health care services is increasing in North Dakota, she said.

"There is such a growing need, especially with mental health, not only in Minot but also Williston, where there's extremely poor access."

Before her clinic opened, people waited four months to see a mental health professional in Minot, she said.

"When you're struggling with mental health issues, four months is an incredibly long time ...

You can't really afford delay in mental health.

"Our goal is to get them in the same week, (when) we can generally achieve the best outcomes."

Warren's work includes medication management for patients who range in age from 10 to adulthood. Cornelisen provides individual and family therapy for teenagers and adults.

"A small private practice has worked well for us," Warren said. "(People) can see both of us (at the same time) and tell their story once, which they appreciate, especially if there was trauma involved."

Warren is consulting with another NP who plans to open a private practice in mental health this fall in northwestern North Dakota, she said.

Enhanced appeal

The decision by the legislature to grant prescriptive authority to NPs makes the profession more attractive to prospective students, Rivinius said.

"If a person can have more independence, it's definitely more attractive, especially in rural areas, but also in urban areas," she said.

"(Facilities) can hire more providers with less cost and (their staff) can see more people in a shorter timeframe."

More independence for NPs may also explain the increase in NPs practicing in North Dakota, according to Dr. Connie Kalanek, executive director of the North Dakota Board of Nursing.

"It's certainly increased our numbers here," she said.

In 2009, the state had 753 advance practice nurses, she said. By the end of 2014, that figure was approaching 1,100.

North Dakota is among 18 states which allow NPs to prescribe medication without a collaborative agreement with a physician, Harsell said, and other states are considering the same action.

"North Dakota is absolutely a pacesetter, in that (it has) embraced the role of the NP," Harsell said. "The state is recognizing that NPs have an advanced degree, and they have the education and training to provide quality health care, especially in rural areas."

The ability of nurse practitioners to practice more independently "is helping to recruit students to the profession," she said.

"It's very exciting."