Up to 40 percent of Erie County residents who receive Medicaid benefits have jobs.

“They’re not leeches on the system,” said Michael R. Szukala, the Medicaid inspector general for Erie County. “They just aren’t making a lot of money.”

Those receiving benefits from the federal health care program earned an average of $997 a month at their jobs, which equates to an annual income of $11,961, according to the annual Medicaid report for Erie County.

The Medicaid report, released Thursday, also revealed:

• Whites comprise the largest and fastest-growing group of Medicaid recipients, with 20 percent more whites receiving Medicaid benefits last year than in 2010, compared with 11 percent growth for blacks.

• Treatment for mental illness cost Medicaid the most money – more than $209 million last year – among all defined conditions that were diagnosed countywide.

• Childhood obesity remains a major issue. Among all Medicaid beneficiaries treated for obesity during the first half of this year, 43 percent were children, nearly double the percentage from four years ago.

• Similar to private health insurance trends, an opioid painkiller remains the No. 1 prescribed drug for Medicaid recipients. Hydrocodone-acetaminophen, also known as the brands Vicodin and Lortab, is a frequently abused prescription narcotic.

• If current trends continue, one out of every three Erie County residents could be on Medicaid within six years.

“While more than 28 percent of our county’s residents now receive their health insurance from Medicaid, that number is projected to rise to over 33 percent by 2021 if trends continue,” Erie County Executive Mark Poloncarz said.

The number of people receiving Medicaid benefits continues to rise by more than 4 percent a year, Szukala said. That’s largely due to the federal Affordable Care Act, which allows more people to qualify for Medicaid benefits.

Nearly 259,000 residents – more than 28 percent of county residents – received health insurance through Medicaid last year, according to his report.

Medicaid covers health care for low-income families and for the blind and disabled. Barring special circumstances, families must be within 133 percent of the federal poverty level to qualify for Medicaid benefits. For a family of four, that income limit comes to $32,253.

“Poverty is a very real problem in Erie County, and we remain committed to addressing it,” said Poloncarz.

Children account for more than one-third of Medicaid recipients.

“The face of Medicaid in Erie County is not a poor black child. It’s a poor white chid,” Szukala said.

This year’s Medicaid report highlights the issue of the working poor. Szukala gained access to databases that allowed him to analyze data for 47 percent of all adult Medicaid clients serviced by the county last year.

Szukala found that 40 percent of those people received W-2 forms, indicating that they earned income in 2014. The analysis does not indicate how long the Medicaid recipients worked, or in what areas, but he said his analysis dispels the notion that most Medicaid beneficiaries stay at home watching TV reruns.

Those who did not work included residents receiving disability and retirement benefits, he added.

“What we have refutes a number of myths,” he said.

Those myths extend to perceptions of which races and ethnicities receive benefits, he said.

Among Medicaid recipients who identified a specific race, whites outnumbered African Americans, Latinos, Asians and Native Americans combined – not surprising given that whites comprise three-fourths of the county’s population.

But whites between the ages of 21 to 64 became Medicaid recipients nearly five times faster than blacks or Hispanics. Whites also account for the highest average cost per Medicaid client, according to the report.

African Americans make up 13 percent of the county’s population, followed by Asians and Latinos who together account for 7 percent.

A disproportionate percentage of African Americans in the county receive Medicaid benefits. According to Szukala’s review, 17 percent of whites were on Medicaid in Erie County, compared with 60 percent of blacks.

Erie County Medicaid services cost taxpayers an estimated $1.6 billion last year. The county continues to see a decline in its portion of Medicaid costs because the state now picks up a larger share of Medicaid costs. In previous years, Medicaid costs were a crushing expense for many communities statewide.

The county’s Medicaid costs for this year is expected to be $8.1 million less than last year, capped at $211 million. The federal government assumes half of the total Medicaid costs.

While the bulk of Medicaid recipients live in the city, particularly the East Side, West Side and Black Rock/Riverside, the county also showed a high percentage of Medicaid beneficiaries in Cheektowaga, Lackawanna, and the city and town of Tonawanda.

The Medicaid data for Erie County, covering the period from January 2011 through June 2015, examined more than 172,000 files of Medicaid recipients who are over the age of 18.

“We are continuing to see increases in the number of Medicaid recipients less than 21 years of age and in the number of white recipients, even while actual Medicaid costs to the county decrease as a result of the ACA’s reimbursement formula,” Poloncarz said.

A couple with two children – with each caregiver working full-time and earning the minimum wage – wouldn’t qualify for Medicaid.

“This report shows again this year that many Medicaid recipients are employed outside of the home but are still not earning enough to rise above the qualification threshold,” Poloncarz said. “These individuals are not the lazy, unemployed stereotypes that many people have of Medicaid recipients, but rather are doing all they can to provide a better life for themselves and their families.”

email: stan@buffnews.com