Avalanche defenseman Nikita Zadorov is participating in the University of Denver’s annual pro alumni camp at Magness Arena. He’s on the red team in this video, with the black Avalanche helmet (no number) and black Avalanche breezers. Just look for the biggest guy on the ice, and a left shot.

I missed Zadorov after the skate, mostly because I was talking to others and the entire locker-room facilities at Magness Arena are being rebuilt from the June flooding of the building. Many of the guys were undressing in a curtained-off area beside the Zamboni room, with no showers. Others were doing so in the neighboring rink, Joy Burns Arena. The Murray Armstrong Hockey Complex and the basketball locker rooms are all being re-done.

But good showing Tuesday at DU, for Day 1 of the camp that continues through Friday, from 10-11:30 a.m. each day. Twenty-six guys scrimmaged for the last 45 minutes of the skate, including incoming DU freshman Troy Terry of Highlands Ranch and a handful of veteran Pioneers. The amateur guys can’t be on the ice during the first 45 minutes, when DU coach Jim Montgomery and his staff conduct drills.

The NHLers include former DU stars Paul Stastny (St. Louis Blues), Tyler Bozak (Maple Leafs), Matt Donovan (Sabres) and Nick Shore (Kings). The former Avalanche include Kyle Quincey (Red Wings), John-Michael Liles (Hurricanes) and Peter Budaj (free agent). DU’s 2015 graduating class was well represented with Josiah Didier, Matt Tabrum, Ty Loney, Zac Larraza, among others, and former DU recruit Cal Foote — Adam’s oldest son, who is heading to the WHL’s Kelowna Rockets — was probably the youngest skater. Cal Foote turns 17 in December.

The camp is open to the public — and free.

I’m writing a Stastny story for Wednesday. We talked for a while, including his take on Zadorov (which will be in Wednesday’s story). Here’s a quick Q&A for this space:

A year after leaving Colorado to sign with St. Louis, you must be better settled? “This summer and going into next season, we’re a lot more comfortable. You see that in all sports. You move forward. You still have three or four of your best friends on your old team, but for us going forward we’re just a lot more comfortable. Last summer was just hectic with bachelor parties, weddings, and July 1 (free agency). There was a lot of traveling and this summer is a lot more low-key.”

Why did the Avalanche struggle so much last season? “That Western Conference is so tough. If you’re not consistent for 75 out of 82 games and you go without points, you don’t make the playoffs. It’s crazy that six or seven teams finished with over 100 points. It seems every team gets better in the Western Conference, no matter what. The good teams get better and the bad teams make moves and play better hockey. That Western Conference just keeps getting deeper and forces you to be good day in and day out.”

Your take on the Ryan O’Reilly trade to Buffalo?

“It’s business. Look at the Brandon Saad situation with Chicago. They win the Cup and say Saad will be there forever, a Blackhawk for life. Then five days (later) he gets traded. Both parties have to look at their interest … O’Reilly is a very smart player. We’ll see how it turns out.”

It didn’t appear like you were the leader, on the ice and off, in St. Louis, as you were with Colorado. Fair?

“By the end of the year I started speaking up. The first year with a new team, you kind of fly under the radar and be quiet. But as you get older you have to speak up. You want to win. If you see something go wrong, you’re not going to sit there and not say anything. (Leadership), it’s another attribute and ability that you’re good at, and feel like you’re not being used for it and kind of hindering yourself and not being involved as much as you should be. But at same time when you come to a new team, especially a team that’s good and has been built from the bottom, they already have their leaders.”