Two-year-old Eli Borden slides down a slide in the family’s backyard as mom Sarah, sister Chloe, 4 and dad David Borden look on. Eli, originally for medical reasons, has received all his nutrition through a feeding tube most of his life. Credit: Michael McLoone For the Journal Sentinel

Jim Stingl In My Opinion SHARE Eli, holds his clothing in the air as his father holds a syringe filled with a liquid meal. The liquid drains through a gravity-fed feeding tube into a port that goes into Eli's stomach. Michael McLoone For the Journal Sentinel

Two-year-old Eli Borden will someday look back on July 2015 as the time when he finally learned to eat.

Real food, I mean. And not the watery formula piped through a feeding tube into his stomach half a dozen times a day as vital but joyless nourishment.

This might surprise you, especially in food-happy America, but Eli doesn't know what it means to eat, to put food in his mouth, chewing and swallowing until he's full. He has never done that.

"It's a psychological issue right now. There's no medical reason why he can't eat," said his father, David. "He's a normal little kid. I know he wants to eat deep down inside, but he's got this general anxiety and fear of swallowing because he doesn't understand what food is for."

Eli sits at the dinner table at his Oak Creek home with dad, mom Sarah, and 4-year-old sister, Chloe, who told me she likes Buffalo Wild Wings and even sushi. Eli sometimes licks or nibbles certain foods — pickles, ketchup, bacon — but spits out them out. Tasting is an end in itself. Because of the tube feedings, which are no longer medically necessary, he never feels hunger.

His parents fervently hope this is about to change. They discovered a Virginia-based practice, Spectrum Pediatrics, that offers feeding therapy and, starting in earnest Monday, will strive to wean Eli from his feeding tube and teach him to eat like other 2-year-olds. First the calories Eli receives via the tube are being reduced by half in order to stimulate hunger.

Over a period of 10 days, Spectrum therapist Heidi Liefer Moreland will spend several hours a day at the Borden home, which is more relaxed than a hospital setting. David, an IT manager, and Sarah, who works in marketing, will step away from their jobs during that time to be part of the process.

Spectrum owner Jennifer Berry said Moreland, who is based in Chicago, will come in and hit the reset button by offering food in a natural, no-pressure way, teaching Eli that eating is healthy and normal. The success rate is high, Berry said.

"She's there for just about every mealtime during the day, and she's sometimes feeding the child and teaching him new ways to approach food that are really trusting and safe. She doesn't have the history that the child's parents have tied up in all these therapies and medical things," Berry said.

The program and yearlong follow-up runs $25,000, and it's unclear how much will be covered by the family's health insurer. The Bordens made a public appeal on YouCaring.com, a crowdfunding website. As of Thursday, $17,500 had been donated, some of it by strangers. Money left over after any insurance payouts will be paid forward to other families needing the therapy, David said.

So how did Eli get into this situation?

He was born in 2013 with a low birth weight and underdeveloped kidneys. After a few months of breast feeding, he was switched to formula, which made him sick because of a dairy allergy that went undiagnosed by doctors for too long. Eli was beginning to associate eating with pain and vomiting. He was switched to an amino acid formula that tasted awful.

At 7 months old, Eli was fitted with a feeding tube in his nose, which also proved ineffective. Then the tube was switched directly to his stomach. From the time he got the tubes, Eli never ate anything on his own again and resisted all spoon-in-the-face type therapy.

His life has been a blur of doctor visits, mostly at Children's Hospital of Wisconsin, inpatient and emergency visits, scans and other tests. He weighs just 22 pounds.

"Our family is exhausted," Sarah wrote in her appeal on YouCaring. "We can't leave the house without packing all of Eli's feeding supplies, including feeding syringes, tubes, bottles, ice packs, etc. Wherever Eli goes, they need to go, too. We can't hire a normal baby-sitter. Even our family has a hard time managing a G-tube feeding flawlessly."

At day care, while the other children eat their meals and snacks, Eli gets his special formula by tube. He doesn't seem bothered by eating that way.

When I visited the Borden home last week, I found an energetic and verbal little boy who chased around with his sister and gave me lots of hugs and high-fives. Then, after the rest of the family had enjoyed carryout from Culver's, Eli sat in his favorite chair while David gravity-fed formula dinner — mixed in the blender with a banana — through the tube into his tummy. It took about five minutes.

Soon, Eli will exert his own food preferences. Some children in this situation begin with baby food and work their way up. Others go right to french fries or other solid foods.

Eli may need the feeding tube for a while to supplement his oral eating. He already can drink water from a cup, so he understands swallowing at least that much.

Sarah hopes her son remembers none of this struggle as he gets older. David said he gets tearful thinking about the solution.

"Something so simple as swallowing food to nourish yourself. It's hard to even imagine him doing that at this point," he said. "I really hope he's the poster child for the program."

Call Jim Stingl at (414) 224-2017 or email at jstingl@jrn.com