New Jersey has rolled out its new computerized standardized tests for students in grades 3 to 11 and its launch has stirred up a lot of negative reaction.

Called the Partnership for Assessment of Readiness for College and Careers (or PARCC in acronym-happy education circles), the tests are suppose to measure student achievement and preparedness for college and careers. They will replace the NJASK in grades 3-8 and HSPA in high school.

Right out of the gate, the new test has become the target of the powerful New Jersey Education Association, which has launched what has to be an expensive media blitz that says the exam will divert valuable teaching time to preparing for the test, siphon off resources and put more stress on already frazzled children.

The anti-PARCC sentiment also has been amplified by some parents who are opting not to have their children take the required tests that will be administered on computers instead of with the traditional paper and No. 2 pencils.

One parent who took the practice version of the test complained that it was too difficult for her let alone for her third-grader.

All this negative feedback is reminiscent of the debut of the website for the Affordable Care Act or Obamacare in 2014, when a series of glitches made the launch a nightmare.

Some state lawmakers now want to put the PARCC exams on hold. Last week, the Assembly passed a bill that would put a moratorium on using the results of the tests to make decisions affecting students and teachers, including student placement and teacher evaluation. The legislation still awaits action in the Senate.

Despite all the angst the new exam has generated, there is a definite need for a way to measure student and teacher performance. A standardized test would also indicate how well tax dollars are being invested in our school districts.

There has been a chorus of supporters for the new online exams. They say the tests focus more on critical thinking rather than rote learning of facts. It also would be a factor in the evaluation of teachers, much to the chagrin of the NJEA.

No testing system is perfect, and PARCC has its problems, but it should be given a chance.

Princeton Superintendent Stephen Cochrane put it all in perspective in an interview with the Wall Street Journal. "Good instruction leads to good test results. We don't emphasize test prep. We emphasize critical thinking and good writing, and that leads to good results on PARCC or any assessment."



Follow The Times of Trenton on Twitter @TimesofTrenton. Find The Times of Trenton on Facebook.