The church at Mepkin Abbey has a unique cross meant to be visible as such from both the front and side entrances. It’s symbolism: The cross is the anchor of the world.

They wander in, almost haphazardly, as the minutes before high noon evaporate in the humid late-December air. The brothers bow at the small square altar, make the sign of the cross and assume their positions in the choir, several on one side of the austere church, several on the other side. Two or three guests solemnly join them.

It is the fourth day of Christmas and the monks of Mepkin Abbey are gathering for their midday prayer. The church is modestly decorated with greens and poinsettias. They sing unison hymns and carols; they read from Psalm 119, which concerns the importance of following God’s laws; and they sing again, this time antiphonally.

The bells in the tower ring three times, then thrice again, then a final three times. They signify the Christian trinity, the promise of Jesus’ birth, the past, present and future.

They produce sounds meant to be contemplated. This ringing through the live oaks and across the graves of dead brothers, this sound that echoes by the columbarium and the retreat center, that glides along the banks of the upper Cooper River is an aural representation of life here at the monastery.

Slowly, governed by unchanging ritual, the brothers move their minds and hearts and bodies in simple motions dictated by faith and commitment. They work and pray and eat. They welcome their visitors and celebrate the force that grants life and imposes death.

The unrelenting sameness of the monastic life is no confinement. The Trappists are not entrapped. Rather, this structure — rising at 3 a.m., praying together seven times a day, working each morning and each afternoon, eating together and retiring at 8 p.m. — is the framework within which the brothers may be free to perform their spiritual wanderings.

Now it is Christmastide, a joyful period for Christians of rebirth, seasoned with foreboding. Though the rituals at Mepkin Abbey remain ever the same, the church is greener than usual, the grounds are decorated with nativity scenes, the sweets after meals are somewhat more abundant.

Christ is born of a family, atop the hay, homeless, wandering, in possession of a terrible, glorious fate. The monks, they see it everywhere.

After the noon prayer, they make their way silently to the refectory for lunch, helping themselves to plates of tender salmon, scalloped potatoes with Gouda cheese and monk-grown mushrooms, salad, fruit, pumpernickel and whole grain bread and beverages.

Once they are settled, a voice projected through speakers reads from David Brooks’ latest book “The Road to Character,” in which the author describes the importance and value of reciprocal love, citing the relationship between the great English writer George Eliot (Mary Ann Evans) and George Henry Lewes, who was married to another woman and unable to divorce her.

Moral love takes precedence over legal love, the voice intones. “Love prefers deep to wide and here to there.”

The monks eat silently, listening.

Fr. Joseph Tedesco runs the monastic kitchen. He knows that the brothers enjoyed the food when the leftovers disappear quickly, he says. If the leftovers linger in their metal pans, it’s a sign of mild discontent. Still, nothing goes to waste. What’s left uneaten ends up in a soup or stew.

These days Fr. Joe is keeping to a healthy menu that features whole grains, vegetables and seafood. No red meat. No foul. No whole milk (though Fr. Joe will add cream to the potatoes and chowders). Desserts are not uncommon. Fr. Joe is a very good baker.

“The food has to be nutritious, look good and taste good,” he says. “For us, whose lives are really kind of stripped down, food is one of the ways for life to feel complete. It helps to have a good meal.” Besides, he says, eating together is among the most sacred of acts.

He has consulted with a nutritionist and he works closely with the abbey nurse. The newer men see their health improve after a few months at the monastery. A few might abandon their medications. This is one way Fr. Joe measures success.

Some food is delivered to the monastery, but much of it is purchased at the store. Once every two weeks, Fr. Joe drives to Charleston to go shopping. He visits Costco, Sam’s Club, Crosby’s Seafood, International Gourmet and Atlantic Bread Company to stock up. It takes him up to five hours.

The nativity

Outside, between the rectory and the visitors’ center, several nativity scenes are installed along the walking path. They are the larger, longer-lasting examples of creches on display in November and early December as part of the annual Mepkin Abbey Creche Festival.

Fr. Guerric Heckel oversees the project. He and his team of volunteers display more than 50 nativity scenes from all over the world in the library, then fling open the doors to the public.

This season, the exhibit included prints by Vermont artist Janet McKenzie and one painting called “The Night Visitors” she painted on commission for Mepkin Abbey. The Cistercian monks living their quiet lives of contemplation along the banks of the Cooper River in this remote part of Berkeley County are not of the sequestered sort who know nothing of the outside world.

No, the brothers interact with the world at large. They deliver their home-grown mushrooms to the distributors, helping to load the trucks. They host concerts in the church. They welcome visitors on retreat. They drive and shop and visit doctors and attend meetings.

And they commission art.

In the mid-2000s, the brothers restored Clermont Cemetery, an African-American burial ground on the grounds of the monastery. Then-abbot Francis Kline wanted to commemorate the slaves and their contributions through art, so he asked artist Jonathan Green to make a painting.

Green produced a stunning work called “Seeking,” which referenced an initiation ritual that leads to spiritual enlightenment. It hangs today in the church at Mepkin Abbey.

This year, McKenzie was asked by Fr. Guerric to make a painting for Christmas, perhaps one that reflected the values of the community. “The Night Visitors” portrays the culminating moment of a journey under the star of Bethlehem to the Holy Family. The visitors surround the newborn king with eyes closed in contemplative prayer. Mary, instead, looks out from the canvas, drawing the viewer’s gaze.

She is strong yet perhaps sad, draped in a purple shawl. Jesus is swaddled in pink. The image is meant to convey the gentle side of men’s characters, according to the artist. And the figures constitute a multicultural gathering that signifies togetherness and reconciliation.

If the painting seems infused by a dark longing, it’s because McKenzie was moved by the June 17 Emanuel AME Church shooting, which guided her hand.

The wonder

For Abbot Stan Gumula, Christmas is summed up in the phrase found in John 1:14, “The Word became flesh and made his dwelling among us.” This is what makes Christianity unique among religions, he says. God descends to Earth for the sake of mankind, forming a spiritual bridge between the profane and the sacred. In other religions, the earthbound aspire to become divine. In Christianity, the divine God aspires to join the earthbound and, remarkably, finds a way to do so.

“That for me is Christmas,” Abbot Stan says. And with 56 Christmases under his monk’s rope belt, “It still is the wonder.”

Something else is a wonder, something that is not always given its due, he says. Jesus was born into a family. He had a loving father and mother. He was nurtured. He gained friends and admirers. This was the sentiment expressed by Pope Francis in a homily delivered during his visit to the U.S. last year, and it captured Abbot Stan’s imagination.

“God came into the world in a family,” he says. “This is where we are going to find God: in our relationships. Relationships are primary.” Feasts and fasts, constant prayer and ritual, “That’s not what makes us holy.” Holiness, perhaps, is easier than that. It is expressed through love of one another. “If you say you love God and hate the brother next to you, you are not loving God.”

The Word was made flesh. The infinite love expressed in this action remains difficult to grasp. It is why Abbot Stan has been so shocked by the xenophobic hate and bigotry he has witnessed this year, especially the antipathy toward Muslims, now expressed even by presidential candidates.

Early in 2015, he visited a mosque hoping his presence might function like a vaccine among the Muslims against the disease of intolerance. He watched in horror the plight of Syrian refugees. Then something unspeakable happened: a white supremacist joined a Bible study group at Emanuel AME Church in Charleston and, after an hour spent with 12 black church members, shot and killed nine of them.

Such hate. And then, forgiveness. Abbot Stan was moved to write a letter of love and solidarity to the church.

“I want to be a part of people who can forgive in that way,” he says. “I’d like to hope I would do that, but I don’t know that I would.”

And here, Abbot Stan reveals a hidden truth about the monastic life: It is rich in experiences that teach and inform and inspire the brothers to become better people. Mepkin Abbey is not exactly a place of retreat from the “real world,” nor is it a sanctuary populated by holy and wise men who might deign to bequeath upon their worshipful and awestruck visitors a holy word.

No. The brothers are students of God, students of the world, absorbing what they can, how they can, in an effort to gain insight into the divine order of things.

“It’s always a two-way street,” Abbot Stan says.

Reach Adam Parker at (843) 937-5902. Follow him at facebook.com/aparkerwriter.