Seven sexual assaults were reported by service members in a unit formed by the Marine Corps to study the integration of women into all ground combat roles, according to a 103-page report obtained and published by The Washington Post Thursday.

“Sexual assaults reported during the life of the ITF [Ground Combat Element Integrated Task Force] were at a rate slightly higher than those experienced in other military populations,” according to the report.

Still, the report concluded that there’s no evidence to suggest that sexual assaults in the Marines would rise after gender integration in ground combat units.

“While occurrences of both sexual harassment and assault were reported in the ITF, there is no basis to assume that integration will change the overall rate of these activities in the Marine Corps,” according to the report.

The report was part of a larger study of integrating women into all jobs. A summary of the study was released last month and sparked controversy for suggesting all-male units outperformed those with women. The sexual assault information was not included in the summary.

The report does not specify the circumstances of the sexual assaults or whether men or women reported them. One was reported formally, while the remaining six were reported anonymously, according to the report.

The news of the sexual assaults comes as Defense Secretary Ashton Carter is deciding whether to grant any exceptions to the order to open all military jobs to women. The Marines are reportedly the only service branch that requested any exemptions.

As part of its effort to determine whether to ask for exemptions, the Marines formed the ITF unit with 300 men and 100 women. The nine-month study included training and a simulation of being deployed.

In a statement to The Post, Marine Corps spokesman Maj. Chris Devine said the sexual assaults could have happened outside the ITF.

“This behavior — whether on duty, on liberty or online — is not in keeping with our core values and is detrimental to victims and to unit cohesion and readiness,” Devine said. “Without violating the confidentiality of our Marines, it’s impossible to tell if the sexual assaults they experienced occurred at the ITF, while on liberty or leave, or at a prior unit. Because of the anonymous reporting, these cases of sexual assaults could have occurred [as a member of the integrated task force] and could have occurred prior to joining.”

In the whole of the Marines, 7.9 percent of women were sexually assaulted in the past year, according to the report.

One of the female Marines who participated in the study told The Post she was surprised by the reports of sexual assault. She said the task force had training on sexual assault awareness and prevention, as well as sexual assault prevention and response officers, just like other units she has been a part of.

“I never experienced, saw or heard of any sexual assault cases while I was with the unit,” Sgt. Danielle Beck said. “If there were any, it should have been addressed to the entire unit.”

The report also delves into the details of the publically released summary of the unit’s performance. The report found both positives and negatives in integrating women into all ground combat jobs.

Positives include increased diversity, superior decision-making skills of integrated groups and lower instances of disciplinary actions. Negatives include twice as many injuries, less accuracy with certain weapons and slower tactical movements.

Still, the report does not make a recommendation as to whether to integrate women into all units.

“In the end, the recommendation of the commandant will have to be based on best military judgment,” according to the report, “as there cannot be a definitive correct answer, but simply one that is best supported by empirical evidence and formulated with the needs of the Marine Corps in mind.”