Health Scientists Find That Most Types Of Cancer Are Caused By ‘Bad Luck’ CREDIT: Shutterstock

About two thirds of cancers in adults largely stem from what amounts to bad luck, rather than specific lifestyle choices, according to a new study conducted by Johns Hopkins researchers. The study authors anticipate that their findings could change the way that cancer prevention is funded.

According to the study, which was published in the Science journal on Friday, the majority of cancers can be attributed to random gene mutations that occur when stem cells divide. That helps explain why certain tissues are more likely to give rise to human cancers.

For instance, researchers found that the pancreas, the brain, and the small intestine tend to develop cancerous cells as a result of cell division. While all cancers stem from a combination of environmental and genetic factors, developing cancer in certain tissues can be mostly chalked up to bad luck — a mutation that arises from the normal process of stem cell replication.

Although scientists were already well aware of that dynamic, the latest results illustrate just how common this type of random mutation is. Among the 31 types of cancers that the researchers examined, 22 were identified as “bad luck” cancers.

Considering that evidence, our cancer prevention efforts may need to shift toward an attempt to screen for the mutations in the tissues that are particularly prone to this phenomenon.

“If two-thirds of cancer incidence across tissues is explained by random DNA mutations that occur when stem cells divide, then changing our lifestyle and habits will be a huge help in preventing certain cancers, but this may not be as effective for a variety of others,” Cristian Tomasetti, an assistant professor of oncology at Johns Hopkins and one of the co-authors of the study, told BBC News. “We should focus more resources on finding ways to detect such cancers at early, curable stages.”

As Tomasetti alludes to, the findings don’t mean that doctors should stop encouraging lifestyle changes that can help lower Americans’ risk of developing cancer. Certainly, some cancers are greatly influenced by individual choices. Lung cancer and skin cancer, for instance, have strong correlations to smoking and spending time in the sun. Altogether, the study authors identified nine types of cancer that likely arise mostly due to genetics, pollution, and personal habits.

Ultimately, with more information about what exactly causes cancerous cells, scientists and doctors may be better equipped to figure out how to stop their spread.

“All cancers are caused by a combination of bad luck, the environment, and heredity, and we’ve created a model that may help quantify how much of these three factors contribute to cancer development,” Bert Vogelstein, the study’s second co-author, said in a statement.

Cancer is the second leading cause of death for Americans, killing about 185 people for every 100,000. There’s recently been some good news in this area, however. Nationally, cancer mortality rates have been falling over the past two decades; this week, the American Cancer Society reported that the number of deaths from cancer has dropped 22 percent since 1991. Death rates from breast cancer, prostate cancer, and colon cancer have seen particularly significant declines.