Conservative watchdog group Judicial Watch and voter fraud watchdog group True the Vote announced Friday they have reached an “historic settlement” in their lawsuit against election officials in Ohio.

The 2012 “Judicial Watch/True the Vote lawsuit charged Ohio election officials with failing to take reasonable steps to maintain clean voter registration lists as required by Section 8 of the National Voter Registration Act,” Judicial Watch President Tom Fitton wrote in a press release.

The settlement – “the first of its kind in the history of the National Voter Registration Act” – was reached with the help of Ohio Secretary of State Jon Husted, which resulted in the state agreeing to take specific measures to ensure compliance with the Act.

According to Judicial Watch:

Under the terms of the settlement, which extend through November 2018, the State of Ohio specifically agreed to take or continue to take the following nine actions relating to voter roll list maintenance and NVRA compliance: To participate in the State and Territorial Exchange of Vital Events (STEVE) to obtain out-of-state death information. To participate in the Interstate Voter Registration Cross-Check program administered by the Kansas Secretary of State to identify registered voters who have moved out-of-state. To use Ohio Bureau of Motor Vehicles data to identify registered voters who move within Ohio, with frequent updates being sent to local officials. To use an online voter registration change of address website to encourage voters to keep their registration information current. To conduct a special, monthly, duplicate registration elimination program, within defined technical thresholds, for all Ohio County boards of election voter lists. To keep online, and available for public access, a current voter registration list. To require the county boards of election to send accurate survey information to the Secretary of State’s Office, to be compiled and forwarded to the Election Assistance commission for its NVRA-related surveys. To use reasonable efforts to promote the expanded use by recent college graduates of Ohio’s online voter registration change of address system, including education to remind college graduates to keep their voter registration addresses and information current and to request necessary updates; and to endeavor to coordinate these activities in conjunction with Ohio’s colleges and universities. To direct boards of election to send confirmation notices annually to voters who may be inactive; and to query boards of election on a regular basis as to whether this direction is being followed.

In an email, Fitton said the Obama Justice Department “has zero interest in enforcing laws to ensure clean elections,” which is why groups like Judicial Watch and True the Vote have made election fraud a top priority.

Fitton said the groups continue to watch election officials, particularly in battleground states, and are working to ensure clean voter rolls across the country.

Fitton wrote:

Judicial Watch notified a dozen states that they must clean up their voter registration lists or face lawsuits. Judicial Watch and True the Vote subsequently filed lawsuits against election officials in Indiana and Ohio, and prompted the state of Florida and other states, without litigation, to remove thousands of ineligible voters from state registration lists. According to independent research published by Pew Charitable Trusts in February 2012, approximately 24 million active voter registrations throughout the United States – or one out of every eight registrations – are either no longer valid or are significantly inaccurate. Stay tuned. The forces on the Left are not going to be pleased with this turn of events because it hampers their ability to steal elections. So you can expect leftists groups like Project Vote and the various ACORN spinoffs (with help from the Obama Justice Department) to continue to wreak havoc in the electoral process. We must remain vigilant if we are to counter these efforts effectively. And we will. In fact, we have active litigation over clean election rolls in Indiana and are seeking to defend North Carolina clean election laws from a coordinated assault by Eric Holder and fronts for Al Sharpton and other radicals.

More from Judicial Watch and True the Vote.

Read: Sheriff Arpaio: Feds trained his deputies to profile, now demands $38M in compliance costs