AURORA — The fundraising effort for a permanent memorial to the victims and families of the Aurora theater shooting is going much slower than organizers envisioned, leading them to significantly lower the financial objective from the original $400,000 goal.

Since fundraising began in December, a committee overseeing the effort has brought in about $15,000 in donations. The goal now is to raise $50,000.

“We think $50,000 might do a nice memorial,” said Aurora City Councilwoman Barb Cleland, a member of the Reflection Memorial Garden committee. “We’ll see if that’s enough. We just don’t know.”

The plan for the memorial garden would be to extend the current xeriscape garden at the Aurora Municipal Center, adding benches, artwork, sculptures and pathways. The idea is to provide a serene place for survivors, family members and the community to reflect and remember the victims.

It’s not clear how those plans will change given the lower projected budget, officials said.

For a variety of reasons, outreach to potential individual donors has been lacking. But as the three-year anniversary of the July 20, 2012, massacre — in which 12 were killed and 70 wounded — nears, fundraising efforts are ramping up.

Megan Sullivan, whose brother, Alex, died in the shooting, said maybe the tragedy isn’t in the forefront of people’s minds.

“We’re just not getting the response we would have hoped for — that’s both through outreach and with business donations,” said Sullivan, who is also on the memorial garden committee.

City spokeswoman Kim Stuart, also a member of the committee, said commercials began airing on Comcast network-TV stations and Aurora TV in May. Social media has also been used to bring attention to the 7/20 Memorial Foundation fund.

The effort is expanding to include letters and phone calls and meetings with individuals and organizations, Stuart said.

It took more than eight years for a permanent memorial for the Columbine High School shooting, which happened in 1999. The memorial was dedicated in 2007.

Aurora Mayor Steve Hogan said he had hoped fundraising would have started a little sooner. But he said it was important to give the families of those killed or wounded enough time to grieve.

He will reach out Sunday to churchgoers of the Highpoint Church in Aurora. Its pastor, he said, feels it is important to bring the fundraising message to parishioners there.

“I think what we were trying to do was balance the needs and desires of the families of the victims and move forward at a pace they were comfortable with,” Hogan said. “Every time I was asked about it, the word that came back was that the families weren’t ready yet.

“Even though I wanted to do something sooner, they weren’t ready yet — and if they’re not ready yet, why force something upon them?”

Carlos Illescas: 303-954-1175, cillescas@denverpost.com or twitter.com/cillescasdp

To donate to the reflection memorial garden:

Log onto https://npo.justgive.org/720memorial