Reprinted from REPORT ON MEDICARE COMPLIANCE , the nation's leading source of news and strategic information on Medicare compliance, Stark and other big-dollar issues of concern to health care compliance officers.

Enforcement of the Stark law keeps taking new directions, and for the first time it veered into physician compensation inside a practice, unrelated to hospital referrals. New York Heart Center, a cardiology group practice with seven offices, agreed to pay $1.336 million to settle false claims allegations stemming from Stark violations, the U.S. Attorney’s Office for the Northern District of New York said Aug. 14.

According to the settlement, compensation for physicians who were partners in New York Heart Center allegedly was based on a formula that directly incorporated the volume or value of their orders for CT scans and nuclear diagnostic tests they didn’t personally perform, but referred to others in their medical group, from September 2007 to August 2008. That allegedly violated the Stark law, which bans Medicare payments to an entity for “designated health services,” such as radiology and certain other imaging services, if they were ordered by physicians who have a financial relationship with the entity, unless an exception applies.

“The issue of internal physician practice compensation under Stark has been a sleeping giant,” says Atlanta attorney Alan Rumph, who is with Baker Donelson. “It’s not like physician compensation from a hospital,” which has dominated Stark-based false claims cases, including the $85 million settlement with Halifax Health (RMC 3/10/14, p. 1) and the $237 million judgment against Tuomey Healthcare after a trial (RMC 10/7/13, p. 1).

Thomas Spina, chief of the civil division for the U.S. Attorney’s Office, tells RMC there was no whistleblower who exposed alleged compensation violations at New York Heart Center or an audit under way when problems came to the U.S. attorney’s attention. “Someone tipped us off,” he says, but declines to be more specific. The exception to the Stark law for group practices providing in-office ancillary services, which could have gotten New York Heart Center off the hook, did not apply, Spina says.

The compensation plan that led to the Stark settlement was retired a long time ago, says Stewart Weisman, an attorney for New York Heart Center. Even so, the physicians believed it was legal, and had obtained counsel’s advice before implementing it. “The practice went to great lengths to comply with the opinions,” Weisman says. According to the compensation formula, physicians referred certain diagnostic tests to other physicians in the medical group. Because the referring physicians didn’t personally perform the technical component, the government alleged the referrals violated the Stark law, he says. “We disagreed,” Weisman says. Rather than risk litigation, however, New York Heart Center settled the case. It has since switched to a productivity compensation arrangement, he says.

Weisman notes that no unnecessary medical procedures were performed when the allegedly noncompliant compensation plan was in effect. “Looking at the records, the physicians didn’t earn any more money after the productivity plan than they did before because there were caps on compensation, so there was no appreciable increase in tests other than the vagaries in medicine,” he says. New York Heart Center did not admit liability in the settlement.

Notwithstanding the allegations against New York Heart Center, which operates in Syracuse and other upstate cities, physicians generally have more leeway than other DHS entities to reap the fruits of their referrals, Rumph says. Compensation from hospitals, labs and other DHS entities can’t take the volume or value of referrals into account in any manner, whether it’s direct or indirect, he says. Congress and CMS made a policy decision, however, that physicians may receive from their group practices a share of income from DHS if it’s indirectly related to their referrals. “This is a place where group practices are treated more favorably than any other compensation relationship under the Stark law,” Rumph says.

But CMS has made it clear that group practices must steer clear of compensation based directly on referrals, he says. “If you refer 100 CT scans and get the profits based on the 100 CT scans, that’s clearly improper,” he says. It’s often possible, however, to achieve something like this, perhaps by sharing profits with doctors based on their compensation from non-DHS services or personally performed work relative value units — which CMS considers permissible compensation methods only indirectly related to referrals, Rumph says.

“The bottom line is, it’s all very complicated,” says Rumph, who was not involved in the New York Heart Center case. “The arcane rules can really bite a practice. It’s a very complex area and many practices don’t realize Stark reaches in and regulates how they can distribute their DHS income. Other practices are aware of the rules and try to comply but may miss something.”

One Stark evasive tactic is the de minimis rule. If DHS revenues are less than 5% of a group practice’s total revenues and DHS revenues allocated to each physician are less than 5% of his or her total compensation, “you can use any method of compensation you want” and are home free with regulators and enforcers, Rumph says. “The de minimis rule often saves practices that are not aware of it.”

In the end, he anticipates more whistleblower cases built on the New York Heart Center settlement. “They will see that practices are not satisfying Stark,” Rumph says. Also, more practices may self-disclose to CMS under its self-referral disclosure protocol even though there are no hospital referrals implicated. “You would hope that CMS would be more forgiving in settling for a smaller than normal fraction of DHS referrals” because practices often lack the compliance resources enjoyed by hospitals, which are the usual hat-in-hand DHS entities that use the self-disclosure process established by the Affordable Care Act.

In a statement, another attorney for New York Heart Center, Kirk Ogrosky, former deputy chief of the fraud section for the Department of Justice’s criminal division, said the medical group “is committed to providing only the best in quality cardiology services in the region.” Ogrosky, with Arnold & Porter in Washington, D.C., contends “the underlying dispute was a compensation arrangement that paid the group physicians less than they made prior to the agreement, and it had absolutely no impact on the number of tests ordered or provided.”

Read the press release on the heart center case at http://go.usa.gov/NXZP.

© 2014 by Atlantic Information Services, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

For practical help in reducing potentially enormous liabilities under complex, ever-changing physician self-referral regs, check out the comprehensive Guide to Complying With Stark Physician Self-Referral Rules at the AIS Marketplace.