CHELMSFORD, Mass.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Kronos Incorporated today announced the latest release of its Kronos Workforce Ready suite – which delivers enterprise-class workforce management solutions in the cloud to small and midsize businesses (SMBs) – including several innovative and intuitive features to help organizations drive effective human resources, recruiting, talent management, scheduling, and compliance strategies.

News Facts

Enhancements to Workforce Ready HR continue to help SMBs effectively recruit, manage, and reward the workforce : Powerful recruiting and onboarding tools help SMBs win the increasingly difficult battle for talent with an intuitive and enticing applicant experience, a flexible and customizable job requisition workflow, and onboarding features to facilitate internal communication between multiple colleagues and drive positive employee engagement from the first day on the job. Employees and managers who desire consistent job feedback will appreciate an enhanced performance management process with the ability to import past performance review information, expand core values and competencies, initiate mid-year reviews, and add weighted percentages to both company and employee personal goals. An updated integration with easyBackgrounds is now available via the Workforce Ready Marketplace with enhanced security settings, reporting features, and an a la carte menu of competitively priced options that adds more flexibility for background searches and streamlines the entire process to help organizations more efficiently hire best-fit applicants.

help SMBs : Ease-of-use and employee self-service features continue to drive positive user experience while fostering higher employee engagement: Employee self-service with new mobile options can be added to allow employees to pick up and/or drop work shifts in the scheduling module. Simple and secure access to benefits management information with added export capabilities reduces benefits administration burden with new carrier reconciliation and confirmation features while also providing easier insight to employee benefits information.

continue to drive positive user experience while fostering higher employee engagement: Streamlined timekeeping and robust scheduling tools continue to improve organizational efficiencies: Ability to automate manual processes often associated with an attendance management point system while providing more flexible options for employee time-off requests. Time and attendance features have been added to drastically reduce time needed to process payroll with new payroll exports for international organizations and reporting tools that make it easier to access specific workforce data. Enhanced functionality for the recently launched Workforce Ready Scheduler module, including employee workday breakdown by cost center, scheduling conflict alerts, new time off displays, and the ability to cut and paste shifts, streamlines the scheduling process to be simpler and more efficient for shift planners.

continue to improve organizational efficiencies: Workforce Ready continues to help SMBs minimize compliance risk associated with ever-changing rules and regulations : Benefits plan visibility and auto-population features provide organizations with tools that simplify management of their Affordable Care Act (ACA) strategy – or even implement ACA features mid-year – by capturing and reporting data and forms (e.g. 1094-C, 1095-C, etc.) required to meet compliance as the January 2016 reporting deadline nears. Automation and reporting enhancements reduce the administrative burden of managing I-9 tax forms and accommodating Immigrations and Customs Enforcement (ICE) auditing. Specific tools to reduce compliance risk associated with new California labor laws, including California Notice to Employee forms, shift guarantee, and split shift premium.

:

Supporting Quotes

Robin Mitnick, director of payroll, New York Health & Racquet Club

“Many of our employees, both full- and part-timers, work second jobs and have other careers. They also have lives. With greater visibility into schedules, HR, benefits, payroll, and staffing across our different locations throughout New York City, we can make better decisions for our workforce to improve employee engagement and satisfaction. The self-service features of Workforce Ready also empower our employees to actively participate in workforce management. Happy employees lead to happy customers, and Kronos solutions help us complete this virtuous circle.”

Bob DelPonte, vice president and general manager, small and midsize business, Kronos

“Our development team continues to drive innovation for small and midsize organizations by working closely with customers and our network of internal and external thought leaders to update monthly product releases with features and functions needed to survive and thrive in this competitive, regulatory-heavy landscape. The beauty of the Workforce Ready cloud model is that these new features are automatically pushed out and integrated into our customers’ platforms so they can stay ahead of the competition.”

Supporting Resources

About Kronos Incorporated

Kronos is the global leader in delivering workforce management solutions in the cloud. Tens of thousands of organizations in more than 100 countries — including more than half of the Fortune 1000® — use Kronos to control labor costs, minimize compliance risk, and improve workforce productivity. Learn more about Kronos industry-specific time and attendance, scheduling, absence management, HR and payroll, hiring, and labor analytics applications at www.kronos.com. Kronos: Workforce Innovation That Works™.

© 2015 Kronos Incorporated. All rights reserved. Kronos and the Kronos logo are registered trademarks and Workforce Innovation That Works is a trademark of Kronos Incorporated or a related company. See a complete list of Kronos trademarks. All other trademarks, if any, are property of their respective owners.