In the late 1980’s Tupelo’s community leaders saw a need and took action. As a result, Tupelo’s Major Thoroughfare Program was created and became a model for cities around the country to make sustained investments in their infrastructure. This spring, the registered voters of Tupelo will be asked to vote for the sixth time on a special 10-mill levy to continue improve and build roads in the city proposed by the citizen-driven Major Thoroughfare Committee and approved by the Tupelo City Council.

Since its creation in 1991, the Major Thoroughfare Program has enjoyed unparalleled success which has greatly contributed to the economic growth of our city and our region. Several of the recent successes of this great program are evidenced by the northern loop, the improvements to South Gloster and the ongoing East Main Street project which will be completed this summer.

The proposed Phase VI of this program will include the continuation of the previously slated Thomas Street/Highway 6 interchange, improvements to West Jackson Street and maintenance and signalization improvements that will help alleviate traffic congestion throughout the city and make your daily commutes easier. The proposals for this next phase have been guided by public opinion surveys, engineering surveys, the work of the Major Thoroughfare Committee members, the Tupelo City Council and the city’s administration department. We feel that this next phase will continue to enhance the livability of our All-America City as well as continue to provide a basis for the recruitment of employers to our region.

Our great infrastructure is a major reason for our success in recruiting local manufacturers, small business and job creators that grow our economy. Now is the time to keep on keeping on as so many areas continue to fall behind as they continue to deal with the aftermath of the Great Recession while Tupelo’s economy is growing at a brisk pace.

To paraphrase the late George McLean, if we want a better city, it is up to us to build it, because no one is going to do it for us. That has always been the mindset of our progressive leaders and at this critical juncture it is not the time to change our philosophy.

The continuation of this crucial program is vital to the efforts to continue to revitalize our neighborhoods, our schools and our city. Please consider joining the effort to help pass this citizen-led initiative.

In the coming weeks, members of the Major Thoroughfare Committee, your council members and I will be visiting with you to discuss in detail the priorities and finer points of Phase VI of the Major Thoroughfare Program. We invite you to ask questions and discuss any details.

The Major Thoroughfare Program has been a huge success for the City of Tupelo, and I think we can all agree that the continuation of the program is vital to the continued growth of our All-America City.

Jason Shelton, a Democrat, is serving is first term as mayor of Tupelo. Contact him at Leesha.Faulkner@tupeloms.gov.