Elizabeth Hahn

The health care environment has undergone rapid reform. The use of Nurse Practitioners (NPs) to help fill the gap of primary care providers is necessary to increase patient access to care ultimately reducing mortalities, emergency department visits and hospitalizations (HealthAffairs, 2013). According to Cross & Kelly (2014), NPs “provide quality, cost-effective care across a variety of populations” (p. 28). Effective health care reform will require recognition of NPs as independent primary care providers. State legislatures must reform the NPs scope of practice to conform to the ever evolving, complex health care industry we are faced with today.

The passage of the Affordable Care Act of 2010 was a monumental step forward in improving access to health care services. Its primary purpose was to increase access to health care through regulating the health care industry, providing tax credits and implementing advanced financing and delivery models (Mason et al., 2014). Since its implementation, approximately 32 million previously uninsured Americans have been seeking care under a primary care provider (Cross & Kelly, 2014). However, there is a growing shortage of primary care physicians in the United States, with no significant increase anticipated (Cross & Kelly, 2014). This leaves a large gap in health care coverage between available primary care providers and previously uninsured individuals.

The Health Resources and Services Administration has identified 5,700 geographic areas containing 55 million individuals with a shortage to primary care (HealthAffairs, 2013). These identified areas would need more than 15,000 providers to meet the target ratio of one primary care provider for every 2,000 individuals (HealthAffairs, 2013). Many initiatives to improve access to care focus on increasing the supply of physicians who serve as primary care providers. Although the role of the NP has been around since 1965, it has only recently gained attention as the passage of the ACA has placed a higher demand on current primary care providers.

NPs are nationally certified and licensed by each state and are able to diagnose, prescribe and treat acute and chronic illnesses. Currently, approximately 189,000 NPs practice in the U.S., with 52 percent of them working in a primary care setting (Cross & Kelly, 2014). By comparison, within the last decade the rate of specialty care physicians has exceeded the rate of primary care physicians with an estimated 70 percent in specialty practice (Cross & Kelly, 2014). This has inevitably left primary care physicians in high demand. Access to care depends on the availability of care to be delivered. To address this growing concern, it seems not only logical, but necessary to further develop the role of the NP to meet the increased demands for primary care providers, and ultimately, for the betterment of patient outcomes. However, many barriers continue to be present.

State laws dictate NPs scope of practice, with only about one-third of the nation allowing NPs to practice without restrictions (Hein & Fleck, 2014). Thirty-two states require physician involvement to either diagnose and treat or prescribe medications (HealthAffairs, 2013). Nonrestrictive practice is defined as “licensure that allows diagnosis, ordering/interpretation of diagnostic tests, treatment, and prescribing privileges regulated by the board of nursing without physician oversight” (Cross & Kelly, 2014, p. 22). Reduced practice limits NPs scope in at least one area and/or requires physician oversight.

Change undoubtedly does not come without opposition. Physician groups opposed to expanding the role of the NP site patient safety as a concern (HealthAffairs, 2013). However, patient outcomes and satisfaction levels have been found to be equal amongst NPs and physicians, with some studies citing higher satisfaction levels with NPs (Cross & Kelly, 2014). Studies have found patients seeing NPs do better on measures related to patient follow-up, time spent in consultation and provision of screening, assessment and counseling services (HealthAffairs, 2013). Studies have also shown since the addition of NPs to the health care environment, there has been an increase in patient access to care (Cross & Kelly, 2014), precisely what we as a nation are trying to remedy.

MY VOICE

Elizabeth Hahn, Sioux Falls, is a graduate family nurse practitioner student at the University of North Dakota. Opinions expressed are solely those of the author and do not reflect those of the university. My Voice columns should be 500 to 700 words. Submissions should include a portrait-type photograph of the author. Authors also should include their full name, age, occupation and relevant organizational memberships.

Send columns to Argus Leader, Box 5034, Sioux Falls, SD 57117-5034, fax them to 605-331-2294 or email them to letters@argusleader.com.

Read or Share this story: http://argusne.ws/1ptkKAV