A new generation of Latinos continues to move up in American politics. Some are immigrants, others are homegrown; most are progressive, but conservatives have elevated serious talent as well. Last year's list of excellent Latinos in politics focused on Capitol Hill. This year's looks further, to Latinos in key roles across the spectrum of American politics.

In 2014, the Obama administration is the most significant catalyst of Latino advancement in professional American politics. While Latinos remain underrepresented in government, more Latinos are doing important work in Washington than ever before. Julián Castro's rise to Secretary of Housing and Urban Development creates a viable Latino contender in national politics for the Democratic Party.

On the other side of American politics, organizations like the LIBRE Initiative are beginning to consolidate top Latino conservative talent into serious political machinery. These top Latino operatives will be essential to future conservative causes, campaigns, and eventually, presidencies when Republicans someday return to the White House.

Regardless of where you fall on the American political spectrum, the facts to keep in mind are these:

There are only 28 Latino members of the House of Representatives. Nine are Latina.

There are only three Latino Senators, all Cuban-American men.

In the 2012 elections, 11 million Latinos voted. Over 12 million eligible Latinos did not.

66,000 Latino citizens become eligible to vote every month.

Ultimately, Latino political priorities (read: immigration reform) will forever live or die in Washington on the threat of enough registered voters taking action on Election Day. Our political heritage in America will be defined less by how we vote than by how many of us are registered vote and where. This Hispanic Heritage Month, consider the impact you can have by not just registering to vote, but registering your friends and neighbors too.

Well, that's all I've got. Without further ado, here are 40 Latinos under 40 years old doing great work in politics, listed alphabetically by first name. Congratulations to everyone who made this year's list.

Surely this list is not all-inclusive. Who is missing? Let me know in the comments or tweet them at @vato. Meanwhile, check out these other useful Latinos lists as well:

Follow Pablo Manriquez on Twitter: www.twitter.com/vato