Dana Milbank and the star of those GOP debates. A couple of weeks ago, I wrote: “Let’s not mince words: Donald Trump is a bigot and a racist.” I went with fascist. You say tomato, I say “watch out, that idiot is throwing tomatoes.” “Let’s not mince words,” somebody tweeted under the name Helios Megistos. “Milbank is an anti-white parasite and a bigoted kike supremacist.” “[Trump] may well be a bigot and a racist,” one Michael Banfield wrote me via email. “But one thing is certain: The only thing missing from your photo is a [vulgar word for penis] in your mouth, gay bastard.” Various Trump defenders derided Muslims as “Muzzies” and “Mo-slimes.” One reader informed me that “Muslims worship a man who f----- a 9-year-old.” They spoke of the “sociopath Hussein” — President Obama — and his “Islamic butt buddies.” But mostly they zeroed in on my Judaism, which they discovered from Internet searches. “You are a kike communist,” one informed me. Another called my girlfriend, who has a common Jewish surname, a “Gross Jewess.” Still another sent me a Nazi-style cartoon of a big-nosed Jewish man with a skull cap and bad teeth. Yes, those would be Trump supporters. But then, would you really be surprised if one of those tweets came straight from the Donald? The tweets I received in response to my Trump piece that week were more succinct. Like the one that simply said “Traitor.” ...the Trump-backers’ venom is without precedent. His supporters surely aren’t all bigots — but he is bringing the bigoted in from the cold. And giving them warm mugs of bile. The Washington Post goes more with… what is the right term for a former secret police official turned strong-man leader who rules through personal charisma, fear, and cronyism. Oh, yeah. Fascist. For Donald Trump, nothing merits respect more than high poll numbers, including his own, which the Republican presidential hopeful equates with strength, intelligence and success. In Mr. Trump’s worldview, that simplistic formulation is reason alone to accord deference and esteem to Vladimir Putin — never mind that the Russian president is an autocrat whose popularity at home rests in no small measure on having silenced critics whose views, were they allowed a public airing, might put a crimp in his approval rating. For his part, Mr. Putin, whose cynicism and snarling vulgarity are mirrored in Mr. Trump’s own political oratory, sees in the U.S. mogul a man after his own heart. For the Russian president, who once recommended that a journalist get circumcised, Mr. Trump’s suggestion that Fox News’s Megyn Kelly was menstruating when she challenged him must have seemed a bon mot, if a little too subtle for the Russian’s taste. Ditto Mr. Trump’s indulgence and outright approval of his supporters’ use of violence. Trump and Putin would probably have some very productive meetings when it comes to dividing the world into Trumpistan and Putinia. And putting lots of signs on things so they know who owns what. David Ignatius on why, no matter what he says, Obama can’t seem to calm down people who are determined to Not Be Calm. Obama’s speech was a homily to American values. He welcomed new citizens from 25 countries to the fellowship defined by our Constitution and Bill of Rights: “You don’t look alike. You don’t worship the same way. But here, surrounded by the very documents whose values bind us together as one people, you’ve raised your hand and sworn a sacred oath.” Obama delivered a blunt message to those who are embracing Donald Trump’s counternarrative of nativism and intolerance: “The truth is, being an American is hard. Being part of a democratic government is hard. Being a citizen is hard. It is a challenge. It’s supposed to be. There’s no respite from our ideals. All of us are called to live up to our expectations for ourselves — not just when it’s convenient, but when it’s inconvenient. When it’s tough. When we’re afraid.” As Obama prepares to begin the last year of his presidency, he stands in an unusual position on the national stage: He is the rationalist, a creature of intellect rather than emotion. Dry as a bone, often disdainful of politics, averse to selling his policies (and also not very good at it), he is sometimes his own worst enemy. But compared with our other recent two-term presidents who stumbled as they neared the finish line, Obama seems to be gaining strength. Reason vs. rhetoric. Logic vs. Fear. Steel-cage death match scheduled for next November. The New York Times looks back… no, wait. That’s forward. Or is it?

How many laws making it harder to get an abortion will pass before the Supreme Court sees them for what they are — part of a tireless, coordinated nationwide assault on the right of women to control what happens with their own bodies without the interference of politicians? One answer is, no fewer than 288. That’s how many abortion restrictions states have enacted since the beginning of 2011, when aggressively anti-choice lawmakers swept into statehouses around the country. The trend accelerated in 2015, as state legislators passed 57 new constraints on a woman’s right to choose. Hundreds more were considered, most of which could come up again in 2016.

Ross Douthat and the Secret Fate of Obamacare…

For the first six years of the Obama era, many Republicans made an apocalyptic case against the president’s health care law. It was unconstitutional, immoral, borderline tyrannical. It wouldn’t just fail: It would fail disastrously, in a death spiral that would take down most of American health care as we know it. Then the apocalypse failed to arrive. The law survived two Supreme Court challenges; it survived the website fiasco during its rollout; it survived the wave of cancellations and premium increases; it successfully enrolled millions of the uninsured. At which point Republicans, never particularly eager to grapple with the actual details of health care policy, began talking about the issue less and less.

As long as by less and less, you mean in every session of Congress, in every speech, debate, and campaign meet-and-greet. Then yeah, sure. They barely mention it.

But don’t you worry. Obamacare is failing even though Republicans are totally leaving it alone!

...after the initial surge, Obamacare’s enrollment numbers have mostly disappointed. Not in a catastrophic way — the law has knocked down the U.S. uninsured rate to about 11-12 percent, compared to a pre-Great Recession level of 14-15 percent.

Three percent? Why pshaw and fiddlesticks. Hardly seems worth doing. Of course, it could be that 16 states have not adopted Medicaid expansion, more states haven’t implemented state exchanges, and states that have resisted both are the very ones where the rate of uninsured is highest. Let’s look at the states where the uninsured rate is worst. Those would be Oklahoma at 15.36%, Georgia at 15.83% , Florida at 16.57%, Alaska at 17.21% and Texas at a whopping 19.06%. All states where Republicans have done everything they can to cripple the implementation of the Affordable Care Act.

Douthat’s “Obamacare is totally being a disappointment while the Republicans are being nice” act is like the kid who has absolutely no idea how that lamp got broken.

The New York Times on rat-faced snake weasels.

There is ample evidence that drug prices have been pushed to astronomical heights for no reason other than the desire of drug makers to maximize profits. Prices in many cases far exceed what’s needed to cover the costs of research and clinical trials, and some companies have found ways to rake in profits even without shouldering the cost of drug development. The two worst offenders are bottom feeders that simply buy companies they believe have underpriced their drugs and then quickly raise prices to astronomical levels. In August, Turing Pharmaceuticals acquired the American marketing rights to a 62-year-old drug to treat a devastating parasitic infection and raised the cost of one pill to $750 from $13.50. That brought the cost of a course of treatment for some patients to hundreds of thousands of dollars.

Note Douthat’s crowing in the previous piece about that medical costs ticked up in 2014. Now note that about 10% of medical costs are directly attributable to prescription drugs—not counting the cost due to people not being able to afford those drugs.

First, let’s try giving expedited license to create any generic drug currently manufactured by only one company. If that doesn’t work, let’s build a nice little factory for the FDA and let them sell the stuff at cost.

Alessio Fasano on the mythology of gluten.

Many people now vilify wheat as unfit for human consumption. … This “sensational science” is fertile terrain for TV shows such as “Dr. Oz” and books that identify gluten as the villain of the 21st century. Gluten has been blamed for many diseases outside gluten-related disorders, and therefore some people have suggested that it should be completely banned from the human diet. ... For the approximately 1 percent of humans with celiac disease, the immune system can’t handle the cleanup. Instead, it goes into overdrive, producing autoantibodies that attack the tissue in the small intestine, leading to inflammation and tissue destruction. This leads to malabsorption of nutrients, which causes myriad symptoms, gastrointestinal and otherwise, in people with this autoimmune disorder.

The other 99%? Don’t have “gluten allergy” because it doesn’t exist. Multiple double-blind studies have failed to find any such critter.

epidemiological studies, including our 2003 study in the United States, show that the vast majority of us tolerate gluten without any problem. The fact that about 1 percent of the population is affected by celiac disease, while almost 100 percent of humankind is exposed to gluten-containing grains, is evidence that these grains are safe for most people.

So, can we please stop stamping “gluten free” on things like sugar, which never had any gluten to begin with, and better yet start fighting the real enemy — the flood of godawful “gluten free” cardboard cluttering up the shelves at the supermarket?

Michael Mitchell and Nick Wiger on the joy of eating at chain restaurants.

Americans are more polarized than ever, but chains remain a common point of reference. Eating at them is one of the few things we still do together as a country. Eight out of 10 Americans eat fast food at least once a month. Some months, nearly half of all Americans stop in at McDonald’s (and 1 in every 8 U.S. workers has been employed by the fast-food giant). … Chains put us in conversation with one another. As we learned from the fans of our weekly podcast on chain restaurants, people forge fierce allegiances to their regional chains, such as In-N-Out Burger, Waffle House and L&L Hawaiian BBQ. National publications cover controversies over Starbucks’s pumpkin spice latte or Taco Bell’s Doritos Locos Taco. An unironic review of the Olive Garden in Grand Forks, N.D., by local restaurant critic Marilyn Hagerty went viral a couple of years ago. Hagerty’s rave (she described the restaurant as the “largest and most beautiful” in the city) was met with predictable coastal mockery, but at least her sincere appreciation got people talking.

I’m still going to voice my preference for local places. I don’t like McDonalds, but then I’m kind of blah on the whole beef thing. It’s not because I seek out healthy food, mind you. You will not find me downing kale smoothies. But if you come into Mr. Curry’s from some Tuesday Tikka, or stop by Edible Difference for “bricks and blood” Wednesday (that would be grilled cheese and tomato soup) , or crave a Slinger Jr. at Chili Mac’s, or slide into Pharaoh’s Donuts just about any time, you’re likely to cross my (ever wider) path.

Get the full sized Chemistry Advent Calendar at Compound Interest.