Chibuihem Amalaha says that God has given him the “wisdom to use science as a scientist to prove gay marriage wrong.”

Chibuihem Amalaha says that God has given him the “wisdom to use science as a scientist to prove gay marriage wrong.” drab makyo CC By 2.0

On Sunday, opposition to marriage equality jumped up a notch when doctoral candidate Chibuihem Amalaha announced that he had successfully disproved homosexuality. Moving away from religious objections and scriptural bars, Amalaha relied on a series of experiments to “prove” that same-sex attraction is not only against the laws of God –– it’s against the laws of nature, too. In spite of the evidence suggesting otherwise, he argues that homosexuality does not exist.

The Nigerian research effort comes in response to the UK’s recent threat to cut all aid if the country proceeds with legislature that would jail same-sex couples for up to 14 years. According to Amalaha, his latest findings are not only backed by his university, but by God himself. The Lord, he says, has given him the “wisdom to use science as a scientist to prove gay marriage wrong.”

“I asked myself why should a man be marrying a man and a woman marrying a woman, does it mean that there is no more female for a man to marry or there is no more male for a woman to marry?” he explained, speaking to This Day Live. “And recently, Britain told Nigeria to legalize gay marriage of forfeit international aid. I thank God for our lawmakers who refused to sign the bill legalizing gay marriage.”

To fortify his country’s decision to outlaw gay marriage, Amalaha designed a series of scientific experiments that he claims contradict same-sex attraction. While the program invokes a variety of disciplines, most originate in the same basic principle of physics. The emblematic experiment, which can be performed by anyone age 4 and older, concerns the fundamental interaction of electromagnetism.

“I used two bar magnets in my research. A bar magnet is a horizontal magnet that has the North Pole and the South Pole and when you bring two bar magnets and you bring the North Pole together you find that the two North Poles will not attract,” Amalaha elaborated. “They will repel, that is, they will push away themselves showing that a man should not attract a man.”

For additional evidence, Amalaha cited the truism that two identical chemical agents do not yield a reaction, as well as the fact that he’d never seen a lion have sex with another lion. The next step, he says, is to publish the findings in an international journal. He believes his work is worthy of the Nobel Prize.

He said, “my ambition is to go beyond the sky.”