Innocent victims: Not only have the people of Sudan had to deal with a brutal war, but the country is mere months away from full-blown famine. Photo: James Akena

Many an exhausted Australian parent has surely invoked the image of starving children when dealing with a picky child turning their nose up at food at meal time.

"There are kids in Africa who'd give anything for that piece of [insert "yucky" vegetable here]!" we'll say and the obstreperous child might suggest you post the broccoli or fish-finger to the symbolic hungry stripling.

Having witnessed this many times, I often wonder if the cliche is actually true or, are starving African kids also finicky about what they eat?

Illustration: Rocco Fazzari.

The truth, unfortunately, is heartbreaking, at least in the experience of Olivia Zinzan, the emergency media manager for Save the Children Australia.

Advertisement

Olivia spent the month of June in South Sudan, which is experiencing the worst food insecurity crisis in the world thanks to civil war and drought and is just months from full-blown famine.

Children there often "don't want to eat, when they're severely malnourished", says Olivia, because their bodies are shutting down and rejecting the very thing that will preserve them.

When the kids are simply hungry, however, not yet starving, they will and do eat anything. Desperate mothers in Akobo, on the Ethiopian border, are today collecting grass and leaves to boil and feed to their children.

In better times, their daily meal might be a handful of the grain sorghum, ground and boiled to make porridge. Fruit, vegetables, milk or meat of any description? Forget about it.

Aid workers are continually identifying the most dangerously sick children among more than 2 million hungry kids in the region so they can be treated at clinics where they're fed a highly nutritious peanut paste similar to peanut butter.

The brutal irony here is when children are brought back to a more "normal" level of nourishment, they return to the ravages of daily hunger outside the clinics armed with their restored healthy appetite.

"50,000 children may be dead by the end of the year if the international community doesn't act," says Olivia, which has to give us all pause as we scrape leftovers into bins and leave café tables with plates still crowded with toast and sides we "can't get through".

Last year, I worked as a garbage man on several council compactor trucks and it was stunning how much food spilled from bins and bags, destined for landfill. Our profligacy with food is like the dissipation of a fabulous inheritance by a prodigal child.

With organisations such as the World Bank warning of disruptions and volatility in food production because of global warming, potentially within the next decade, it's high time Australians rethink their assumptions towards food, waste and the sustainability of what we put in our mouths.

In this regard, perspective can be instructive. We all hear stories of celebrity excess, of the rich kids of Instagram, and shake our heads at how people can spend fortunes on clothes, 40 Ferraris, obscene weddings or gold-plated toilet seats.

For a family starving in Sudan, however, you and I are the fabulously wealthy, as we order or buy whatever food we want, whenever we want, then waste it, and finally retire to our beds in homes with three TVs, running water and electricity, only to do it all again the next day.

In their world, a jar of peanut butter can save a child's life.

If you'd like to help go to www.savethechildren.org.au/southsudan