During a month when the government clumsily rolled out Obamacare, it's important to remember that our government used to promote the American ideals of individual freedom and self reliance. If you were capable, then you were encouraged to, taught to, and even expected to handle monumental goals like saving for your nest egg and even getting the actual eggs for your breakfast.

"Uncle Sam expects you to keep hens and raise chickens," read a public service poster circulated in 1918 by the U.S. Department of Agriculture. It had a black and white drawing of a little boy in overalls hammering nails into a wooden chicken coop while his pigtailed sister tossed feed to their flock. "Two hens in the back yard for each person in the house will keep a family in fresh eggs."

Ah, the good old days, back when citizens were allowed reasonable use and enjoyment of their own private property. Fast-forward nearly a century later and cities are planted thick with ordinances against having even a couple of hens in the backyard. This is causing friction with the national "urban chicken" trend fueled by people wanting affordable and nutritious eggs.

"These days, people have to fight and petition and beg and plead in many municipalities to get their government to let them keep a few backyard hens," wrote Robin Mather in Mother Earth News, a magazine covering sustainable and self-reliant living. "And even when city leaders permit it, they lay out complicated rules about how many, where and how the birds must be housed."

The issue is currently being debated in north Alabama, where a group of citizens have petitioned the City of Huntsville to loosen its restrictions that essentially forbid the keeping of a few hens in most neighborhoods – even if you don't have a noisy rooster around (hens lay eggs without them).

"The main rule for keeping urban chickens is 'no roosters allowed,'" according to the website for the Huntsville Hen Alliance (HHA), the group backing the change in the Rocket City's ordinance. "Hens do not make a ruckus in the morning like their male counterparts and they are fast asleep in their coop by the time the sun goes down."

More than two dozen speakers packed a recent Huntsville planning commission hearing on the issue. The debate lasted nearly an hour before the commission decided it needed more information before passing its recommendation to the city council.

The trend of keeping three or four hens in the backyard is spreading across the country. Several cities in Alabama allow the practice on some level, including municipalities in Mobile, Jefferson, Shelby and Limestone counties. Other than the misunderstanding about noise, some of the holdout cities like Huntsville worry about the smell.

"The reason people fear an odor problem is because their only experience with chickens...is on a farm or commercial poultry operation," according to HHA's website. Only thousands of chickens kept in crowded and poorly ventilated conditions produce those smells. "A backyard coop housing six to eight (hens) does not create the odor issue that is concerning some residents."

Politics makes strange bedfellows, and this issue is one where libertarian-minded conservatives can find common ground with environmentally-conscious liberals. Even though each isn't mutually exclusive, one side wants the nanny-state to mind its own business while the other calls for more nutritious, locally grown food free of additives.

"The appetite for locally grown food produced by people you know using methods you approve of grows stronger every day," wrote Steve Bender in Southern Living magazine, adding that one cannot get more local than their own backyard. "When raising chickens for eggs, meat, or both, nothing goes into your birds that you don't control – no antibiotics, hormones, or genetically modified feed."

There are also plenty of people who just want to save a few dollars a week on eggs, and have their kids enjoy a pet that actually provides something in return for the family.

HHA has launched an online petition and continues its efforts to have the restrictions eased. Let's hope they do. Otherwise, that industrious little boy and his adorable sister on the government poster would remain outlaws in a modern Huntsville.

J. Pepper Bryars grew up in Mobile and is now a writer living in Huntsville. You can reach him at jpepperbryars@gmail.com.