In this Jan. 6, 2015 file photo, Congressional Black Caucus Chairman Rep. G.K. Butterfield, D-N.C. speaks on Capitol Hill in Washington. (AP Photo/Lauren Victoria Burke, File)

Rep. G.K. Butterfield's endorsement of Hillary Clinton is noteworthy not just because he is the chairman of the Congressional Black Caucus, but also because the black lawmaker's group is co-sponsoring a debate for the Democratic presidential candidates this month in South Carolina.

Most of the 46 members of the caucus have endorsed Clinton, and it's certainly Butterfield's prerogative to throw his support behind the candidate of his choice. But in his endorsement, which was published Thursday on The Grio, an online site featuring news and commentary about black issues, Butterfield (D-N.C.) writes that "Clinton's goals align closely with those of the Congressional Black Caucus and the black community as a whole."

He cites Clinton's "commitment to reforming our criminal justice system, expanding voting rights, creating jobs and economic opportunities, and enhancing workplace diversity." He concludes by declaring: "Of all the candidates, she is best positioned to better African-American lives."

[For Clinton, a challenge to keep black voters energized about her campaign]

“I didn’t make the endorsement as chairman of the Congressional Black Caucus. I did it in my individual capacity,” Butterfield said in an interview Wednesday. He also noted that the Jan. 17 debate in Charleston, S.C. is being co-sponsored by the Congressional Black Caucus Institute, a separate nonprofit, nonpartisan entity, chaired by Rep. Bennie Thompson (D-Miss.). “I was very careful in my statement to make sure I did not suggest that she has the backing of either organization.”

The CBC institute, whose missing is educating voters and developing future political leaders, is hosting the debate along with NBC News and YouTube. It one of six face-offs between the candidates sanctioned by the Democratic National Committee. In addition to Clinton, Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders and former Maryland governor Martin O'Malley are expected to participate. The Sunday night event at Charleston's Gaillard Center is scheduled to air from 9 p.m. to 11 p.m. on NBC.

Lester Holt, anchor of the NBC Nightly News will moderate the debate, marking the first appearance of an African American journalist in a prominent role in any of the eight debates held so far by both parties. For Democrats in particular, South Carolina, in addition to holding the first primary in the South, also will be the first presidential contest in which a large number of African Americans voters will participate. The Palmetto State's Democratic primary electorate is more than 50 percent black.

Butterfield said he hadn’t thought about waiting until after the debate to announce his endorsement. He said he endorsed Obama eight years ago in January and this seemed as good a time as any to announce his support for Clinton, the frontrunner for the Democratic primary.

[Joe Biden may 'regret' not running for president. But it's too late now.]

“This time around I waited to see what the vice president was going to do,” he said, referring to Vice President Biden, who spent several weeks mulling a run and being lobbied by supporters to jump into the race. This week he told a Connecticut television station that “every day” he regrets passing up the 2016 race.

Butterfield said there’s no guarantee he would have endorsed Biden, but he would have considered it because "we're friends. Joe and I are on a first name basis." He said he doesn’t know O’Malley very well and called Sanders “a very able member of the United States Senate.”

“I just feel Mrs. Clinton’s experience and her view of the world qualifies her to be my choice,” he said, adding, “I believe she is better suited to beat the Republican nominee, which now appears to be Donald Trump.” He said he planned to head to Iowa this weekend to campaign for Clinton.

As Butterfield noted in his endorsement op-ed, Clinton holds a substantial lead in favorability among black voters. "Four out of five black adults in this country have a favorable opinion of Clinton. Black support for her is far stronger than for any other candidate," he writes, citing a Gallup poll from last August. In a Washington Post-ABC News poll from early November, Clinton's favorable rate among African Americans was 82 percent. Sanders, who is running competitively with Clinton in Iowa and slightly ahead in New Hampshire, has struggled to gain traction with black voters.

[The new number that drives home Bernie Sanders's black voter problem]

African American activists, particularly those involved in the Black Lives Matter movement, have complained that the issue of the disproportionate deaths of unarmed black people during encounters with police has not been sufficiently addressed by the political candidates. During the summer and fall last year, activists disrupted the Democratic candidates a number of times on the trail, forcing them to include plans for criminal justice reform in their platforms.

Asked if perhaps it was too soon to endorse without hearing more from the candidates about their proposals to address issues important to black communities, Butterfield said he has been impressed with what he's heard from Clinton. He noted that she and Sanders had both met with the caucus, and said that more than 30 of its members have endorsed the former secretary of state. "We were very pleased with her response. I was very pleased with her response. She gets it; she understands our agenda," he said, citing Clinton's support for criminal justice reform, the Affordable Care Act and target funding for low-income communities.

"We're not going to get on a bandwagon," he said. "We're going to hold Mrs. Clinton accountable. And I have reason to believe she's going to be accountable to the agenda not just of the Congressional Black Caucus, but the agenda of the black community."