The good, the bad and the... ordinary: Day four of Lakme Fashion Week a mixed bag



As days pass at Lakme Fashion Week Winter/Festive 2014, the runway has been producing some repeated styles, leaving audience members jaded.



Day 4 at Palladium Hotel in Mumbai had only a few collections that truly stood out. Designer Nupur Kanoi presented a range of chic silhouettes in winter wear with bridal undertones of bronze, silver and gold.



While embellished garments didn't create much of a buzz, the simpler ensembles that included gold shot jackets, crinkled dupatta drapes, jumpsuits and anarkali dresses- with pleated cloth draped on the lapels-brought back '90s nostalgia in a smart way.



Sultry Indian Bollywood actress Elli Avram Showstopper

Payal Singhal's show had a pretty vibe to it, with chintzprint dresses, skirts, crop-tops and even saris.



Beige-and-blue maxi dresses and trousers, teamed with elaborate gold jewellery, were an interesting introduction in the collection, so was a full-length dress with a wide tail and an embroidered midi skirt with churidar and a croptop.



At label Lovebirds' show, straight cuts and boxy silhouettes took centrestage in materials such as faux leather and silk. Shades like moss, teal, ochre, grey and brown were seen on loose tops, A-line skirts, trousers and collared tops.



Jewellery designer Suhani Pittie showcased floral detailed accessories, while fashion designer Shehla Khan's collection of tulle, silk and lace dresses and lehengas featured autumn leaves. Khan's collection, however, wasn't as satisfactory as her previous ethnic collections.



Delhi boys Shantanu and Nikhil presented a 39-piece collection with pastel-toned tulle fishtail gowns, lehengas, draped jersey blouses, anarkalis, and textured lehenga choli-cumsaris in chiffon, georgette, tulle and organza.



Indian Bollywood actress Dia Mirza Khan showcases a creation by designer Vikram Phadnis in collaboration with Nakkashi during the Lakme Fashion Week (LFW) Winter/Festival 2014 in Mumbai on August 24, 2014. AFP PHOTO/STR Indian cricketer Yuvraj Singh A creation from Meghna Garg

Meanwhile, men's wears included smartly tailored sherwanis, bandhgalas, kurtas with bundies and embossed textures. Supermodel Jesse Randhawa gracefully sashayed down the ramp in a white 'willpower textured gown' with 3-D embellishments.



One of the highlights of the day was the launch of UK brand Miss Selfridge in India. Dressy options flooded the catwalk at the Jabong stage, with 1920s-inspired beaded gowns to faux ostrich feather jackets for a fashionable winter.

Elli Avram of Bigg Boss 7 fame walked in a bright red gown with beaded embellishment. The good, the bad and the ordinary day ended with a bang with Arjun Khanna's show. The collection began with 28 helmetclad biker boys marching down the runway with their muscles on display, which left the ladies, and a considerable number of men, pleased.



The boys paraded down in leather, suede, lightweight wool and corduroy separates-with leather tassels attached to trousers and jackets for a free-spirited American feel. Metal plaques and embroidered messages on the back of the jackets and trousers read 'biker bundi' and 'butts of steel', respectively, besides some other rebellious terms.



Adding surprise to the show, Khanna's showstopper walked down the ramp wearing a helmet. As the music pumped and teh showstopper reached the front of the ramp, cricketer Yuvraj Singh revealed his face.



He was dressed in a white jacket with tassles and fitted trousers with 'Real Steel' embroidered on the back.



Amid the constant hooting and adulation, the boys walked down the ramp twice and ended the evening on a high note.

Embroidery rules the ramp



Bengali beauty Bipasha Basu closed the show for designer Vikram Phadnis

Day 5 was as much about celeb attraction as the designs on the ramp. And the day started with the sultry Malaika Arora Khan walking down the ramp for Sonaakshi Raaj in a red-and-nude lacy embroidered gown with a layered tulle flounce.



With her soft waves parted to one side and smokey eyes to finish the look, she embodied the 'yummy mummy' title to perfection.



The occasional multihued embroidery on dresses and jackets added life to the designs, which stuck to monotones and gold on the whole.



Designer Vikram Phadnis pulled out the stops with not one, but two showstoppers for his heavily embroidered bridal line.



With Sanskrit shlokas being chanted in the background for music, the first segment was concluded with pretty diva Dia Mirza in a champagne- toned net lehenga teamed with a short nude coloured kurta, velvet jacket with gold embroidery, and a mustard dupatta with soft gold latkans.



Changing the colour palette, Bengali beauty Bipasha Basu closed the show in an oxblood-coloured lehenga-choli with a yellow and purple dipped net dupatta with gold detailing on the borders. Both actresses had their hair tied back in a bun and were wearing big gold earrings to accentuate their looks.



To many a fashionistas' delight, these elaborate creations will be soon available at affordable prices with the help of Phadnis' association with ethnic wear brand Nakkashi.



Talking about bringing on board the two beautiful ladies, Phadnis shared, "This is a milestone in my career, and I wanted someone as my showstopper with whom I share a great relationship. I have known both Dia and Bipasha for years now, and our friendship goes beyond clothes."