DETROIT — In August 1967, before the first NFL-AFL exhibition, all- decade defensive tackle Alex Karras proclaimed he would walk back to Detroit from Denver if the Lions lost to the Broncos.

Before a crowd of 21,228 at the old University of Denver Hilltop Stadium, the Broncos prevailed 13-7.

Mongo flew home in embarrassment and silence.

If the Broncos lose to the Lions on Sunday night at Ford Field in Detroit, I will return home on Frontier flight 627 at 6 a.m. Monday in steerage in a middle seat between a singing fat lady in a Lions jersey and an insurance salesman.

But the Orange Stampede wins 35-16.

The Lions are 30th in overall defense, the Broncos No. 1.

The Broncos’ offense, after a mini-bye week, is ready to break out. Peyton Manning will throw for 300 yards, and the running game, with RH-positive and C.J., will produce 130 yards. The defense will get four sacks and three turnovers and hold Detroit to one touchdown. There were be no roar of the Lions or the crowd.

Manning will be 2-0 in Detroit, 4-0 vs. the Lions and keep intact his career winning percentage of 75 in domed stadiums.

The weather will be 72 degrees inside (dome) and outside, and the artificial turf is perfect for the quick, athletic Broncos defense and wide receivers Emmanuel Sanders and Demaryius Thomas, and the running of Ronnie Hillman — the RH factor.

The Lions’ offensive line is worse than the Broncos’ and Detroit’s defense is missing three interior linemen (especially Ndamukong Suh) from last year. Matthew Stafford should have been listed on the medical reports as “banged up.” He, not Manning, is Pro Football Focus’ lowest-rated passer (minus-7.9). Calvin Johnson is not playing against shrubbery.

Any questions?

Yes, I know the one. Peyton is not on life support, notwithstanding the endless drivel on social media and even in Denver. Despite the recommendation from a flannel shirt-wearing New England sportswriter, Peyton didn’t retire Wednesday.

I’d rather trust a former NFL quarterback, Peyton’s confidant and the patriarch of the Manning Football Family.

“Peyton will be fine,” says dad Archie. “We knew it would take some time with the changes in the offense. The Broncos are getting it fixed.”

The younger Manning — Peyton is only 39; his father is 66 — threw for three — count ’em — three touchdowns, 256 yards and one interception in the victory over the Chiefs.

(He threw for six touchdowns in his only other appearance in Detroit.)

Against K.C., Manning led a fourth-quarterback comeback that cumulated in a tying touchdown. The Broncos, waiting for overtime, won on a fumble return seconds later.

According to the Elias Sports Bureau, it was the first time an NFL team had two touchdowns, the second the go-ahead score, in the final minute since Atlanta beat New Orleans on Nov. 12, 1978.

The losing quarterback then was Archie Manning.

“I didn’t know about that. I wish you hadn’t told me,” Archie said Saturday afternoon by phone from Oxford, Miss., where he was primed for his alma mater’s game against Vanderbilt.

Archie is in a festive mood these days, after both his quarterbacking sons had been criticized severely early this season. The New York Giants’ Eli Manning suffered a mental burp in the defeat against the Dallas Cowboys, and Peyton had been portrayed as The Old Man and The I-N-T. But the Broncos are 2-0 — Archie was in Denver for the Broncos’ opener — and Eli played extremely well in the Giants’ victory Thursday night.

And Archie’s Ole Miss Rebels pulled off a major upset over Alabama to ascend to third in the college power rankings.

In regard to the Broncos’ offensive line woes that made Peyton Manning vulnerable, Archie said: “They need to fix that, but Gary Kubiak is a very good coach, and I think you’ll see improvement in Detroit. It’s not as bad as some people are making it out to be. I try to stay away from offering advice, but Peyton’s healthy and confident. He’s still got a lot to accomplish.”

Like another Super Bowl championship.

Archie will rejoin his son in Indianapolis for a rather important game. There’s a chance Peyton will set the record for all-time regular-season victories (187) against the Colts.

Peyton has an uprising for No. 182 on Sunday, and Paige is upgrading Monday.

Woody Paige: woody@woodypaige.com or @woodypaige