When Andi Manzano walks down the aisle on Tuesday in a church in Baguio, she will be marrying club and restaurant owner GP Reyes, the love of her life. The day is extra-special because Andi’s mother Rose will be there.

The bride-to-be smiles during the event, which was held exactly a week before her wedding. ‘I’ve always wanted to get involved in a cause or advocacy. This one is perfect for me because I really believe in it,’ says 26-year-old Andi Manzano.

Several months ago, this seemed hard to imagine for Andi and her four siblings, their father and especially Rose, who is not even 50 years old.



“We thought she was just going through menopause. She was moody and she was bleeding. This went on for two months until someone told my mom this wasn’t normal. She was urged to have herself checked,” says the 26-year-old Andi during the media event for “X Means Love,” which aims to increase awareness for cervical center.



Andi describes as “devastating” the next turn of events. Rose was diagnosed with cervical cancer. She tells her children, who cry for a while and decide to be their mother’s support system.



Andi, who lives on her own, assigned herself to be Rose’s chauffeur every time the latter would need to go to UST hospital for her chemotherapy and radiation treatments. The radio DJ and TV/events host saw her mom in extreme pain and discomfort. Her heart broke every time Rose would lose strands of hair or run to the bathroom to throw up. Andi would drive from her home to Antipolo to fetch Rose, bring her mother to UST and ferry her home after the treatments. It wasn’t easy. Andi refused to cry in front of her mom. She would put on a brave face and cry only when GP would take her into his arms.



“My mom is my best friend. I cannot imagine living without her. She knows everything about me,” says the bubbly Andi, who many say is her mom’s spitting image.



Less than two months ago, Rose was declared cancer-free.



“For six months, I couldn’t even plan my own wedding. It was nerve-wracking and painful at the same time so when the doctor gave my mom a clean bill of health, we could only say ‘Thank you, Lord,’” says Andi.



Cervical cancer is the second most common form of cancer after breast cancer among women worldwide with an estimated 529,409 new cases and 274,883 new deaths in 2008. In the Philippines, it ranks as the second most frequent cancer. It is estimated that every year, 4,544 Filipino women are diagnosed with cervical cancer with 1,856 dying from the disease.



Andi has long wanted to be involved in a charity or advocacy. Thus, when she was approached by GlaxoSmithKline and Healthway Medical to be a part of “X Means Love,” the bride-to-be could only say, ‘Let’s go!”



So who is susceptible to cervical cancer?

Andi is teary-eyed as she talks about her mother’s ordeal.

“It is basically every woman,” says GlaxoSmithKline product manager Kristel Guce. “The scary part about cervical cancer is that in the early stages, there are no symptoms. So having oneself checked via a pap smear is a must.”



Andi convinced her sisters and even her mom to get the HPV vaccine. Cervical cancer can be caused by the human papillomavirus. Genital HPV is a common highly-transmissible virus that is passed from one person to another through direct skin-to-skin contact during sexual activity. No penetration is required to transmit the virus so it can be passed on via girl-on-girl sex. Monogamy will not save a woman from contracting the virus.



“As long as the woman is sexually active, she can be infected. The incidence of cervical cancer starts rising when a woman is 30 years old. It is highest in women ages 40-55. Most sexually active people will get HPV at some time in their lives, though most of them will never recognize it. About 80 percent of women will acquire an HPV infection in their lifetime,” says Guce.



Andi, as one of the campaign’s brand ambassadors, urges women to get screening using a pap smear or HPV DNA test. More importantly, she says women should get the HPV vaccine. Females from nine years old are eligible for vaccination.



Guce points out HPV vaccines have been proven safe and effective. It does not eliminate the need for screening later in life since HPV types other than 16 and 18 cause up to 30 percent of all cases of cervical cancer.



Andi sees her wedding as a fresh start of sorts for her and her mom. She and her husband-to-be are very well-matched, despite the differences in their ages and lifestyles. Before she met GP, who would wake up at 1 p.m., Andi would go to bed early as she had to rise for work the next day. So what happened next? “We compromised,” she says.



“I really wanted to pick someone more mature, someone who is driven to be my husband. I didn’t want to be taking care of someone who was still dependent on his parents. I am very mature for my age, I think,” she stresses.



Andi and GP met on the social networking site Facebook. GP had a crush on Andi and he asked Luis Manzano, who is her cousin, to introduce them. What happened was that they became Facebook friends first before they actually met in person.



Andi finds it endearing that GP asked her mom for her hand in marriage months before actually proposing to her at NAIA-3. Months before that, the couple had been to Paris and GP took Andi to the Eiffel Tower.



“I was a nervous wreck. I thought he was going to propose there. Every time he moved, I would look at him but the proposal didn’t happen there. It happened at the airport while I was wearing shorts with my hair in a bun,” she says.