What is the biggest mistake entrepreneurs make when dealing with angel investors?

SHARON HADARY: The greatest mistake entrepreneurs make when getting either angel or venture-capital funding is not spending enough time thinking through what they are going to do with the money once they get it.

They focus on the easy things—their areas of expertise. For example, a young software-development company I know put all its funding into product development. The entrepreneurs were from an engineering and software background and they invested in what they knew—hiring software developers to enhance the product. Some years later, they told me that they wished they had taken the time to identify what they did not know very well—software marketing—and had allocated the funds across several areas of the business including market research. Instead, they relied on their investor’s marketing expertise—but their investors’ marketing experience was not in software marketing.

The result of their failure to think strategically about how to allocate the investment, they said, was an over-engineered product that they were never successful in selling.

Lessons learned:

Think strategically about how to allocate investment of money into the business. Do not put it all into one bucket.

Figure out what you don’t know—and allocate funds to fill in those gaps.

Recognize that offers from your investors to provide business products and services are valuable only if there is an alignment with your company’s needs.

Learn from your mistakes and persevere. (See postscript)

P.S. The entrepreneurs learned from their mistakes and with self-generated funding (their consulting revenue) built a highly successful consulting company.

Sharon Hadary (@hadaryco) is the founding and former executive director of the Center for Women’s Business Research, an adjunct professor in the doctorate of management program at the University of Maryland University College and has co-written a new book, “How Women Lead: The 8 Essential Strategies Successful Women Know.”

Read the latest Small Business Report.