Topics: bill cosby, Dylan Farrow, Editor's Picks, The Cosby Show, The New York Times, Woody Allen, Life News, Entertainment News

I’m sick of hearing, thinking and talking about Woody Allen. Nonetheless, the allegations against him continue to capture our national attention because so much of the story is strange and sordid. These are the lives of celebrities and their children, so we feel perfectly entitled to sort through details and offer up our own pieces of evidence, court transcripts, interviews, rumors and so on, as if we are playing a national game of Clue.

For many people, this week has been difficult and triggering. Something about this case is reaching people somewhere deep, probably because we identify, so strongly, with one party or another. We are earnest. We are righteous.

Dylan Farrow wrote her letter (and Nicholas Kristof used his New York Times column) to share her testimony with a broad audience. It stands to reason that Woody Allen would have some kind of response and that the New York Times would feel obligated to publish that response.

Despite where I stand, I do recognize that Woody Allen was trapped between a rock and a hard place when it came to how, if at all, he should respond. But his own letter, published by the Times on Friday, is erratic and desperately ill advised, no matter how you feel about this situation.

At no point in the letter does Allen demonstrate genuine concern for Dylan. There is a telling callousness in the way he chooses to defend himself, offering up various self-serving pieces of evidence, many of which have been convincingly rebutted elsewhere. It’s hard not to think, “This makes him look even worse.” Though Allen is purportedly declaring his innocence, he takes exquisite care in making his feelings about Mia Farrow clear. The acrimony between the ex-lovers has clearly not tempered with time.

Allen’s desire to speak in his own defense is understandable. And there was no right way to respond, because the situation is so fraught. There were, however, less vindictive, less narcissistic ways of responding. There were ways of responding that might take Dylan Farrow’s feelings into account, and that might respect her emotional well-being.

But in truth, I don’t have the energy to pore through Allen’s letter, line by line, pointing out everything that is troubling, petty, or downright sleazy. Plenty of people will be doing that, and how.

I have realized, though, that we’re avoiding a more difficult conversation by focusing so intently on the sensational details of this Woody Allen travesty. When the dust settles, we are going to have to consider the choices we are willing to make when we learn just how human those we admire actually are.