New payment model that incorporates value-based reimbursements would improve telehealth adoption rates.

As the healthcare industry begins to update its technology, the implementation of more telehealth services lags behind. A report published in the American Journal of Managed Care (AJMC), argues that the main reason why the addition of telemedicine is slow is because of the fee-for-service payment model. Coauthor Robert S. Rudin, PHD and his colleagues argue that a new payment model that incorporates value-based reimbursements would improve telehealth adoption rates.

The fee-for-service model is one of the most commonly used payment methods. In this model, patients only pay for the services they receive and physicians can bill for any services they provide. However, this model tends to create a system that promotes quality over quantity; a system that doesn’t fit in with the new Affordable Care Act (ACA) initiatives.

Although providers want to give their patients better quality service, they also want to make a profit. Providers against telehealth adoption point out that it will be bad for revenue.

“Most healthcare providers who adopt virtual visits will be financially penalized because many types of visits are not reimbursed or are reimbursed at lesser amounts,” the report states.

Previously, EHRIntelligence, reported that the American Medical Association adopted a new set of telemedicine standards to ensure appropriate reimbursement and a separate article reported that the Center for Medicaid & Medicare Service (CMS) expanded Medicare reimbursement to telehealth services. Instead of the fee-for-service payment system, the report from AJMC suggests capitation, a payment model where providers receive a fixed payment to provide care for each patient. Capitation involves substantial risks for providers, and therefore is not a common payment arrangement. Accountable Care Organizations (ACOs) are an example of new emerging models that may alter this problem. ACOs require providers to meet specific quality of care standards, which often leads to technologies that reduce costs and maximize the quality of patient care.

“By placing incentives for reduced cost and improved quality in the hands of provider organizations rather than insurers, new payment approaches should help foster the efficient use of telemedicine. “ the report states. “Under new payment models, adoption decisions are made by the providers, who have the flexibility to experiment with telemedicine and use the technology in a way that maximizes clinical outcomes and minimizes costs.”

According to another report on RevCycleIntelligence, providers expect value-based reimbursement to overtake fee-for-service payment models by 2020. It goes on to state that 81 percent of providers are already utilizing a combination of fee-for-service and value-based payment programs and that new technology solutions and tools will help to speed up telehealth adoption.

“Healthcare is at a tipping point,” says Dana Benini, Vice President at ORC International. “If we look at where institutions fall on the continuum towards value-based reimbursement and how that’s evolving, we see that the pace of change is a lot faster than many believe. This is particularly apparent in the growth of accountable care.”

While the exact impact of telemedicine on provider payments remain uncertain, the study states that providers are unlikely to support adding telemedicine as a reimbursed service. “Emerging payment models offer the greatest hope that telemedicine will be widely adopted and used in a way that will make it worth the cost.”