Topics: College, Education, For-profit education, From the Wires, Higher education, Student Debt, News, Politics News

After three years of law school, I have $150,000 in student debt, compounding at an interest rate of 7 percent. I don’t regret a penny of it and am in the fortunate position of being able to pay my loans as they come due. But not everyone has been so lucky. Many of my fellow borrowers have gotten piled on, first with debt and now with blame.

Most recently, the debate about how best to manage the $1.2 trillion in national student debt has taken a disappointing turn—toward creating student eligibility standards for federal aid when we still lack basic institutional ones. In tone and character, this finger pointing resembles the blame heaped on mortgage borrowers at the start of the 2008 financial crisis. We would do well to remember what we learned during that period: not to blame hopeful homeowners but rather to question the banks who relinquished their lending oversight responsibilities while encouraging trading on speculative mortgage-backed securities. Similarly, instead of erecting hurdles for students deemed unfit to borrow, the government should aim its regulatory efforts at the predatory for-profit colleges that reap taxpayer dollars and hand out substandard degrees.

Yet experts have recently begun dishing out proposals ranging from disbursing loans based on credit scores, high-school grades and test scores to, more disturbingly, predicating loans on the earnings potential of certain majors. At best, this approach is duplicative of efforts already being made by legitimate, nonprofit institutions that select students using admissions criteria presumably designed to ascertain who will succeed under their degree programs. At worst, it inappropriately puts the government in the position of admissions czar, threatens to systematically disadvantage students with high ambitions but bad credit, and rations the immeasurable benefits of a quality liberal arts education to only those who can prove their ability to finance the risk.

Like encouraging homeownership, promoting education is more than a pragmatic national goal—our policies in this realm are weighted with symbolic significance about who is permitted to pursue the American Dream. Countless studies have shown not only that an educated population is the key to economic growth and national prosperity but also that education is the path out of poverty and that educational choice is critical to self-determination. Both our short- and long-term solutions to the current student loan crisis should be crafted with an awareness of these stakes.

The short-term solution is to focus squarely on suffering students and bail out those who most need help. This is a solution we readily provided to big banks but are oddly reluctant to offer students hoodwinked by predatory for-profit “schools” on our watch. The Obama administration’s recent decision to forgive $28 million in loans for 1,312 former Corinthian Colleges students exploited by the now-defunct for-profit chain is a laudable start, but more must be done. Specifically, while federal loans offer employed graduates options like forbearance and income-based repayment, there is little sympathy or flexibility for those who, despite their best efforts, are unemployed. That must change.