GARLAND — Lakeview Centennial High School junior Dalton Allen was one of the lucky ones.

Dalton spent his New Year’s Day helping clear out a relative’s tornado-damaged house in Crystal Lakes, rather than at his own home, which was mostly spared. He wasn’t like the others, like two of his baseball buddies.

One of them, Ian, is in a hotel, Dalton said. The other, J-Reece, is with a relative, but his family is split up. Neither will likely live in their own home again for most of the new year.

“For me, I feel blessed that everything is all right as it is,” Dalton said. “As for Ian and them, it’s starting to hit them a little harder. As more time goes on, they’re starting to realize the gravity of the situation.”

While New Year’s Day brought optimism for some of those in the tornadoes’ path, others like faced uncertainty and questions. Are their homes a total loss, or can they be salvaged? How will their kids get to school? What will they do about the barbecue grill at the bottom of the swimming pool?

School’s back in

The end of the holiday season means school is back in on Tuesday for Rowlett and Garland students. Somehow, the tornadoes completely missed all the school buildings. Some still served Friday as American Red Cross shelters.

Garland ISD Superintendent Bob Morrison and his cabinet met Friday with unanswered questions of their own. Up to 3,500 of the district’s 58,000 students were in the affected areas, district officials said Friday. But the actual number of displaced will likely be lower, officials said.

Morrison used to live in Moore, Okla., which has been hit hard by tornadoes in recent years. He said Friday that he had called up Moore’s superintendent, a friend of his, for advice.

“I just asked him, ‘What am I not thinking about?’” Morrison said. “And the nice thing is, the list he went through, we were already right on it.”

Morrison and his staff spent the morning trying to sort out where the school buses will stop since neighborhood streets still aren’t passable with a bus. The data on the affected is limited. School choice in the district adds an extra wrinkle to the transportation plans. As do the dozens of special needs children who need to be picked up close to home.

The district will have volunteers to stand at the temporary stops to make sure students get on the right bus. They also hope to have “temporary bus stop” signs to mark the new stops. But they fear the company they use won’t be able to produce enough signs for all the stops by Tuesday morning.

Administrators also have to send SUVs to pick up students in other cities, such as Addison and Wylie and Royse City.

The cost of the operations in the storm’s aftermath “hasn’t even been a thought,” Morrison said. He said he knows some things won’t go as planned, but said his staff is working hard for Tuesday morning to go as smoothly as possible.

The schools chief said he is also impressed by the outpouring of community support and volunteerism in the area. He said he will volunteer at one of the bus stops from 5:45 a.m. until 8 a.m. this week.

Morrison’s staff also hopes to offer paper and pencils to anyone who needs it and will have counselors at the 18 schools with affected students. He said the children won’t be able to just move on and act like things are normal.

“It’s the memories, the feeling of being displaced that’s difficult,” Morrison said.

Taking stock

Rowlett High School student Nicholas Reyes, 17, said he expects to be out of his home for at least six months. A pile of junked furniture, televisions and other debris filled his front yard Friday.

His family is staying in a Richardson hotel for now. Reyes lost his school supplies, but he said his world history teacher told him he’d give him some stuff.

“I’m just grateful to have friends who still pray for me,” Reyes said. “They’re always telling me if I ever need anything to come to them.”

Dozens of volunteers — some of them children from other school districts — went house to house Friday to help clean up and give away hundreds of hot meals.

Julie Truex, a barista and mother of three, said she started volunteering with the Saturn Road Church of Christ during the week. The work left Truex, 42, too exhausted to make it to midnight on New Year’s Eve.

She said the work feels physically rewarding.

“This is a great time for fresh starts, for do-over,” Truex said.

Sharon and Jerry Curtis, who are still waiting to hear whether their Garland home of 26 years is a total loss, had a similar sentiment.

“We’ve turned a corner somehow,” Sharon Curtis said. “We’re being positive and thankful we’re here.”

Their home took a bizarre beating. A bedroom door had flown off and smacked Jerry Curtis, 68, in the face. Somehow, their granddaughter’s sweatpants were tied around a ceiling beam. The fake Christmas tree somehow stood strong over even though the roof was ripped off and windows blew out. The bathroom doesn’t have a roof over it. And the backyard grill is in the pool.

Sharon Curtis, 64, managed to laugh at all of it with her husband and sons, 40-year-old son Jerel of Flower Mound and Jarrod, 46, of Tyler.

The tornadoes left a man on life support and 11 others dead. The family of Timothy Harris of Greenville started the new year with a funeral. Jerel Curtis said the lost property doesn’t matter in light of that.

“There are 11 families are without people,” Jerel Curtis said as he kicked a ball across a pile of collapsed insulation and roofing. “This is nothing. This is just material.”

Twitter: @TristanHallman