If the last thing you read about the Affordable Care Act was an error message, it's time to check back in. The insurance marketplaces at Healthcare.gov are up and humming, with young adult enrollment growing by 65 percent last month. But the White House wants a lot more of you signed up by the time open enrollment ends on March 31, which is why Valerie Jarrett, a senior adviser to President Obama, took a few minutes to talk about the importance of getting covered.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

P.S. Jarrett's boss also sent this new video message to Cosmopolitan.com. (The last five seconds are the highlight.)

Why is having young healthy people join the insurance pool so vital?

It is extremely important because part of what makes the exchanges work is to have young people sign up and get insured. And it's a good way of making sure also that you establish good habits of taking care of your body at a young age. You get insurance for your car, your home, even your computer, so doesn't it make sense to have the same insurance for your body? With six weeks to go [before the end of open enrollment], our top priority is to do everything possible to make sure everyone that needs it has access to quality, affordable health insurance.

Most Popular

How have young people responded so far?

As of the end of January, we've had 3.3 million people sign up for private plans. That's remarkable progress, but we are also being as creative as we can to spread the word, working with athletes, celebrities, insurance companies, and anyone else who has a platform that can reach young people who do not have health insurance. Julia Louis-Dreyfus was at the state dinner for the president of France and we had a great talk about the issue, and she was part of our Valentine's Day campaign on Twitter. Mindy Kaling, Amy Poehler, Sarah Silverman, Pharrell Williams, Beyonce, Neil Patrick Harris, and Adam Levine — so many people with reach into the young adult community have lent their support.

Today we are releasing a new video from the president where he speaks directly about the importance of getting covered. As he says in the video, most people are eligible for subsidies that allow them to buy a plan for $100 or less — that's less than the cost of most people's cable bill. It's an investment in yourself.

More women are signing up than men. Why do you think that is?

That should be no surprise! Women are very responsible, particularly younger women. And also, there are benefits that are unique for women — the preventive care such as screenings for breast and cervical cancer, and contraception coverage without copay. Women have faced discrimination in insurance, including paying higher premiums because they were women [but the Affordable Care Act has made that illegal]. So it is not unusual for women to make the effort to understand those new benefits. And we know that women also have the ability to encourage the men in their lives, whether it's brothers, sons, husbands, friends. So women's reach extends beyond themselves.

A lot of women still aren't clear on what's now free with no copay in terms of contraception. Is there a straightforward answer to this?

All insurance plans are required to cover contraception without a copay — for free. Free! Women should talk to their insurance company about which brands are covered. And if your doctor thinks you need a particular brand but it's not on your plan, then the insurance company has to cover that, too.

The deadline for the end of open enrollment is coming up on March 31. What do women who aren't yet insured need to know to make it in time?

Go on Healthcare.gov, take a moment to look at the plans in their [state] marketplace. It's a very easy process to go through, when you think about what you are getting in exchange. You won't have to think about going broke if you get sick because you can't afford to pay for it.

Follow Sara on Twitter.

Photo Credit: Getty Images