A controversial health care startup that promises to upend the diagnostics industry is opening a Pennsylvania lab and plans to set up shop in the Lehigh Valley.

Theranos Inc., of Palo Alto, Calif., and Pennsylvania insurer Capital BlueCross announced last week a partnership through which Theranos will offer its screening services at CBC stores — initially at CBC's new Harrisburg-area store, and later at its location at the Promenade Shops at Saucon Valley in Center Valley.

Theranos specializes in blood testing, but with a twist: While traditional labs normally require several test tubes of blood, Theranos has developed needle-less technology that allows it to perform the same functions using only a few drops of blood drawn by a finger prick.

The process, which was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration this month, is not only less intrusive and distressing, it's also cheaper. Theranos bills itself as the first lab in the country to publish all of its pricing which, it says, is at least 50 percent below the Medicare reimbursement rate.

"Our partnership with Capital BlueCross is centered on a common mission — to provide access to high-quality, affordable health care, so that people everywhere can own their health and take action to live their best lives," Theranos' CEO and founder Elizabeth Holmes said in a news release.

Theranos' new approach and pricing strategy, according to experts, could revolutionize a $60 billion-a-year business dominated by companies such as Quest Diagnostics and LabCorp, whose many satellites have become a mainstay of routine health maintenance.

The company is jumping into the marketplace just as insurers are pushing their customers toward high-deductible coverage, which requires them to pay for all out-of-pocket costs, such as deductibles and co-pays, up to a certain threshold — perhaps $1,000 or 2,000, or more.

"That's really what the consumer movement is all about," said Dennis Olmstead, the chief strategy officer and medical economist for the Pennsylvania Medical Society, which represents doctors in Harrisburg. "That is the trend, to let consumers get more engaged in their health care decisions."

The number of people with high-deductible plans rose to nearly 17.4 million in January 2014, up from 15.5 million in January 2013, according to a study by America's Health Insurance Plans, an industry group in Washington, D.C. Enrollment increased at an average annual rate of 15 percent since 2011, when 11.4 million people had such plans.

High-deductible plans give patients a financial incentive to shop around for the best deals. And gradually, as the example of Theranos shows, the marketplace is responding — by providing new options.

"That's called competition in the marketplace," Olmstead said. "That's something that's probably good … as long as all the quality controls are in place."

In Theranos' case, for example, the price for a cholesterol test is $2.99, and a full fertility panel costs $35.

All told, the company offers more than 150 diagnostic tests for under $10, which is less than the co-pay required by even many traditional insurance plans. In other words, where Theranos is an option, people might be better off not using their insurance.

Founded in 2003, Theranos soon became a darling of venture capitalists. By 2010, it had reportedly raised $70 million. Today, it is worth an estimated $9 billion.

Some in the scientific community, however, have viewed the company with concern. At issue is its secrecy.

Theranos began offering its blood tests to the public in 2013 without its methodology being examined in peer-reviewed scientific journals.

Writing in the Journal of the American Medical Association, influential Stanford University professor John Ioannidis said the lack of transparency "creates total ambiguity about what evidence can be trusted in a mix of possibly brilliant ideas, aggressive corporate announcements, and mass-media hype.

"The main motive appears to be to develop products and services, rather than report new discoveries as research scholarship."

While Theranos' patented finger-stick technology remains shrouded in mystery, the FDA's approval has allayed fears about its effectiveness.

"As an insurance company, it is important for us to partner with companies that have the commitment not only to the highest standards, but also to constant innovation," Capital BlueCross CEO Gary D. St. Hilaire said. "FDA's favorable review of Theranos' testing systems last week affirmed what we already know — that their technology meets the highest quality standards, and we're proud to bring it to our community."

Currently at the CBC store at Hampden Marketplace in Hampden Township, a Theranos representative takes blood samples, which are then sent to a lab in California for overnight processing. Eventually the samples will go to a lab in Pennsylvania, according to Aji Abraham, CBC's senior vice president of business and network development.

Depending on the test, a doctor's note might be required under Pennsylvania law.

Increased access and affordability is not without its potential downsides, particularly if it leads to excessive testing, a certain percentage of which will inevitably result in false positives, noted Dr. David George, a vice president and the chief academic officer at the Reading Health System.

False positives can prompt people to seek more invasive — and costly — follow-up procedures. After a false positive for celiac disease, for example, the next step could be an endoscopy, requiring the insertion into the digestive tract of an endoscope, which is a flexible tube with a light and camera attached to it.

"The more tests you order, the more false positives you're going to get," George said.

Olmstead, the economist, has a different perspective. He noted that the plans available through the Affordable Care Act's insurance marketplace require enrollees to cover potentially substantial out-of-pocket costs. For bronze-level plans, such costs can account for up to 40 percent of one's medical expenses. (For silver plans, it's 30 percent; for gold, 20 percent; and for platinum, 10 percent.)