CLEVELAND, Ohio – Five health centers in Northeast Ohio will use the latest federal funding from the Affordable Care Act, announced Friday by Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell, to increase the size of their staffs and expand medical services in disadvantaged communities.

The more than $1.2 million in grants are part of $295 million awarded across the country, including $8.5 million in ACA, or Obamacare, funding to 37 health centers in Ohio to expand primary care services.

Northeast Ohio Neighborhood Health Services on Cleveland's East Side, which in 2013 handled more than 43,000 patient visits, received $332,278, the largest of the five local awards.

A women's health case manager and women's health nurse practitioner will be added to the staff, NEON Chief Operating Officer Karen Butler told The Plain Dealer.

"This will help us to provide essential women's health services to our patients, and to reduce community health disparities," Butler said. The expansion will take place at two of NEON's seven locations - Miles Broadway, at 9127 Miles Ave., and Southeast, at 13301 Miles Ave.

The other four federally qualified health centers to receive federal funding are:

Asian Services in Action, $187,000. The social services group will be able to increase operations at its health center at 3820 Superior Ave. in Asian Town Center to five days a week. Michael Byun, executive director of Asian Services in Action, known as ASIA Inc., said the money will go to two key areas – hiring more health care providers and expanding services such as transportation and interpretation services.

Care Alliance, $237,150. Now that renovations – which included the addition of more exam rooms - are complete at the health center's Riverview Towers clinic, at 1795 West 25th St., the next step is adding staff. Dental hygienists, dental assistants and a medical assistant are among the anticipated new hires.

"When everyone is on board, we'll be adding 12,000 patients," said Care Alliance CEO Francis Afram-Gyening.

Lorain County Health & Dentistry, nearly $219,000. The clinic, which has four locations in Lorain and Elyria, will add a full-time nurse practitioner at the health center's Grove Avenue location in Lorain, said Stephanie Wiersma, the clinic's president and CEO.

The clinic also will be able to expand its prenatal and women's health care services at its East River Street location and in the Wilkes Villa public housing community, both in Elyria.

"When we can locate in neighborhoods with a high need, we can remove a barrier and perhaps reduce the use of the emergency room for non-emergency needs," Wiersma said. "That is a much more cost-effective use of health care dollars."

Neighborhood Family Practice, $225,216. The center operates four clinics on Cleveland's West Side.

"We've been seeing a big demand because of Medicaid expansion, and now we're really seeing an increased demand for mental health services," said NFP Executive Director Jeanne Polster.

The latest award will allow the center – which last month also received $250,000 in federal money for renovations to its main Ridge Road location to support patient-centered medical homes - to add a nurse practitioner and a nurse coordinator to provide services for patients with severe mental illness, as well as a behavioral health counselor and data analyst.