Buy Photo Excellus medicare subscribers won’t be able to fill prescriptions next year at Walgreens, one of the region’s larger pharmacy store chains. (Photo: Richard Drew/AP file photo / AP)Buy Photo Story Highlights Excellus medicare subscribers won’t be able to fill prescriptions next year at two of the area’s larger pharmacy chains.

Medicare subscribers at Rochester’s largest health insurer won’t be able to fill their prescriptions next year at two of the region’s larger pharmacy chains.

Excellus BlueCross BlueShield has informed self-enrolled customers with Medicare Part D coverage —prescription drugs — that both Walgreens and Rite Aid will not be participating in the plan next year, beginning on Jan. 1.

“The change applies only to our Medicare Advantage customers starting in 2015,” Excellus spokesperson Jim Redmond said this week. “Every year, pharmacies have the choice whether to participate with our plan, just like hospitals and doctors. This year, Walgreens and Rite Aid decided not to participate.’’

Redmond said the pharmacy companies, not Excellus, made the call. No one from either company responded to requests for comment.

The Rochester region has one of the largest populations of Medicare Advantage customers in the nation. Medicare Advantage refers to enhanced Medicare coverage offered by private health insurers. The federal government provides administrative subsidies to these insurers.

Excellus has about 38,000 Medicare Advantage subscribers in the Rochester area and 130,000 statewide. Medicare Advantage plans grew nationally by 1.4 million people to 15.7 million in 2013-14.

Increases in premiums and changes in services at the local insurer level have been instituted since The Affordable Care Act was adopted. The federal law is cutting $156 billion over 10 years from Medicare Advantage, cuts that affect insurers and, by extension, providers and pharmacies.

Redmond said the loss of Rite Aid and Walgreens should not be too great an inconvenience for users.

“While some pharmacies don’t participate, we have tens of thousands of pharmacies in our network so I’m sure our members will be able to find one that’s close and convenient,” Redmond said.

An effort has begun to attract the Excellus Medicare Advantage customers moving from Rite Aid and Walgreens.

Wegmans Food Markets has run ads and sent out neighborhood flyers seeking to round up the exiled customers.

“You may have been affected by recent changes in your current Medicare Part D plan,” according to a recent Wegmans flyer. “If you are self-enrolled in Excellus BlueCross BlueShield, you recently received a notice that Walgreens and Rite Aid are no longer part of its Medicare Part D pharmacy network as of Jan. 1, 2015.

“If you need to switch pharmacies, we hope you’ll consider Wegmans Pharmacy as your new partner in wellness. Wegmans accepts most Medicare Part D plans, and has been part of the Excellus pharmacy network for over 40 years.”

Excellus and Wegmans also joined forces recently in an move that likely will send more pharmacy customers to the supermarket chain. Excellus subscribers can now get free home delivery of 90-day supplies when they have their prescriptions filled at Wegmans.

TTOBIN@DemocratandChronicle.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.rocne.ws/1zYLB7P