Sharlene (Yabe) Hansen and Ed Hansen exchange wedding vows at Pinnacle Rock on Friday morning before kayaking to the takeout at American Adventure Expeditions. ( Carie Canterbury / Daily Record )

Sharlene (Yabe) Hansen and Ed Hansen kayak down the Arkansas River from Pinnacle Rock to the takeout at American Adventure Expeditions following their wedding ceremony along the river Friday morning. Sharlene has a veil attached to her helmet, and both have flowers secured to the fronts of their kayaks. (Carie Canterbury / Daily Record)

Sharlene (Yabe) Hansen isn't interested in following tradition, but she and her new husband, Ed Hansen, did want to make a splash when they exchanged wedding vows Friday morning at Pinnacle Rock along the Arkansas River.

Tuxedos and formals were traded for sunscreen and life vests, raft guides were used instead of ushers, and Mother Nature's natural beauty replaced balloons, streamers and flowers.

The couple pledged to love one another through the high and low tides of life, regardless of the waves and rapids they may face.

Following the ceremony, the couple, along with about family members and friends, climbed into rafts and kayaks and traveled down the river from Pinnacle Rock to the takeout at American Adventure Expeditions at Parkdale, the exact trek they traveled during their first date more than two years ago.

"Our first date was running this river," Ed said. "Later, when we decided to get married, instead of having a large, elaborate church wedding, we'd have a group float and a party at the end."

Sharlene said their first date stemmed from a beginners trip for the Pikes Peak Whitewater Club where they were supposed to be lending support, but since there was enough manpower, the two floated that section of the river by themselves.

"I don't do traditional, so we thought we'd invite everyone to do what we love to do on the place where we had our first date," she said.

Sharlene expressed appreciation for American Adventure Expeditions and their help and support to accommodate the event. A reception was held at the American Adventure Expeditions following the raft/kayak trip.

"They are doing a phenomenal job," she said.

Standing up with the couple was the groom's friend, Davey Ferguson, and the bride's daughter, Marcella Veis.

Kayaking is Ed's passion, and Sharlene is the president of the Pikes Peak Whitewater Club. Ed works in corrections, and Sharlene works at the Royal Gorge Bridge & Park and is a massage therapist.

The couple lives in Rockvale.

Carie Canterbury: 719-276-7643, canterburyc@canoncitydailyrecord.com