In case you need a palette cleanser during all this shutdown business, take a minute and check out what Elizabeth Warren and Bernie Sanders–two of the only legislators that are worth a damn out there these days–have to say about this idiotic shutdown bullshit and the hostage-situation tactics being used by the GOP.

This clip of Elizabeth Warren is from two days ago, right before the shutdown. But good lord–I could watch this for days! This is a woman with ovaries of goddamned steel. I just get so tired of seeing the GOP treated like delicate Faberge eggs when they’re the ones running around like bulls in a china shop.

Having conniption fits over women taking birth control? Please. Get the hell over it. You don’t shut down an entire government and screw with people’s jobs because you don’t want delicate employers to have to cover birth control, or because you’re not getting everything on your Christmas Wishlist. Screw you, grow the hell up.

In this clip from yesterday, Bernie Sanders also weighs in on the GOP’s “We want what we want when we want it” blackmail plan. He explains how if the Senate and the President give into them and they get to see that it works, that this is just what they’ll do all the time. Which, hey, they’re kind of doing anyway. These are people who, for the most part, bragged about their plans to shutdown the government before they were even elected or knew why they’d be shutting it down! They never even planned on doing anything other than getting paid for having fancy titles, like some kind of American Royalty.

In addition to explaining his own position on the subject, Sanders also quoted several prominent Republicans who, though opposed to the Affordable Care Act, didn’t think that shutting down the entire government if you don’t get your way is the best way to run things. I hate to say it, I’m actually starting to feel badly for these people. Peter King in particular. Sure, I don’t agree with them on anything, but there’s a difference between “holding different positions than I do” and being legitimately batshit crazy. It’s a subtle difference, but it’s there.

Another important thing that Sanders and Warren mention is that it’s not just the Affordable Care Act they want to go away. They want to implement Paul Ryan’s budget. Many of them want to eliminate the minimum wage, eliminate Medicare, Medicaid, Social Security, the EPA, Veteran’s Benefits, etc. etc. If they were to get everything they want, we’d have a serious, seriously dystopian world on our hands.

The GOP does not care about Democracy, they care about getting their own way. Thank goodness, at least, there are a few sane people left in government. Warren/Sanders 2016, anyone?