Cecelia Hall and Andrew Stenson sing in the Milwaukee Symphony Orchestra’s concert production of “Così fan tutte.” Credit: Jonathan Kirn

By ,

The Milwaukee Symphony Orchestra opened the new concert season Friday evening with an exquisite, semi-stage performance of Mozart's "Cosi fan tutte."

The production, led from the podium by MSO music director Edo de Waart and directed by James Darrah, winnowed away the traditions of period costumes and opulent sets to focus attention on the comic opera's requisite elements: music and story.

Built of more small vocal ensemble numbers than solo arias, "Cosi" requires a well-matched bunch of very fine voices — and oh, what voices these were.

Soprano Brenda Rae as Fiordiligi, mezzo-soprano Cecelia Hall as Dorabella, bass-baritone Gordon Bintner as Guglielmo, tenor Andrew Stenson as Ferrando, soprano Jennifer Zetlan as Despina, and baritone Rod Gilfry as Don Alfonso each brought powerful, facile, highly refined, colorful voices to the stage.

Each of the six singers had the musical sensibility and capability to meld their unique ranges and timbres into seamless, sparkling ensembles that were perfectly balanced in power and fluid technique, and full of musical and theatrical nuance.

They delivered glorious singing and delightful theater and made it all look easy.

Cameron Mock and Emily MacDonald's brilliantly simple, one-piece backdrop/raised-platform set was done in rich, warm tones that shifted subtly with changes in lighting.

The set carved out a human-scale space on the large Uihlein Hall stage, giving a feeling of intimacy to the action.

Mock and MacDonald used large headshots of Guglielmo and Ferrando, both disguised and not disguised, as a simple means of creating and sustaining the opera's mistaken-identity comedy.

Costumes, in a white and black palette, were pared away by bits and pieces, leaving five characters in their skivvies by the final scenes.

De Waart and the MSO gave a taut, musically rich performance, playing from a raised, open-front pit, with the musicians' heads at stage level.

This convention from Mozart's time made the orchestra a visual element of the production and gave tremendous presence to artfully executed instrumental work.

Harpsichordist Kevin Murphy and MSO principal cellist Susan Babini played from the stage, adding sensitive continuo accompaniment to recitatives.

A contingent of the MSO chorus made several tastefully subtle appearances.

The MSO's "Cosi" will be repeated Sunday at 2:00, at the Marcus Center for the Performing Arts. For ticket information visit www.mso.org or call (414) 273-7206.