Every year numerous educators across the nation are the recipient of the Milken Award and $25,000 in cash. An award that highlights impressive achievements of teachers and the promise of what they'll accomplish in the future. For many it's a surprise of a lifetime. Rhonda Burrage of Magnolia Middle School is this years Mississippi Milken Award recipient, but who is she and why does she put so much into teaching, especially in a technological world.

"In my classroom everyone can succeed," Burrage said. "I usually do small groups for students who are struggling and I always try to catch the strugglers immediately. No one can fail my class. I'm always there before and after school to do tutoring. I'm always in contact with parents for tutoring contracts. I always have my door open for when students are doing electives so they can come back to me and talk. I'm always accessible no matter what."

Burrage says her desire to become a Math teacher began in 7th grade, when teachers had her tutor anyone from middle school to college students. She says since then she has made education an enjoyable time for students.

"I have a set routine for my classroom, when they come in they have a bell ringer that's in their Chromebook," said Burrage. "After the bell ringer they have a program called I-ready that helps them with their math skills they have lacked in the past years. After that we go over the bell ringer and review homework. They're expected to do homework without fail."

Burrage says as technology advances more ways of teaching kids becomes available and she capitalizes that every chance she gets. In the end, Burrage says it all boils down to being their for your students no matter what.

"I'm here everyday and I think showing up for your students really matters," said Burrage. "You have got to be there for them."

The Milken Awards were created in 1985. About 40 to 50 teachers nationwide win them each year. So far, the foundation has given away about 64 million dollars in prizes to teachers.