HORSHAM, Pa.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--NextGen Healthcare Information Systems, LLC., a wholly owned subsidiary of Quality Systems, Inc. (NASDAQ: QSII) and a leading provider of healthcare information systems and connectivity solutions, announced today ViaTrack Solutions, the Company’s clearinghouse for electronic healthcare claims and payment solutions, will participate in the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid (CMS) ICD-10 “end-to-end” testing with seven Medicare payers during the week of January 26-30.

The goal of end–to–end testing is to ensure claims with ICD–10 codes can be processed from submission to remittance. Participating in this process will demonstrate that: NextGen Healthcare clients leveraging ViaTrack Solutions can successfully submit ICD–10 claims to the Medicare Fee-For Service (FFS) claims systems; Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) software changes made to support ICD-10 result in appropriately adjudicated claims; and, accurate remittance advices are produced.

ViaTrack Solutions’ testing efforts with Medicare Administrative Contractors (MACs) will take place with the following seven Medicare payers:

Cahaba GBA Jurisdiction 10 Georgia Medicare

Novitas Solutions Jurisdiction L Pennsylvania Medicare

Novitas Solutions Jurisdiction L New Jersey Medicare

Palmetto GBA Railroad Medicare

Palmetto GBA Jurisdiction 11 South Carolina Medicare

WPS Jurisdiction 5 Kansas Medicare

WPS Jurisdiction 8 Indiana Medicare

“The implementation of ICD-10 represents a significant code set change that impacts the entire health care community,” said Ana Croxton, vice president of EDI products and services for NextGen Healthcare. “We believe end-to-end testing is an essential step in ensuring that providers, clearinghouses and payers are fully prepared to process ICD-10 claims, and are committed to helping the industry succeed in this transition.”

For more information on CMS ICD-10 End-to-End Testing, visit http://www.cms.gov/Regulations-and-Guidance/HIPAA-Administrative-Simplification/Affordable-Care-Act/End-to-End-Testing.html

About NextGen Healthcare

NextGen Healthcare Information Systems, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of Quality Systems, Inc., provides integrated clinical, connectivity and financial solutions, including revenue cycle management services for ambulatory, inpatient and dental provider organizations. For more information, please visit www.nextgen.com and www.qsii.com. Follow NextGen Healthcare on Twitter at www.twitter.com/nextgen, Facebook at http://www.facebook.com/NextGenHealthcare or LinkedIn at http://www.linkedin.com/company/nextgen-healthcare-information-systems.

About Quality Systems Inc

Irvine, Calif.-based Quality Systems, Inc. and its NextGen Healthcare subsidiary develop and market computer-based practice management, electronic health records and revenue cycle management applications as well as connectivity products and services for medical and dental group practices and small hospitals. Visit www.qsii.com and www.nextgen.com for additional information.

Certain statements in this news release are forward-looking statements within the meaning of the federal securities laws, including but not limited to those statements made related to the Company’s future participation in and predicted results from the end-to-end testing and those statements made by Ana Croxton related to developments and trends in the healthcare industry. These statements are based on current expectations of future events. If underlying assumptions prove inaccurate or unknown risks or uncertainties materialize, actual results could vary materially from the Company’s expectations and projections. Factors that could cause the anticipated results to differ from those described in the forward-looking statements include the possibility that products will not achieve or sustain market acceptance; the impact of incentive payments under The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act on sales and the ability of the Company to meet continued certification requirements; the development by competitors of new or superior technologies; the timing, cost and success or failure of new product and service introductions, development and product upgrade releases; undetected errors or bugs in our software; changing economic, political or regulatory influences in the healthcare industry; availability of third-party products and components; competitive pressures including product offerings, pricing and promotional activities; the Company's ability or inability to attract and retain qualified personnel; possible regulation of the Company's software by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration; and general economic conditions. Additional risks and uncertainties are set forth in the Company’s public filings with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, including the discussion under the heading "Risk Factors" in the Company’s most recent Annual Report on Form 10-K and any subsequent Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q. The Company expressly disclaims any intent or obligation to update these forward-looking statements except as required by law.

© 2014 Quality Systems, Inc., Irvine, CA 92612

® Marks owned by Quality Systems, Inc.

All other non-QSI Marks are the property of their respective owners