Sen. Marco Rubio Marco RubioWhat happens when the GOP base abandons the party platform? Puerto Rico debt relief faces serious challenges in Senate Trump encourages Rubio to reclaim Senate seat MORE is hoping to use an annual defense bill to limit President Obama's ability to close the Guantanamo Bay prison.

The Florida Republican, who is running for president, has filed an amendment to the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) that would block funds from being used on a program that is focused on closing the detention facility at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

ADVERTISEMENT

Rubio also filed a separate change to the annual defense policy bill that would set up a series of requirements that would have to be met before the United States could transfer the Guantanamo naval station to the Cuban government.

Rubio is the latest Republican to offer language meant to block President Obama from closing the prison. Sens. Ted Cruz (R-Texas) and James Inhofe (R-Oka.) have also filed amendments that would place hurdles in Obama's path.

The defense bill spearheaded by Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.) would allow the administration to close the prison if Congress approves a plan for doing so.

Inhofe wants to remove language allowing the administration to submit a plan, along with another section that allows detainees to be temporarily transferred to the United States for medical treatment.

Cruz wants to block the administration from using any funds to transfer a detainee to a country that the State Department has issued a travel warning against.

Republicans are split over Guantanamo.

GOP Sens. John McCain (Ariz.), Lindsey Graham (S.C.), Roger Wicker (Miss.), Mike Rounds (S.D.), Thom Tillis (N.C.), Dan Sullivan (Alaska) and Mike Lee (Utah) voted for the Guantánamo plan on the committee. Inhofe, as well as GOP Sens. Jeff Sessions (Ala.), Kelly Ayotte (N.H.), Deb Fischer (Neb.), Tom Cotton (Ark.), Joni Ernst (Iowa) and Ted Cruz (Texas), voted against it.

The administration has threatened to veto the defense policy bill because it views the Guantanamo language as curbing its ability to close the prison.

“The administration strongly objects to provisions of the bill that would impede efforts to close the detention facility at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba,” the White House said in a statement, adding that "this process for congressional approval is unnecessary and overly restrictive.”

The administration has threatened to veto the annual defense bill in the past, but has never followed through on the threat.

Obama vowed to close the prison during his first week in office, but has repeatedly run into opposition from Congress.