Senate to take up bill paving way for direct primary care

Long before the days of Obamacare and long wait times to fight with health insurance companies, people used to barter with their physicians -- sometimes with food, says Johnson City state Sen. Rusty Crowe, even leaving their doctor a cow as payment.

But in 2016, with Tennessee legislators opposed to expanding Medicaid to more than a quarter million people under a plan pushed by the governor, lawmakers are considering out-of-the-box solutions to address health care costs.

Sen. Kerry Roberts’ solution, up for debate next week, harkens back to “good old fashioned health care,” with primary care physicians charging patients a monthly fee for unlimited doctor visits and services without ever having to use the health insurance system.

Should patients have insurance, Roberts says, they can shift catastrophic health coverage in the event of a major injury or illness.

“It’s solving an even larger problem than Medicaid expansion,” said Roberts, adding that any of the state’s 6.6 million Tennesseans could benefit from a direct-pay plan, not just the 280,000 estimated people who would qualify for health coverage under Insure Tennessee because they don’t qualify for TennCare but also aren't eligible to use health care exchanges.

“It’s something done completely independent of insurance. It’s done completely independent of TennCare,” Roberts said. “It truly is a free-market solution to providing people with affordable health care.”



It’s a practice being done in Tennessee, albeit it sparsely. GracePointe Healthcare PLLC in Franklin charges $49 a month for free office visits, basic labs and diagnostic tests, prescription refills and phone consultations. Business at Rob Tomsett’s clinic has grown so much he’s considering a move to a larger building.

“I’m so sick of the rat wheel of medicine being, 'Go! Go! Go! Go! Go!' and feeling like I’m not helping anybody that much,” said Tomsett, a physician assistant who runs GracePointe. “Just like your favorite restaurant or your trusted mechanic, they come back to me because they value the services I provide to them.”

Without having to spend time or money trying dedicating staff to chase down insurance companies rejecting their claims, Tomsett said he has more time to talk with patients instead of rushing them out the door after a five- or 10-minute exam to fill out more paperwork. His patients range from people of low income to millionaires, he said.

The Roberts bill stems from last year’s failure of Insure Tennessee, Gov. Bill Haslam’s plan offer health care coverage to the section of the population left unaccounted for after a U.S. Supreme Court ruling found states are not required to expand their Medicaid programs to satisfy the Affordable Care Act. The idea was unpopular among Tennessee lawmakers from the beginning, first with former Democratic Gov. Phil Bredesen calling a federally-required expansion the “mother of unfunded mandates” and Republicans in the legislature killing the governor's Insure Tennessee plan early in committee.

Haslam said he doesn’t see the new legislation as hurting or helping his chances of trying to convince the legislature to consider a health care expansion in the future — although any further attempts, if any, would happen after the November presidential election.

“If this is a good idea on its own, it should stand on its own regardless,” Haslam said. “But we should make certain — there’s still 280,000 Tennesseans who don’t have health care coverage. And even having primary care provider coverage, there’s a lot of different missions and agencies people can go to for the basics. But then when the costs get big beyond that, like I said, the surgery or ongoing cancer treatments, that’s been what the issue has been.”

The Tennessee Medical Association, the state’s largest professional organization for doctors, supports the plan, but would like direct primary care operations to be quarterbacked by a physician to ensure the quality of care and other minor aspects of the bill.

“It will be interesting to see if public policies pave the way for some of this, like this bill might do,” said Dave Chaney, spokesman for the TMA. “I don’t even have a prediction, but even the push for it in and of itself even reflects the exhaustion with all the administrative stuff that they have to go through.”

According to the legislation's fiscal note, which predicts costs and economic impact, the legislation is expect to ease the pressure on insurance companies by reducing the number of claims to process.

The legislation, called the Health Care Empowerment Act, is up for a Senate vote Monday. From a technical standpoint, the legislation ensures any such direct primary care arrangements are not misconstrued as insurance. But Roberts hopes the legislation will help physicians across the state consider medical practices that resemble this arrangement, kicking the issue of affordable health care to the free market.

“We don’t know how widespread it will be because it’s not the government’s jobs to fan the flames of this thing. It’s the free market's job and it will spread like wildfire,” Roberts said.