Topics: American History, police abuse, police violence, Racism, sandra bland, slavery, The South, White Supremacy, News, Politics News

It is likely that almost every black American has a story—familial or personal—about being unjustly harassed or otherwise treated badly by this country’s police. These stories begin in childhood and continue throughout life. I, for one, am lucky to have survived my own encounters with police and other security forces. Sandra Bland was not as fortunate.

Bland, as has now been widely reported, was driving from Chicago to Texas to take a dream job at her alma mater Prairie View A&M University. She changed lanes to allow a state trooper, Brian Encinia, to pass. Encinia decided to stop Sandra Bland for an “illegal lane change.” As recorded on Encinia’s dashboard camera, the situation begins badly and ends even worse: Sandra Bland’s basic questions about Encinia’s behavior go unanswered. Encinia becomes agitated that she, a black woman, would dare question him. He orders Bland out of the car, then threatens to “light her up” with his taser.

By this point, Bland must be panic stricken; the state trooper throws her to the ground, assaulting her, injuring her arm and head. The videotape of the incident appears to be altered. The police report is vague and imprecise. Sandra Bland is dead three days later, supposedly hung, having committed suicide with the garbage bag used as a makeshift curtain for her jail cell. This is not a good death.

Responsible black parents tell their children (and those others in their charge) about how to deal with America’s police:

Your life is at risk in every police encounter. The police are not your friends, not if you are a person of color in America. The police could kill you. They are racist, and the system which they are part of is racist. Know your rights but realize that your rights will likely not be respected, because you are black. Do what is necessary to survive. Please come back home alive.

Sandra Bland found herself in the middle of those parables and lessons. As a Black American, she knew how badly it could all end. During the 8 minute long dashboard video, she is narrating her own death.

Sandra Bland’s story is a story about race, about intergenerational folk wisdom and practical knowledge about how to survive as a black person in a society that still views you as a threat, as the preeminent Other. Sandra Bland’s story is also an example of the great migrations and movements of black folks from and to the South, and the centrality of cars, the road, about Jim and Jane Crow, both in the past and lived present for those of us who are citizens of Black America. It started in the South, and for Sandra Bland, that’s where it ended too.

The South, with its many thousands of black bodies killed by chattel slavery, and many thousands of Civil War dead, is full of ghosts. My grandmother used to tell me stories about how a white half-man/half-beast specter would run past the rural farm she grew up on, cursing any people he found on the road, spewing fire out of his nose. The beast was fond of black people who dared to pass through his territory. My grandmother made me promise that I would always be watchful for this evil creature, aware of my surroundings at all times.

With his arrogant swagger, authoritarian demeanor and crude power, Brian Encinia was no “hero cop” with a “hard job,” one of those police officers deified by an uncritical media and an American cultural mythology that prevents police from being held accountable for their thuggery. Brian Encinia was one of those demons of casual racism and violence that haunt the South (as well as other parts of the country) and the collective imagination of Black America.

From the late 19th through to the middle of the 20th centuries, African-Americans left the South — with its slave-labor camps, mass rape, lynchings, Ku Klux Klan, racial pogroms, ethnic cleansing, debt peonage, and the indignity of Jim and Jane Crow — for the improved opportunities they imagined would await them in other parts of the country, for “the warmth of other suns.” Of course, those freedom dreams ultimately encountered the realities of white racism and segregation in places like New York, Chicago, and Los Angeles. Nevertheless, the ledger of African-American freedom and opportunities was more balanced there than under the formal American Apartheid of the Jim and Jane Crow South.

In the late 20th and early 21 centuries, Sandra Bland and millions of other African-Americans are returning to the South: They are participating in a “reverse migration” to their ancestral home on this side of the Black Atlantic. Sandra Bland was part of Black America’s Third Great Migration—alas, one that she would not complete, a journey interrupted by an over-zealous cop and death in a jail cell.