PLANT CITY There seems to be no lack of things to be riled about these days depending on your philosophic, political or religious leanings, from ISIS to Iran, to Obamacare, to same sex marriage, to the war on Christianity.

But sometimes it’s the smaller things: there’s the loitering driver who insists on driving in the passing lane when everyone else is in a hurry, or the cell phone-oholic with the phone glued to one ear and a blind eye on the road ahead, or how about the shopper with a buggy full of stuff maneuvering through the express lane at the grocery store.

My pet peeve are people who violate my privacy while driving down the road blasting out their so-called music with the kind of wattage that could light up a small city?

You feel it before you hear it.

Whoooomph! Whoooomph! Whoooomph!

It’s the sound of the wall-thumping, window-rattling music coming from “boom-box vehicles” as they cruise the streets of the city.

Picture yourself in your car at an intersection waiting for the red light to change. Next to you the Mrs. and in the back seat your 4- and 5-year-old grandchildren. In the next lane is a car with its boom box stereo screaming music so loud that your car doors are rattling, your safety glass windows are pulsating with the velocity of a high speed blender, profanity laced lyrics permeating our space as vile as the world below.

Inside the car, two teenage boys, in the back seat two young teen Lolita-types nodding heads in time to the music. All seemingly oblivious to the aural trail of anguish and annoyance they create as they wait for the light to change.

For me it’s not the burden so much as it is the strength to bear it.

Last week they stuck again, this time it was one of those heavy metal musical concerts on wheels rumbled down Collins Street through the historic district. The pick-up truck blasting noise with enough kick to vibrate everything around me; people holding their ears, dogs howling, birds circling erratically, squirrels climbing ferociously to the top of trees.

You run but you just can’t hide from it!

I understand it’s the job of every generation to criticize and disparage the musical tastes of the younger generation. In the 1950s Elvis Presley shocked the older generation with his hip-grinding performances. The ‘60s brought us the Beatles and long hair. Chubby Checker’s “Twist” was reviled from pulpits as decadent.

In the 1960s I frustrated my father with the rock ‘n’ roll music of Chuck Berry and Eddie Cochran.

I suppose I am just being my father 50 years ago, but never has a generation imposed their vile music on the public in such a way as they do today.

When rapper Ice-T sings, “I’m ‘bout to dust some cops off,” it’s not only offensive, it’s inflammatory.

Today’s youth and their rap music could use some of grandma’s soap.

Yet the Supreme Court ruled that people have a legal right to impose that ribald style of music on others.

Turn up the volume people, the courts have your back.

The Florida Supreme Court put itself in the passenger seat of these boom box vehicles, ruling that people have a right to such behavior, regardless of the rights of others.

First Amendment Rights, they say.

Most people believe in the right to free speech, but debate whether it should cover flag-burning, tobacco advertising, hate speech and hard-core rap that impose on the privacy of others. Many would agree to limit some forms of free speech.

Police Chief Ed Duncan says he has received numerous calls from citizens complaining about loud music coming from vehicles.

“Before the Supreme Court ruling, a city noise ordinance gave us a voice, that’s not the case now,” Duncan said. “It’s not something we are going to be able to address because of the law. It’s something that’s out of our control.”

To the state Supreme Court, here’s a bulletin:

The blasting of offensive music on an unwilling audience violates the right to peace and tranquility. The majority of people don’t care to hear their music, they don’t care about the number of watts in their sound system, and they certainly don’t care to hear the vile.

But there is hope.

The state’s high court ruled, in State v. Catalano, that the state’s ban on booming loud music from a vehicle can’t be enforced because it carved out exceptions for vehicles blasting out sound for business or political purposes, while putting a restriction on other types of sounds. Such “content-based” restrictions are unconstitutional; the court noted, however, that the state does have an interest in keeping loud car radios from bothering people, if there a reasonably objective way to do it.

The Supreme Court left the door open to revising the law.

State Rep. Dan Raulerson please take heed because our community needs your help to find that “reasonable and objective way” to keep loud music from infringing on the rights of others.

The law needs to be re-written restricting the sound of “boom box” music to 25 feet while leaving out any types of exceptions, presumably making the bill constitutional and preserving our right of privacy.

And that is music to my ears.