ESSEX COUNTY — Voters heading to the polls on Nov. 4 will choose between 21 candidates for all nine seats open on the Board of Chosen Freeholders.

Voters will choose between the following eight candidates for four at-large seats on the board.

DEMOCRATS

Patricia Sebold – The current vice president of the Freeholder board, Sebold was first elected in 1993. A former West Orange High School English teacher from Livingston, she says her priorities include improving the quality of life in Essex County, working with the open space trust fund, and working to create vocational schools in Essex County. “I grew up in a family where I learned you do as much as you can for other people,” she said. “I feel the same way about being an elected official; I do as much as I can.” Rufus Johnson – Johnson is a current Freeholder running for his third term on the board. The Newark resident said his priorities include public safety, park improvement, and infrastructure improvement. “The bottom line is results,” he said of his political style. “I don’t need a soap box, I like to let my work speak for me.” Lebby Jones – Jones, who spent 20 years as a councilwoman in Irvington, is running for Freeholder for the first time. Her biggest concerns, she said, include the tax rate in the county, and managing services to both the urban and suburban residents in Essex. “I hope to bring something to the table from the urban perspective, while considering the suburban perspective, too,” she said. Brendan Gill – A current Freeholder in District 5, Gill is running for his first shot as an at-large Freeholder. Gill, of Montclair, who is also currently working as an advisor on the Cory Booker senate campaign, said he is most concerned about taxes and the county’s fiscal health, improving residents’ quality of life, protecting open space, and creating vocational schools in Essex County. “It’s been an honor to serve the people of Essex County and I hope I can earn their trust and support again,” he said.

REPUBLICANS

Adam Kraemer – Kraemer, a Columbia Teachers College graduate and West Orange resident who works at a international plastics manufacturer in Livingston, is running for his first term as Freeholder. His priorities, he said, include improving traffic safety, creating a county-wide 911 emergency call system, reforming the welfare office, and bringing more transparency to the county’s bidding system. “Essex County is a wonderful place, it’s very diverse. But, all nine Freeholders on the board are from the same party. There’s not a diversity of ideas there,” he said. Ryan Funsch – Funsch is a 23-year-old Montclair State graduate who works for the state of New Jersey, according to family members. He declined an interview for this article. Ricardo Alonso – Alonso is a first-time Freeholder candidate from Caldwell. The issues he cares about most, he said, are economic development and job creation. “It’s very difficult in Essex County when you have an R next to your name,” he said. “I want people to vote for me, for who I am.” John Anello – A lawyer and lifelong Belleville resident, this marks Anello’s first run for office in Essex County. He said his main concerns are decreasing taxes and creating a magnet public high school in the county. “My number one issue is taxes,” he said. “Essex County has become unaffordable. I think the county spends too much money, and it spends it on foolish things.”

DISTRICT ONE

Three candidates are running for one District One Freeholder seat. District One includes the North, East, and parts of Central and West Wards in Newark.

Democrat Rolando Bobadilla – First appointed to the seat in 2011 and elected to his first term later that year, Bobadilla is currently seeking his second term. Bobadilla, a Newark resident who works at the North Ward Center, Inc., said he is focused on increasing access to education and creating magnet schools, switching county vehicles to a fleet of hybrid vehicles, and saving money. “We need more common sense in government, not just politicians,” he said. Republican Aracelis Sanabria Tejada – Tejada, of Newark, has owned a bookkeeping and tax preparation service since 1998, and is running for office in Essex County for the first time. She is focused on improving student access to quality education, and ensuring that Newark residents can tap into county-level resources, she said. “Every corner of this city has a need,” she said. “I want to advocate for the residents of the city of Newark. I think you can do this job with a heart.” Independent Raul Lopez – Lopez, of Newark, running on the “A New Vision” ticket. He could not be reached for comment.

DISTRICT TWO

Four candidates are running for one District Two Freeholder seat. District Two includes the South Ward and parts of the West Ward of Newark, Irvington, and Maplewood.

Democrat Wayne Richardson – Richardson is the president of the Laborers Local 55 construction workers union and is running for freeholder for the first time. The Newark resident would like to focus, he said, on expanding vocational schools, increasing police presence on county roads, and improving quality of life issues. “I’m a bridge builder, I like to bring people together,” he said. “I’m in construction, that’s what I do.” Independent Gary Jones – Jones of Maplewood has not registered with a specific part or slogan. Jones, a retired Newark public school teacher, said he would like to focus on building strong school communities, managing family services, agencies, and senior services, advocating for safer streets and implementing job training programs. “I have decided to run for office because I am not pleased with the current representation we have at the county level,” he said in an email. “I feel I could be an integral resource and representative for all the residents living in the Essex County (Second) District. A Community Built on Pride will Always Rise.” Independent Jean Lamothe – Lamothe, of Irvington, is a member of the “At Your Service” party. He could not be reached for comment, but according to a PolitickerNJ article, he lost a bid for mayor of Irvington earlier this year. Independent Selvin “Chipper” White – White, of Newark, is a member of “The Real Democrat” party. White, a graduate of Weequahic High School who worked for the White House and on Al Gore's presidential campaign, said he would focus on increasing police presence, maintaining county roads, improving services for all residents, especially seniors, and introducing more transparency into county contracts. "After 10 years spent working at the White House and on Capitol Hill, one of the primary lessons I learned from President Bill Clinton was the civic responsibility to return to my community and do positive, uplifting work that would improve the quality of life," he said.

DISTRICT THREE

Two candidates are running for one District Three Freeholder seat. District Three includes parts of the west and central wards in Newark, East Orange Wards 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, South Orange Village, and Orange.

Democrat Britnee Timberlake – Timberlake, of East Orange, is running for the first time. She said her main concerns include supporting the county college, improving the county jail, improving the welfare system, and advocating for low- and moderate-income residents. Timberlake, who is the founding Executive Director of a nonprofit affordable housing organization called the Essex Community Land Trust, said she feels it is “humbling and exciting to get the opportunity to help people.” Independent Tariq Raheem – Raheem, running on a “Family Jobs Education” platform, could not be reached for comment. But, according to the Newark resident’s campaign website, his main priorities are improving and securing a better family life, maintaining and creating jobs and making sure residents can fill them, and addressing abandoned properties.

DISTRICT FOUR

Two candidates are running for one District Four Freeholder seat. District Four includes Caldwell, W. Caldwell, N. Caldwell, Essex Fells, Fairfield, Livingston, Millburn, W. Orange, Roseland, Verona, and Cedar Grove.

Democrat Leonard Luciano – Currently serving his first full term on the board, Luciano is a library media specialist in the Newark public school district and previously served as Commissioner of the Essex County Utilities Authority. The West Caldwell resident's main concerns, he said, include maintaining the tax rate, increasing revenue to the county, focusing on public safety, and improving the quality of life for residents. “I’ve really enjoyed my last three years as Freeholder),” he said. “I’ve worked tirelessly and now I’m seeing many of the projects I’ve been working on come to fruition.” Republican Richard Leonard – Leonard, a realtor and business owner, has served as the mayor and longtime councilman in Roseland, and is running for freeholder for the first time. His priorities, he said, include creating “innovative” revenue opportunities for the county like marketing it as a filming location, and focusing on economic development. “I always wanted to serve outside Roseland,” he said. “I work well with others. Working with all different groups of people, to me, is a beautiful thing.”

DISTRICT FIVE

Two candidates are running for one District Five Freeholder seat. District Five includes Belleville, Bloomfield, Glen Ridge, Montclair, and Nutley.

Democrat Cynthia Toro – Toro, of Bloomfield, is going for her first run at freeholder. She is a social worker and Commissioner of the Essex County Improvement Authority. Her priorities, she said, include job creation, bringing in revenue to the county, and enhancing residents’ quality of life. “I’m not a politician, I’m a social worker,” she said. “I want to use this platform to help families.” Republican John Kelly – Kelly, of Nutley, is a lawyer running for Freeholder for the first time. His main concerns include high taxes, addressing veteran unemployment, and creating more opportunities for resource sharing. He also plans to propose creating a county-wide bank. “There is a burden of debt and taxes that will fall on the shoulders of my generation,” the 29-year-old said. “I want to nip these issues in the bud, I want to be involved in the solutions.”

Jessica Mazzola may be reached at jmazzola@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @JessMazzola. Find NJ.com on Facebook.