That’s it for face-offs in the Charleston mayor’s race.

Online To stay up-to-date on South Carolina politics, go to palmettopolitics.com or download the Palmetto Politics app for iOS or Android.

After weeks of debates and forums where the candidates clashed over everything from tourist bathrooms downtown to better roads and parking, the multi-candidate clashes are done.

There are no more get-togethers scheduled for the six candidates.

An official count shows there was no shortage of being in front of the public.

Jack O’Toole, who is with John Tecklenburg’s campaign, said Tecklenburg participated in 27 forums during the election cycle.

During a week in mid-September, there were five forums in four days, he said. Tecklenburg was the first candidate to announce he would run for mayor.

Maurice Washington, who entered the race later than most of the other candidates, said he has participated in more than 20 forums.

William Dudley Gregorie said the smaller, in-person gatherings were good for candidates who don’t have a lot of money and can’t afford TV spots.

The election is Nov. 3 with a Nov. 17 run-off likely between the top two vote-getters.

Sanford will support Paul Ryan

U.S. Rep. Mark Sanford said he will support Wisconsin Republican U.S. Rep. Paul Ryan for House Speaker in the election this week.

Sanford, R-S.C., is one of the approximately three-dozen members of the sometimes unruly, anti-spending House Freedom Caucus conservatives who contributed to John Boehner’s decision to quit.

“I believe that a Ryan speakership represents the best opportunity for conservative members to have their voices heard, to advance conservative policy and to restore unity to the House Republican Conference,” Sanford said.

O’Malley was here for money, too

Democratic presidential candidate and former Maryland Gov. Martin O’Malley visited North Charleston last week to advocate for gun control in the wake of the Emanuel AME Church shooting, and to speak to students at the College of Charleston.

But he was also here to raise some campaign cash.

An invitation to a reception, held at Victor Social Club on John Street in Charleston, requested $2,700 per person to be a co-host of the event, while young professionals or students could attend for a mere $45 and $25, respectively.

The event was hosted by local attorney Mullins McLeod, Charleston City Councilman Rodney Williams, consultant Phil Noble, former lieutenant governor candidate Ashley Cooper and former lawmaker Boyd Brown.

Hutto makes case she’s a Republican

Former Democratic state Rep. Anne Peterson-Hutto of James Island is setting the groundwork for a return to politics with a probable run for Paul Thurmond’s soon-to-be-open state Senate seat.

Hutto earlier this month appeared at the Charleston County GOP meeting to introduce herself and explain why she’s had a political change of heart.

“I voted Republican in the last primary,” said Peterson-Hutto, adding that she fully supports Gov. Nikki Haley.

Thurmond announced earlier he would not seek re-election next year to his Senate District 41 seat. The seat runs from James Island into West Ashley and Dorchester County.

Several Republicans and Democrats have shown an interest, as well.

Hutto served as a Democrat in the state House for one term representing James Island from 2008-2010. She is currently a lobbyist representing the Coastal Conservation League, among other interests.

Bobby Harrell makes Mount Pleasant GOP appearance

Former House Speaker Bobby Harrell was in the audience last week when the man who succeeded him, current House Speaker Jay Lucas, addressed Mount Pleasant Republicans.

Lucas, R-Hartsville, was giving his standard lunchtime speech about the upcoming session and gave a shout-out to the Charleston Republican, saying, “It’s great to see Speaker Harrell.”

Harrell, who resigned his post last year after his Statehouse ethics case conviction, sat with his son, Trey Harrell, who is interested in following his father into politics as a potential GOP candidate for a Mount Pleasant seat in the S.C. House of Representatives next year.

Graham in the undercard Wednesday

CNBC has finalized the lineup for its debate Wednesday in Boulder, Colo., and for the third showdown in a row U.S. Sen. Lindsey Graham, R-S.C., is assigned to the undercard.

Graham’s poll numbers in several recent surveys did not crack the 2.5 percent average to make it on the main stage. He will go on at 6 p.m. Eastern time along with Bobby Jindal, Rick Santorum and George Pataki.

The main event at 8 p.m. includes Donald Trump, Ben Carson, Marco Rubio, Carly Fiorina, Jeb Bush, Ted Cruz, Chris Christie, Mike Huckabee, John Kasich and Rand Paul.

The Charleston County GOP is holding a debate watch Wednesday night at Cinebarre in Mount Pleasant, beginning at 7:30 p.m.

Presidential visits this week:

Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton on Friday is the keynote speaker at the Charleston Branch NAACP’s 98th annual Freedom Fund Banquet at the Charleston Area Convention Center in North Charleston.

Compiled by Schuyler Kropf and Diane Knich