Providence College goalie Jon Gillies carries the trophy after the Friars defeated Boston University 4-3 for the NCAA hockey title on Saturday night at TD Garden. Gillies, who made 49 saves on Saturday, was named the NCAA Tournament’s MVP. USA TODAY Sports





For weeks now, Boston University coach David Quinn has been telling folks that the margin for error grows smaller the deeper a team goes into the playoffs.Quinn’s words proved excruciatingly prophetic for the Terriers Saturday night, as Providence College staged one of the most shocking finishes in the history of the NCAA Division I tournament, using a strong third period and a bit of saintly luck to grab a 4-3 victory at TD Garden...The Terriers entered the game heavily favored, with Hobey Baker Award winner Jack Eichel leading the way, a starry supporting cast of talented forwards like Eichel linemates Evan Rodrigues and Danny O’Regan, and a blossoming freshman-laden defense that had been the talk of the land...All the pieces were in place to grab a sixth national title. And BU led 3-2 going into the third, and was 19-0 when leading through two frames this season.But then, suddenly, the hockey gods turned a blind eye...A casual dump-in by Friars defenseman Tom Parisi was caught by BU junior goalie Matt O’Connor (39 saves), who then played the puck like Dick Stuart on a popup — dropping the puck between his skates and over the line. The goal came at 11:24 and knotted the score, 3-3...Quinn called timeout at 13:41 to settle his troops, but the effort backfired. Over on the other bench, Friars associate coach Steve Miller concocted a faceoff strategy that paid huge dividends. From his offensive right circle, centerman Kevin Rooney won the draw to his left, and left winger Steve McParland tied up his Terrier counterpart — allowing junior right winger Brandon Tanev to cut across the circle, pick up the puck, enter the slot and rifle a wrister over O’Connor’s glove to give PC the lead with 6:17 to go...“It was amazing. I couldn’t even register what was going on,” said Tanev. “It was a heck of a draw win by Kevin Rooney. Steve McParland was able to give me some space and I was able to rip that puck and it went in.”..The Friars (26-13-2) would not have had a chance last night but for tournament Most Outstanding Performer Jon Gillies, who made 49 saves and kept it close as BU threatened to break it open.“We beat a terrific opponent tonight,” said PC coach Nate Leaman. “They had us on our heels in the first and third periods and Jonny (Gillies) held us in there. Obviously, we got a big bounce, got a heck of a bounce.”..The Terriers (28-8-5) outshot PC in the opening period, 18-6, but it was the Friars who jumped ahead at 9:25. Junior co-captain Noel Acciari rifled the puck off the right post, and the carom came to sophomore defenseman Anthony Florentino, who found the far side behind O’Connor...But BU went to work and connected twice in a record-setting four-second span. First, Ahti Oksanen pumped home a shot just inside the near post at 12:50.On the ensuing faceoff, Eichel pushed the puck forward and retrieved it, suddenly exploding into the Friars zone. He slid a feed to O’Regan, who let fly a backhander while falling that sailed past Gillies at 12:54...PC junior Mark Jankowski knotted the score on the power play at 4:29 of the second period. BU answered at 11:36, when Oksanen put a shot on net, that Gillies couldn’t control and Hohmann potted the rebound at 11:36 for a 3-2 lead...The Friars put the pressure on in the third period, earning a 20-12 shot advantage, and the heat finally caused O’Connor and the Terriers to crack.“Sometimes experience is the best remedy for what we went through tonight and we didn’t have it,” said Quinn about the nation’s youngest team (20 years, 145 days). “I’d love to have our guys up here with smiles on their faces instead of tears in their eyes. But, sometimes it’s a process ... It’s a tough one to swallow, but we’ll be back.”..