Advertisement

Trinity Health Corporation, one of the biggest Catholic health care delivery systems in the US, is responsible for the operations of 126 care facilities and 88 hospitals in the country. On Oct. 1, the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) announced a lawsuit against Trinity Health Corporation for abortion refusal.

ACLU stated that Trinity Health Corporation continues to impose religious restrictions on hospital and health care staff. These religious rules often collide with many heathcare rights in women.

The lawsuit explained that Trinity Health Corporation has 'repeatedly' failed to provide emergency abortions to women who suffered from pregnancy complications or miscarriage, even in life and death situations.

Trinity-operated hospitals and facilities are required to follow Ethical and Religious Directives (ERD), designed by the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops to guide Catholic health institutions in their daily operations. ERD serves two purpose: one, to endorse ethical health care standards that stem from the Catholic church's teachings pertaining to a person's dignity; and two, to give 'authoritative guidance' concerning various moral issues.

US-based hospitals are required to follow federal laws including the Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act (EMTALA) which requires institutions to treat emergency patients regardless of financial stability and insurance policy. In the lawsuit, ACLU argued that in life or death cases, a pregnant woman has the right to receive emergency abortion and doctors are required by law to perform such operations.

Doctors within the Trinity Health Corporation also cannot perform tubal ligation in women whose preexisting cancer is at risk when they become pregnant. Physicians are also prohibited from discussing emergency contraceptives with post-rape victims.

These religious restrictions have a collective effect in many patients in the US, regardless of religion. The nation has around 25 big hospital systems to date and 10 of them are Catholic. Recent mergers resulted in almost 16 percent increase in the ratio. While some may argue that patients can get the care they need in other institutions, for several communities in the US, a patient's option is often left to just one. For many patients, imposing religious doctrines can be a matter of life or death.

"Patient welfare must be the [number 1] concern of health care professionals. Every pregnant woman who enters an emergency room should be guaranteed that she will get the care she needs, and should not have to worry that she won't get appropriate care because of the hospital's religious affiliation," said ACLU lawyer Alexa Kolbi-Molinas.

Trinity Health Corporations' public relations manager Eve Pidgeon said in a statement that ACLU's case has no merit. In 2013, a similar case was dismissed by the federal court. Trinity expressed that they will push for a dismissal for the same justification.

Founded in 1920, ACLU acts as the nation's 'guardian of liberty', defending the rights and liberties of Americans as stated in the laws and Constitution of the United States.

© 2016 Tech Times, All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.