HAMILTON — There's a little bit of Waterloo Region in the famous hitchhiking robot that has crashed a wedding, attended powwows and ridden in strangers' cars over the past few weeks.

Hitchbot's co-creator David Smith was born and raised in the region.

The talking robot has been adventuring in the care of strangers as part of an interdisciplinary research project exploring the interaction between humans and technology.

It is hitchhiking from Halifax to Victoria, chatting and tweeting up a storm with its new-found companions and thousands of Twitter followers.

"It changes our conception of robots," said Smith from Hamilton. "We think of them as connected devices rather than just stand alone autonomous machines."

The transient robot's behaviour is not far-fetched from its co-creator's own past: Smith moved from one city to the next as an artist, and his art travelled between exhibits and galleries across North America.

He graduated from Bluevale Collegiate Institute in Waterloo before leaving his roots to pursue art at the Ontario College of Art and Design in Toronto.

Smith, now an assistant professor in communications studies and multimedia at McMaster University, came up with the idea for Hitchbot with co-creator Frauke Zeller, an assistant professor in communications at Ryerson University.

After working as an artist — including a stint making stained glass windows in Waterloo Region — Smith took his passion a step further and delved into the world of digital art and new media.

The duo liked to discuss robotics and culture, so they decided to combine the two in a cultural experiment.

"We imagine delegating things to robots like work or surveillance … to do something for us," said Smith, 58.

They created Kulturbot a few years ago — a robot made from a floor sweeper that captured images of art and tweeted about it. It was essentially a robot art critic, tweeting jumbles from Italian poet Filippo Tommaso Marinetti's Futurist Manifesto published in 1909.

Even though it was just a vehicle of critique, Smith said it's why he thinks the robots are great cultural engagement pieces.

"So the idea of sending a robot on an adventure became an interesting one," he added.

Hitchbot's 'family' never knew who Hitchbot ended up with or which route would be taken, but Smith said they were never concerned about its safety.

"People have been making sure to take very good care of it like leaving it in nice places," he said.

Hitchbot was made of a bucket with pool noodles for limbs. It can send out progress reports, Tweets and uses GPS tracking.

Smith said that it is a good example of maker culture — a movement where people can create multimedia objects out of repurposed technology.

"What's ironic and beautiful at the same time is that Hitchbot is a robot, but it's engendering people and meeting new people so its becoming a social facilitator in a way."

Hitchbot may be hours or a few days away from its destination in Victoria, B.C.

Smith said that the team plans to throw Hitchbot a party when his adventure ends.