Gov. Rick Scott needs to stop the hypocrisy of blaming the Obama administration for Florida's failed Medicaid politics.

Scott went to the Capitol last week to enlist Florida's congressional delegation in his effort to force the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services to extend the state's Low Income Pool, claiming the feds are using mafia-like "coercion tactics" to force Florida to expand Medicaid.

He is suing the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services for CMS' plan to stop funding LIP, a $2 billion program that mostly pays hospitals for providing care to the uninsured and underinsured, in its current form.

The feds contributed about $1 billion last year to the program.

Rep. Fred Upton, R-MI, chairman of the Energy and Commerce committee, will hold a hearing this summer to review the so-called coercion.

If CMS wanted to coerce the state to provide health coverage to the 800,000 uninsured Floridians who would be eligible under the Affordable Care Act, the agency could have withheld two waivers that allowed the state to privatize Medicaid. Scott went to Washington, D.C., in 2013 to make a personal appeal for the waivers to the Obama administration.

CMS approved the waivers over the objection of health care advocates and despite the Republican-dominated Legislature's opposition to Medicaid expansion.

Scott, a vociferous opponent, came out in favor of Medicaid expansion after getting the first waiver. He never, however, put his political capital where his mouth is. Now he's flopped again, claiming the federal government can't be trusted to pay, pointing to LIP as evidence.

LIP is an optional program. The Affordable Care Act is law.

The person who can't be trusted is Scott.

State officials have known for some time that federal funding would end next month for LIP, yet Scott included it in his budget proposal anyway. Now he's desperate.

Florida lawmakers will return to Tallahassee on June 1 for a special session to finalize a balanced budget that must be in place before July 1 to avoid a government shutdown.

The House and Senate budgets are about $4 billion apart because the Senate wants to expand Medicaid and counts federal funding in its plan but the House doesn't.

Scott, who has sided with the House, is apparently hoping he can coerce the feds to help bail him out.

So far it doesn't look good.

Upton's hearing will come too late to affect the budget. A ruling on his lawsuit probably won't be timely.

Nor is Scott likely to prevail.

The Obama administration has made no secret that it would like the 21 states that haven't expanded Medicaid to do so, but CMS is under no obligation to finance uncompensated care pools in Florida or the other eight states seeking extended funding. Five of those states have already expanded Medicaid. CMS is applying the same principles in its review of Florida's LIP program as it is for the other states.

The criteria are certainly an incentive to expand Medicaid, but not a mandate.

Florida's proposed LIP changes don't meet the criteria, one of which is that funds not pay for what would be covered by expanding Medicaid. That makes sense given the federal government is paying the full cost of expansion for the first three years and no less than 90 percent thereafter.

LIP was never meant to be permanent. It was part of a 2005 waiver Florida received to implement a pilot Medicaid managed care program. It was intended to support safety-net hospitals, county health departments and other facilities during the transition.

Florida has now expanded managed care statewide and the feds want to see LIP redesigned.

Scott has a history of taking or rejecting federal money depending on whether it suits his political purposes. He wants LIP funding the state is not entitled to so he can fund a budget that meets his priorities. He doesn't want billions in Medicaid funds the state is entitled to that would meet the needs of the state's uninsured.

It doesn't get more hypocritical.

Rhonda Swan is a freelance journalist and life coach. Reach her at rswan@evolutionslifecoaching.com.