(KUTV) It signed up tens of thousands of people in Utah for health care coverage, but the announced demise of Arches Health Plan---a co-op spawned with the Affordable Care Act, otherwise known as Obamacare---was sudden and stunning.

The state Insurance Department put out a one page news release, the day it put Arches into "receivership"---but in the first explanation for Utah lawmakers last week---the co-op's CEO had sharp criticism for a federal agency, charged with implementing many ACA reforms.

"They changed the rules, and didn't do what they said they were going to do," said Shaun Greene, who founded and led Arches for several years.

Specifically, he said an entity known as the Center for Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight (CCIIO), had pledged Arches millions through a "Risk Corridor" program, designed to infuse new co-ops with money to shore up their bottom lines.

The funds would apparently come from insurers who were making money, and would be paid to those with losses. But Greene said the agency had far more requests for cash, than it had money.

So, instead of paying Arches $11 million in 2014, and more than $16 million this year, the CEO said he was informed the company would get only a fraction of those amounts---and ended up never seeing any of the risk corridor money.

He cited "incompetence, laziness, duplicity, business inexperience, massive bureaucracy and politics" as reasons for the change.

"So you wanted 11, another 16, and you got nothing?" 2News asked. "Correct," Greene replied.

But Greene acknowledged Congress passed legislation which limited the Center for Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight from paying out what it did not have.

On a website, the agency said it "works closely with state regulators, consumers, and other stakeholders to ensure the Affordable Care Act best serves the American people."

Meantime, Greene and the Utah Insurance Department said claims for Arches members would be paid. Insurance Commissioner Scott Kiser described the winding down of Arches, which burst onto the Utah insurance landscape not long ago, as a "soft landing."

The Insurance Department said people who had enrolled in Arches must now re-enroll with other carriers.