Published Aug. 9, 2015 at 5:13 a.m. Tweet

Every week in 2015, OnMilwaukee.com and local design company Too Much Metal join forces to introduce the latest member of the Milwaukee All-Stars – a team of unfamiliar winners living in the city who consistently and diligently make it shine. Each week, a new member will join the team – based on your recommendations – and at the end of the year all will come together in a Rally of the Raddest Milwaukeeans. We're not sure what that means quite yet, so for now, meet …

Steven Armendariz

Steven Armendariz is in his third season serving as the motion graphics designer for the Milwaukee Brewers.

"I'm doing my part to make the scoreboard look fun and really cool," says Armendariz.

OnMilwaukee.com / Too Much Metal: What season is your favorite in Milwaukee and why?

Steven Armendariz: I will give you the basic answer and say that "I love autumn." Specifically, I love the end of September into October. In a good year, this is when the team is looking to make a push into and through the postseason. This is also the time of year when the Milwaukee Film Festival begins and I set aside time to watch films all day and night for a couple weeks.

OMC / TMM: What's your favorite / or least favorite smell in Milwaukee?

SA: My favorite smell is kettle corn being popped in the stadium when I get there early before a day game. Everything is still quiet and everyone is preparing for the arrival of 35,000-plus fans. A close second would be the smell of Maharaja on Farwell. Indian food is so good and that place is unbelievable.

My least favorite smell is cigar smoke on a bike path while I'm on a run or riding my bike to work.

OMC / TMM: What neighborhood do you live in ?

SA: I live in Bay View.

OMC / TMM: What's your hope for Milwaukee?

SA: My hope for Milwaukee is for the entire world to know what an amazing city this place has become over the years. I think a World Series Championship would definitely up our profile, as would an NBA championship. I say, let's get both.

OMC/ TMM: When / how did you fall in love with Milwaukee?

SA: I was born and raised here, so it feels like a part of my family. About five years ago, I was on the verge of moving to another city when I met my wife, who had just moved back to Milwaukee. I knew immediately we would be together for the rest of our lives. She couldn't move again right away, so it became obvious that I would just stay. I have always loved Milwaukee and then I fell in love in Milwaukee.

OMC / TMM: Why do you do what you do?

SA: I'm lucky enough to have my dream job. When I was in college, I assumed a creative job in an artistic field was unrealistic, so I majored in communications. I graduated and took practical jobs to pay the rent, but kept looking for other opportunities. Eventually, I taught myself the software I needed to know to become an animator and graphic designer. I got pretty good at it quickly because I loved it. More jobs and opportunities came along, to the point where I was offered this job, working for my hometown baseball team, doing my part to make the scoreboard look fun and really cool.

OMC / TMM: What's your one guilty pleasure?

SA: My guilty pleasure is going to the Oriental Theatre by myself and watching a film, especially something that is truly bizarre or unnerving. I like going to the movies with my family and friends, but the anonymity of seeing something at the most beautiful theater in Milwaukee, all alone, and stopping the real world for two hours is like stealing time.

OMC / TMM: Name a Milwaukeean you would like to high five.

SA: He doesn't know me, but I would give a high five to Lee Barczak. He's the man who finally was able to reopen the Avalon Theater. I went to that theater as a kid, saw Raiders of the Lost Ark there, and it seemed like such a lost opportunity to have such a great place closed for so long. I'd also give Luc Wall a high five if he ever came home to Milwaukee to visit once in a while.

Do you know a Milwaukee All-Star? OnMilwaukee.com and Too Much Metal are looking for true-hearted folks living in the city of Milwaukee who love what they do – and do it with zest and style. Email fred@toomuchmetal.com or molly@onmilwaukee.com with recommendations.