When we look back on the latter part of 2015, it will be seen as among the most critical periods for climate politics, both global and domestic, in memory. With the critical international climate talks in Paris almost upon us, a look at recent political news suggests we are at an inflection point in climate politics that could have far-reaching implications for the 2016 elections and beyond.

Since June, we have seen Pope Francis’ sweeping encyclical on climate change and speech to a joint session of Congress, a Canadian election that ushered in a new pro-climate government, the death knell of the Keystone Pipeline, and the UK announcing it would phase out its remaining coal power plants in the next 10 years. But the must-read tea leaf came recently from endangered New Hampshire Republican Sen. Kelly Ayotte Kelly AyotteSenators to Obama: Make 'timely' call on Afghan troops levels Overnight Defense: Pentagon chief fears sequestration's return Senate GOP ties Iran sanctions fight to defense bill MORE, who tried to distance herself from her party and her own record by announcing that she would support limits on carbon pollution under President Obama’s Clean Power Plan (CPP).

ADVERTISEMENT

Since the rise of the Tea Party in 2010, a nearly unwavering rejection of the scientific consensus around climate has been a persistent part of Republican dogma – until recently. Ayotte’s attempt to greenwash her record and her party’s reputation is the most recent indication that a reversal of this trend is underway. Vulnerable Republicans in purple states that want to speak to the general electorate in 2016 have little choice but to distance themselves from their climate-denying brethren – and their anti-climate voting records.

It is no coincidence that Ayotte’s announcement came exactly three weeks after New Hampshire governor Maggie Hassan announced she would challenge the Republican. Nor is it a coincidence that Sen.Mark Kirk Mark KirkFunding boost for TSA sails through committee GOP senators propose sending ISIS fighters to Gitmo VA chief 'deeply' regrets if Disney comment offended vets MORE of Illinois, the most vulnerable Republican in the Senate, recently joined Ayotte in voting against the Republican CRA disapproving of the CPP, nor that 11 House Republicans, most from swing districts, recently signed onto a resolution acknowledging that climate change is caused by humans and calling for action to address the problem.

These endangered Republicans are right to worry. In the last two weeks, two of the most respected polls on energy an environmental issues, the University of Michigan National Survey on Energy and Environment and the University of Texas Energy Poll, both released new data showing a sharp uptick in the belief that climate change is occurring – returning to its 2008 apex (back when the GOP nominee for president supported cap-and-trade).

Moreover, poll after poll shows that climate action is overwhelmingly popular. A recent poll for the League of Conservation Voters (conducted by a bipartisan team of pollsters) showed that a 60 to 28 percent majority supported the CPP, even after they heard a simulated debate about the issue that included messages from opponents of the plan. And Quinnipiac recently found that two-to-one majorities in Colorado, Virginia, and Iowa backed Pope Francis’ call for climate action.

Demonstrating the increased salience of the issue; a poll Global Strategy Group (GSG) recently conducted for a coalition of climate groups in the presidential battleground states found that if former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton Hillary Rodham ClintonCarson rooting for Trump, Sanders debate Clinton ad slams Trump for calling pregnancy 'an inconvenience' Sanders: Networks calling about Trump debate MORE were to support an ambitious plan to cut carbon pollution by 80 percent by 2050, voters would be more, rather than less, likely to support her candidacy for president by a 19-point margin.

Moving forward, we will only see more of the Ayotte-style greenwashing because two of the most critical groups – millennials and Hispanics – in electoral politics are among the staunchest supporters of climate action. It is common knowledge that millennials are among the most pro-climate voting bloc. Indeed, according to a poll from NextGen Climate Action, 41 percent of millennial voters said that climate denial would fully disqualify a candidate for them, regardless of their other positions. Meanwhile, in a poll GSG recently conducted for the Sierra Club and Here Now, 69 percent of Hispanics rated “reducing carbon pollution” as an extremely high priority for the country, 14 points higher than the electorate as a whole.

Looking beyond the Clean Power Plan, candidates from both parties would be wise to take note of the growing electoral salience of energy and climate issues. Several recent polls, including our own, show that voters from across the political spectrum will reward leaders who support aggressive goals for moving the country to more renewable energy and energy efficiency at the ballot box.

Kelly Ayotte may be one of the first Republicans since 2008 to embrace climate action. But she won’t be the last.

Baumann and Canter are a vice president and senior vice president, respectively, at Global Strategy Group, a public affairs firm.