Action Points An American Society of Clinical Oncology position statement points out that that obesity is a major unrecognized risk factor for cancer and is associated with worsened prognosis after cancer diagnosis.

The statement indicates that the American Society of Clinical Oncology is committed to reducing the impact of obesity on cancer and has established a multipronged initiative to do so.

Obesity represents "a central challenge" to cancer prevention and care and requires immediate action to reduce the toll, the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) asserts in its first-ever position statement on obesity.

Published in the Journal of Clinical Oncology, the statement calls for increased efforts to address the critical priorities of education and awareness about the links between obesity and cancer, development of new resources for clinicians, intensified and coordinated research, and policy changes to improve access to obesity screening, diagnosis, and treatment.

History suggests that a lot of hard work lies ahead, with no guarantees of success.

"Obviously, nobody is so simplistic as to suggest that we simply counsel patients to lose weight," ASCO immediate past president Clifford Hudis, MD, of Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in New York City, told MedPage Today. "Our sister societies in many areas of medicine have been highlighting the risks of obesity with regard to diabetes, heart disease, and other problems for decades."

"The truth is, the obesity problem, despite their careful counsel, has simply gotten worse," said Hudis, one of the co-authors of the position statement. "I don't think that anybody harbors the illusion that by drawing attention to this that we will immediately control weight in the U.S."

The magnitude of the problem was illustrated by a study published more than a decade ago. At that point in time, the results suggested that as many as 20% of cancer deaths could be attributed to obesity.

Developed by ASCO's Energy Balance Working Group, the policy statement emphasizes the growing cancer threat posed by obesity, which is predicted to overtake tobacco as the leading preventable cause of cancer. Almost three-fourths of Americans meet criteria for overweight or obesity, which underscores the health threat and its potential to "undo decades of prevention, early diagnosis, and treatment of cancer," Hudis said.

The policy statement establishes a road map for addressing the four priorities laid out in the introduction to the document:

Work with ASCO membership and other health organizations to develop weight management guidelines for cancer survivors, tools to help clinicians initiate conversations about weight loss with patients, patient-directed tools, and resources on weight management

Close gaps in health insurance coverage (public and private) that restrict access to weight management services

Partner with other organizations to promote increased public awareness about the role of a healthy lifestyle in cancer prevention

Advance national policies that encourage support for healthy lifestyles in the community and workplace

Advocate for policies that will improve access to screening, diagnosis, and treatment for obesity

With regard to closing gaps in health insurance coverage, ASCO calls for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to add obesity to the list of conditions eligible for the proposed Complex Chronic Care Management Services payments, and for the Department of Health and Human Services to develop clear definitions of access to obesity treatment services in state healthcare exchange plans that have emerged from the Affordable Care Act.

As an example of resources for clinicians and patients, ASCO pointed to its guide, released earlier this year, to help oncology providers engage patients in conversations about the effects of obesity on cancer risk, as well as a companion guide for patients.

The policy statement calls for development of a clearly defined, coordinated, and robust research agenda involving unresolved issues in the association between obesity and cancer. Studies are needed to determine whether weight loss can reduce the risk of developing or dying of cancer, whether obesity should be treated differently in cancer survivors than in the general population, and when and how to initiate weight management interventions for cancer patients.

"Research has clearly established that there is a critical relationships between cancer and obesity, but more work is needed to determine whether weight loss, increased physical activity, and improved dietary quality can lower cancer rates and improve outcomes," Jennifer Ligibel, MD, chair of ASCO's cancer survivorship and cancer prevention committees, said in a statement.

"No single organization or medical specialty can address obesity alone, and we will collaborate with other groups to find evidence-based solutions for our patients," added Ligibel, one of the co-authors of the position statement.

ASCO has organized an obesity research summit that will occur later this year. Obesity researchers from multiple disciplines will meet to identify specific research priorities and strategies.

The complete policy statement is available online.

Hudis and Ligabel disclosed no relevant relationships with industry. One or more co-authors disclosed relevant relationships with Amgen, Boehringer Ingelheim, Champions Biotechnology, Clovis Oncology, Fujirebio Diagnostics, Genentech, GlaxoSmithKline, Oxigene, PharmaMar, Tesaro, Novartis, Pfizer, Novo Nordisk, Genomic Health, DSM, Lignan Research, Exercise By Science, and Medivation/Astellas.

Reviewed by Zalman S. Agus, MD Emeritus Professor, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania and Dorothy Caputo, MA, BSN, RN, Nurse Planner