Wisconsin Badgers quarterback Joel Stave throws an incomplete pass to wide receiver Robert Wheelwright in the first half against Iowa. Credit: Rick Wood

Madison — Jeff Potrykus reviews Wisconsin's 10-6 loss to Iowa Saturday at Camp Randall Stadium.

OFFENSE (F)

Four turnovers, eight drives in Iowa territory producing just two field goals and nine failed chances on third down. That threesome captures the ineptitude of UW's offensive performance.

A review of the video reveals blown blocking assignments on key plays, errant throws and/or questionable decisions by quarterback Joel Stave and too many drops by his receivers.

This offense isn't explosive enough or consistent enough to overcome such gaffes.

Right guard Micah Kapoi made two errors on Stave's fourth-quarter fumble inside the Iowa 1-yard line. First, he stepped back and onto Stave's right foot. Then he was beaten badly by defensive end Nate Meier, who drilled tailback Taiwan Deal.

If right tackle Jacob Maxwell had been able to sustain his block against tackle Jaleel Johnson one play earlier, Deal might have been able to drive into the end zone for a 4-yard touchdown.

Maxwell also had a role in the fourth-down incompletion on UW's final offensive play. Stave's throw to tight end Troy Fumagalli sailed wide toward the sideline and out of bounds. But as he was releasing the ball Stave was hit by Maxwell, who was being driven into the backfield by Meier. A cleaner pocket might have meant a more accurate throw and a first down.

DEFENSE (A-)

Iowa hurt UW on the ground at times as Jordan Canzeri averaged 4.8 yards per carry and finished with 125 yards. However, the bottom line is that the Hawkeyes scored on two of 12 possessions (excluding the kneel-down at the end of the game) and the scoring drives covered 31 yards and 1 yard.

Linebacker Joe Schobert, a former walk-on, was arguably the best player on the field and made plays from start to finish. The pass coverage was tight, though UW lost track of tight end George Kittle dragging underneath on the 1-yard touchdown catch.

One mistake early in the second quarter, by reserve outside linebacker Jesse Hayes, cost UW a turnover at the Iowa 34.

Iowa faced third and 3 from its 31 when quarterback C.J. Beathard dropped back to pass and went through his progressions. He settled on a check-down over the middle to Canzeri but linebacker T.J. Edwards made a tremendous break on the ball and intercepted the pass at the 34.

The play was wiped out by a penalty on Hayes, who drove his hand up into the face of an Iowa lineman.

SPECIAL TEAMS (B)

The units have been solid overall but hidden yards lost against Iowa turned out to be critical.

Drew Meyer placed punts at the Iowa 5 and 16 in the fourth quarter, though the latter punt should have been a few yards deeper. He appeared to mishit his first punt, however, and the ball traveled only 33 yards to the Iowa 49. The Hawkeyes failed to score after driving to the UW 8 but the drive flipped the field in Iowa's favor.

Sojourn Shelton, filling in for Alex Erickson on punt returns, gained 17 yards to the Iowa 43 on the Hawkeyes' final punt of the day. A penalty (illegal block) on Keelon Brookins pushed UW back to its 47. Shelton appeared headed out of bounds when Brookins threw the illegal block and the player he hit, reserve linebacker Travis Perry, made the play anyway. Can't make that mistake, particularly when your offense is clawing for every yard it gains.

The miss from 42 yards by Rafael Gaglianone was enormous and the sophomore kicker knows it. UW also missed Andrew Endicott (unspecified injury) on kickoffs.

COACHING (B)

Defensive coordinator Dave Aranda showed his creativity by using a 2-4-5 that featured a variety of linemen pairings depending on the down and distance. That rotation gave valuable work to freshman nose tackle Olive Sagapolu.

With tight end Austin Traylor (shoulder) expected to be miss the Nebraska game don't be surprised to see the Badgers utilize tandem fullbacks more than they did against Iowa. Nebraska is third in the Big Ten Conference against the run (85.0 ypg) but the Badgers have to run the ball consistently to take pressure off Stave and the receivers.

Coming off that dreadful offensive performance and with fans clamoring for just about anyone in a UW uniform to replace Stave, the coaches will have to set a tone of poise and confidence this week in preparation for the Nebraska game. That won't be a problem.