Golden’s historic armory building has been many things in its 101 years, and it is about to enter a new phase under the recent ownership of Calvary Episcopal Church.

The church purchased the cobblestone building at 1301 Arapahoe St. for $2.1 million last month.

Rev. John Wengrovius, the rector and senior pastor at Calvary, said the building’s current tenants have nothing to fear, despite rumors that the building will be torn down or changed in the near future.

“Nothing has been decided yet because we have to listen first,” he said.

He is referring to input from the community that will be gathered throughout the next six months or so at meetings hosted by Golden Community Commons, a nonprofit forming a board of directors that will help decide the future purpose of the building.

So far with stakeholders like Jefferson County Human Services and members of locally focused nonprofits like the Golden Backpack Program and Community Faith in Action, the effort has a community service slant.

However, Wengrovius is cautious about attributing any great meaning to that.

“We’re wanting it to be that this is a huge opportunity to work together on something and we don’t want preconceived ideas being hurdles,” he said.

For example, Wengrovius said one rumor was that the building would be torn down, which he said is the last thing that would happen. The building was placed on the National Register of Historic Places;Wengrovius said the church will work to ensure preservation of the building.

The Armory Building is three floors of 6,600 tons of cobblestone sourced from Clear Creek, built in 1913 by the Colorado National Guard for its company of engineers. With its tall front tower, it resembles a castle, which is the engineers’ emblem, said Richard Gardner, a member of the Jefferson County Historical Commission and the Golden Landmarks Commission who works out of Gardner Law Offices next door to the building.

“It’s one of our crown jewels, it’s a great landmark” Gardner said.

At the time it was built, Gardner said, many people said that a cobblestone building of such a size would never stand, but the Armory has required minimal upkeep in its 101 years. It also housed the Golden post office, served as student housing for the Colorado School of Mines and, after the National Guard moved out in the 1970s, various businesses.

Wengrovius said it will need some financial investment in order to move forward into its next phase, whatever that purpose may be.

Golden Community Commons is still seeking interested parties for its board to help gather and guide community input. The city of Golden’s communications manager Karlyn Tilley said the city does not have a position regarding the future of the building, but it does not rule out the possibility of a city staff member volunteering to be part of the input process.

Josie Klemaier: 303-954-2465, jklemaier@denverpost.com

Golden community commons

To participate, contact Khristine Rogers at khristinerogers@gmail.com.