The Affordable Care Act has been law for five years. Two changes to the law were recently passed through amendments to the budget bill. (Photo: Sal Burciaga)

The Affordable Care Act, affectionately known as ObamaCare, has been federal law for over five years. During this time period, it has largely been bullet proof to change. When Democrats controlled the House of Representatives or the Senate, they merely refused to take up the bill. Former Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid made a habit of the Senate refusing to consider any amendment to the ACA, although the Republican-led House of Representatives has voted to repeal it 61 times. Against this backdrop of rigid protection, it surprised many to find material changes to the ACA buried in the recent Budget Bill. Let's look at the changes and how they were accomplished.

First, the changes. In the Budget Bill, Congress repealed a requirement that large companies automatically enroll employees in employer health plans. Automatic enrollment was required by the ACA as another means for increasing the percentage of the population having health insurance. There was an employee opt-out provision, but increasingly employers became worried that the automatic enrollment would commit employees to health coverage they could not afford and for which they had made no affirmative decision to obtain. Accordingly, both the White House and the Congress agreed to repeal the provision.

The automatic enrollment provision comes on the heels of another October amendment in which Congress gave flexibility to the states in defining small businesses required to have ACA coverage. Originally, the ACA required all employers with over 50 full-time employees to provide health insurance or pay a penalty. The change in flexibility is largely expected to permit the states to increase to 100 or more the number of employees subject to the small business mandate required to have ACA coverage.

How was the change accomplished? Largely, run silent, run deep. The Budget Bill was unveiled on Oct. 26, passed by both houses of Congress 75 hours later and signed by President Obama on Nov. 2. No press conferences, no Rose Garden signings, no end zone dance by either party. Significantly, both the House and the Senate voted by voice, leaving no roll call register for future political retaliation.

These two changes are not signaling a likely repeal of the ACA, but they do signal the prospect of a meaningful dialogue to "normalize" the ACA legislative process and to lay the groundwork for a possible technical corrections act. In 2011, Congress repealed an IRS reporting requirement for the cost of health coverage to employees, and in 2013, Congress eliminated an ACA program providing long-term care insurance.

In five years, these four relatively modest amendments amount the totality of technical corrections to this major federal legislation.

Republicans will likely continue to clamor for a full ACA repeal, but the real issues up for discussion are the "Cadillac tax," the medical device tax, the Independent Payment Advisory Board and other ACA issues for which there are super majorities and bipartisan support for repeal. As the House of Representatives assembles new leadership under Speaker Paul Ryan and the Senate prepares for the final stretch of the Obama administration, it will be interesting to see if the stalemate continues, or if there is an opening for constructive dialogue about how to improve the law that has largely been implemented throughout the U.S. economy.

Richard Cowart is chairman of the health law and public policy departments at Baker Donelson law firm. Reach him at dcowart@bakerdonelson.com.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1NHQT0W