Luke Engelhaupt excelling at CSU in his newest sport

Colorado State University rugby player Luke Engelhaupt runs with the ball during a 7-on-7 game this season. Engelhaupt is a former four-sport athlete at Sterling High School. ( Courtesy photo )

STERLING —— Luke Engelhaupt has always welcomed new challenges, whether they be on a mat, track, diamond or field.

His wide range of athletic ability made him not only one of the most well versed athletes to pass through Logan County, but one of its most unique.

Engelhaupt, a 2012 graduate and honor roll student from Sterling High School, is a former wrestling state champion in the 170-pound class and holds five school records for most pins in a career, pins in a season, team points in a career, team points in a season, and the most consecutive pins.

He was no slouch in the three other sports he played either. Engelhaupt claimed a school record in baseball for the most stolen bases in a season, was a dominating two-way football player, and a state qualifying hurdler during his time wearing the Tigers' black and orange.

Luke Engelhaupt is a former four-sport athlete at Sterling High School and current rugby player at Colorado State University. (David Wilson / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

His natural talent and work ethic that made him a four-sport star is enough to make his story intriguing on its own, but perhaps what makes Engelhaupt even more unique is that, while many athletes dream of continuing their playing careers at the collegiate level in sports they've established themselves in, Engelhaupt politely declined the opportunities.

He had a scholarship offer to wrestle at Western State University that he turned down.

He had a baseball scholarship to Northeastern Junior College that he originally accepted in 2012, but eventually passed on.

When asked why he declined those opportunities that many high school athletes would jump at, the 20-year-old with distinct talent gave a distinct answer.

Advertisement

"I was kind of burnt out of all those sports. I had played them for so long that it was kind of like 'let's see what else I can do with my abilities and see where I can take myself aside from those four sports,'" Engelhaupt said. "I got offers to wrestle and play baseball, but I wanted to go a different route with my life. I was ready to start something new."

He didn't speak of his athletic prowess with arrogance or cockiness, but rather with a humble confidence and a desire for an endeavor that did not fit the norm.

Sterling's Luke Engelhaupt, right, defeats Discovery Canyon's Adrian Mack in 170 lb class 4A State Championship round on Feb. 18, 2012. (Joe Amon / The Denver Post file photo)

Now a sophomore communications major at Colorado State University, Engelhaupt has found that "outside the box" challenge he sought after with rugby.

"I just showed up to the first practice and jumped right in. The team had a meeting, I went there, it sounded like something I'd be interested in, and I just started up from there," Engelhaupt said.

Despite not knowing the rules, plays or concepts of the game going in, it didn't take long for Engelhaupt to find success on the pitch.

Just a handful of months after picking up a rugby ball for the first time, he was one of 15 CSU club players — Engelhaupt estimated there are upward of 50 players on the team — selected to play on the Rams' 7-on-7 team that went to the USA Rugby College 7's National Championships on Nov. 23-24.

The two-day tournament held in Greensboro, N.C. hosts the top 25 Division I rugby teams from across the country.

"I was pretty excited to be picked for the national team. I wasn't sure throughout the season if I'd be going because there are a lot of players on the team that had been playing rugby their entire lives," Engelhaupt said. "I was kind of surprised when I was picked, but I'm glad I was because I saw a lot of playing time when I was there, which was cool."

Engelhaupt credited his previous experiences in wrestling and football at Sterling for helping him make a smooth transition into rugby.

"The mix of football and wrestling I think is what has made rugby the perfect sport for me and for the combination of my skills," Engelhaupt said. "I think a lot of the reasons I'm good at rugby is because of my background in wrestling, football and stuff like that, but I'd say wrestling is probably what has helped me out the most in picking up the game."

The Rams, an up and coming rugby club team that won one game at last year's national tournament, lost their three games in pool play on the first day against high seeds, but went on to collect wins over Auburn and San Jose State before losing to South Carolina in the final day of the tournament.

The CSU players will return to the field after the holiday break to begin working toward another national championship appearance in the spring, this time in the traditional 15-on-15 season that starts in February.

And as for Engelhaupt, he said he believes he has finally found his niche with the university, team and sport he was destined to do all along.

"I'm definitely going to play rugby for as long as I can. If I wasn't playing rugby, I don't know what I'd be doing because the game is so good for me and I love it that much," Engelhaupt said. "It's definitely my favorite sport that I've played so far. It was rough at first because I didn't know what was going on with the concept and rules of the game, but once I progressed, I've had no regrets on my decision to play rugby."

Contact David Wilson at 970-526-9285 or dwilson@journal-advocate.com