St. Thomas More Hospital's annual Pamper Your Heart event was a success with more than 125 men and women attending Thursday at E-Free Church. The event is held each year in February during National Heart Month, to raise awareness heart disease being the number one killer of women in the United States.

Participants enjoyed a plethora of free health screenings including blood pressure, body mass index, cardiac risk assessment, sleep health assessment and cardiac step test. Additionally, there were more than 12 education stations on other services provided by the hospital including tobacco cessation, stroke, cardiac rehabilitation, diabetes management, nutrition, exercise, spiritual health, Women's Wellness Connection, the St. Thomas More Physician Group and alternative medicine by EastWest Harmony.

We are very pleased with the turnout for tonight's event. The health screenings provided them with an idea of their current heart health, our education booths gave them health tips on how to improve their health, then our speakers provided insight and encouragement to dream big. I am proud to have achieved our goal of providing an event that focuses on holistic health and well being for our community. We have heard nothing but very positive comments and thank yous from participants for putting this event on for them, and it really is our pleasure to do so.

Following the health fair portion of the event, the St. Thomas More dining services team led by executive chef Tim Ferrari provided a delicious heart-healthy meal. Participants were raving about the dinner, and also were provided with recipe cards for the prepared meal.

Advertisement

Sheri Trahern, Chief Executive Officer, provided a reflection that challenged participants to "live with failure, yours and mine," "risk looking like a fool for love, for your dream, for the adventure of being alive," and "see beauty even when it's not pretty every day." Guest speaker Tobi Steinberg, a mental health therapist from Penrose-St. Francis Health Services, provided a program on dreaming big and how to make a plan to achieving those goals. The base of the program was the book "What if? What else? What now?" by Sara Boatz, a friend of Steinberg's, that serves as a workbook to dream planning in all aspects of life such as character, career, material and learning dreams.

Participants enjoyed a dreamcatcher exercise in which she asked them to dream big and share with the group. Among volunteered responses were: get a tattoo on my 80th birthday from a 79-year-old woman, live in a foreign country, learn to play the piano, learn to speak Mandarin Chinese, and from a few very young women in the crowd, be with God and take shop class in high school. After door prizes were given out, including a copy of Boatz's book and several gift certificates to the St. Thomas More From the Heart Gift Shop, participants left the evening with tools, worksheets, and encouragement from Steinberg who said, "Now, go turn your can'ts into cans and your dreams into plans."