Bill Frist (Photo: Submitted)

A recent study about antibiotic resistance hit close to home for me. It projected that drug-resistant bacteria are developing at a pace that could soon threaten the lives of thousands more surgery patients each year.

This study also revealed that as many as half of infections after surgery are already being caused by pathogens that don’t respond to standard antibiotics.

While the threat of antibiotic resistance may sometimes seem amorphous and removed from our daily lives, research like this helps to crystallize why there is growing urgency to address this issue.

I know all too well the inherent risks involved in any surgical procedure. To think about patients surviving complicated heart bypass or organ transplant surgery only to lose their lives to a subsequent untreatable infection is infuriating and tragic.

Yet, this is the reality today, and it’s only going to get worse until we take collective action as a country and as a global community.

Over the past decade, the prevalence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria has skyrocketed due to the overuse of antibiotics. These “superbugs” — difficult or impossible to treat with existing medications — are evolving quickly, spreading at an alarming rate, and outpacing our ability to fight them off.

Take, for example, carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae (CRE), which have become resistant to most or nearly all antibiotics we have today. These nightmare bacteria — which can kill up to 50 percent of patients when they infect the bloodstream — were very rare before 2007. But as of this year, 48 states, including Tennessee, have reported CRE infections. And this is just one of the many superbugs out there.

Unfortunately, the pipeline for new antibiotics is dwindling at a time when we need them most. Only nine new antibiotics were approved from 2000-2010, compared with 23 in the 1990s and 29 during the 1980s.

And according to analysis from The Pew Charitable Trusts, there are few drugs currently in development intended to combat the most serious drug-resistant bacterial infections.

The reasons for this are many and complex, including an exodus of major pharmaceutical companies from the antibiotic arena due to clinical development challenges and limited revenue potential.

As a result, the FDA has asked Congress to create a new approval pathway that will help advance the development of new antibiotics for specific, limited populations of patients—those with serious and life-threatening bacterial infections that are resistant to current treatments.

This Limited-Population Antibacterial Drug (LPAD) pathway has broad, bipartisan support.

Earlier this year, it was overwhelmingly approved by the House, as part of the 21st Century Cures Act, and in July, the Bipartisan Policy Center issued its “Advancing Medical Innovation for a Healthier America” report, which recommended that the Senate follow suit.

I was motivated to co-chair the BPC report in part due to the threat of antibiotic resistance, and am joined by an ever-growing, diverse group of expert stakeholders who have thoroughly vetted and strongly support the creation of a new FDA approval pathway for urgently-needed antibiotics.

From senior FDA officials and the President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology, to leading public health and medical organizations, we all agree: LPAD is smart and vital policy.

While the LPAD pathway is by no means a silver bullet, the regulatory barriers it addresses are very real, and taking action to reinvigorate antibiotic innovation is just as important as being good stewards and preserving the effectiveness of the antibiotics we currently have. It’s all part of the holistic approach to combatting antibiotic-resistant bacteria that I wrote about earlier this month.

LPAD offers Congress the opportunity for definitive and meaningful action to address what is one of the most pressing public health issues of our time. I urge the Senate to stay the course in advancing this critical legislation as part of its soon-to-be-released Innovations for Healthier Americans bill, and am thankful to Tennessee’s own Sen. Lamar Alexander for his role in leading the way.

For the sake of the millions of people acquiring multi-drug resistant infections in the U.S. each year, and the countless more at risk, we can’t afford to wait any longer.

Dr. William H. Frist is a nationally acclaimed heart and lung transplant surgeon. He served as U.S. Senator from Tennessee from 1995 to 2007, and as former U.S. Senate majority leader from 2003 to 2007.

Abstract medicine background. Brain concept with icons (Photo: Hilch, Getty Images/iStockphoto)

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1jfFJUy