Chef Jose “Pepe” Mendieta at his El Rey Sol restaurant in 2002. Credit: Journal Sentinel files

By of the

Jose "Pepe" Mendieta got his first taste of the restaurant business when he was 5 years old.

His mother ran a small but well-known restaurant in the market in the town of Zimapán in the state of Hidalgo, Mexico, and the young Mendieta was in charge of carrying the brasero — a type of grill — for her.

While she served up local cuisine, he would sometimes nap under a table in the restaurant.

"That's where he started his passion for cooking and becoming a chef," said his daughter, Citlali Mendieta-Ramos.

He brought that passion to Milwaukee in the late 1990s when he and his wife, Elvira Prado-Mendieta, opened El Rey Sol, a restaurant on the city's south side that celebrated gourmet Mexican cuisine.

Chef, gourmet, gracious host and restaurateur, Mendieta died Thursday after a battle with pancreatic cancer. He was 82.

Mendieta came from humble beginnings in central Mexico. His mother ran the small restaurant in the market. His father painted churches.

He opened his first restaurant, El Gran Teocalli, near the Aztec pyramids of Teotihuacan in central Mexico in 1958. The pyramids were an inspiration to him, his daughter said. The restaurant was operated by one of Mendieta's 10 children until they sold the business a decade ago.

"He was very passionate about history and culture and food," said Mendieta-Ramos, who with her husband, Nicolas Ramos, owns and operates Antigua restaurant in West Allis.

El Gran Teocalli became an institution, and during the course of a few decades, Mendieta opened restaurants in Tijuana and Morelia, including the first El Rey Sol, and rose to prominence in the culinary world. He was invited to cook for Mexican presidents and other politicians when they traveled to Tijuana.

In the early 1990s, Mendieta moved with his fourth wife, Elvira, and their daughter Citlali to Anaheim, Calif., so she could attend school in the U.S. After a short time there, then another brief stint in Chicago, the family landed in Milwaukee, where Citlali started to attend Marquette University.

Once in Milwaukee, Mendieta started publishing a small newspaper called El Heraldo de Wisconsin. It was a gastronomic publication, and the only one like it in the city.

Arnoldo Sevilla, a historian in the Latino community in Milwaukee and friend of Mendieta, did some photography for El Heraldo. He said his friend was dedicated to sharing his love of food and culture with his new city.

"He was so proud of the newspaper," Sevilla said.

In 1998, Mendieta and his wife partnered with the Orozco family, the owners of Tres Hermanos restaurant, and opened the second El Rey Sol. Like the original in Tijuana, the new restaurant was named for France's King Louis XIV, known as the Sun King.

"There was no other restaurant in the Latin community to have what we call gourmet food," Sevilla said. "It was very special."

Mendieta forewent the chimichangas and tacos typical of many Mexican restaurants in the U.S. in favor of more complex dishes, such as pit-roasted pork with sour oranges (a flavor of the Yucatán), or chicken with a sauce made of crushed almonds and avocados.

"There was a full spectrum of cuisine that he would try to showcase, and he was very successful doing it," his daughter said. "When he arrived here, he definitely made waves."

While the white tablecloths and elegant place settings created a formal feel, Mendieta's warm charisma made customers feel at home. He regularly worked the dining rooms, chatting with friends and strangers. He explained the history behind the dishes on the menu and told stories and jokes.

"He went above and beyond as far as being a host and a chef," Mendieta-Ramos said.

His positive attitude made people crave not only his cuisine, but his company as well.

"He always looked at life like it was beautiful," Sevilla said.

The closing of El Rey Sol in 2006 capped Mendieta's 50-year career as a chef.

But, even as his health declined in recent years, he would still make it into the kitchen in his daughter's restaurant.

"He was always there to give me advice," she said. "He was unstoppable."

In addition to his wife and daughter, Mendieta is survived by his children Monica Mendieta Hernandez, Maria Mendieta Hernandez, Rodrigo Mendieta Hernandez, Eduardo Mendieta Hernandez, Jose Mendieta Hernandez, Maria Mendieta Acuña, Vanessa Mendieta Acuña, Smith Mendieta and Juan Mendieta, as well as 17 grandchildren and one great-grandchild.

Jose Mendieta

Jose Mendieta's family will hold a visitation at 1 p.m. Saturday at St. Peter's Evangelical Church, 1205 S. 8th St., Milwaukee. Mass will follow at 2:30 p.m.