It’s that time of year again, when HR managers force employees to choose their benefits packages for the coming year. Despite all the hullaballoo created by state insurance exchanges and the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, most employees will just sign up for whatever they had last year without looking at their options. It doesn’t have to be that way, says financial services giant MetLife, which just released findings from its 11th annual Employee Benefits Trends Study. Complete your profile to continue reading and get FREE access to BenefitsPRO.com, part of your ALM digital membership. Benefits:

Your access to unlimited BenefitsPRO.com content isn’t changing. Once you are an ALM digital member, you’ll receive: Critical BenefitsPRO.com information including cutting-edge post-reform success strategies, comprehensive service provider listings, educational webcasts and videos, resources from industry leaders, and informative eNewsletters.

Exclusive discounts on ALM, BenefitsPRO Magazine and BenefitsPRO.com events.

Access to other award-winning ALM publications including LifeHealthPro.com, ThinkAdvisor.com and Law.com. Register Now Already have an account? Sign In X Sign in with your ALM Account Remember Me Or... Sign In With LinkedIn

1. Upgrade the enrollment experience: Make the enrollment experience closer to online shopping than whatever it now is for your workers. Employees say that’s what they want, and if it gets them to take more control of their benefits selection, give your process the online shopping makeover. 2. Use a simple and straightforward enrollment process: Too many steps, too many choices, and too many “you missed one, start over’s” can kill an employee’s enthusiasm for the selection task. Complicated processes can deter employees from participating in benefits enrollment. Fewer and easier-to-use decision-making tools can pay off in greater engagement.

3. Aim for online enrollment: Get into the 21st century and offer online enrollment. Only 35 percent of employees interviewed said online enrollment was available to them. Put it online and watch participation grow. 4. Communicate clearly: More than half of engaged employees say they are engaged because benefits materials are easy to understand, offer examples that reflect their own lives, and are personalized whenever possible. Get a wordsmith to put the mumbo-jumbo into everyday language.