MISSION — The owners of Mission Regional Medical Center have had their credit bond rating lowered for the second time this year and the hospital may fall into technical default on its bonds, Standard & Poor’s Rating Service warned.

A technical default does not mean the hospital, a nonprofit organization, will be seeing its operations appreciably affected in the short-term, but does pose a long-term challenge on paying back nearly $30 million in bonds from issues in 2005, 2007 and 2008.

Hidalgo County Health Services Corp., which owns the facility based in Mission, saw its bond rating drop to “BB+” from “BBB-,” said the Dec. 15 report by Standard & Poor’s.

This means the bonds are no longer considered “investment grade,” which prohibits some banks from investing in them. Shifting from investment grade to speculative grade impacts borrowing costs for the hospital.

The rating agency also placed the ratings on a “Creditwatch with negative implications.”

Nick Espinosa, marketing director for the medical center, said he was unaware of the rating lowering. He told The Monitor he would talk to hospital officials about the development and call back; he never did.

A default means the hospital has not fulfilled specific requirements in order to qualify for the bonds, or loans.

Standard & Poor’s said in its report that the projected loss, compared with the hospital’s budget for $2.1 million of operating income, is the result of Medicaid reimbursement rates.

A financial newsletter called The Bond Buyer explained that Mission Medical Center is suffering the same crisis as many other Texas hospitals because state officials, protesting the so-called Obamacare, are refusing federal funds to expand Medicaid coverage.

Mission hospital directors have already reached out to a bond trustee and a notice of noncompliance with the debt service coverage is forthcoming, the S&P report said.

This marks the second time this year that S&P lowered the hospital’s bond rating. In March, the rating service lowered it to a “BBB-” from a “BBB.”

At the time, the rating company indicated softer patient volumes, modest reserves and its business position with competitors as reasons for its new ratin