Play Facebook

Twitter

Google Plus

Embed Trump on '02 Iraq Comments: 'I Really Don't Even Know What I Mean' 1:51 autoplay autoplay Copy this code to your website or blog

Donald Trump responded to a 2002 clip where he pledged, at best, lukewarm support for the Iraq war, a war he says he does not support now, by saying, "I really don't even know what I mean." Back in 2002, Trump told Howard Stern on his radio show that he was for invading Iraq but that he wishes "the first time it was done correctly."

When asked by NBC's Chuck Todd to explain what his 2002 comments meant he said:

"Well, what I mean by that is it almost shouldn't have been done. And you know, I really don't even know what I mean, because that was a long time ago, and who knows what was in my head. I think that it wasn't done correctly. In retrospect, it [the Iraq War] shouldn't have been done at all. It was sort of, you know, it was just done. It was just, we dropped bombs. Now if you look back, actually, that was probably the correct way of doing it, not going in, and not upsetting, giving them a lesson or not. I mean, I think Senior actually did a pretty good job of what he was doing. He went in, he taught them a lesson. "

In the last few weeks, the undisputed GOP front-runner also seemed to shift on his opinion of the women's health care organization Planned Parenthood and whether he supported the health insurance mandate that is a part of Obamacare.

On the subject of federal funding for Planned Parenthood Trump said:

"Planned Parenthood does a really good job at a lot of different areas. But not on abortion. So I'm not going to fund it if it's doing the abortion. I am not going to fund it."

Play Facebook

Twitter

Google Plus

Embed Trump: Planned Parenthood 'Does Some Very Good Work' 0:39 autoplay autoplay Copy this code to your website or blog

And on the health insurance mandate he said he doesn't believe in it, however that it's still important to take care of people who can't afford health care:

"I'm really talking about people that can't afford it. We're not going to let people die in squalor because we are Republicans, okay? ... We're going to take care of people. But no, people don't have to have it [health insurance]. We're going to have great plans, they're going to be a lot less expensive than Obamacare. "

On Saturday, Trump won all 50 delegates in South Carolina taking his delegate count up to 67 in the hunt for the 1237 delegates needed to be declared the presumptive nominee.