Reuters Laura Tyson, professor at the University of California, speaks at Center for American Progress 10th Anniversary policy forum in Washington, Oct. 24, 2013. (REUTERS/Yuri Gripas)

Overhauling U.S. tax rules on overseas earnings could bring about $1 trillion back to the U.S. immediately and boost the economy, according to a new study sponsored by a business group seeking the change.

The report by former Clinton administration economist Laura Tyson and two co-authors was sponsored by a group of U.S. firms, the Alliance for Competitive Taxation, which is pushing for the U.S. to adopt the kind of tax system already in use in most other developed countries.

The report is part of a push by big business to get Congress to switch from the current system, in which corporate income taxes are figured both on U.S. firms’ domestic earnings and on international earnings they bring home, to one in which the tax is imposed only on the money firms earn at home, a system known as territorial taxation.

Under the current setup, U.S. firms have a big incentive to leave their international earnings offshore, where they can avoid U.S. taxes. In recent years, U.S. firms have built up large stockpiles of cash and assets offshore that are now estimated to total around $2 trillion.

The group is expected to use the $1 trillion figure as ammunition in lobbying lawmakers for a comprehensive tax overhaul that would include territorial taxation. Despite a concerted effort by a wide range of U.S. businesses, a tax overhaul remains a long shot in the current Congress, in part because of the big changes it would require in deductions and other breaks.

The group’s report says that during a transition to a territorial system in the U.S., the additional $1 trillion flowing into the U.S. would result in increased spending and investment that would boost U.S. GDP by at least $208 billion and create at least 1.46 million additional jobs.

According to the authors of the study, by Berkeley Research Group, the $1 trillion would flow back to the U.S. as soon as allowable under whatever transition plan is used, but the timing would depend on exactly which scheme was adopted by Congress.

The report also says that in the years following the switch, companies would bring home about $114 billion more annually above current levels. That would create more than 150,000 jobs on an annual basis, the report says.

“As lawmakers in Washington look for policies to boost economic growth and job creation, reforming the corporate tax code to allow American businesses to invest their foreign earnings in the United States . . . is an opportunity that should be considered,” Ms. Tyson said.

Opponents of the idea say much of the cash hoard that U.S. companies have built up offshore already is invested in the U.S., for example through Treasury bills.

Robert McIntyre, director of the liberal Citizens for Tax Justice, said a smarter change for the U.S. would be to end the practice of allowing firms to park their overseas earnings offshore and defer tax. “If you really wanted to get the money [back to the U.S.] . . . get rid of deferral,” he said.

U.S. firms and their advisers say that would put American companies at an even bigger disadvantage when it comes to tax rules.

Ms. Tyson and her co-authors said on a conference call with reporters that allowing companies to bring their cash back to the U.S. would let them determine the most economically efficient way to use the money, either through domestic investment or through returning the money to shareholders.