Topics: Africa, America, Disease, ebola, Editor's Picks, healthcare, Money, National security, public health, public health crisis, Security, Troops, Victims, Politics News

The rapid spread of the Ebola virus across western Africa and the first diagnosis of a case within the United States has caused a spike in fear here in the United States even though few Americans face any risk of contracting the deadly disease. And when Americans are afraid, our country’s response is often to declare “war” on our opponent, to send police, guns, bombs, or troops to fight it, lock it up, destroy it.

Except you can’t do that to a disease.

This latest Ebola epidemic happened to come to Americans’ attention at about the same time as ISIS, the militant group in Iraq and Syria that is the latest target of American military strikes. This has led to many unfortunate comparisons between the two, including a chyron at CNN asking if Ebola was “the ISIS of biological agents?” Apparently we can only understand a virus if we can compare it to armed fighters.

National security reporter Ali Gharib joked on Twitter last month, “Obama announces $500 million-dollar fund to train and equip 5000 anti-Ebola fighters.” Two days later, on September 15, he found that he’d actually been more correct than he thought, when the announcement came that President Obama would indeed commit $500 million and 3000 U.S. military forces (the number has since grown to a possible 4000). The president called the fight a “national security priority.” The Center for Disease Control and Prevention has deployed over 100 to the ground.

We are to be reassured, it seems, that the U.S. troops “will not be directly treating infected patients.” Instead, they will be doing “command and control,” setting up facilities, and delivering medical supplies. Meanwhile, tiny Cuba has sent the largest medical team from any single nation, 165 health professionals with 296 more on the way.

Obviously, the U.S. military isn’t going to actually try to eradicate a disease with military force. But the national security response, the all-too-accurate jokes should tell us something about our priorities.

What it takes to save Ebola patients, according to a man who survived the disease, is care, not security. And care is something that is not particularly valued in the United States. Foday Galla, a medical student and ambulance driver who was infected with the disease while bringing an infected four-year-old boy to receive treatment, told Time it was the compassion and care of the doctors and nurses with medical NGO Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) that brought him through. He now says he will apply this lesson from his Ebola experience to his work as a doctor: “You have to care, you have to give encouraging words, you have to tell them they will survive. Because if you don’t have that [as a patient] you are going to want to die.”

Ebola is particularly treacherous because the people who care are the ones who are most likely to be infected. Medical workers like Galla put themselves at risk trying to help. Even Thomas Eric Duncan, the Liberian man diagnosed with Ebola in Dallas, Texas, contracted the disease helping a friend and neighbor get to the hospital in a taxi because no ambulance was available.

According to Liberian officials, women make up about 75 percent of the cases they are seeing because women tend to be primary caregivers and nurses. Health officials consider educating and training women to be crucial to fighting the spread of the disease. “By reaching the women, they are reaching those who can best protect their families, and their own health,” said Maricel Seeger, a WHO spokeswoman in Monrovia, Liberia.