Barack Obama is right wing in virtually all of his policies, but because he is a Democrat and African-American, he is given a free pass by many liberals (similar to how he gets criticized by much of the right for simply being a Democrat and African-American). Democrats who still support Obama are likely just defending a symbolic icon rather than objectively analyzing his policies.

Conservative, reactionary politics are expected from those Republican presidents who came before him but Obama branded himself as being different, something for which Americans were ready. Instead, Obama and the Democrats have maintained the status quo, thus betraying Americans and the world. Below is a list of 20 ways summarizing this betrayal (click here or on the graphic below to view a slideshow expanding on these points).

Obama perpetuated the myth that the U.S. is "exceptional" yet needs to live in fear. The rise of JSOC - the ultimate covert killing machine. Obama is pushing the secretive TPP trade pact. Cherry-picked intel on Syria; on same side as Al-Qaeda and Taliban. Deported a record number of immigrants. The recolonization of Africa. Obama's "secret kill list" targets Americans for assassination. Drones have become the new - and most cowardly - weapon of war. Obama has waged a war on whistleblowing and other forms of dissent. Environmental position has been far from progressive. Spying on Americans - and the world - has been taken to a new level. The war in Afghanistan has been escalated under Obama. Liberals sold out Americans by supporting Obamacare. Like Republicans, Obama and Democrats pander to their pro-Israel donor base. Iran continues to be terrorized by the U.S. Gitmo and other torture centers remain open. Obama started a covert war in Yemen. Pro-Wall Street and pro-bank policies continue. Obama, the constitutional lawyer, makes a mockery of the Constitution. The war in Iraq is not over.

It can be argued that the U.S. started its shift to the far right with the Ronald Reagan presidency (deregulation, trickle-down economics, war on drugs, covert wars in Latin America). The shift continued under George H.W. Bush (Persian Gulf, Panama, Clarence Thomas), Bill Clinton (welfare reform, media consolidation, NAFTA, Kosovo, Iraq sanctions) and of course George W. Bush (neo-conservatism, Iraq, Patriot Act).

Manifest Destiny and xenophobia are principles that could have been laid to rest, or at least diffused. Instead, Obama and Democrats have normalized them.