Topics: Donald Trump, Elections 2016, GOP primary, Health Care, Labor, Obamacare, Unions, News, Politics News

Brand icon and Republican presidential front-runner Donald Trump boasts that he provides good health insurance to his employees. I mean, really good health insurance. After all, everything Trump touches turns to great. “They don’t have to worry about ‘Obamacare,’ my people,” Trump recently said. “I treat them really good with health care. It’s a very important thing.”

And that does appear to be true for some Trump workers. But only if you’re full-time. Part-time employees at the 64-story Trump International Hotel in Las Vegas like Alma Zamarin aren’t eligible for the health plan.

“I don’t have no healthcare,” says Zamarin, 55, who says she makes $9.71 plus tips delivering room service. “I don’t have no insurance. Because I’m only on call.”

Zamarin says she has been on call for nearly six years, passed over for full-time jobs time and again thanks to a manager’s discrimination and favoritism. She says that she desperately needs the insurance to treat injuries sustained in a car accident that left her with a metal rod in her spine and neck. She takes pain medication every day.

It’s unclear how many workers at the hotel and condominium, where the exterior windows are gilded with 24-carat gold, work part-time. Neither the Trump Organization nor Donald Trump’s campaign responded to repeated requests for comment. But Zamarin and her co-worker Miguel Funes say that multiple other workers in room service are on call.

“They don’t want to give the opportunity to everybody to be full-time because that’s going to be money out of their pockets,” says Funes, 38, who like other workers interviewed for this story support the union campaign.

In December, hotel workers voted to join the powerful Culinary Workers Local 226 and Bartenders Local 165, though management has fought to overturn the results. The Culinary tells Salon that it doesn’t know how many workers are on call because it hasn’t received detailed information from the hotel. But it believes that the number is large.

“A union contract provides for job security, good health benefits, and fair wages,” according to a statement emailed by Culinary spokesperson Bethany Khan. “Mr. Trump says he wants to make America great again – he has a great opportunity to start right here in Las Vegas at his hotel. His employees are eager to start contract negotiations, especially after Trump Toronto employees got a deal signed in one month. If he can negotiate in Canada, surely ‘The Great Negotiator’ can make a deal in the USA as well.”

The Trump Hotel’s insurance is pretty good, according to Paul Fronstin, director of the Health Research and Education Program at the Employee Benefit Research Institute. He reviewed a copy of the Trump International Hotel Las Vegas health benefits guide that the union provided to Salon.

“The premiums are below average,” says Fronstin. “Some might consider this a Cadillac plan.”

The union, however, says that it has a superior plan—and it includes no monthly premiums. Fronstin, from what he reviewed, agrees.