Wes Stiller, of the Military Order of the Purple Heart, lays a wreath in honor of fallen military personnel at Stephen Day Park in Longmont on Monday as part of a Memorial Day service. See more photos at timescall.com. ( Jonathan Castner / For the Times-Call )

Residents of a northeast Longmont neighborhood joined veterans and their family members Monday morning for the first in a set of annual local remembrances of men and women who died while serving in the country's armed forces.

Scott Sullivan and Dean Augustad said they aren't veterans themselves but — as they've done for several years — they showed up with their 10-year-old daughters, Brynne Sullivan and Kiya Augustad, for the Memorial Day ceremony at Longmont's Stephen Day Park, 1340 Deerwood Drive.

The city park is named for Army Private First Class Stephen Wayne Day, a Hygiene resident who was born in Longmont and attended Longmont schools. He died on Dec. 1, 1966, in Vietnam at the age of 22.

Ralph Bozella and Mary Blue listen to the playing of "Taps" at the end of the wreath-laying ceremony in honor of the fallen military personnel at Stephen Day Park in Longmont on Monday. (Jonathan Castner / For the Times-Call)

The Sullivan and Augustad girls, students at nearby Fall River Elementary School, and their parents participated in the recitation of the Pledge of Allegiance and looked on as various veterans' organizations and service clubs placed wreaths on stands.

They also saw an American Legion John Harold Buckley Post 32 honor guard, which featured flag-bearers and seven riflemen who fired a three-volley military salute.

"We come every year," Scott Sullivan said.

He said the ceremony offers a chance to "teach our children to realize that these veterans fought for our freedoms" and that Memorial Day "is not just another day off."

Steve Augustad said the event is an opportunity "to show the kids, to remember, the reason we're here."

Advertisement

The Stephen Day Park ceremony, which was repeated at Foothills Gardens of Memory, 14241 N. 107th St., and Mountain View Cemetery, 620 11th Ave., later in the day, concluded with the playing of "Taps."

The remarks at the Stephen Day city park ceremony overseen by Post 32 chaplain Bill Bohn were brief, coming chiefly from several of the wreath-bearers.

A representative of local American Legion post's auxiliary, for example, said that organization's wreath was "in memory of the brave men and women and the sacrifices that they have made."

Other wreaths were presented by representatives of Longmont Elks Lodge 1055, Veterans of Foreign Wars Post 2601, the Daughters of the American Revolution, the Military Order of the Purple Heart and Disabled American Veterans, Bohn said.

Longmont's Ralph Bozella, chairman of the American Legion's National Affairs Committee, said that at the Mountain View event, he'd be speaking about how "remembrance is the highest form of honor" and how the day is the national occasion that's observed to remember the nation's deceased veterans "and learn from their sacrifice."

The service at Mountain View Cemetery also marked the first such Memorial Day event being held there since a granite Civil War memorial statue was broken when tipped over by vandals in August 2013. The statue has been replaced and was rededicated during the ceremony.

Memorial Day, once called Decoration Day, has its own origins with the Grand Army of the Republic, an organization of Union Army Civil War veterans, which in May 1868 established a day for the nation to decorate the graves of that war's dead with flowers.

John Fryar: 303-684-5211, jfryar@times-call.com or twitter.com/jfryartc