A growing movement to reward organizations that provide high-quality, coordinated care at a controlled cost is changing the way local health care systems — and even some commercial insurers — care for and interact with patients.







In the wake of the Affordable Care Act, Northeast Ohio's health systems embraced the concept of accountable care organizations, or ACOs, to varying degrees. While University Hospitals and Summa Health System seemingly went all in on the concept early on, Cleveland Clinic was anything but eager to embrace experimental payment models that had the potential to hurt its revenue streams.







But just last month, the Clinic quietly announced it had entered into Medicare's shared savings program, perhaps the most well-known ACO program. UH and Summa had been involved from the start, with MetroHealth joining the fold shortly thereafter. And while all of their approaches have been different, they agree this model isn't going away anytime soon. By 2018, for one, the feds would like to see half of Medicare spending in some sort value-based contract. That's a far cry from the current model, which mostly pays out based on how many services are rendered.







“An ACO in of itself is not a money maker,” said Dr. William Steiner, interim president of UH's accountable care organization.







“Even if you do great, you're still getting less money than the old-fashioned way,” Steiner said. “We're looking at how to do this correctly, build an infrastructure and fine-tune it. We're looking ahead to the days when probably all medical payments are going to go this way.”

Good accounting

Today, UH is one of the largest accountable care providers in the country, serving more than 250,000 self-insured, commercially insured, Medicare and Medicaid members and their beneficiaries. Over the last few years, the health system has hired a few dozen patient navigators to help its ACO patients navigate the complex health care system. It also has invested heavily in analytics — something previously only embraced by insurers — that allow docs to identify high-cost patients that require more intense intervention.







As for why UH jumped in so early, Steiner said UH was more interested in “driving the bus, rather than getting run over by it.”







The efforts appear to be paying off, according to Steiner, an internist by trade who still sees patients. The health system launched an ACO that encompassed its 25,000 employees, spouses/same sex partners and dependents enrolled in a UH medical plan. By more intensely managing their care, UH kept premiums flat for several years and when increased, Steiner said the hike was well below the rest of the market.







Also, as part of the Medicare ACO, UH's spend on Medicare patients came in slightly below its target in the first year of operation, and it met the federally dictated quality targets. That said, UH didn't reduce the cost of care for Medicare patients quite enough to share in any savings with the feds. As part of the shared savings programs, if health systems reduce spending beyond a certain sliding threshold, they share in 50% of the generated savings with the government. UH should learn later this year how it fared in the second year.









The late adopters

“In the first year, we bent the cost curve and did the right thing saving the government money, but we didn't get any back,” Steiner said.“It was hard to start this thing off from scratch.”Summa — also an early adopter — was the only Medicare ACO in the state to actually generate any shared savings in the first year of operation.The health system generated about $11.8 million in savings, bringing about $5.8 million back into the system's coffers. Summa's model was focused on driving more patients toward primary care by creating more same-day appointments, thus steering them away from costly emergency room visits, according to Dr. Mark Terpylak, president of NewHealth Collaborative, Summa's ACO.

Although the Clinic didn't jump all-in in 2012, the health system had been quietly preparing to participate in the Medicare shared savings program since that time, according to Dr. David Longworth, chairman of the Clinic's Medicine Institute. Since that time, the health system has transformed many of its primary care practices to better manage patients.







Some of the investments include hiring care coordinators to manage complex patients, redesigning workflows to reduce the administrative burden on physicians and embedding a registry in the health system's electronic medical record to flag high-risk patients.







Ultimately, the health system began simulating being in an ACO, and in July, realized it was ready to apply for the Medicare program, Longworth said.







“This is about transforming the way you deliver care,” Longworth said.







“It would have been shortsighted to do this without that transformation. We wanted to be sure we could deliver the care before we took that risk.”









The commercial side

Meanwhile, MetroHealth is no stranger to managing complex patients.As Cuyahoga County's public hospital, the health care provider has long-served uninsured patients who oftentimes frequented the emergency room instead of handling the bulk of their care through primary care outlets. But as Medicaid eligibility expanded under the Affordable Care Act — and before that, through an experimental waiver in Cuyahoga County — the health system has retooled itself to manage the health care of these challenging populations. Some of those efforts include the usual targeted outreach to high-risk patients. Other efforts include offering patients transportation and even legal assistance.So when MetroHealth's ACO joined the Medicare shared savings effort last year, it already was well-suited to manage the care of the roughly 10,000 lives in the program, according to Susan Mego, MetroHealth's executive director of managed care.“If we didn't have these resources in place, one of the most challenging things would be getting them up to scale,” Mego said. “People were already familiar with those programs.”

Local health systems' ACO-like arrangements, of course, go beyond Medicare. All of the local health systems have struck risk-based arrangements with commercial insurers. UH, for one, has launched ACOs with several commercial insurers, including Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield, Cigna Healthcare, UnitedHealthcare and Aetna.







The financials of these arrangements are confidential, but insurers typically help foot part of the health system's bill for transforming the way they deliver care. It takes money, for instance, to hire care coordinators who steer patients through a health system. Also, these aren't capitated payer arrangements, where providers receive a lump sum per patient — a common characteristic of managed care plans from the 1990s.







Like the Medicare arrangement, there's also a shared-savings component, but even more importantly, these sort of contracts are changing the dynamic between insurers and health systems.







Rather than haggling over the unit price of a service rendered or claims, insurers and health systems are trying to work together to care for patients. Much of that involves real-time data sharing.







“It really is a partnership between us and them,” said Barb Cannon, director of accountable care organizations for Anthem Inc.







“They have great information about their patients, but they don't have the full picture. We have a part of the picture they need.”