GOP presidential frontrunner Donald Trump said Tuesday he would work to simplify the tax code, possibly with a flat tax."Put H&R Block out of business," he said Tuesday morning on "Fox & Friends." Trump said he would like to see a simple return that people could fill out without having to pay a lot of money to a professional to help them through the process."We have to simplify our code, bring down taxes," he said. "It's too complicated."Trump said he has plenty of lawyers and accounting firms to handle his complex taxes, but that most people don't have that advantage.Trump has been moving more toward policy this week after a weekend feud with Fox News Channel and debate moderator Megyn Kelly over questions that he said were unfair.Trump said Fox News President Roger Ailes has assured him he'll get fair treatment on the network, and he appeared to take him at his word. In addition to opening the day on "Fox & Friends," he also closed it with a one-hour interview on "Hannity." Trump told "Fox & Friends" his plan for the Islamic State (ISIS) is "to knock out their wealth. … Take the oil, knock the hell out of them."Trump also talked to CNN, saying he would consider partial defunding of Planned Parenthood amid the recent undercover videos showing doctors discussing the sale of fetal tissue for research.On "Hannity," Trump said he favors replacing Obamacare with health savings accounts and allowing health insurance companies to compete across state lines."It's an amazing system, and I actually think that if you're a Democrat you can go with it," he said.Trump also addressed his third-party threat, saying that if he doesn't win the nomination he would support the Republican nominee if it is someone he agrees with on the issues."I'd never go to the other side," he said.He declined to say which candidates he does like, but said some of them are not very high in the polls.He also said he gave to the Clinton Foundation – and to politicians such as Democratic Rep. Nancy Pelosi – because he wanted to have access.Trump said he is a conservative, but also a businessman. If he were asked for a campaign contribution and said no, then needed to talk to that same person later for approval on a project he wouldn't get it."That's a bad system," he said.Hannity asked if the Saudis gave to the Clinton Foundation for access, too. Trump replied,"Absolutely."