There are a lot of people in the city, especially former and future foes on the campaign trail, who may not want to admit it, but 18 months in, Bill de Blasio has been a pretty darn good mayor. Infuriating at times, mystifying at others. But overall, passing with flying colors.

Grading a mayor requires a serious curve nowadays. Thanks to hard-won victories of the last couple of decades, running the country's largest city is easier than it used to be. Unlike the New York of my youth, nobody today suggests that the city is ungovernable or at a tipping point thisclose to anarchy.

The subways are packed and tardy, but they are not graffiti-tagged and they are clean and safe. And the streets above are so transformed that the gritty and risky feel of New York movies of the 70s, 80s and even the 90s just don't work anymore — because, for the most part, we can't even imagine a time of empty storefronts and toughs ruling the streets.

Mayors today don't worry about default or slashing payrolls because we are the world's safe deposit bank. As the dollar's preeminence as the world's reserve currency gets reinforced by the challenges in Europe and low interest rates leaving the rich with few other options, New York real estate and Wall Street equities have become a boon for the modern mayor, who has plenty of tax revenue to do his job.

But even with the city being easier to run, there are still ways to grade the modern mayor, so here goes:

Taking Care of the Big Thing: A-

So long as the city is kept safe, citizens of New York will overlook a lot of lesser disagreements. Contretemps about stats and very real concerns about police-community relations should not distract us from the remarkable fact that crime is almost as low as it can go. It's now so low that crime categories spike up and down in percentage terms when there are literally single-digit differences in the number of crimes.

Earlier this year, the media made a stink about a jump in subway crime. The "spike" represented less than a single additional subway assault a week in a system with an average weekday ridership of 5.6 million.

The success tracks back to de Blasio's smart-as-hell decision to tap Bill Bratton — a world-class professional who even many of the mayor's opponents admire — as his NYPD commissioner. The commish is overseeing overdue reforms to stop-and-frisk while continuing to police serious crimes aggressively and trying out new technology and tactics.

It's clear that the mayor understands that real progressives (and everyone else for that matter) wants him to keep crime in check. The only reason he doesn't get a full A here is the slow start in bringing cop body cameras online. They are crucial to fostering better police-community relations.

Making the Grade: A-

The people of New York are a raucous and diverse bunch. Your chances of being all things to all people around here are nil. This is particularly true when far too many people think that civic participation begins and ends with booing a politician when he throws out the first pitch at a baseball game.

New Yorkers don't expect to agree with you on every single issue; they had lots of day-to-day disputes with Mike Bloomberg, Rudy Giuliani and Ed Koch. What they want is to see their mayor fighting the good fight.

The mayor's indisputable success in building up his signature universal pre-K initiative wins big points. Out of whole cloth, and with hardly a hiccup in implementation, he created a major new program that's helping thousands upon thousands of working families — and then expanded it.

He finally settled a teacher's contract that Mayor Bloomberg had failed to ink — winning not only overdue pay raises but some serious reforms, including more time for parental engagement and (more on this below) supposedly guaranteed cuts to the cost of health care.

The rest of his education agenda is going to take some time to assess; student achievement gains are always slow to manifest. But by naming a no-nonsense pro in Carmen Fariña as chancellor and refusing to get burned too badly by the overhyped hot potato of charter schools — which, even when successful, educate a tiny fraction of the city's public school kids — the mayor's moves should convince most parents that he has their backs.

Making the Rent a Bit Less Damn High: Incomplete

Like crime, figuring where the middle class and those struggling to make it are going to live in modern New York is one of those existential questions that we simply have to solve. De Blasio deserves credit for his weekly and sometimes daily focus on the need to make housing in our city more affordable.

He has good plans and is talking a good game, but he needs a lot of help, and it's too soon to see if he is going to get it. He strong-armed the votes for an unprecedented rent freeze for 1 million rent-regulated tenants, but that's not enough.

He — and all of us — need help from Washington to really get to the bottom of the needs of our sprawling network of crumbling public housing developments.

And his balanced proposal to change the way we incentivize developers to build more affordable units was at first met with exasperation by the governor and flat out opposition by the Republicans. Fortunately, 90% of de Blasio's plan finally got through at the end of the legislative session. We should start to see seeds of new affordable housing planted in neighborhoods across the city.

The mayor probably deserves a good grade if any of these important plans move forward, but until we start to see shovels in the ground, he gets an Incomplete.

Being our Spokesmayor: A-

More often than any other leader at any other level of government, the mayor is the person who is called upon to be a voice of the people he represents. If you can't communicate, you can't lead.

He spoke for so many of us in his admiration for our police and stood tall even when rhetorical tomatoes were tossed his way by some in response. At the same time, he used his bully pulpit to speak of the challenges of being the father of black children — a tough subject that he tackled head on, and refusing to back down even when the police unions histrionically demanded an apology. And when the urge for drama and fearmongering about Ebola got the better of other leaders, New York's mayor was like its people: smart and cool.

This year, after wisely waiting until after the legislative session ended, de Blasio finally hit back hard at the governor for his not-so-anonymous sniping, backbiting and his now well-known habit of cynically undermining the mayor just to show who's boss.

Those petty tactics have made de Blasio and residents of the Big Apple into Cuomo's piñatas. Someone had to finally call the governor on it.

De Blasio lost the A here over his silly and self-indulgent response to questions about Hillary Clinton's candidacy, and for his quixotic and poorly explained globetrotting. Hitting the road from time to time is fine, but it should always be about something that clearly benefits New Yorkers.

Preparing for the Worst: C

New York has had a pretty amazing run after the Great Recession; now, the economy is bound to turn down and maybe burst.

The toughest and most thankless thing to do in politics is to cut from your constituents today to protect your city of tomorrow. So mayor after mayor have fallen into the same boom-and-bust cycle: Spend the money when we have it and slash the budgets when the rainy days come.

Rudy was bad at this. Mike was bad at this. And now Bill seems to be bad at it, too. The budget just passed is 12% bigger than the last one of the Bloomberg administration. Headcount is moving towards the highest level in city history, and our debt is so high that 12 cents of every dollar we spend goes to banks and bondholders.

On the health-care front, the still unproven tactic of asking labor unions to find their own savings in return for raises is nothing like the structural change we need as more and more workers and retirees take advantage of the city's extraordinarily generous benefits.

In fairness, we must remember that Bloomberg left a heap of unpaid labor bills, and the initiatives I praise above cost money. Also in fairness, de Blasio is fighting to hold the line on police disability pensions.

But that said, de Blasio has done too little to reckon with the big three black holes that threaten to swallow up the rest of the budget: heath care, pensions and debt.

Innovating for the Future: B

In some regards, running the city is like running a public company: If you are not constantly updating the brand and the way the place runs, competitors will pass you by and investors will flee. The modern mayoralty makes this way of thinking so important; ensuring we remain the capital of what Richard Florida coined the Creative Class — staying a magnet for the best and brightest — means constantly thinking about new and better ways to do things.

So when the de Blasio administration unwraps plans to repurpose old phone booths into wi-fi hot spots or figures out the way to get undocumented people out of the shadows with a new municipal ID card, it solves problems and improves our city's brand.

Simultaneously, the city is in the midst of a technology revolution that hopefully will make the day-to-day work of our teachers, cops, firefighters, sanitation workers, transit workers and others more productive. We'll see if de Blasio seizes the opportunity; early signs are positive.

Giving de Blasio room to grow to an A in this area just reflects my bias for trying out new ideas practically every day — then scrapping those that don't work.

This is the FDR method: "It is common sense to take a method and try it. If it fails, admit it frankly and try another. But above all, try something."

So, tune out the "one-term mayor" howls from the cheap seats. A year and a half in, our not-so-new mayor is solidly on the path to the dean's list. He would benefit from expanding his contact with regular voters by holding town hall meetings weekly and dialing down his schedule in other cities for a while. But on the whole, we have been well served by Mayor Bill de Blasio.

Weiner, a former city councilman and congressman representing Brooklyn and Queens, is a two-time candidate for mayor.