I have watched as the new Veterans Affairs hospital in Aurora has risen from the ground, grown to ridiculous proportions, and then stalled multiple times. All the while, veterans have been forced to seek care in a worn and outdated mess of a facility in East Denver.

I ran the VA hospitals in the Rocky Mountain states from 1995 to 2003. I left in disgust after support for an innovative approach for new VA health care facilities collapsed because some veteran groups got greedy and the Bush administration failed to lead the way to a 21st century solution.

I spent the last two years of my employment working out an arrangement for a new VA hospital and gathering support for the idea. I worked with the president of the University of Colorado Hospital, Dennis Brimhall, to forge a plan that would allow the VA and university health care facilities to merge.

The VA was to pay the university to expand its plans for health care facilities at Fitzimmons and would ensure veterans’ needs were met through a shared governance arrangement: VA officials would serve in key positions on the board of trustees of the University of Colorado Hospital.

The price started at $157 million, but rose to around $350 million when Brimhall and I were persuaded that veterans needed their own outpatient facility and a spinal cord injury and disease center attached to the inpatient facilities which would jointly sport the University of Colorado Hospital and VA logos.

The plan called for the university to actually manage the facilities. That is because they were less burdened by cumbersome procurement and personnel regulations and could do nearly everything quicker and more efficiently than the VA. For example, at the time we were negotiating the deal, the Denver VA had closed operating rooms because nurses and other staff could not be recruited to work there.

The VA personnel system was and is a mess. We could not pay health care workers enough to take our jobs and could not fire them if they did not perform. University Hospital has the freedom to be more innovative and respond to the market so that employees can be hired, managed and let go. In other words, they could put patient care first, not the rules and regulations of a giant bureaucracy.

We gained support from the Colorado congressional delegation and most veteran groups, but then things changed. The American Legion in Washington, D.C., went to speak to Veterans Affairs Secretary Anthony Principi. They had decided that they would lose influence if the arrangement went through. Principi was persuaded.

Then, some veteran leaders in Colorado demanded their own facility. Talks continued for awhile, but the innovative and cost-effective idea fell apart and Colorado veterans were promised their own facility. Now that is a giant disaster!

Veterans deserve the best health care in this country. That care is not provided in VA hospitals. It is provided in academic medical centers like the University of Colorado Hospital.

If not for greed and a fair bit of ignorance, Colorado veterans could have been receiving the best care available in this state for years. Instead, they are living the soap opera that is unfolding as the government struggles to finish a stand-alone hospital $1 billion over budget.

Sometimes things need to change. Now is that time. No more stand-alone VA facilities should be built. Instead, the VA should work with academic medical centers and the private sector to provide the best care efficiently.

How much care could be provided for $1.7 billion?

A lot.

Terrence Batliner of Boulder is a former health care network director at the Department of Veterans Affairs.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.