President Barack Obama speaks at a summit on Obamacare in 2013. Experts are unsure whether recent decreases in health care costs and other positive economic indicators can be attributed to the law's implementation. Ron Sachs/Getty Images

The White House has a message for those who doubted President Obama's health care law: It turned out not to be the "job killer" many thought it would be.

Still, Jason Furman, chairman of the White House's Council of Economic Advisers, admitted Thursday in remarks at the Center for American Progress that when it comes to the economy "not everything that has happened – good or bad – is because of the Affordable Care Act or despite the Affordable Care Act."



[READ: 5 Numbers to Know for Obamacare’s 5-Year Anniversary]

He added: "But I do want to establish that it has made a meaningful contribution."



Early in March, the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office, the government's scorekeeping agency, released new figures that suggested the cost of implementing the health law would be less than previously projected. The agency also has in recent months found that, though the cost of health care overall is still growing, it is growing at a slower rate than it has in previous years.

Economists have attributed most of these changes to the recession – when people have less money, they spend less on everything, including health care.



Health Care Price Inflation v. Overall Inflation

Courtesy Bureau of Economic Analysis, CEA calculations

White House officials have pointed to these lowered projections as a sign that the law is cost-effective and working, but they come with several caveats noted by the Congressional Budget Office.

First, the price tag is lower in part because fewer Americans will be covered by health insurance under the law than previously thought. It isn't clear at this time, however, if this is occurring because more people are now getting health insurance through employers or if they are choosing to go without coverage.

Second, many of the health insurance plans Americans have selected that are tax-subsidized are less expensive for the government because they can be more expensive for consumers. Some plans Americans have selected have high deductibles and contain narrow networks, meaning that an insurance company may not cover some doctors, hospitals, procedures or even individual members of a surgical team.



[RELATED: Health Insurance Coverage Discrimination: Mental Illness]

Furman admitted in his remarks that deductibles have increased in recent years but noted that they are increasing at a rate that is no faster than they were before the law went into effect. A deductible is the amount of spending that a patient has to take on before an insurance company kicks in to help.

Average Deductible in Job-Based Single Coverage

Courtesy Kaiser Family Foundation and Health Research and Education Trust, Employer Health Benefits Survey; Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, Medical Expenditure Panel Survey; Bureau of Economic Analysis; CEA calculations.

As the economic recovery has taken place, the job market has improved. Businesses have created 12 million new jobs over 60 months of continuous job growth, the longest streak of private sector job growth on record, according to Furman. In the private sector, 3.2 million jobs were created, and from 2013 to 2014, the unemployment rate declined by 1.2 percentage points.

Net Change in Employment Since March 2010

Courtesy Council of Economic Advisers

Under the health care law, large employers have to provide health insurance to all those who work 30 or more hours a week – less than the traditional 40-hour definition. In protest, businesses have pushed for Congress to reinstill the 40-hour workweek, saying they would be forced to cut employee's hours. The latest data suggests that this hasn't occurred yet, but it may be too soon to tell because this particular portion of the law only became enforceable this year after being delayed for a year.

Other than expanding access to health care coverage, the law aims to change the way health care is paid for so that patients become healthier. In his remarks, Furman noted changes in hospitals and other health care facilities. In December, the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality reported a 17 percent reduction in infections that patients transmitted in hospitals, as well as a reduction of 150,000 in hospital readmissions.



Change in Rate of Patient Harm in U.S. Hospitals

Agency for Health Care Research and Quality, CEA calculations