PITTSBURGH — Justin Morneau might play in a Rockies uniform again after all.

The veteran first baseman, who has missed most of the season because of a neck injury and concussion symptoms, began a rehab assignment with the Double-A New Britain Rock Cats on Friday night. He is expected to play in three games for the Rock Cats. If that goes well, he could return to the Rockies for the final month of the season.

“Justin wants to try and get back out there with us this season, and we’re all in for him,” manager Walt Weiss said. “We are going to do whatever we can for the guy. It’s good that he’s out there playing again. Real good.”

Morneau, 34, suffered whiplash and a concussion while diving for a ball May 13 in Anaheim, Calif., against the Angels. He also missed significant playing time in 2010 and 2011 with concussions while playing for the Minnesota Twins. Two weeks ago, Morneau took batting practice on the field for the first time since his injury in May.

The Rockies have Morneau signed through this season, with a $9 million mutual option next season. He is owed a $750,000 buyout if not re-signed.

Roster shuffle for Jason Gurka. Seeking left-handed relief in the bullpen, Colorado selected the contract of Jason Gurka from Triple-A Albuquerque. Gurka, 27, is making his first appearance on a major-league roster.

To clear a roster space for Gurka, the Rockies optioned right-hander Tommy Kahnle to Triple-A and designated left-hander Kenny Roberts for assignment.

Gurka, who throws a fastball, curveball and changeup, was signed as a minor-league free agent last winter.

“To be honest, I was happy I was playing a game for a job,” said Gurka, a 15th-round draft pick by Baltimore in 2008 out of Angelina (Texas) Junior College. “I loved every day of it. I never looked up. I knew opportunity would happen, and I got one with the Rockies.”

Gurka was 2-1 with a 3.18 ERA in 21 games (including one start) for Albuquerque this season after getting called up from Double-A.

Pitchers over position players. Weiss said the Rockies are more likely to call up pitchers rather than position players Tuesday when big-league rosters can be expanded. Veteran right-hander Kyle Kendrick (strained shoulder) is scheduled to pitch a side session Saturday. Weiss said he still is not sure whether left fielder Corey Dickerson (fractured ribs) will return this season.



Looking ahead

Rockies’ Chris Rusin (4-6, 4.97 ERA) at Pirates’ J.A. Happ (6-7, 4.21), 5:05 p.m. Saturday, ROOT; 630 AM

Who shows up on the mound Saturday night for the Rockies, Dr. Jekyll or Mr. Hyde? Over his last two starts, Rusin has been both. Throwing with precision, the left-hander pitched a five-hit shutout against the Padres at Coors Field on Aug. 16. He followed that with an ugly outing against the Mets last Sunday, getting raked for 11 runs and 12 hits in just two innings. He is 1-2 with a 4.19 ERA in four starts against the Pirates.

Happ, acquired from Seattle at the trade deadline, has been terrific for Pittsburgh, going 2-1 in four starts with a 2.08 ERA. The left-hander earned his second win as a Pirate on Monday at Miami, pitching six shutout innings.

Sunday: Rockies’ Jorge De La Rosa (7-6, 4.61 ERA) at Pirates’ Charlie Morton (8-5, 4.20), 11:35 a.m., ROOT

Monday: Diamondbacks’ Patrick Corbin (3-3, 3.78) at Rockies’ Chad Bettis (6-4, 4.69), 6:40 p.m., ROOT

Tuesday’s first game: Diamondbacks’ Rubby De La Rosa (11-6, 4.46) at Rockies’ Yohan Flande (3-1, 4.09), 1:10 p.m., no TV

Tuesday’s second game: Diamondbacks’ Randall Delgado (4-3, 3.15) at Rockies’ TBA, 6:40 p.m., ROOT

Patrick Saunders, The Denver Post