Balloon sellers wait for customers in this 2014 photo. (Photo by Kim Kyung-Hoon/Reuters)

Helium is pretty cool stuff. Even near absolute zero, it won't freeze. Scientists use it in quantum computers, among all other kinds of experiments. It's fantastically light, but it won't explode (unlike hydrogen, for example). Doctors use it to help some newborn babies breathe.

And the world is running out of it. Known supplies on earth will last another 40 years or so, by some estimates.

Meanwhile, the federal government has been selling off its stockpile of helium over the past two decades at Congress's insistence. An auction of gas from the national reserve outside Amarillo, Texas, didn't go as expected last year, according to a report by the Government Accountability Office. The government made a lot of money at the sale, but the winners may have been able to afford to pay higher prices only because they had special access via pipeline to the reserve.

As Colby Bermel reports in National Journal, A House committee will be hearing from people who are dissatisfied with the results of the auction on Wednesday.

On the one hand, if the complaints about last year's auction are accurate, the sale could be a classic example of the risks involved in privatizing a public resource. Those with the best access can corner the market on what the government is selling and turn a profit, which seems unfair. At the same time, it's hard to say what price really would be fair when it comes to a crucial and limited natural resource that no one knows how to replace.

The good news: at least there's plenty of helium on the moon.

Welcome to Wonkbook. To subscribe by e-mail, click here. Send comments, criticism or ideas to Wonkbook at Washpost dot com. Follow Wonkblog on Twitter and Facebook.

What's in Wonkbook: 1) Greek debt 2) Opinions, including Willie Nelson on monopolies in poultry 3) What happened to all the kids at the border, and more

1. Top story: A deadline for Greece

Greece has until the end of the week. "Eurozone leaders set Greece a Sunday deadline to come up with new and even-tougher economic measures if the country wants to avoid defaulting on the European Central Bank and crashing out of the currency union. As a sweetener for such a deal, leaders raised the possibility of some short-term financing to help Athens make a July 20 payment and—most important for Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras—action down the road to relieve Greece’s crushing debt burden. ... Without some new cash in the coming weeks, Greece won’t be able to make the €3.5 billion ($3.8 billion) bond payment to the ECB, leading to the country’s second default in less than a month. Such a nonpayment could push the ECB to cut emergency lending to Greek banks—a move that would send the country’s financial system into meltdown and force the government to print its own money to recapitalize them." Gabriele Steinhauser and Matthew Dalton in The Wall Street Journal.

Frustrated German politicians and voters oppose a deal. "'Of course we do not want to abandon the Greeks, but they do not have to be a member of the euro zone in order to receive help,' said Christian von Stetten, a lawmaker from German Chancellor Angela Merkel's Christian Democratic Union, summarizing an increasingly prevalent view in the German capital. ... The mounting German anger after the Greek referendum on Sunday is a major challenge for Merkel, who, as the euro zone’s most powerful leader, needs to hold together its fractious members while preserving her domestic standing. She does not want to be blamed for a sudden Greek exit from the euro zone, but giving away too much would cost her at home. France and others are starting to break away, calling for a softened deal in the aftermath of the referendum. Merkel's electorate, however, has had no such turnabout. Nor have her political allies." Michael Birnbaum in The Washington Post.

President Obama spoke by phone with Tsipras and Merkel Tuesday. "The White House has urged Greek and European officials to reach an compromise that allows Greece to remain in the eurozone. But the U.S. is not playing a leading role in brokering an agreement." Jordan Fabian in The Hill.

What if the International Monetary Fund gave Greece a break? Athens's request for an extension "will soon go to the IMF’s board for what should be a vigorous discussion. Since the early 1980s the IMF has steadfastly refused to consider granting members more time to pay their debts to the fund. To be the international financial system's lender of last resort the IMF has long insisted it needs 'super seniority' as a creditor. Missing a payment to the fund is like failing to repay a beneficent grandmother who helps you out when things have got so bad no one else will. It does not go down well with the family and casts a shadow over all conversations that follow. But what happens if your grandmother is telling your uncles and aunts to give you a break? Should she not be willing to do so as well? The IMF is, of course, a long way from being a genial granny." Shawn Donnan in The Financial Times.

PORTER: Europe is forgetting about Germany's debt, forgiven in 1953. "The 20th century offers a rich road map of policy failure and success addressing sovereign debt crises. The good news is that by now economists generally understand the contours of a successful approach. The bad news is that too many policy makers still take too long to heed their advice — insisting on repeating failed policies first. ... The recurring, historical pattern? Major debt overhangs are only solved after deep write-downs of the debt’s face value. The longer it takes for the debt to be cut, the bigger the necessary write-down will turn out to be. Nobody should understand this better than the Germans. It’s not just that they benefited from the deal in 1953, which underpinned Germany’s postwar economic miracle. Twenty years earlier, Germany defaulted on its debts from World War I, after undergoing a bout of hyperinflation and economic depression that helped usher Hitler to power." The New York Times.

2. Top opinions

Poultry corporations are curtailing farmers' rights, write musician Willie Nelson and Rep. Marcy Kaptur (D-Ohio). "Growers reported retaliation in the form of canceled contracts, substandard chicks and feed, unannounced audits, rigged prices and expensive upgrade requirements if they chose to speak publicly or to their congressional representatives, or to organize with fellow growers to defend their interests. How can this be? The story of the modern poultry industry is one of corporate consolidation, where companies such as Tyson, Perdue, Pilgrim’s Pride and Koch Foods exert almost complete control over farmers. ... Many areas have only one processing facility where farmers can deliver their chickens, creating localized monopolies. This lack of competition means many growers have to accept whatever terms they are offered." The Washington Post.

The recycling industry has failed to change with technology, writes author and journalist Adam Minter. "Unfortunately, the industry failed to change its infrastructure in response to America's changing reading habits. The high-tech Municipal Recycling Facilities that many recycling companies built during the recycling boom of the 1990s and 2000s were designed to handle -- and profit from -- lots and lots of paper. The recycling industry managed to ignore the hollowing out of its business model for a few years because China's commodity boom drove up the price of most recyclables, including paper. But once the commodity boom went bust in the early 2010s, U.S. recyclers lost their cover." Bloomberg View.

KIMMELMAN: The Hudson River needs new tunnels. "Passenger traffic under the Hudson River — and by association a hefty chunk of the nation’s economy — relies on a couple of broken-down, century-old tunnels strained to capacity. ... In 2010, Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey killed a plan called ARC to add tunnels. Despite federal assurances to the contrary, he claimed potential cost overruns could leave his state holding the bag. Instead, Governor Christie directed money already set aside for the tunnels (including billions from the Port Authority) to roadway projects. Considering the Hudson is a chokepoint for passenger rail traffic all the way from Boston to Washington and even beyond, that move left the whole Eastern Seaboard transportation network in a highly precarious position." The New York Times.

3. In case you missed it

The Obama administration issues major new rules on housing segregation. "When the Fair Housing Act was passed in 1968, it barred the outright racial discrimination that was then routine. It also required the government to go one step further — to actively dismantle segregation and foster integration in its place — a mandate that for decades has been largely forgotten, neglected and unenforced. Now, on Wednesday, the Obama administration will announce long-awaited rules designed to repair the law’s unfulfilled promise and promote the kind of racially integrated neighborhoods that have long eluded deeply segregated cities like Chicago and Baltimore. The new rules, a top demand of civil-rights groups, will require cities and towns all over the country to scrutinize their housing patterns for racial bias and to publicly report, every three to five years, the results. Communities will also have to set goals, which will be tracked over time, for how they will further reduce segregation." Emily Badger in The Washington Post.

Will Congress extend bankruptcy protections to Puerto Rico? "Members of Congress are stuck between conflicting forces. Wall Street executives—who remain powerful brokers in the 2016 election—will likely suffer losses if Puerto Rico is allowed to move forward with bankruptcy, and U.S. bondholders are not paid. Conservative campaign backers also may be skeptical of lending a hand to a fiscally liberal territory, making it harder for Republicans to back the plan. But presidential candidates and lawmakers also know that they must remain in good favor with millions of Puerto Rican voters in the U.S. who still have strong ties to the territory and could make a major difference for them in a swing state like Florida." Lauren Fox in National Journal.

Republicans could use spending bills to attack Obamacare. "Congressional Republicans are not going to leave the law alone. They will keep trying to chip away at it and pick off unpopular or controversial pieces of the Affordable Care Act. ... The medical-device tax that helps pay for the ACA has become perhaps Republicans' top repeal target. They have also long wanted to nix a Medicare advisory board created by the law. And if the White House won't agree to those provisions on their own, conservatives are floating the idea of attaching them to must-pass bills to test the administration's resolve. Another government shutdown over Obamacare suddenly isn't so far-fetched." Dylan Scott in National Journal.

Women are saving money on birth control because of the law. "Out-of-pocket spending on most major birth control methods fell sharply in the months after the Affordable Care Act began requiring insurance plans to cover contraception at no cost to women, a new study has found. Spending on the pill, the most popular form of prescription birth control, dropped by about half in the first six months of 2013, compared with the same period in 2012, before the mandate took effect. ... Cost has long been a major obstacle to women getting birth control, and declines in what they pay for contraceptives have the potential to increase access and reduce unplanned pregnancies. About half of the 6.6 million pregnancies a year in the United States are unintended, far higher than in most developed countries." Sabrina Tavernise in The New York Times.

Hillary Rodham Clinton gave an interview. "Hillary Clinton used her first nationally televised interview as a presidential candidate to attack the Republican party for failing to denounce Donald Trump's much-publicized comments on Mexican immigrants. ... On the subject of her use of a private server for e-mails as Secretary of State, she said everything she did was appropriate. ... Clinton appeared less willing to discuss her Democratic opponent in the presidential primary -- Vermont Independent Senator Bernie Sanders. When asked about why Sanders is pulling large crowds in cities across the country, she said that she always expected the race to be competitive and repeated that she's happy about how her campaign is going." Arit John for Bloomberg.

The Obama administration has resolved the border crisis -- for now. "The administration has increased the number of shelters and beds for unaccompanied minors. Images of young kids crossing the border have faded from the front pages and from cable news as their numbers decreased. But immigration advocates warn that the problem isn't over. ... Experts say a variety of factors contributed to this change: Additional manpower was dispatched to the border. The administration began a media campaign in the Northern Triangle. And the U.S. worked with Mexico and Central America in an attempt to curb the influx of unaccompanied minors, according to a Migration Policy Institute report... But the report raises skepticism that these efforts will yield lasting change." Rachel Roubein in National Journal.