HERE is part two of my posting on how the Obamacare and contraception saga looks to people in Europe who are interested in law and religion.

Europeans, no less than Americans, are well acquainted with the idea that people of fervent religious faith may seek the right to opt out of activities that most other people are expected or obliged to undertake. To that extent, America's Supreme Court hearings over the contraception mandate look familiar on this side of the Atlantic. But in Europe, the people who demand exceptions mostly fall into two categories: religious bodies and their immediate affiliates, and professionals in the field of health.

In many European countries, exceptions on grounds of conscience have been regarded as a political necessity whenever legislation on touchstone moral issues has been liberalised. In Ireland, where conservative Catholic sentiment remains strong (see picture) even now, the legal sale of contraceptives faced huge hurdles when it was introduced in 1979; and it was duly agreed that anybody who was asked to be involved at any stage in the sale or distribution of such items could avoid that duty on religious grounds. Britain's pharmacists were allowed by their self-regulatory agency to opt out of selling the morning-after pill; this is controversial. Italy's abortion law permits doctors to decline, and this has real consequences; at least half the country's gynaecologists refuse to carry out the procedure. In Belgium, health-care workers can decline to participate in euthanasia (which is legal) or abortion. Britain's abortion law, dating from 1967, allows doctors and nurses to opt out; two Scottish midwives are fighting a legal battle for the right to avoid even indirect involvement with terminations.

In staunchly Catholic Poland, access to abortion is limited both by the law and by the fact that many doctors conscientiously object. This has earned the country a rebuke from the European Court of Human Rights. A Polish woman who virtually lost her eyesight as a result of a pregnancy (as she had been warned was likely to happen) won damages at the Strasbourg court after she complained that her efforts to secure a termination were rejected by doctors. But in Europe's highest court, no less than America's, opinions can differ; one judge dissented from that ruling, saying that the woman's child—six years old at the time—had "a right to be born". In another case two French pharmacists, who fell foul of their country's law after refusing to sell contraceptives, made an unsuccessful appeal to the European Court; their obligations as vendors were deemed to trump their objections of conscience.

On the whole, the Strasbourg court has a record of defending secularism; it has upheld the right of France and Turkey to restrict headscarves and other forms of religiously-motivated dress. But it did affirm the right of a British Airways employee to wear a small cross with her uniform; this was hailed as a victory for individual acts of conscience, even if they were not based on a formal religious requirement, as long as no countervailing rights were at stake.

At least one other sort of religious exception is familiar in Europe. The European Union's employment directive says that "churches or other public and private organisations the ethos of which is based on religion and belief" do have a right to discriminate in their hiring policy: in other words, a church can insist that people who perform its rites or teach its dogmas do actually adhere to the relevant beliefs, and if it believes the priesthood should be confined to one gender, it can act on that belief. When this directive was translated into British law, there were hard arguments over how wide an exception religious bodies should be allowed, and only a narrow right to discriminate was granted.

The really unusual thing about the Obamacare case, from a European perspective, is the fact that corporations, rather than individual believers or health workers, are seeking a conscience-based opt out. First, the very idea that private firms have a wide margin of discretion over their employees' health-care arrangements is relatively unfamiliar to some Europeans, accustomed to free medical care or compulsory insurance. And in Europe's comparatively secular societies, the idea of corporations taking a conservative stance on touchstone ethical issues is harder to conceive—if only because being "branded" as religious might alienate quite a lot of godless consumers.