Michael Jennings (Photo: Provided )

Michael Jennings, M.D., is chief clinical officer at The Christ Hospital and president of the St. Vincent de Paul Charitable Pharmacy Board of Directors.

As a Hamilton County taxpayer, I appreciate the scrutiny given to the tax levy review process and want my dollars to be spent wisely. As a physician and health care provider, there’s no wiser investment than the programs funded by the Hamilton County Indigent Care Levy, including the St. Vincent de Paul Charitable Pharmacy.

In this tumultuous time for health care, Hamilton County Commissioners Chris Monzel, Greg Hartmann and Todd Portune took the long view to realize the continued need for the Hamilton County indigent care levy, and the Tax Levy Review Committee responsibly recommended the levy continue at the current millage. On Aug. 6, the commissioners approved the Health and Hospitalization Levy, also known as the indigent care levy, for the November 2014 ballot.

Current agencies receiving levy money are widely recognized for their collaborative, cost-effective delivery of services to local residents. The University of Cincinnati Medical Center, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center and other levy recipients provide a wide variety of health care services to the indigent. While all of us in the health care system bear some of the burden, we appreciate having this well-knit safety net in our community.

In the current health care climate, there can be a misperception that the Affordable Care Act has completely solved the problem of the uninsured. Although the uninsured rate is down statewide, those living in poverty remain more likely to experience health insurance instability. The reality is that many of the uninsured will become the underinsured with all the co-pays and deductibles that working poor patients cannot afford. The ACA does not provide universal health care – many of the working poor who are eligible for expanded Medicaid or the health care exchange will still have difficulty affording premiums and co-pays. This is exactly what we are seeing at the St. Vincent de Paul Charitable Pharmacy, which has been the last-resort pharmacy for Southwest Ohio, particularly Hamilton County, since 2006 and part of the indigent care levy since 2012.

The St. Vincent de Paul pharmacy fills a gap in services for virtually every other health care system in our county and is often the missing piece for other programs funded by levy dollars. It’s so gratifying to see everything work in concert – levy dollars are used to invest in the services that diagnose and treat medical or mental health conditions, and to further secure that investment, the pharmacy provides the needed medicine to ensure improved health and increased productivity. Thanks to the support from the indigent care levy, the St. Vincent de Paul pharmacy continues to serve a diverse cross-section of Hamilton County residents, half of whom are coming from suburban neighborhoods and many of whom have found they need help for the first time in their lives.

The indigent care levy has been placed on the ballot for a three-year renewal cycle as we continue to evaluate the effects of federal and state health care changes. County officials have done their job; now it’s time for us voters to do our job and pass the indigent care levy on Nov. 4.

Read or Share this story: http://cin.ci/1oh5hgk