Stephen Greenway was elected the new Chairman of the Georgia Association of College Republicans at today’s convention. Greenway is a rising junior at the University of Georgia. He succeeds two-term chairman Will Kremer.

Also elected at the convention were Jessica Burnette from Georgia State University as Vice-Chairman, Cody Hall of the University of Georgia as Secretary, and Nick Kovakenko from Emory University as Treasurer. Each of the new officers were elected by unanimous vote.

Prior to his election, Greenway addressed the convention delegates gathered in the State Senate chamber. Here are his remarks, as prepared for delivery:

I have greatly enjoyed this time together. It has been wonderful meeting everyone and talking about issues, candidates, and especially the role that we will play in shaping the future of the GOP and the size of our Big Tent in this new century.

I humbly accept the chairmanship of the Georgia Association of College Republicans, with high hopes for this organization and great faith in the team that will lead it. It is an honor to have your confidence and support. The strength of our association is our members, our door-knockers and phone-callers, along with every single College Republican across this state who believes that history can still be made by those that love their country. I am grateful for the chance to lead you into what is going to be a very promising election year for our party in 2016.

The Georgia Association of College Republicans is one of the strongest branches of the College Republican National Committee. We are a national leader and standard-bearer for conservatism amongst university students in Georgia. This body is representative of the very best our party has to offer, and the future of Republican leadership is in this chamber this morning. We are on the edge of taking on the torch of the conservative movement. What will we accomplish? What will history say of us? And what kind of party will the Republican Party be when we are its leaders?

These are tough questions for a movement that is so divided over ideological purity and political tactics. While an unpopular president might explain our loss in the 2008 election, the same calculus cannot be applied to 2012. Two years ago we were still struggling to make sense of the Romney defeat. We asked ourselves: “Why had we lost a winnable election, and what long-term changes should we make in the future?”

Since our bitter shortcoming in 2012, we Republicans have made valiant efforts to improve our technology and our outreach strategies. For the Midterms this past cycle, the Georgia Republican Party opened up Victory Offices in every major county in the state, mobilizing volunteers and activists to ensure the election of Governor Nathan Deal and David Perdue. Many of you were on the front lines of these important races, making phone calls, waving signs, posting on Facebook and Twitter, engaging in the process any way you could. We will always remember the sweetness of that November night when the people entrusted to Republicans the hands of government.

But I would caution that this past November’s results are not indicative of a widespread belief in conservative leadership that existed during the time of Dwight Eisenhower and Ronald Reagan. Time and time again, the Republican Party fails to unite America around a set of principles and policy ideas crafted for the modern era. On every one of our college campuses, many of our peers view our party as one that is afraid of the future. We are seen as a party that is constantly reaching into the past, desperate to “take our country back” to some fictional era in which budgets were balanced and borders were blocked; in which hard work cured all ills and people just lifted themselves out of economic despair.

I can’t tell you how many times that I have been talking with my friends about my desire to see women empowered in every area of life, or about my hope that African Americans would one day believe that the criminal justice system wasn’t tainted, or about the compassion and empathy I feel for the impoverished and my longing to see the poor and jobless in Athens and Macon grasp on to that first rung of the ladder upwards, and my peers will tell me “Stephen, you can’t believe in those things. You’re a Republican.”

How did our party get to this point? When did we become the obstructionists, the anti-women, anti-minority, anti-everything party?

Of course these stereotypes are untrue, but we sure do a great job of reinforcing them. When we couldn’t repeal Obamacare, we shut down the government. When a member of our own party tried to craft a comprehensive solution to immigration reform in an attempt to attract much needed Hispanic support to the GOP, we trashed him on talk radio and cable television. When President Obama spoke about the need for women to be paid as much as men when they perform similar tasks in his 2015 State of the Union Address, Speaker of the House John Boehner sat in his chair while the chamber stood and applauded. Now, regardless of whether or not you agree with the particulars of an “Equal Pay for Equal Work” policy, every woman in America saw the embodiment of the Republican Party refusing to stand for them. When the 50th anniversary of the march to Montgomery from Selma occurred in March of this year and civil rights leaders gather to remember the courage of those protestors, only one member of the Republican congressional leadership attended.

When such patriots as Bob Dole and Colin Powell say things like they don’t recognize the Republican Party any more, then our tent has gotten awfully small and we have certainly lost our way.

After six years of a political philosophy that has championed mostly negativity, ideological purity, and obstruction, I think that it’s time for a new direction. “Stop Hillary” is not a mantra for a party that seeks to grow and attract and reinvigorate Millennials. Our generation is so exhausted from the hyper-partisanship that has characterized the last decade of American politics. The health of the nation is suffering from it, and our friends across our campuses know it. Disgusted by the inability of Washington to set ideology and partisan interests aside, our classmates have rarely seen their representatives sincerely work towards policy solutions that are for the betterment of a nation that is failing to restore its economic supremacy and that is inconsistently responding to the dangers of a post-Cold War world.

Our classmates think the current system only responds to those entities with the largest wallets or the highest number of hired lobbyists. You and I may look at Atlanta or D.C. and say “Well that’s just politics as usual,” but our friends on our campus say “that’s the politics I never wanted.” They stopped coming to our weekly meetings a long time ago because they’ve lost faith in the idea that politics can be anything more than politics. Our mission is to prove them wrong. The integrity of the Republic that we so love can only be ensured if the people truly believe that their democracy answers not to super PACs or partisans, but to them.

If we new conservatives think that we are fit are to lead the state of Georgia and the country out of this political depression, we best be armed with policies and platforms that empower the entrepreneurs, businesses, and families that are working tirelessly each day to transition America into the new economy. As College Republicans, we need to understand that we are on the front lines of political change. Our activism can inspire and encourage others to become part of the answer to the dysfunction and base politics that are currently defining Washington. Our meetings can welcome those students who care deeply about the future of Georgia and about the direction of the country, but believe that the current trajectory equates to a managed decline of American exceptionalism. Together, we can lift candidates and ideas up that reflect our conviction that Georgia should be on a path to national leadership in education, transportation, criminal justice reform, and economic growth.

Together, we can spread the word from Georgia Southern to Berry College that there are still young people who treasure in their hearts the words of Abraham Lincoln, who said “that this nation shall have a new birth of freedom—that government of the people, by the people, for the people shall not perish from the earth.” The opening up of this Big Tent begins with you and with every student that your chapter reaches out to in the coming year. May you shake your classmates from apathy; may you rally them to care about the issues that will shape their future; and may you show them that conservative leadership means innovative responses to economic malaise and strong answers to foreign dangers. We can redefine this party to our generation if we show what small, smart governance can accomplish in the way of affecting positive change in American life.

Though young as we are, we Millennials have already occupied a unique time in history. From the attacks on September 11th to the Great Recession, we have grown up in a turbulent time of constant change. We as a country have been knocked down, and we’ve got scars and bruises. We’ve made mistakes and had failures, but we always get back on our feet. It’s just what we do as a people. Because of the difficulties that we as a generation have lived through, we know that the United States of America cannot afford to govern from crisis to crisis, cliff to cliff, any longer. It is time for our party to lead, to be the answer to the problems that prevent America from succeeding each year.

Our country demands much more from the party of Reagan than a message of “No.” For it was President Reagan who stated that the challenges before America will require “our best effort and our willingness to believe in ourselves and to believe in our capacity to perform great deeds, to believe that together with God’s help we can and will resolve the problems which now confront us.” The great American victories of the 20th century can be repeated, but only if our generation responds to the call to weather these storms together, to unite in order to solve problems, and to honor the promise engraved in monuments and in the hearts of every one of us: that no matter our differences, the torch of freedom, of democracy, of opportunity will forever burn in this land. And it will truly light the world.

Thank you.