ASHBURN, Va. (WJLA) - Women across the country are finding themselves in a birth control bind, with the cost of their bills going up unexpectedly. The 7 On Your Side I-Team found it may be because of misinterpretation of the health care law.

Women are fighting back, claiming insurance companies are skirting around a law that was supposed to have them covered.

As a stay-at-home mom, Ashburn's Stephanie Kamerman keeps a close eye on her family's spending. She was surprised to find the birth control she was shelling out a monthly $30 copay for suddenly tripled in cost.

"It was a sticker shock," she said. "I feel blessed we can afford it. I know there's a lot of women out there that are probably looking at their receipts [wondering], 'How am I going to be able to budget this?'"

Kamerman says she's now budgeting because of the Affordable Care Act (ACA). Once it took effect, she says she had to pay out of pocket for a birth control method called Nuva Ring that releases hormones once inserted.

"This is an issue that affects people around the country," said reproductive rights activist Erin Matson.

Matson says that while the ACA was supposed to make birth control coverage easy, in some cases, it's made things worse for women.

"It's because insurance companies are exploiting the law and they're trying to see what they can get away with right now," she said.

The law clearly states women should get access to the full range of FDA-approved contraception, which includes a Nuva Ring. But the language allows companies to offer generic drugs to control costs. In Kamerman's case, she says her insurer offered to cover the pill as an alternative to Nuva Ring.

"The hormones you take via the pills is considered their generic equivalent, but the pill just doesn't work for me," she said.

"Contraceptives are not one and the same, and it's just simply wrongheaded to believe that they are interchangeable," Matson said.

Although the feds made the law, it's up to states to police it. Advocates say you can file a complaint with your state's insurance commission, something Kamerman did.

"I'm pretty angry about it, only because they shouldn't decide what they should cover," she said. "My doctor wrote a prescription for a reason and they should cover it."

Kamerman's insurance company, United Healthcare, asked ABC7 to get her permission to comment specifically about her case, but then gave a general answer to 7 On Your Side's questions. The United Healthcare representative said the company offers a wide selection of options with no copay or deductible, but if patients choose from wider options, they may come with a cost and patients should consult their doctors.