Jan 6, 2015 4:00 PM Jan 6, 2015 4:00 PM

A family fled their vacation home in East Hampton’s Northwest on New Year’s Day as a wind-whipped fire that started in the garage quickly engulfed the entire structure.



At least four members of the family, and a massage therapist who was visiting, were in the house on Hedges Banks Drive, which is owned by women’s activist Merle Hoffman, when the fire broke out and spread rapidly, according to witnesses.



None of the occupants was hurt, but all were rattled by the dramatic events, neighbors said. A family dog made it out of the house, along with the occupants, but as many as three cats were also in the house, and witnesses said they didn’t see if they made it out.



Family members told neighbors and other bystanders that they had no idea how the fire started.



“They had a hard time calling the fire department at first, because they had no reception [on their cellphones],” said Aubrey Baratta, an area resident who was nearby when the fire started, of the family members who fled the burning building. “The firefighters got there so fast, but I would say probably three-quarters of [the house] was already hit.”



East Hampton Town Fire Marshal David Browne said the cause of the fire is still under investigation, but that it does not appear to be suspicious in nature. “We know the origin was reported early on as being from a garbage can,” he said by phone on January 6.



By the time firefighters arrived, flames had already broken through the roof of the house, East Hampton Fire Department Chief Richard Osterberg said. He said it appeared as though the fire had started in the garage of the house and was spread quickly by the stiff northerly breezes blowing through the bayfront neighborhood on New Year’s Day.



Chief Osterberg, who had been attending the swearing-in ceremony for new chiefs at the Springs Fire Department, said that he could already see the smoke from the fire as he raced down Three Mile Harbor Road.



“There was a good wind blowing, and it just pushed [the fire] through the house,” Chief Osterberg said. “It was a newer house, so there are a lot of composites, not wood framing … they burn a lot hotter than traditional wood does. And there were two cars in the garage burning as well. Thank God everyone got out of the house.”



Chief Osterberg said that ultimately the fire became so intense that he had to pull his firefighters out of the interior of the structure, which was showing signs of collapsing.



In all, some 100 firefighters from six departments—including Springs, Sag Harbor, Montauk, Amagansett and Bridgehampton in addition to East Hampton—were either on the scene or on standby. Even after the last apparent flames had been extinguished, the East Hampton Fire Department had to hire excavating equipment from Keith Grimes Inc. to scoop out debris from the foundation, to ensure that there were no smoldering embers in the rubble of the former house.