HANNA CITY — Mike Lewis has been the rescuer on the ladder, but before Thursday, he had never been the guy on the burning roof.

That’s where Lewis, a former Limestone volunteer firefighter and Farmington police officer, and his three young children waited while their rural Hanna City home blazed.

Firefighters from the Logan-Trivoli Fire Protection District arrived at 2903 N. Eden Road within moments, lowering the family to safety. Lewis described the ordeal Tuesday at the Peoria County Sheriff’s Office, where he and his wife, Laurie, accepted two $250 gift cards from the Fraternal Order of Police Lodge 157.

“I did this for so many years, and I never understood what it meant to people to be rescued,” Lewis, 38, said. “I am forever blessed. I can never repay these guys. We went from having everything to having nothing in 30 minutes. … The family of emergency personnel has been critical in rebuilding our lives.”

A wailing fire alarm shocked Lewis awake a few minutes before midnight, when the smoke was bright white. He grabbed his phone, dialed 911 and headed to his son’s room. Laurie, a nurse, wasn’t home at the time.

“After the first few seconds, I knew I was in trouble,” said Lewis, who served as a Limestone firefighter more than 10 years until he was hurt on the job in 2004. “The house went to uncomfortably hot in 30 seconds.”

The smoke darkened. Lewis remembers screams and scrapes — his children yelling for help, his dogs’ paws scrambling on hard floor downstairs as the animals collapsed.

Three-year-old Ted didn’t want to let go of his dad when he became the first Lewis child thrust through a kicked out window onto the roof.

“He was screaming at me, ‘Daddy, don’t leave me here,’ ” Lewis said.

The smoke by then was black. The father crawled to 5-year-old Taylor’s room and put her out on the roof with her little brother. Lewis plunged back into the murk, guessing from the sound of 6-year-old Jessie’s last scream that she had gotten out of bed and moved to the front of her room.

He was correct: Jessie had opened her window and passed out from the rush of smoke seeking any way to escape. Her father found her on the floor by feel.

“I remember grabbing her and just trying to go, but that’s all. I don’t remember carrying her out onto the roof,” Lewis said. “By the time I got out and looked at the back of my house, all I saw was orange.”

The pets perished. Insurance is covering the Lewis family’s stay at a Peoria hotel as they plan how to rebuild. But donors like the sheriff’s deputies and others who have set up an account for the family at Farmington Bank have immediately brought back some semblance of holiday spirit, if not normalcy.

“My kids will have Christmas,” Lewis said. “They’re just so young to be dealing with all this.”

___

How to help

An account to benefit the Lewis family, who lost their rural Hanna City home to fire last week, has been opened at Bank of Farmington. Donations can be sent to the bank or call 245-2441 for more information.

Bank of Farmington

1620 N. Main St.

P.O. Box 320

Farmington, IL 61531

___

Matt Buedel can be reached at 686-3154 or mbuedel@pjstar.com. Follow him on Twitter @JournoBuedel.