The move is part of the govt’s strategy to curb the consumption of Gudumba, a cheap, spurious liquor made in large parts of the state

Hyderabad: Move over subsidized rations, fuel, drinking water, and idlis; the Telangana government will soon begin supplying cheap subsidized liquor to its population.

This is part of the government’s strategy to curb the consumption of Gudumba, a cheap, spurious liquor made in large parts of the state.

The government hopes affordable liquor will discourage people from consuming Gudumba, which has sometimes caused deaths.

“Saving people’s health is important,” chief minister K. Chandrashekar Rao was quoted in a statement sent from his office. “Families should be happy. They should lead healthy lives. If cheap liquor is available at lower prices, I am confident people will not drink Gudumba,” Rao said.

The Telangana government’s move is in contrast to other southern states such as Kerala, which is in the process of closing down booze shops in a phased manner. Political parties in Tamil Nadu have been pushing for a ban on liquor shops in the state. United Andhra Pradesh (before Telangana was bifurcated in June last year) had also seen spells of prohibition, when sale of liquor was banned.

Cheap liquor will be manufactured under the government’s supervision and distributed through its channels. Chief minister Rao’s office took care to point out that providing liquor at subsidized rates will mean a loss to the exchequer.

“Sales of cheap liquor will lead to lower revenues for the government. Yet, it is fine,” said Rao.

In the same tone, KCR, as Rao is popularly called, has declared a war against the Gudumba makers.

At a meeting with top officials to review the new excise policy, he identified a strong network that exists from villages, where Gudumba is manufactured, to sale points across the state. Illicitly brewed liquor is consumed at what are called belt shops.

“We have to crush the network,” KCR told officials. “If necessary, we should enforce PD (Preventive Detention) Act on those who make Gudumba,” the chief minister said, asking the police and excise departments to collaborate to end the menace. The government will also reward informants.

Telangana’s new excise policy will take effect from 1 October.