Photo

Good Friday morning from Washington, where the government funding bill squeaked through after a day of nail-biting in the House, President Obama skipped out of the photo line at the White House Christmas party to take care of congressional business, and Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts is finding new friends in Obama world.

The near-death experience of a bipartisan, governmentwide funding bill on Thursday highlighted a fundamental problem with Congress at the moment: the lost art of compromise.

As veteran lawmakers and congressional aides watched the struggles of a measure that was backed by the majority leadership of both the House and the Senate as well as the White House, they acknowledged that the deep partisanship and procedural disorder of recent years have taken a significant toll on the ability of the House and the Senate to get things done.

“You have a real breakdown in the institution, and this is the result of that breakdown,” said Representative Doc Hastings, the retiring Washington Republican. He presided over much of the House session as the funding measure came under attack from two directions just hours before the government was to run out of money. It finally passed on a vote of 219 to 206 just before 10 p.m.

With both parties increasingly playing to their base constituencies, lawmakers are apt to oppose any legislation that does not fully meet their demands even if their own leaders had a hand in creating it.

In this case, conservative Republicans deserted the bill because they saw it as doing nothing to challenge Mr. Obama on his immigration policy. Many House Democrats, encouraged by their leader, Nancy Pelosi, refused to vote for a measure that contained many provisions they favored because of a single provision they saw as too generous to Wall Street banks.

Congress used to be a place where lawmakers tried to cut the best deal they could. Then they would back the final product even if it had elements they didn’t like as a way to advance their own priorities. If every lawmaker insists on ideological perfection in every bill, not much can get done.

— Carl Hulse

A group of more than 300 former campaign staff members for President Obama will release an open letter on Friday morning calling for Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts to seek the Democratic Party’s nomination for president.

The signers each worked on Mr. Obama’s successful White House campaigns or at his political organization, now called Organizing for Action, mostly in midlevel jobs as field organizers or as part of the campaigns’ groundbreaking data and technology efforts. They include Rajeev Chopra, who served as chief information officer for both of Mr. Obama’s presidential bids; Catherine Bracy, who directed the 2012 campaign’s tech field office in San Francisco; and Judith Freeman, who served as new media field manager on the 2008 campaign.

Their open support for Ms. Warren is a stark departure from the path taken by most senior Obama veterans, many of whom have attached themselves to “super PACs” and nonprofit groups helping to pave the way for Hillary Rodham Clinton‘s likely presidential bid.

“These former Obama staffers are joining the growing momentum behind Elizabeth Warren because we believe in Warren’s vision for our country, and we’d love to see her run in 2016,” said Erica Sagrans, an Obama alum who now the campaign manager for Ready for Warren, a pro-Warren super PAC.

While the letter does not mention Mrs. Clinton, its language suggests that her nascent campaign — already pre-emptively embraced by many in the Democratic establishment — deserves a challenge from Ms. Warren.

“We believed in an unlikely candidate who no one thought had a chance,” the letter states. “Rising income inequality is the challenge of our times, and we want someone who will stand up for working families and take on the Wall Street banks and special interests that took down our economy.”

The letter is the latest in a series of overlapping efforts by liberal organizations, donors and others to pull Ms. Warren into the race.

— Nicholas Confessore

Any visitor to the Capitol must have wondered what happened on Thursday afternoon when the House went into an unexpected break and a loud wail went through the congressional press corps followed by this strange exclamation: “Blue screen!”

Here’s the backstory. In recent years, the sign of an imminent legislative collapse — and a potentially long day and night ahead — was signaled by the House suddenly going into recess with no explanation. C-Span, which is on most television monitors around the Capitol, would respond by showing a blue screen for long stretches with a notice that the House was in recess subject to the call of the chair.

It quickly became known as the Blue Screen of Death because it meant that some piece of legislation was in serious trouble.

On Thursday, the blue screen was initially replaced by a nice photo of the Capitol and video from earlier debate.

But it looked like a Blue Screen of Death just the same.

— Carl Hulse

Even the federal government is giving up on print.

The venerable Government Printing Office, which produces reams of government documents for bureaucratic consumption and sells them to the general public, is about to be rebranded, acknowledging the fact that the office doesn’t print that much anymore.

A provision in the omnibus spending measure would change the name of the Government Printing Office, which has operated under that name since 1861, to the “Government Publishing Office.” It’s part of a shift in strategy that the office’s leadership has been promoting for several years.

“G.P.O. is transforming from a print-centric to a content-centric publishing operation,” Davita Vance-Cooks, the head of the office, said in congressional testimony last year.

According to a 2013 report on the office’s future, the demand for federal print publications had declined by half over the previous two decades. That’s a challenge for the office, because it gets only a small amount of funding from Congress each year and relies on government agencies that use it to publish documents and from sales of documents to the public.

So how is the office going to refine its mission for the digital age? Its plans involve using the Internet to better preserve and search for government documents, and developing new ways of delivering information to its customers, such as mobile apps and e-books.

— Andrew Siddons

President Obama meets with Prince Mohammed bin Nayef bin Abdulaziz Al Saud, Saudi Arabia’s interior minister, at the White House to discuss efforts to contain the Islamic State.

The Senate could vote on a $585 billion Defense Department bill.

Margaret Hamburg, the commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, speaks at a workshop about finding an Ebola vaccine.

The Department of Labor releases its latest reading on inflation at 8:30 a.m.

As the House of Representatives tried to avert a government shutdown on Thursday night, President Obama was mingling across town with much of Washington’s press corps.

The White House holds several holiday parties every December. On Thursday night, a few hundred print journalists turned up to take photos with the president and first lady and nibble on stone crab claws, shrimp and lamb chops while they admired the glittering decorations in the mansion’s first floor.

Of course, with the drama unfolding at the Capitol, Mr. Obama could not completely focus on socializing.

A tipster told First Draft that at one point in the evening, Katie Fallon, Mr. Obama’s legislative affairs director, dashed to the bottom floor of the East Wing, past a line of people waiting to take pictures with the president. Five minutes later, Mr. Obama jogged past the line of waiting reporters and editors and smiled.

“I’ve got to keep the government open,” he said. “I’ll be right back.”

— Alan Rappeport

The director of the C.I.A. defended the agency’s interrogation tactics but avoided the issue of torture in a rare news conference.

A move to roll back a financial regulation that big banks dislike nearly scuttled the passage of the House’s $1.1 trillion spending bill.

The Senate Foreign Relations Committee voted to officially authorize the use of force against the militant group the Islamic State.

William P. Wilson, the television aide for Senator John F. Kennedy in his 1960 presidential debate against Richard M. Nixon, died at 86.

Bloomberg reports that Jeb Bush’s ties to private equity could pose problems similar to what Mitt Romney faced in 2012 if he decides to run for president.

Senator Mark Udall, Democrat of Colorado, tells Esquire that the full C.I.A. torture report needs to be declassified.

The State Department is failing to turn over government documents that cover Hillary Rodham Clinton’s tenure as secretary of state to The Associated Press and other organizations that have filed Freedom of Information Act requests.

Former Gov. Ed Rendell of Pennsylvania offered sharp criticism of Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, according to NJ.com, calling him “pathetic” for being a fan of the Dallas Cowboys.