Von Miller reduced the risk, leaving him in position to increase the reward. No longer in the NFL drug program after staying clean for two years, Miller enters the final year of his contract with added leverage. A positive test will not sideline him for a full season. Because of his clean record and last season’s revamped drug program, Miller starts over. A mistake, which he has shown no signs of making, would only place him back in the program and would not result in a suspension.

It shows how far Miller has come since his career went briefly off the rails two years ago. Miller acknowledged his situation has changed, but insisted it won’t change him. He made changes for the long term, not a two-year window.

“I mean that’s it? I got a long way to go, right? It’s not time to throw the confetti and the balloons. I still got a long way to go,” Miller said Sunday night. “I still got a long way to go to be the type of player I want to be for this organization. So that’s where my mind is right now. Just coming out here having fun and all that other stuff is cool. But I already came to camp with my mind in the moment and wanting to get everybody else better, wanting to inspire everyone else to play great to let this year be the year.”

Miller appears poised for a big season. Outside linebackers have flourished in defensive coordinator Wade Phillips’ 3-4 defense, creating predictions of a 20-sack season for Miller. The Broncos could choose to franchise tag Miller. The template for a long-term deal was provided by Kansas City’s Justin Houston, who received $52.5 million guaranteed last month after a 22-sack season. Miller hears the contract talk, but only when the issue is raised.

“I was happy for Justin — 22 sacks I think he should get a lot more. I have always said before when I am here and I am on the football field, I am grinding. I really don’t think about (the contract) at all,” Miller said. “When I go home I really don’t think about it all. That’s what has worked for me since coming in from college and from my rookie season. I do give it mind when you guys talk about it, but as soon as I am out of this moment I am on to the next thing. I am just trying to be great.”