With a little over three weeks remaining to file federal income tax returns, the IRS announced more than 150 locations throughout South Florida are offering free help in helping people calculate their taxes.

The IRS trains people for the Volunteer Income Tax Assistance program, which offers free basic income tax return preparation in Broward, Palm Beach and Broward counties. The IRS-certified volunteers will be working up until the April 15 deadline to file taxes.

People can call toll-free 1-800-906-9887 to find the closest free tax preparation or they can go online to irs.gov and click on "Get Free Tax Preparation Help."

Waits to reach an IRS operator were taking 10 to 15 minutes on Friday afternoon, according to a recorded message on the toll-free number.

Many people qualify to receive the free tax preparation help, said Michael Dobzinski, IRS spokesman in Plantation.

"We'll generally help people whose incomes are $53,000 or less to prepare their federal income tax returns and provide free electronic filing" he said. "We can also help taxpayers with assistance this year with tax questions relative to the Affordable Care Act."

However, the United Way of Palm Beach County offers free tax help to people with 2014 household income of $60,000 or less.

United Way's assistance can be online or at one of 14 sites in Palm Beach County. Go to TaxesFiledFree.org or call 211 for locations

Meanwhile, the United Way of Broward County has a bus, called the Mobile Resource Center, on the road to provide free tax preparation for those whose household income is $53,000 or less. For a schedule, go to UnitedWayBroward.org/eitc or call Natalie Beasley at 954-453-3765 Monday through Friday.

People wanting their taxes prepared by a volunteer should bring:

• Valid photo ID and Social Security cards or Individual Taxpayer Identification Numbers for themselves, spouses and dependents.

W-2 wage and earnings statements and Forms 1099 interest and dividend statements.

A copy of last year's return and any other information concerning their income and expenses for the 2014 tax year.

Service is provided on a first-come, first-served basis, Dobzinski said.

dgehrke@sunsentinel.com or @donnagehrke