Not that you will hear much about it, but the United States Supreme Court’s decision in the Citizens United case has actually helped to level the playing field of American politics.

Prior to it, conservatives were surprisingly constrained against mounting effect counter arguments to the dishonest, misleading advertisements put up against them by nebulous dark money groups possessed of oh so apple pie sounding names like “Americans for Good Government” and “The Committee to Protect the Future of Our Children.” It was not so much that those on the right lacked the stomach for a good fight; far from it, in fact. It was more a case that conservatives lacked the vast resources consistently available to the left (and coming largely from dues money forcibly extracted from unionized workers) to develop and air any kind of meaningful response.

Thanks to Citizens United, however, the economics of the equation have equalized, which is probably why President Barack Obama and his left-liberal allies in the House and Senate hate the decision so much. They realized immediately it meant conservatives would be able, individually or in consort with one another, to put much-needed resources into fighting back against the liberal smear machine that so dominated American politics from the 1970s into the current decade. Not only that, but it has enabled conservatives to mount an offense, criticizing liberals on issues the left once though it owned, such as the all-too-cozy relationship between certain candidates and the business community.

[Check out our collection of political cartoons on Super PACs.]

Most of America probably thinks that the Republicans are the party of so-called “big business” while the Democrats are busy “fighting for the little guy.” It’s an image the party of FDR, JFK and Jimmy Carter encourage – even if it’s not necessarily true, as demonstrated by a pair of ads recently put up by the conservative Freedom Partners, a group with plans to be a major player in the upcoming elections.

The ads highlight the hypocrisy of Colorado Sen. Mark Udall and Iowa Rep. Bruce Braley – who is running for the Senate seat being vacated by fellow Democrat Tom Harkin – on the health care issue. Udall and Braley are the beneficiaries of ads paid for by the Senate Majority PAC, which wants Nevada’s Harry Reid to stay on as majority leader, that portray them as standing up for ordinary American against the nation’s evil health insurance companies.

What the Senate Majority PAC ads don’t explain, but the Freedom Partners’ spots do, is that while Braley and Udall have supposedly been standing up for the little guy, they’ve been sitting down with folks who support Obamacare – which has been a major boon to the health insurance industry and practically guarantees them a federal bailout if the new health care law does not generate the promised economic activity – and have been taking money from special interests tied to the health insurance industry.

[See a collection of political cartoons on Obamacare.]

Further, thanks to the lack of objectivity among the media, who hesitated to say a negative word about Obamacare as it was being formulated, most people don’t know that the administration worked hand-in-hand with the health insurance industry to develop the legislation. When Republicans do that it’s called “generating the appearance of a conflict of interest,” triggering a congressional investigation. When Democrats do it they don’t get called on it, largely because nobody who wants to make a big deal out of it has the resources to do so and must depend on others, like the media, to carry the message forward.

When you look closely at Obamacare, you can see a number of ways in which it benefited the industry, from the aforementioned protections against financial loss to billions of dollars in taxpayer subsidies to the individual mandate itself, which compels people, under threat of fine, to buy health insurance whether they want it or not.