<p>Jake Pirosseno takes a bite of his burrito during lunch at a Moe's in Naples on Monday, Decmeber 22, 2014. The FDA is changing its regulations and will start requiring restaurants to list calorie content on menus. (Logan Newell/Special to the Daily News)</p>

By John Osborne

Southwest Florida restaurant franchisees are taking in stride a new U.S. Food and Drug requirement that food-selling outlets with more than 20 locations start listing calorie counts on their menus and menu boards.

Food vendors have one year to comply with the FDA ruling, which also covers sales of food and beverages in such locations as convenience stores, bakeries and amusement parks.

Vending machine operators covered under the rule will have two years to comply with the FDA requirements, which stem from the 2010 Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.

To help consumers understand the significance of the calorie information in the context of a total daily diet, menus and menu boards will also include the statement:

“2,000 calories a day is used for general nutrition advice, but calorie needs vary.”

Mike Silverman, who owns seven Moe’s Southwest Grill locations in Lee and Collier counties, with another coming to Naples this spring, said he didn’t believe listing calorie counts would have a significant impact on his business.

“Right now, people can go online to see calorie counts and customize their orders, and our menu boards are magnetic, so it’s no inconvenience at all,” he said. “It won’t be any problem for us.”

Silverman also isn’t worried that customers will decide to go elsewhere once they see the calorie counts on his menus and menu boards.

“The beauty of Moe’s is that you can make your order as healthy as you want it to be,” he said. “You can have free-range chicken and grass-fed beef and all the fresh produce you want, or you can be crazy and get the nachos with everything. It’s entirely up to the customer.”

Frank Edwards, general manager of Culver’s in Estero, said his establishment would need to purchase new menu boards through the restaurant chain’s corporate office in Wisconsin. With new menu boards also required for the drive-thru, Edwards estimated that the cost would be “in the hundreds.”

“There’s a cost associated, and it’s not cheap,” he said.

Still, while Edwards said that listing calorie counts on the menu boards should make it simpler for customers concerned with watching their caloric intake, he doesn’t think it will influence most people when it comes time to order.

“When people come to Culver’s they’re looking to indulge in something special,” he said. “So I don’t think it will be a deciding factor as to whether or not they order something.”

FDA officials say Americans eat and drink about one-third of their calories away from home, and that the new ruling would also require covered establishments to list calorie counts on certain alcoholic beverages.

“People today expect clear information about the products they consume,” said FDA Commissioner Margaret A. Hamburg. “Making calorie information available on chain restaurant menus and vending machines is an important step for public health that will help consumers make informed choices for themselves and their families.”

The new FDA rules also require covered establishments to provide written nutrition information about total calories, total fat, calories from fat, saturated fat, trans fat, cholesterol, sodium, total carbohydrates, fiber, sugars and protein.

Seasonal menu items offered for sale as temporary menu items, daily specials and condiments for general use are exempt from labeling requirements.