Former boxing promoter Kellie Maloney has returned to the ringside for the first time since her sex-change operation.

Ms Maloney was pictured at Villa Park in Birmingham with close friend White Dee as they watched a match.

She was back ringside on Friday night, a day before she revealed that she was considering returning to the sport.

Former boxing promoter Kellie Maloney returned to the ringside for the first time since her sex-change operation

Ms Maloney revealed that she was having a sex-change in August last year, shocking the world of boxing

Ringside: Ms Maloney was enjoying herself as she watched eight matches at Villa Park in Birmingham

White Dee joined Ms Maloney ringside as the close friends met for an evening of sport in Birmingham

Ms Maloney, formerly known as Frank, helped Lennox Lewis become world heavyweight champion and retired from the sport in 2013.

She shocked the macho world of boxing in August last year by announcing her decision to change her sex and live as a woman.

The 61-year-old has already undergone hormone therapy, electrolysis to remove excess body hair, counselling and voice coaching.

She also underwent facial construction surgery in November, which went drastically wrong when she stopped breathing.

The procedure left Ms Maloney, who has three daughters from two marriages, with a severely swollen face and the former promoter revealed that she thought her head would 'explode' after the agonising surgery.

Ms Maloney, formerly known as Frank, helped Lennox Lewis become world heavyweight champion

Ms Maloney yesterday said she was considering applying to have her promoter's licence reinstated after a two-year hiatus

The 61-year-old looked on intently as she watched her first live boxing match since retiring in 2013

She has since recovered and looked to be enjoying her evening at the boxing on Friday night, tweeting that she was 'ringside with lovely Dee' as she watched eight matches.

The visit inspired a possible return to boxing for Ms Maloney, who yesterday revealed that she was considering applying to have her promoter's licence reinstated.

She was invited to the bouts by boxing promoter John Pegg, and was said to be scouting for talent ahead of her possible return.

Her highly successful career, which spanned more than 30 years, saw her manage five boxers to world titles as well as many more British, European and Commonwealth champions.

'I would love to go back and prove that Kellie can achieve the same thing Frank achieved,' she told BBC Radio 5 live.

'If I feel like it, I think I will apply for my licence.'

Ms Maloney has already undergone hormone therapy, electrolysis to remove excess body hair, counselling and voice coaching

The two friends smile as they take a picture with a fan during a break between matches on Friday night

Her highly successful career, which spanned more than 30 years, saw her manage five boxers to world titles as well as many more British, European and Commonwealth champions

She also said that she consulted American boxing promoter Kathy Duva over her potential return. Duva is one of the few women to hold a managerial role in boxing and Ms Maloney was grateful for her insight.

'I've been over to New York, met with Kathy and we've chatted and she's told me to go for it, so I'm really considering it,' she said.

Ms Maloney also revealed that it was a difficult decision to go public about her sex change last year.

'Transitioning is a very hard thing and a very personal thing and I believe you've got to do it. Frank was a very unhappy person, if I tell the truth.'