Shortly after Nas’ set wrapped up at Red Rocks on Thursday night, Patricio Illanes was walking down the exit ramp toward the Trading Post and the South Parking lot outside the venue when he heard what sounded like gunshots.

“We heard more than eight gunshots in a row,” Illanes said. “Then we saw an SUV take off and we paused for a minute.”

“We didn’t hear anyone yelling or anything,” he said. “At the time we were thinking the situation might have been fireworks.”

A triple shooting at Red Rocks Amphitheatre outside of a concert featuring Nas, Flying Lotus and Schoolboy Q left three people wounded on Thursday night. The injured men left the park in a white SUV, which police officers tried to flag down, but the driver kept going. Police pursued the SUV into Denver and stopped it at West Sixth Avenue and Kalamath Street.

But immediately after the SUV took off, Illanes said the situation remained calm in the park.

“There wasn’t a ton of commotion,” Illanes said. Without any idea what had happened, Illanes left the park before police arrived. Other concert goers who exited the show later ran into hours of traffic and confusion as police locked down the park.

Josh Wills, who was attending the show with his mom, his son and his son’s girlfriend, left the show shortly after 11 p.m. with no idea that a shooting had taken place about an hour beforehand.

“There were no announcements. If you were in Red Rocks watching the show you would have no idea anything was going on,” Wills said.

As Wills got in the car to leave, he was stopped by a parking attendant, who gave him the first notification of the night’s shooting.

“He said the venue was on lockdown and I should just turn off my car,” Wills said.

That’s when Wills decided to check Twitter on his phone, where he got the first news of what had happened. For the next three hours, Wills sat in his car waiting to leave the venue with only the information he could find on his phone.

At about 12:30 a.m., Wills said police started letting cars leave one at a time.

“I saw the police blockade from where we were stuck and could see them letting cars out one by one.” Wills said. “It was maybe two city blocks from where we were parked to the exit.

“It took two and a half hours to move two city blocks,” Wills said.

During that time, Wills and his company took turns sleeping, and finally by 2 a.m. they reached the exit. There, three police officers asked them to roll down the window.

“They asked the driver’s name and birth date and if anyone was injured and quickly shined a light in the car,” Wills said. “We didn’t step out of the car, they didn’t search the car, they didn’t ask for the driver’s ID.”

After arriving at the venue at 6:30 p.m., Wills made it home by 3 a.m.. But while the show ended in violence and frustration, he said the concert itself was a great experience.

“The show was amazing. There wasn’t really any ruckus or trouble in the venue,” he said. “It was a beautiful night at Red Rocks.”

Matt Miller: 303-954-1785, mrmiller@denverpost.com