Kyle Kendrick’s up-and-down season was on the upswing Sunday.

Too bad the Rockies didn’t swing their bats better in a 3-2 loss to the Miami Marlins at Coors Field.

Lit up in his last start against the Los Angeles Dodgers, Kendrick pitched a terrific seven innings Sunday. Kendrick’s day started off rocky, but he settled into a groove and departed with the game tied 2-2. He gave up five hits, but four of them came in the first inning.

Marcell Ozuna’s two-run single gave Miami a 2-0 lead in the first, but Kendrick set down the next 12 batters he faced.

Ozuna’s single would have been a routine out for shortstop Troy Tulowitzki had the Rockies not shaded the infield to the right side.

“We shifted,” Kendrick said. “Sometimes you get bit in the (rear) like that, and sometimes it works out.”

Kendrick lowered his ERA from 6.55 to 6.16, but his record remained 2-7.

Rafael Betancourt tossed glove into stands

It was clear Saturday that reliever Rafael Betancourt was displeased with his performance when he gave up three runs on five hits in the ninth inning of a 10-5 victory over the Marlins.

The 40-year-old right-hander pounded his glove in frustration after each hit. At game’s end, he chucked the baseball into the right-field corner, then tossed his glove into the stands.

“We had a good conversation,” manager Walt Weiss said. “Raffy will be fine. I don’t worry about him.”

Asked if he monitors the players’ tantrums on the field, Weiss said: “We talk about body language a lot. That’s how you speak on the field. We always have a heightened sense of awareness for what we say with how we act.”

Betancourt, who’s been suffering from a sinus condition, blew a save against the Dodgers on Tuesday, giving up a grand slam home run to Alex Guerrero in the ninth inning.

“It’s more his strength than anything else — he’s been weak, he hasn’t recovered from whatever he had a week ago,” Weiss said of Betancourt. “But his arm feels great.”

John Axford is a shut-down closer

John Axford continues to dominate hitters. He set the Marlins down in order in the ninth inning Sunday.

It was his 12th consecutive appearance without allowing a run, dating to May 6.

He has allowed only one earned run all season, and his ERA is 0.53.

Looking ahead

Cardinals’ John Lackey (4-3, 2.93 ERA) at Rockies’ David Hale (1-0, 4.26), 6:40 p.m. Monday, ROOT; 850 AM

Hale, twice added as the 26th man in a doubleheader, has become the Rockies’ utility starter. He will be recalled from Triple-A again for Monday’s game against the Cardinals. He has pitched reasonably well, but served up three homers to the Dodgers in his last start at Coors Field. Pitching for Atlanta last season, he threw two scoreless innings of relief vs. the Cardinals. Lackey, 36, gave up three runs and 10 hits over seven innings against the Brewers in his last start. He wasn’t dominant, but did enough to earn his fourth victory. He is 2-1 with a 4.59 ERA in four starts vs. the Rockies; 0-1 with a 6.39 ERA in two starts at Coors Field.

Tuesday: Cardinals’ Michael Wacha (8-1, 2.18 ERA) at Rockies’ Jorge De La Rosa (2-2, 6.15), 6:40 p.m., ROOT

Wednesday: Cardinals’ Carlos Martinez (6-2, 2.94) at Rockies’ Chad Bettis (2-0, 2.70), 1:10 p.m., no TV

Thursday: Rockies’ Eddie Butler (3-6, 4.80) at Marlins’ David Phelps (2-3, 4.68), 5:10 p.m., ROOT

Patrick Saunders, The Denver Post