The 2014 BET Awards will be on Sunday, June 29, and will be broadcast live from the Nokia Theater in Las Angeles, California. Chris Rock will be the host, and he is sure to bring a lot of fun and humor to the awards show. Jay z and Beyonce, with 5 nominations each, are tied with the most nominations. Close behind them, with four nominations each, are August Alsina, Pharrell Williams, and Drake. There will be some of today’s best entertainers presenting and getting awards tonight, and also performing on the main stage, so make sure to tune in and watch!

The presenters will include stars such as Bow Wow, Kerry Washington, Keshia Chante, Gabrielle Union, Keke Palmer, Kevin Hart, Larenz Tate, and Regina Hall. Kevin Hart, who stars in one of the summer’s funniest movies, Think Like a Man Too, will likely bring even more light-hearted humor to the BET Awards 2014 show.

The acts which will be performing are also guaranteed to pump up and excite the audience, both at the Nokia Theater and the millions of viewers watching on their televisions, computers, or other electronic devices. The performers will be Yolanda Adams, Pharrell Williams, August Alsina, Jennifer Hudson, Drake, Mary J. Blige, Iggy Azalea, Lionel Richie, Lil Wayne, Jhene Aiko, Mack Wilds, John Legend, Nicki Minaj, Usher, Ledisi, Tyga, T.I., Robin Thicke, and Trey Songz.

In the category of BET Awards Best Female R&B/Pop Artist, the six performers nominated are Beyoncé, Tamar Braxton, Janelle Monáe, Jhené Aiko, Rihanna, and K. Michelle. They are the top female R&B/Pop singers around, and any of them could be presented with the BET award, though even money would probably be on Beyonce, with Rihanna not being too far behind her.

There are five very talented guys nominated for the BET Awards Best Male R&B/Pop Artist. They are Justin Timberlake, August Alsina, Pharrell Williams, John Legend, and Chris Brown. The competition is tough in this category — they all are good enough that any of them could walk away with the award tonight.

The BET Awards Best Group Award category has five groups nominated. They are A$AP Mob, Young Money, Macklemore & Ryan Lewis, TGT, and Daft Punk. Based on their string of hits, alone, Daft Punk might get this award, though Macklemore & Ryan Lewis also have had quite a few hits lately.

That brings up the category of BET Awards 2014 Best Collaboration Award. There are six nominees up for this award: August Alsina featuring Trinidad Jame$ singing I Luv This S**t, Jay Z featuring Justin Timberlake performing Holy Grail, Drake featuring Majid Jordan singing Hold On, We’re Going Home, YG featuring Jeezy and Rich Homie Quan performing their hit, My Hitta, Beyoncé featuring Jay Z singing the extremely popular song, Drunk in Love, and Robin Thicke featuring T.I. and Pharrell Williams singing another hugely popular song, Blurred Lines.

Another award that viewers will be interested in is the BET Awards Coca Cola Viewers’ Choice Award. There are five acts nominated in this category, Pharrell Williams performing Happy, August Alsina featuring Trinidad Jame$ singing I Luv This Shit, Jhené Aiko singing The Worst, Drake performing his popular hit Worst Behavior, and Beyonce and Jay Z singing Drunk in Love. Going by sales numbers and popularity alone, a good guess would be that Drunk in Love by Beyonce and Jay Z or Happy by Parrell Williams will win this award.

The BET Awards 2014 Best Male Hip Hop Artist Award category has five nominees. They are: Kendrick Lamar, Drake, Jay Z, J. Cole, and Future. Kendrick Lamar might win, though Jay Z and Drake could very well be given the award, instead.

Then, the BET Awards 2014 Best Female Hip Hop Award category will be another big award presented tonight. Five females have been nominated: Angel Haze, Iggy Azalea, Nicki Minaj, Eve, and Charli Baltimore. If sheer popularity is the criteria for who will get this award, probably Iggy Azalea will win it; but, who knows?

There are quite a few categories BET Awards 2014 will be giving awards in, besides these. Four more which this article will mention are the ones for Best New Artist, Best Actor and Best Actress, and Best Movie.

In the category of BET Awards 2014 Best New Artist Award, the five worthy nominees are Ariana Grande, Schoolboy Q, Rich Homie Quan, Mack Wilds, and August Alsina. Again, if popularity is the sole factor as to who gets this award, it is a good guess that the winner will be Ariana Grande.

In the category of BET Awards 2014 Best Actress Award, the five people nominated are Oprah Winfrey, Angela Bassett, Lupita Nyong’o, Kerry Washington, and Gabrielle Union. Any of these brilliant and deserving actresses could win this award.

As for the BET Awards 2014 Best Actor Award, five men are nominated. They are Chiwetel Ejiofor, Michael B. Jordan, Kevin Hart, Forest Whitaker, and Idris Elba. Again, all of the five nominees are deserving of the honor, and any of the five could be presented with the award tonight.

The final award this article will go into is the BET Awards 2014 Best Movie Award. The five movies that have been nominated are 12 Years a Slave, Lee Daniels’ The Butler, The Best Man Holiday, Kevin Hart: Let Me Explain, and Fruitvale Station. While a comedy could win, usually a more dramatic film wins an award like this one. Fruitvale Station and Lee Daniels’ The Butler could very well win, but a safe bet would probably be on 12 Years a Slave to be presented with the award, as it has already won several other awards.

Stay tuned in tonight to watch the BET Awards 2014 show and see who will be the big winners! It is a Must-See awards show, showcasing some of the most talented musical artists and actors and actresses of the past year. Watch the show, then please check back here to read a recap and review of who the big winners of the evening were!

Written by: Douglas Cobb

Share this: Print

LinkedIn

Pinterest

Pocket

Reddit

Email

Twitter

Google

Facebook

Tumblr