The owners of Mussel Beach in Delray are now looking at spots on Lake Avenue in Lake Worth.

Plans stalled out in May and June, when the investors learned they couldn’t have as many seats as they planned.

That’s because plans for Manhattan Beach Grill started to stall in May or June, co-owner David McCorison said. He and four other investors found out after they committed to the location and put a couple hundred thousand dollars into the property that the size of the grease trap won’t accommodate the 203-seat restaurant they envisioned, he said.

It was perplexing because fire code would have allowed for that many seats, including 45 on an outside patio. But Seacoast Utility Authority told McCorison the location is only allowed 157 seats because of the grease trap, he said.

Increasing the capacity would require “ripping up the whole back area” of the restaurant and road of the mall, he said.

Manhattan Beach Grill would have replaced RA Sushi next to Yard House.

+ Allen Eyestone Downtown at the Gardens in Palm Beach Gardens, Florida on June 5, 2015. Photo to accompany story about the future of ... read more Allen Eyestone ×

Downtown at the Gardens management declined to comment because of pending litigation.

The five-person team opening the restaurant included husband and wife Mark and Patti Mezzancello and brother and sister Helene and John Rahal. They’re also the brains behind Mussel Beach on East Atlantic Avenue in Delray Beach.

A good portion of the menu from Mussel Beach would have carried over to Manhattan Beach Grill but with more appetizers, burgers, family-style food and sushi.

Now, the restaurateurs are looking for a spot in Lake Worth for what will “probably be more of a carbon copy of what we have in Delray,” McCorison said.

“We’re on Atlantic Avenue now and I think Lake Avenue in Lake Worth could be the next Delray-type hot spot,” in five or 10 years, he said. “They’ve already done a pretty good job with that Lake Avenue area.”

There are a couple locations under consideration. Ideally, the new location would be open for next season, McCormick said.