McDermott Park (Photo: File)

Do you wonder how Wisconsin Lutheran Academy came to have a lease with the city of Fond du Lac in 2005 for part of McDermott Park?

In early 2005 the city of Fond du Lac’s water had too much radium. The city’s proposed $32 million remediation plan would have put a treatment plant in McDermott Park. As part of this plan, the city needed to run a lake water supply line under the northern part of WLA’s property.

WLA sent a letter to the city Feb. 8, 2005, saying they would grant an easement for the pipe. In return, they asked for a 30-year lease on about 1 acre of the park. They mentioned installing a chain link fence for their baseball diamond and also the right to extend their parking lot into the park.

Fond du Lac city council resolution No. 7702 adopted March 23, 2005, authorizes the “proper city officials” to execute a lease with WLA .

(Resolution No. 7702 is the only document that the City of Fond du Lac has produced concerning this 2005 agreement. Public Works Director Jordan Skiff stated at the 27 July 2015 Advisory Parks Board meeting that they have searched the city files and cannot find a copy of this lease. The copy of the 2005 lease that was attached to the agenda came from WLA’s files.)

The next day, the Fond du Lac Reporter had an article headlined “City Council grants easement for WLA baseball fence.” This article on the council meeting says, “The school will receive a 30-year lease to build the fence, there are escape clauses for both parties, and no fees are involved.”

One week after the resolution, the city human resources manager resigned amid accusations of inappropriate behavior. A month later, April 28, the city manager resigned. On May 25, 2005, the permanent utility easement is recorded on the WLA property at the Fond du Lac County Register of Deeds. The initial date of the lease is June 1, 2005.

On June 19 the following headline appears in The Reporter, “Residents invited to attend McDermott Park meeting.” The article begins, “A concerned citizens group will hold a meeting Monday night to discuss the City of Fond du Lac’s plans to build a new groundwater treatment facility in McDermott Park.”

On the day after the meeting, June 21, The Reporter article is titled, “Water pump station opposition may be too late.” The article says “about 200 people attended the Monday meeting... city council President, Lindee Kimball,...said ‘maybe this isn’t a done deal.’ Public Works Director Mark Lentz said in a phone interview after the meeting that the City Council is powerless to stop the current plans.”

On June 23, The Reporter headline is, “More time sought after outcry over water project.”

On July 1, The Reporter headline is: “McDermott park removed as site for water project.” “We're going to look elsewhere,” Public Works Director Mark Lentz said Thursday afternoon. When asked for the reason behind the decision, Lentz said simply, “Public outcry.”

The citizens of Fond du Lac let their city council members know they did not want to lose McDermott Park to a water treatment plant and their elected representatives acted quickly. It didn’t even take two weeks.

What happened to the lease written with WLA in exchange for the easement? Thirty days after it was signed, the city no longer needed the easement over the WLA property. With 30 years to go on that lease, doesn’t it seem reasonable that the two parties should have annulled the agreement?

I am concerned that 10 years later, WLA is ready to execute the part of that poorly written lease that lets them put a parking lot in McDermott Park with the approval of only the director of public works.

What should we do when we have a lease that should have been voided and torn up 10 years ago?

The city and WLA should void it now.

Mary B. Hayes is a resident of Fond du Lac.

Read or Share this story: http://fondul.ac/1Jc2Isl