America’s doctor made a house call to Roanoke on Tuesday.

As part of a cross-country listening tour, U.S. Surgeon General Vivek Murthy spent about an hour speaking with officials from more than a dozen health care and community organizations.

The idea is that by checking the pulse of multiple communities, large and small, the government official who is sometimes called the nation’s top doctor will gain a better sense of the common challenges faced by health officials — and insight on how to solve those problems.

Tuesday’s hour-long session was closed to the general public. But afterward, Murthy shared his thoughts with the news media.

“I think Roanoke is a great example of a community that is facing big challenges … but is actually doing something about it,” Murthy said, referring to the level of collaboration he saw among the public, nonprofit, educational and community groups that he met with.

As the federal official tasked with giving Americans the best information on how to improve their health, Murthy said he saw evidence here of what he considers the country’s most pressing public health concern: the prevalence of obesity and chronic illnesses such as diabetes.

“I believe those are generating the greatest toll for us in terms of lives lost, in terms of disabilities, in terms of dollars spent,” he said.

The medical costs for people who are obese are 42 percent higher than for those who are not, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Roanoke’s obesity rate of 34 percent is higher than the state rate of 28 percent, a recent community health needs assessment reported.

Murthy cited two local programs that impressed him: an emphasis on nutrition in public schools and a “Farmacy Garden” at the New River Valley Community Health Center, where patients are prescribed fresh produce grown just behind

the clinic as a way to combat obesity and chronic health problems.

Roanoke was the third stop on Murthy’s tour. He visited Birmingham, Alabama, last week and Richmond earlier Tuesday.

New to the job, Murthy was confirmed by the U.S. Senate in December after being nominated by President Barack Obama. At 37, he is the second youngest surgeon general in the country’s history.

Murthy said his age gives him the opportunity to reach out to both the young and old. “We need to bridge the gap between generations,” he said. “We need to speak to both the older and younger generations.”

As part of his tour, the surgeon general is also promoting the Affordable Care Act and encouraging people to sign up for health insurance, which is available through a government website at subsidized rates for those who cannot afford it.

He politely sidestepped a question about uncertainties with the law, which is under attack by Republicans in Congress while also facing a legal test before the U.S. Supreme Court.

“I approach this as a physician,” he said. “I’m not a legislator, and I’m not a judge.”

But with insurance plans that are currently available and affordable, he said, “It’s important that we get the message out to people.”

Janine Underwood, who sat in on the discussion as executive director of the Bradley Free Clinic, said she was impressed by what she saw and heard.

“It’s very refreshing to see him come down to the community level and see the challenges that we face,” Underwood said. “He took lots of notes.”