The Eye

'Dark Matter' Renewed? Showrunner Says Season 2 Will 'Blow You Away'

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Facebook/"Dark Matter" Official Page) Will SyFy's "Dark Matter" be renewed or cancelled? The showrunner revealed that if season 2 does happen,"it'll blow you away."

There is still no word on whether or not SyFy has renewed or cancelled "Dark Matter," but the shocking season 1 finale set up quite a lot for a potential season 2. The showrunner, Joseph Mallozzi, revealed that he has a long-term plan for the series.



"I said very early on that I had mapped out this five-year game plan," he told The Hollywood Reporter. "The season 2 finale will be an even bigger "holy s---" than season 1. The first season was about peeling the onion on these characters' backstories, finding out who they are, and it's very personal. Season 2, we blow the doors off, do some world building, the past comes back to haunt, and at the same time, the characters wrap up their exploration of their respective backstories. There's going to be a real driving force early on in the season.



"In much of the first season the characters were reactive, on their heels, whereas in season 2 they become proactive. Like I said in the backstory, these are very bad people who are capable of very bad things, and I think if we do a second season, it'll blow you away.



In the first part of the two-hour season 1 finale, Wil Wheaton guest starred as new character Alexander Rook, the man who created Two a.k.a. Rebecca. Rook explained that Two isn't actually human but was created in his lab using nanite technology. The crew of the Raza had no choice but to hand her over to him.



About the crazy twist concerning Two's real identity, Mallozzi said, "Two is definitely something we haven't seen before, but at the same time more human. It's almost like test-tube designer baby. She's essentially lab-designed but organic, except for the nanites teeming through her bloodstream that make her stronger, faster and heal a lot faster."



The second part of the finale consisted of the crew turning on each other, and it was finally revealed that Six was the traitor on the Raza.



"I set it up with little hints and clues, especially after [Six's] episode in episode 8," Mallozzi revealed. "One of the things that was a subtle clue was who he's flanked by in the corridor. That character is one you've seen before. Any case, if we do a season 2, it all will be explained."



What did you think of the "Dark Matter" season finale? Vote in the poll!





SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.