Meanwhile, Rand Paul has taken a somewhat different tack in engaging with the black community. The Kentucky senator, whose libertarian following allows him more latitude in defying traditional GOP orthodoxy, has been an outspoken advocate for softening drug laws, reforming the criminal justice system, and creating major tax breaks for areas in financial distress, like Detroit. He has also given high-profile speeches at black colleges.

Rather than seek out strategic fights with liberal black institutions to make a point, Paul’s aides say he tries to get their input and look for areas where they can align. To help do that, he has enlisted Elroy Sailor, an influential Republican lobbyist and strategist, to set up roundtable conversations with black community leaders and business owners — most of them Democrats — in Detroit, Chicago, Atlanta, and Houston.

Sailor said Paul has plans to meet with the NAACP and the National Urban League in coming months.

The key difference between Paul’s strategy and that of other Republicans, Sailor said, is that he isn’t approaching the process of engaging with black leaders as “outreach.”

“I just think ‘outreach’ is a term for consultants,” said Sailor. “It’s a good term for politics. Outreach is ‘OK, well, we got six black people today, and we want to get 12 black people next week.’ It’s a numbers game.”

He added, “Do you need the symbolism? Yes. Do you need to do the party to honor Black History Month? Do you need to respond when someone says something that is not in the best interest of one your minority constituencies? Do you need to do the Hispanic Heritage Month luncheon? Yes, of course. But if that’s all you’re doing, you’re setting yourself up for failure. You’ve got to focus on solutions.”

Paul’s approach has not been without missteps. He has expressed concern about how the Civil Rights Act curtails property rights. He has made his own problematic Obamacare–slavery comparisons, a favorite Republican blunder. And when he made news earlier this month by urging his party to lay off its voter ID crusade, he was forced to walk it back days later. But there are signs that he’s building goodwill among people of color: A poll released Saturday showed 29% of black voters in Kentucky would favor Paul over Hillary Clinton in a 2016 matchup. Such an outcome would represent the best showing of any Republican presidential candidate in decades.

“If he runs in 2016, you might not see a lot of African-Americans switching over to becoming Republicans, but I think what you’re going to see is a lot of Paul Democrats,” said Sailor.

Not everyone is so sure. Greg Carr, chair of Howard University’s Afro-American studies department, credited Paul for giving a speech on his campus last year, but said he has a long way to go before he succeeds in changing students’ minds about the GOP. “A lot of them were asking, ‘Is this the Republican Party of Frederick Douglass or Ronald Reagan?’” he said.

Carr was also skeptical of the RNC’s claim that their dustups with black media were meant to appeal to black voters.

“As with any American political party apparatus, the RNC is in the business of winning elections and advancing their political agenda,” Carr said. “I think asking Ebony magazine or a black host on MSNBC to apologize would resonate with their party base long before it would do anything other than reinforce their image as a party hostile to non-whites.”

If the party’s goal really is to attract minority voters, Carr said, Republicans would do well to aim their umbrage at right-wing provocateurs like Rush Limbaugh for “their consistent questioning of President Obama’s bona fides as an American.” Indeed, the GOP has had an uneven record in tamping down its bigot eruptions. Even after Donald Trump spent months trumpeting his birther conspiracy theories, Republican presidential candidates still lined up to kiss his ring and beg for his endorsement in 2012. And earlier this year, when Ted Nugent called Obama a “subhuman mongrel,” Sen. Ted Cruz defended the conservative rock star’s record of championing the Second Amendment, while gently distancing himself from the uncouth remarks. (Paul, by contrast, blasted Nugent.)

Ron Christie, a black Republican strategist and Fox News contributor, said that even if Republicans haven’t landed on a unified message, people of color recognize the party is taking an interest in their vote for the first time in many years.

“I will tell you, from my television work, I have noticed in people of color who have stopped me on the street in recent months have said, ‘You know, I still don’t agree with you guys but you’re really trying to get black voters to listen to you,’” Christie said. “The biggest mistake the party could make now is to say, ‘We increased our number of black votes from 7% to 10% and now we’re done! Mission accomplished.’”

He added, “To use the old adage, actions speak louder than words. What we have done now is created an environment where people of color are willing to listen. Do we squander it by taking folks for granted or writing them off?”