Topics: American History, Antonin Scalia, constitution, Editor's Picks, Electoral College, gun rights, james madison, Second Amendment, Politics News

We talk a lot about inequality these days. Wal-Mart heirs. Plutocrats. Occupy Wall Street. Minimum wage. The 47 percent. Liberals are prone to feeling a strong sense of responsibility for others whom they do not know personally, tending to see good in the potential of innovative social programs. Conservatives are more comfortable emphasizing individual responsibility and religious charity over government-sponsored social programs. But in either case, the American identity is bound up with the idea that the health of the republic flows from a sense of fairness. Our Constitution guarantees it. Or does it?

Freedom and fairness are both relative concepts. The difference is often a question of freedom for whom, fairness to whom? How far should government’s role as an equalizer of opportunity extend? The questions are simple enough for anyone to state, but contained in them are multitudes of possible interpretations (and the basic reason why the court system is a site of contention). Either social programs contribute to a sense of independence, as liberals insist; or they encourage long-term dependence, as conservatives believe. To keep dialogue going, let us at least accept that the aim of both sides is to actualize, to maximize, the individual’s freedom to pursue happiness.

It is critical that twenty-first-century American conservatives agree to one slippery principle, however, if anything good is to take place. And that is this: Individual liberty is not won by “getting government off our backs”; it is gained through good government. Eisenhower Republicans in the conservative 1950s agreed with this notion and responded to empirical evidence. The social safety net was not ideological anathema (socialism) then. We should all accept that in securing liberty, the individual is not free from all constraint, or immune to government. In terms the founders provided us, we are meant to be protected only from corrupt or despotic government. Taxation in itself is not corruption. But when government acts counter to the majority’s welfare (as by delivering outsize economic power and opportunity into the hands of the few) it is corrupt. Fortunately, it is a reversible condition.

The Constitution was far from perfect at conception, as its framers soon realized. Perhaps most immediate, and most significant, was the lack of any means for accommodating rival political parties: the “ticket” of president and vice president was not instituted until fifteen years after the inauguration of George Washington. If the framers couldn’t anticipate parties, just imagine everything else they overlooked that the amendment process hasn’t fixed, that we’re still living with. They governed a country whose population was one one-hundredth what ours is today.

Here is another obvious case of the founding generation’s remoteness from our time: the Second Amendment. These days, among all the critical issues covered by the Constitution, an inordinate amount of debate concerns gun rights — which was perhaps the least controversial issue when the Bill of Rights was adopted. Townsfolk understood that participation in the local militia was a civic duty meant for all males. Owning a weapon was a tool for those who hunted.

When people are led to believe that their quest for liberty is best symbolized in the freedom to arm themselves, rather than something more basic, then they are being abused both by those who profit from growing gun sales, and by those who seek to convince them that security is about something less substantial than the capacity to pursue real happiness through mental and physical labor, measurable self-respect and access to material advance.

We have reached a level of absurdity in associating the right to stockpile arms with individual freedom. Those not obsessed with gun rights should be protected against gun nuts, too, right? Guns in bars? In places of worship? Over the last few decades, the National Rifle Association has been singularly effective in transforming itself from its earlier role as a politically moderate organization desiring an increased awareness of firearms education and improved marksmanship. People have forgotten that the NRA was for many years a proponent of gun control. Today, of course, it represents the interests of gun manufacturers, because no anti-gun realist wishes to dispossess recreational hunters of their responsibly maintained sport rifles. Yet the NRA has succeeded in transforming the general understanding of “gun rights,” so that many millions have become convinced that gun possession is an extension of selfhood. That new dogma has made civil debate impossible. Those who impulsively cry out, “They’re coming for your guns” (meaning the federal government) have chosen an interpretation of the Constitution — even more, the Declaration of Independence — that presents the controversy as one in which personal freedom is in mortal danger. This is paranoid nonsense.

Reason dictates that we not compromise individual freedom, yet we must avoid the fantasy of vigilante heroism. Retired Supreme Court Associate Justice John Paul Stevens made headlines earlier this year by suggesting the addition of five simple words to the Second Amendment in order to better express its late-eighteenth-century meaning: “A well-regulated militia, being necessary to the security of a free state, the right to keep and bear arms when serving in the militia shall not be infringed.” Of course, the town militia was long ago replaced with the National Guard, and private militias with weird ideas about self-protection are not encompassed in the “original meaning” of the Second Amendment either.

Gun rights libertarians have tipped the scale from the victims of gun violence in favor of the shooters. “Stand your ground” laws permit the gun owner to define the threat, giving him or her (usually it’s him) carte blanche in applying lethal force. The George Zimmerman travesty was not the first instance of this either. Remember Bernhard Goetz pulling a gun on black teens in the New York City subway in the mid-1980s?

Americans forget the past with disturbing regularity. Few recall how Ralph Nader changed the safety standards for American cars in the 1960s. True, t­he automobile industry tried to ruin him. But at least GM and Ford never claimed that owning an unsafe car was a constitutional right. Yet here’s a revealing fact about the present debate: the same people who believe it’s an imposition for a gun owner to register his weapon (though he registers his car) believe it’s okay to deny voting rights to those who cannot produce a driver’s license. Think about that.

So, no matter what a slim majority of the sitting Supreme Court says, the right to bear arms, as Revolutionary Americans conceived it, had nothing to do with the modern libertarian conception of “gun rights.” The framers of the Constitution never endorsed what Justice Scalia invented in the Heller decision. They tended to believe in regulation, fearing the greater danger of anarchy; they did not advocate gun rights amid suburban sprawl; their guns fired a single ball. Minimally, then, it should be a requirement that everyone register every gun and declare why he wishes to purchase it. No stockpiling. No hi-tech, military-grade weapons in private hands.

But let us return to the key issue that Americans, when polled, are up in arms about: the decline in economic opportunity for individuals. While we cannot say that each generation is owed a standard of living or level of comfort equal to or better than that of their parents’ generation, we can stipulate that the Constitution — the defining document of nationhood — should dictate against the hardening of social classes.

History gives ample evidence that America was class-conscious even before it became race-conscious. Somehow, though, as the rags-to-riches legend took hold, the majority came to believe that crossing class boundaries was a defining characteristic of American life. It’s simply not true. Social mobility does occur, but not at all in the way, or to the extent, that the old slogan “Land of Opportunity” would suggest. Our eyes do not deceive us: some of the hardest working people in America are also the most poorly paid. Those who say that the poor merely have to work harder to get ahead are merely deluded.

Nothing approaching a comprehensive effort has ever been made to educate the poor. Barely even agents in their own lives, they are told to think small. We should stress here that the majority of poor people in the U.S. are white, not people of color. (Yet compared to whites, a greater percentage of blacks and Latinos in this country live in poverty.) In his Second Inaugural Address, President Obama proclaimed confidently: “We are true to our creed when a little girl born into the bleakest poverty knows that she has the same chance to succeed as anybody else, because she is an American; she is free, and she is equal.” That is not how it is. Those born poor will be nutritionally deprived, in more ways than one.

Prudent men would make good laws — that’s what so-called “Father of the Constitution” James Madison counted on. In his time, the young and promising found patrons and were mentored. It was a workable means of educating, and of introducing new blood, 250 years ago. It does not work that way anymore.

Outspoken republicans of our nation’s founding generation had a remarkable idea: The best citizens were not always those who came from money or who bore a recognizable family name, but were, in fact, those who were the most intellectually curious, desirous of obtaining new knowledge, motivated to help improve society and endowed with recognized mental acuity. The immigrant success stories we hear about mostly involve individuals who received superior training overseas, and used that to find their way into the American middle class. Maximizing opportunity for the modest, deserving citizen was not considered the “job” of government in 1787; it was, however, a desirable outcome under republican government, and it remains today in the long-term interest of every lover of this country.

The founders told us that America was going to be different from other nations, that a permanent moneyed aristocracy was a political evil our republic was dedicated to avoiding. Yet as we now recognize, class self-replicates far more than written and uttered patriotic effusions urge us to believe. Sons of former politicians are voted into office on a “name recognition” basis, just as so many of today’s Hollywood celebs are the offspring of former stars and current producer-directors. Meritocracy? Hardly. How much money and education your parents have is the major determinant of your prospects in life. Period.

The hard truth is that economic opportunity has been proven less real in America than in Western Europe. If we were to construct a new Constitution, it would have to address the mythological components of the American Dream and charge government with an obligation to give credence to the creed. There will never be a completely level playing field, to use the common metaphor; but there should, at least, be a field of play. An untested graduate from a prestigious university is paid six figures at a Wall Street firm right out of school, without having proven worth; a talented classroom teacher in south Louisiana has responsibilities heaped on, and earns barely enough to get by. Or do we not really believe in democracy’s meritocratic element?

The cacophonous media scarcely helps when its programming does more to captivate than to educate. In language that can be consumed in our time without a single word being altered, Thomas Jefferson wrote of the disease spread by sensational editorializing, and railed against “the demoralizing practice of feeding the public mind habitually on slander, & the depravity of taste which this nauseous ailment induces.” Much as we would like cable news shows to be educational vehicles responsive to problem-solving concerns, we know that’s an impossible dream. But let’s not ignore the consequences of tabloid fever. Caught in a political fog, citizens are tacitly encouraged to be compliant and complacent, captive consumer-animals. Often overwhelmed by the struggles of daily life, they are, drone-like, led to pursue “happiness” in self-defining cosmetic choices, fast cars and the gadgets and games they can’t wait to acquire. And often can’t afford, but buy anyway.

Remedying inequality is not a zero sum game. No harm is done to those with automatic access to educational and career opportunities when more chances are given and the stigma is reduced for folks who start out life without advantages. If those who cry “Socialism!” calm down long enough to realize that America is not in danger of becoming a classless society, and if states’ rights advocates calm down long enough to appreciate that regional character is unlikely to disappear just because steps are taken to nudge society in the direction of equality, we will all be less irritable.

Families cannot do everything. Government cannot do everything. Good civic guidance begins when able classroom teachers motivate (and are rewarded) and able students emerge (and are rewarded). Incentive works magic, as private enterprise proves. But … news flash … CAPITALISM IS NOT DESIGNED TO BE FAIR. Until more is done to move people up, as the G.I. Bill succeeded in doing in the 1940s and 1950s, the economy will continue to work disproportionately to the benefit of the already wealthy. Indeed, even the GI Bill discriminated against African-Americans and the poor.

Too many American voters are not equipped to think critically and make informed choices. Clearly, government has some role to play in improving outcomes for the many. Isn’t that the defining hope of democracy?