We’re closing in on 20 years since President and Commander-In-Chief Bill Clinton and aide Monica Lewinsky slow-danced in the White House.

And it was 1991 when more than 100 Navy and Marine Corps officers sexually assaulted some 83 women and seven men at the infamous Tailhook symposium in Las Vegas.

Last year, the Pentagon found that in 2012, across all branches of the military and at many levels, an estimated 26,000 sexual assaults took place.

Last week came allegations that football players at the Air Force Academy served up date-rape drugs to young girls and sexually assaulted them in 2011 at a house in Manitou Springs.

For two and one-half years, the academy said nothing about the party or its investigation.

According to a Denver Post story, “the academy’s inspector general is beginning a review of the ‘mission elements with the athletic department’ following inquiries from The Post and other media … .”

And from the academy: “These efforts will help in eliminating subcultures at the Air Force Academy whose climates do not align with our institutional core values.”

Right.

The sense of entitlement, invincibility and arrogance that spawned the Manitou Springs nightmare and decades of sexual assault cases at the academy starts at the very top. And its roots dig deep.

In the 1990s, Air Force Academy superintendent Lt. Gen. Tad Oelstrom and his wife spent more than $220,000 of taxpayer money on home improvements to their already lavish (and free) house at the academy.

Included in the taxpayers’ bill was a $20,000 dishwasher that cleaned and dried a load of dishes in 90 seconds.

After the story of the misspent money came out, nothing much happened. Oelstrom was given a slap on the wrist by the Air Force. He retired early, with his huge military pension intact, and went to work at Harvard.

Then there are the academy’s roads.

In 2005 I uncovered and wrote stories for other media about the academy’s practice of making sure no money was left in its drawer at the end of each fiscal year. Sometimes, spending all that taxpayer money allocated by Congress takes imagination.

So that year, in a frantic effort to throw money away, the academy repaved a mile of road — Pine Drive — that had been repaved just 20 months earlier. There was hardly a crack in the asphalt surface when it was torn up.

The cost to repave that 1-mile stretch of two-lane road: $250,000. It was part of a 6-mile repaving project — all totally unnecessary — that cost us $1.5 million.

Greg Danis, owner of Danis Asphalt in Colorado Springs, knew all about it.

“I was contacted to bid on an Air Force Academy paving job,” Danis told me back then. “So I looked at the road and told them the asphalt was fine and the road definitely didn’t need to be repaved. They told me they’d find someone else. And they did.”

Nothing changed because of the stories. The mindless paving continues today.

Entitled. Macho. Arrogant. Untouchable.

From former AFA football player Ben Garland, now with the Broncos, on last week’s startling sexual assault story: “They will work through this adversity, fix the problem and own up to their responsibilities.”

Oh, look. A monkey just flew by.

Contact Rich Tosches at richtosches@gmail.com.