City councilors will discuss the South Catalyst project Tuesday night, including agreement with Larimer County

Plans for Loveland's downtown revitalization project, the South Catalyst, have caused some tension between city of Loveland officials and Larimer County officials.

Because the city of Loveland ended its partnership with The Michaels Development Co. on the project earlier this month, Loveland city councilors will be deciding what to include in a new request for proposals process for developers at their meeting at 6:30 p.m. Tuesday night at 500 E. Third St.

That discussion could include whether to keep the Larimer County building as part of the project.

The South Catalyst project spans a two-block area from First to Third streets, between Lincoln and Cleveland avenues.

Larimer County currently has a building located at 205 E. Sixth Street but has allocated $15 million in funding to build a new facility to replace the 50-year-old building. As city of Loveland officials made plans for the South Catalyst, Larimer County was invited to be part of the project, according to county officials. The deal was to exchange the county's old property at Sixth Street and its parking lot at Sixth Street and Railroad Avenue to the city for a new property that the county would build.

Because the county also owns a portion of the Police and Courts building at 810 E. 10th St. (some of which the city leases), City Councilor Troy Krenning had proposed moving the county court into the new county building, creating more space for police in the building at 810 E. 10th St. (in lieu of a new police training facility).

Advertisement

However, after negotiations between county and city officials, the idea was called off because county officials expected the city to pay for the move they proposed, and city officials said the amount of money needed for both parties was not feasible.

But the plans to include the county in the South Catalyst were still in motion — at least until councilors began questioning whether having the county building as part of the project would hurt the city's revenue in the newly formed Downtown Development Authority, according to Assistant County Manager Neil Gluckman.

Councilor John Fogle asked at the Aug. 18 meeting if putting the county building "on the hottest property in the city of Loveland" would be beneficial to the city — the county is exempt from paying property taxes, but property taxes could fund the Downtown Development Authority. Fogle asked to see more numbers about potential revenue and loss.

Gluckman said throughout the process of negotiations with the city, several "bumps" came up, including moving the county's proposed building from Second and Third streets to between First and Second streets (the first location was the suggestion of a company hired by Michaels to draw up a master plan), issues about parking, delays from the city's end on property purchases and now finding a new developer, among others.

"I think when we looked at the terms of the agreement, we always felt like we were making a lot of concessions to make this work," Gluckman said.

Still, he said the county was willing to do it, as long as adequate parking was provided — which is difficult without a complete project, he said — and officials could move forward with their building. After the Aug. 18 meeting, however, county commissioners and staff members started to question that decision.

"The commissioners always felt one of the reasons we were looking at that project is because we were asked by the city of Loveland to join that project," Gluckman said.

But now, he said the commissioners are seriously considering another direction — the county owns more property at 10th Street and could use that property for its new building instead.

Gluckman said he can't speak for the commissioners but said he was working with City Manager Bill Cahill on plans, and despite the bumps, the project seemed to be moving forward, until councilors started to bring up their questions.

"With the board (of commissioners), I think from the county's perspective, there's a strong feeling (the city is) not looking at us as a catalyst, as an anchor for this project, but that we're another project. And it's making the county start to feel like, do we really want to be there?'" Gluckman said.

As of right now, until the commissioners come to a decision, the project is on hold, he said.

But that's not the perspective Cahill had of the project as of Friday afternoon.

He said the project with the county is moving forward, and the county and city are ready to sign the agreement, pending councilors' decision Tuesday night.

The changes in the project, according to Cahill, were due to budgetary restraints and the council directive to look at the potential move of the courts. As for the master plan that had located the new county building between Second and Third streets, Cahill said the drawings had problems and inadequacies that made the design not workable. And, at the time, the county building was planned to be much larger — 90,000 square feet as opposed to the now 45,000 to 50,000 square feet — because of the proposed move of the courts.

Cahill said of the concerns councilors raised in the Aug. 18 meeting and other times the issue has been brought up about the county building: "There have been questions raised occasionally, but those always get raised in a deliberative City Council (meeting)."

City staff members then look at those questions and bring back material to councilors to answer them, he said.

County officials plan to attend next Tuesday's City Council meeting for the discussion on the South Catalyst project.

For more information on the meeting, go to cityofloveland.org.

Saja Hindi: 970-669-5050 ext. 521, hindis@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/SajaHindiRH.