THE APRIL 28 special election to fill two seats on the D.C. Council will complete a transformation of the council started last year when three new members won seats. The addition of five new members within the space of a year, while not unprecedented for the 13-member body, nonetheless offers an unusual opportunity to bring new perspectives to government. Well-qualified candidates have put themselves forward, especially in Ward 8, so we hope voters will prove the predictions of low turnout wrong.

Early voting starts Monday at One Judiciary Square to fill the council vacancies created in Ward 8 by the death of Marion Barry Jr. and in Ward 4 by Muriel E. Bowser’s election to mayor. The races for the unexpired terms, to 2017, have attracted large fields of candidates, increasing the possibility that a small fraction of votes will be enough to win election.

In Ward 4, Brandon Todd has emerged from a crowded but relatively weak field as the best person to succeed Ms. Bowser. Mr. Todd ably served as Ms. Bowser’s director of constituent services and so is well-grounded in the issues and needs facing Ward 4 neighborhoods. He is right to focus on accelerating school reform and economic growth and on the needs of seniors as priorities for the ward, and his approach to governing is sensible. He knows how the D.C. government operates and would be a good addition to the council.

The crowded field on the ballot in Ward 8 includes people with solid credentials and community service, including Sheila Bunn, deputy chief of staff to former mayor Vincent C. Gray, and longtime civic activist Eugene D. Kinlow, but the person who stands out as exceptional is lawyer and community leader LaRuby May . Her blend of experience working and living in Ward 8 for 13 years includes two years as legislative intern and director of constituent services for Mr. Barry; heading the D.C. Housing Authority Board of Commissioners; teaching Sunday school; founding the first adult charter school east of the Anacostia River; and now heading a community development corporation that operates a preschool and has built housing for seniors.

All of this gives her insights into the problems facing the ward and practical ideas on how to tackle them. Whether the subject is affordable housing or education, reliable child care or returning citizens, she can point to lessons learned from experience as the basis for laws that need to be drafted, practices that need to be changed or strategies that should be put in place. She helped elect Ms. Bowser and now has the mayor’s support, but Ms. May leaves no doubt that her first allegiance will be to her ward.

Ward 8 is home to some of Washington’s poorest residents, but it also has great potential. It needs a council member who will fight to fulfill that potential while ensuring that the needs of the vulnerable are not neglected. Ms. May has the passion to wage that fight and the skills and savvy to do so effectively.