Buy Photo Dr. Jeffrey Lederman, a primary care doctor with Internal Medicine Associates of Monmouth in Manalapan, is a member of the MDVIP program, in which patients have access to personalized medicine. He checks the blood pressure of patient Gail Carmichael of Manalapan, who has been a patient with the practice for 18 years. (Photo: MARY FRANK/STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER )Buy Photo

Paul Newell walked into his doctor's office earlier this month and wondered if he had been transported back in time.

The waiting room was empty. His doctor explained the results of his test in detail. And he scheduled another physical for later in the year that he expected would be the most thorough checkup since he joined the Army.

"I remember as a child if I was sick, my mother would take me to the doctor's office, the doctor would see me, and at the end of the visit, my mother would pay the doctor," Newell, 67, of Oceanport, said. "You had a real direct personal relationship with your doctor."

Newell's physician, Dr. Jeffrey Lederman, is one of a handful of Shore-area doctors who have joined MDVIP, a company that offers one-on-one health care with one caveat: Most patients pay an annual fee of $1,650, along with any out-of-pocket expenses mandated by their insurance plans.

The annual fee pays more for convenience than for services. For example, patients' wellness visits likely are covered by their health insurance. But if they need to visit for, say, the flu, they still would be responsible for the copayment and, perhaps, the visit itself if they haven't reached their deductible.

Doctors who participate say it has freed them up to practice medicine the way they had always hoped. But their transition hasn't come without ruffling the feathers of long-time patients who don't have extra money and find themselves needing to decide whether to search for a new doctor.

Obamacare pays for dental clinic for uninsured

Buy Photo Dr. Jeffrey Lederman gives a lung screening test to patient Gail Carmichael of Manalapan. (Photo: MARY FRANK/STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER)

'Symptom of a problem'

"People are paying more to get better coverage, and what they really need to do is fix the system as a whole," said Maura Collinsgru, director of health policy for New Jersey Citizen Action, a consumer group. "This is not the solution. It's a symptom of the problem."

MDVIP, based in Boca Raton, Florida, has more than 700 physicians nationwide, including 32 in New Jersey and five in Monmouth and Ocean counties. Founded 14 years ago, it offers the same type of care corporate executives receive – an intense wellness visit, a battery of tests, a blueprint for a healthy lifestyle, same- or next-day appointments and their doctor's cell phone number in case of an emergency, or even waking up on a weekend with a sore throat.

It stands in contrast to doctors' daily routines that have become familiar: quick visits and then on to the next patient.

Lederman and his partner, Dr. Ronald Weinberg, have offices in Manalapan and Long Branch. Lederman said he was seeing 30 or 40 patients a day, which allowed him about 15 minutes to treat each patient. It wasn't what he had in mind when he graduated from medical school a dozen years ago with a specialty in preventive medicine.

MDVIP approached Lederman and Weinberg last year about joining. They had seen other doctors, overwhelmed with insurance paperwork, give up their practices to become employees of hospitals. But they saw this as their best option to keep their business and improve the quality of care they delivered.

The hitch: They needed to cut back on the number of patients, from more than 2,500 to no more than 600. They sent letters to their patients telling them about the change. They would offer personalized medicine and be available around-the-clock – for an annual fee. (Doctors get two-thirds of the fee; MDVIP gets one-third, a company spokeswoman said.)

Most patients didn't follow them in their new venture. Lederman said there still was room for new patients.

Obamacare tax subsidy ruling: What you need to know

'Best preventive medicine'

"It was not an easy decision, but if I wanted to provide care the best way I could and the best preventive medicine I could, the MDVIP model allows me to do that," Lederman said.

Not all patients are thrilled. Doreen Continanza of Barnegat said her father, Carl Pauli, had been diagnosed with liver cancer, when he received a letter in April telling him his doctor of five years would be moving to MDVIP.

Her father had little choice but to pay the annual fee, Continanza said.

Pauli died Aug. 6 at the age of 83. His doctor provided the extra attention that was promised, Continanza said, but still, something doesn't sit well with her.

"In the long run, we said it was good we did pay the money for it," she said, "but it was kind of like, isn't that what a doctor is supposed to do?"

It's emblematic of a health care system that is overwhelmed with demand – and one that the Affordable Care Act, often called Obamacare, is trying to address, Collinsgru of Citizen Action said.

NJ Obamacare prices highest in the nation

Outcome vs. services

Medicare and private insurers are introducing new models that pay doctors based on the outcome of care instead of the number of services they provide. The idea is that it will compel them to focus on preventive measures such as lowering a patient's blood pressure or helping a patient lose weight.

It would cut down on long-term health problems and, presumably, alleviate some of the stress on the health care system.

In short, it is a model that MDVIP already is using. Company CEO Dan Hecht said MDVIP patients have a far lower rate of hospitalization than their counterparts who visit other practices.

But is this medicine that only the wealthy can afford?

Hecht said, no; patients from all walks of life have joined. And the company ensures that patients who don't are referred to other doctors nearby.

Paul Newell looks at it this way: Before he enrolled in Medicare, he paid about $600 a month, not including copays and deductibles. He pays about $385 a month for his Medicare plan.

His MDVIP bill comes out to about $137.50 a month, bringing his total to $522.50 a month. He decided it was worth it.

"All of a sudden, the intensity of care, the level of care has gone up noticeably," Newell said. "That's what they went to medical school for. To be doctors."

Consumer groups argue NJ bill would weaken Obamacare

Michael L. Diamond; 732-643-4038; mdiamond@app.com

WHAT DO YOU GET FOR MDVIP?

• Office visits of at least 30 minutes.

• No wait.

• Around the clock availability to the doctor by email and cell phone.

• Individualized patient Web page.

• Online personal health records.

• Access to MDVIP doctors in other states.

Source: MDVIP

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1oAPtd0