CSU Healing Colorado State football players get a chance to audition Corner DeAndre Elliott impressing early

Colorado State senior cornerback DeAndre Elliott intercepts a pass during a drill on Friday. Sidelined during the spring, he is finally getting a chance to show the new coaching staff his skills live and in person. (Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald) CSU Camp Notes Position change — At the end of spring practice, coach Mike Bobo toyed with the idea of moving linebacker Cory James, possibly to the line to beef up the pass rush. During that time, they also experimented with him at middle linebacker, a switch from his normal Sam spot. James is starting in the middle, and so far Bobo likes what he's seen. "To me, if you're going to be a good football team, you've got to be good up the middle," he said. "On offense, that starts with center, quarterback, running back. Defense it's linebackers and safeties. he's one of our better players, and we wanted to put him there where he could make more plays." James has started 34 of 39 games in his career, collecting 31 tackles for loss, including 22 sacks to rank fifth all time on the school list. Mood setter — As Colorado State is beginning practice, Coach Mike Bobo has been talked into allowing music to be played over loudspeakers on the field. The decibels are definitely not concert-like, and the time period is limited. "That's a little more of (strength coach Ryan) Davis," Bobo said. "They want the music, and talked to Coach Davis, so we let them play it during the individual period. As long as we keep it clean, we'll listen to the music out here." The team came out to the aptly titled 'Bring 'Em Out' by Straight Up, so it wasn't Bobo's playlist. Missing a bit — Senior defensive end SteveO Michel has not been in camp yet, nor has true freshman defensive lineman O'Shea Jackson. Bobo said both were excused to deal with some family issues, and he expects both back soon. Also not yet on roster is Berthoud walk-on Nate Ryken. He will be added when school begins and the roster expands. Catching on — The freshmen now have three practices under their belt to get used to the differences between the college and prep levels. "They understand what we want, and we have good leadership and good seniors," Bobo said. "They're not allowing them not to practice at the tempo and the pace we want. They're lost a little bit, but it's a little easier to get acclimated now that school is over. Their last final was Friday, so now they're loving life. It's just football." FORT COLLINS — While spring camp was a learning experience for the entire Colorado State football roster, for a handful of the players, that's all was in the end. Injuries kept a few from getting any hands-on training in the new systems brought in by the staff, In turn, it also kept them from being able to show new head coach Mike Bobo what their true potential was on the field. Colorado State sophomore Jake Schlager, who sat out last year with injuries, has returned to the field and feels he's making progress in the new defensive system. (Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald) The injuries were especially notable on the defensive side of the ball in the spring game, where the secondary was short on numbers. As much as guys like DeAndre Elliott and Jake Schlager wanted to be on the field then, finally getting a chance to shine for the first time is a boon. "I was somewhat limited in the spring, but I feel this summer we all progressed really well," said Schlager, who also missed all of last season with ankle and hamstring issues. "I just carried over from the spring to the summer to the fall, and now it's my time to come back and show what I can do to the coaching staff since I was limited in the spring. I'm ready to go, ready to rock." Schlager's reps were light, keeping him out of team drills in the spring. It was worse for Elliott, whose hamstring injury had him rehabbing for the most part, taking in all he could in terms of mental reps when we wasn't. "In a way I do feel like this is my audition," said Elliott, who started six games last year, 23 in his career as he enters his senior season. "But I've been around for a long time, so they can look at film and see what kind of player I am, so I'm not too worried about it." Bobo and his staff definitely took a look a tape, and it does help. But when it comes to the evaluation process, having players on the field adds another dimension to the breakdown. "You learn more when you get out here, and first of all, how do they take coaching," Bobo said. "How do they respond to coaching. There's different styles, there's different terminologies. How fast do they learn? If we make a change, if we coach you up in the middle of a drill, can you adjust and be able to make changes." For Schlager, going to the tape was a two-year process, back to when he was a special teams standout as a true freshman. Injuries have hampered him since, but finally healthy and feeling good, he's moved back into the two-deep at safety. For him, the meetings in the spring were valuable, but it was the chance to run things live in the summer that boosted him most, leaving him feeling he wasn't playing a lot of catchup when fall camp began. "The spring with the limited reps, I got a taste, got my toes in the water," he said. "Into the summer, I was able to progress with that. Coming into the fall, I think I'm as far, if not farther, as I could have been coming in from the spring." Bobo noted before practices began that finding cornerbacks and establishing depth were target points, and Elliott's experience could go a long way in that regard. Elliott has had his moments in a Rams' uniform, intercepting five passes in his first three seasons and contributing 92 tackles. At 6-foot-1, 195 pounds, he brings the size and length desired for the spot, but he's also looking for a more even performance in his final campaign. "You could say I'm trying to put up the consistency, but at the end of the day, I'm just trying to have the best season I can have," Elliott said. "I want to show them that I'm a hard worker. I can come out here and grind as much as anybody else on the team. It's my last season, so I gotta go out with a bang." So far, Bobo has been pleased with what he's seen from the all of those on the mend, a group that includes center Jake Bennett and tight end Kivon Cartwright on offense, as well as Martavius Foster at defensive end. Add in some new faces, and the depth is already improved for defensive coordinator Tyson Summers. "We look better on defense when you put on No. 13 Elliott, you put out No. 9 (Foster), No. 94 and 95 (defensive linemen Darnell Thompson, a juco transfer; and Richard King, a true freshman from Rangeview)," Bobo said. "I'm really impressed with DeAndre Elliott. We've got to shore up some fundamental things we need to work on, but as far as length and ball skills, it's hard to throw one over him, back-shoulder him. He is an excellent defender." Mike Brohard: 970-635-3633, mbrohard@reporter-herald.com and twitter.com/mbrohard