January 29, 2016

The heart of the heartland knows something about roots, and I’m ever grateful that mine stem from the rich soil of my home state of Iowa.

In the western Iowa community of Carroll my brother Jeff and I formed our value base that gave us both a strong commitment to the common good.

For me, this now means support of and advocacy for Bernie Sanders as the Democratic nominee for president of the United States.

Why?

Bernie is trustworthy. “I meant what I said, and I said what I meant!” That proclamation of Dr. Seuss’s Horton the Elephant could well come from the person of Senator Bernie Sanders — though he’s not on the elephant side of the aisle.

Throughout his public life, Bernie has taken the path of integrity, which frequently has been the path of resistance. His vote against the war in Iraq was not a popular vote. His stance against mass incarceration has been against the grain.

His resistance to Clintonian welfare reform was uphill.

His longstanding advocacy of a sustainable environment meant countering the Keystone Pipeline.

His consistent advocacy for the American worker meant standing against the Trans-Pacific Partnership.

His lifetime activism on behalf of racial justice has been unwavering, and he understands the linkage with accountable policing and overall reform of incarceration practices. Black Lives Matter has long been a given in the Bernie book.

He understands feminist values that call for upholding Roe v. Wade and guaranteeing equal pay for equal work.

As for gun control, Bernie has a zero favorability rating by the NRA.

Campaign finance reform and universal health care have been Bernie mantras from the get-go.

“The best government money can buy” has too long been the default practice of electoral politics in our nation. He is unwavering in restoring the Glass-Steagall Act, unconscionably abolished in yes, a Democratic administration. He refuses to take big money from big PACs. It would be unlikely that a mega financial corporation would even ask Bernie to speak.

As for health care, he has never said he would enter office and outright abolish the Affordable Care Act; he helped write it. But he is resolute in working toward universal health care. He gets the impact of over-the-top health-care premiums and co-pays, legislated into the ACA through the bully pulpit that is the insurance industry. He knows that Iowans understand math. An abolition of insurance premiums and co-pays would far outweigh the cost of tax increases. The balance is significantly in your favor.

As for foreign policy, Bernie is less inclined than his primary opponent to call for military intervention.

As chair of the Senate Committee on Veterans Affairs, he perhaps knows all too well the stories of our brothers and sisters and mothers and fathers who return home ravaged by PTSD, or who do not return home at all. Like his primary opponent, he would wage relentless diplomacy but would take it “the extra mile.” Bernie is peace-loving, but not a pacifist.

As for democratic socialism, I was raised to cringe at the very word socialism. But I was also taught in the Carroll Public Schools to question, to analyze, and to go beyond face value.

Democratic socialism is simply democracy with a wider wingspan. Do you value your public schools? This is democratic socialism. Do you value your interstate highways? This is democratic socialism. Do you value federal regulation of prescription drugs? This is democratic socialism. Have you ever enjoyed the natural beauty of state parks and national recreation areas? This is democratic socialism. Do you respect the capacity of our military system? This is democratic socialism. Do you believe that women, infants and children deserve healthful nutrition? This is democratic socialism. Have you been hit hard by the economic recession of 2008? This was not democratic socialism. Democracy for the few — the reality to which we have grown so frighteningly accustomed — sounds to me far scarier than democracy for all.

Let your heart speak. Let your commitment to the common good rise.

Buy in to a pragmatism that suggests what Bernie stands for and what he proposes are possible. The seemingly impossible always takes awhile, but since when were Iowans not up to the task? As you caucus this coming Monday, I urge you to do so on behalf of the common good and your own best interests.

Speak out, turn out for Bernie Sanders as your choice of Democratic nominee for president of the United States.

I want to be so proud of my home state that you did so.