Nepal may be half a world away from South Placer County, but the pain, shock and uncertainty that its people are living through is something a group of local fifth grade students were recently asked to imagine. A little thought soon sparked a lot of concern among the youngsters – and they decided to do something about it.

Now, teachers at St. Rose Elementary say their fifth grade class is learning that people around the globe aren’t as far off as they thought, and that even small gestures can mean a lot to those in need.

For the students, the push to get involved in the Nepal relief effort started when they were asked to write personal journal entries on how they could make a difference in the tragedy that’s cost an estimated 7,500 lives. Under the direction of the school’s religion teacher, Darlene Carlson, and fifth grade teacher Christie Mounkes, the students then held a group brainstorming session on how their own class could come up with an immediate action plan. After an initial ideal to host a bake sale ran into snags, the fifth graders settled on an inter-school fundraising effort that involved breaking the school’s strict dress code for a day. For one calendar date, every student who brought a dollar or more could wear jeans or shorts to school.

Carlson was not expecting just how much cash this fun, well-meaning push would bring in.

“They made posters and announcements to all the students, and our small school of 290 students raised more than $400,” Carlson said. “They have studied and learned about the people of Nepal, the connections we have with these people who are suffering, and they now know that they can make a difference.”

This week, the fifth graders were all smiles with the knowledge the money they raised was on its way to help those in Nepal. And they had no difficulty explaining to the Press Tribune why it was important to them.

“It’s important because anything could happen to us, and we could get hit with an earthquake, and we would want other people to help us if we were in trouble,” observed a student named Jaden.

“Helping them is what God called us to do,” chimed in another student named Collin, alluding to his Catholic faith.

A student named Breanna told the Press Tribune she and her classmates were finding out that they weren’t helpless when it comes to hearing about bad news headlines.

“We can learn a lesson from what we did,” Breanna said, “especially that we can make a difference in the world.”

The teachers in charge of the class’s education could not agree more.

“It was a great opportunity for them to learn about some real world things,” Mounkes observed. “And in this case they were really able to connect with it.”

Scott Thomas Anderson can be reached at scotta@goldcountrymedia.com. Follow him on Twitter at ScottA_RsvPT