REXFORD >> The central figure in the trial that convicted a Rexford woman of harboring an illegal alien has filed a lawsuit against her former employer to recoup withheld wages.

Valsamma Mathai, 49, is the former maid and servant who was employed for six years by Annie George, 40, at three residences occupied by the George family. The civil complaint was filed in federal court by attorney David Irving of the Worker Justice Center of New York.

George was convicted in March of harboring Mathai, an illegal alien from India, in homes where she lived with her husband and their six children. She was found not guilty of a stiffer charge of harboring an illegal alien for monetary gain.

George’s husband was killed in a small plane crash in 2009.

In July, George was sentenced to five years probation and eight months of home detention. She and her family live in the Llenroc mansion, 788 Riverview Road.

At the sentencing, Judge Gary Sharpe upheld the government’s demand that she forfeit the home because it played a part in a criminal act.

In her complaint, Mathai said she worked for the George family from October 2005 until May 2, 2011. On that date, she was taken from the Riverview Road home by investigators from the Department of Homeland Security who feared she may have been a victim of human trafficking.

Mathai claims she worked seven days a week from 5:30 a.m. to 10:30 or 11 p.m. with no days off. She said her duties were to care for George’s six children, prepare all the meals, clean up afterward, do laundry, maintenance, upkeep and clean the home.

She alleges she was never allowed to leave the house on her own, never had access to the money she earned and was only occasionally allowed to accompany George and the children when they went out to look after them. According to Mathai’s complaint, the rules for her employment included that there was to be no talking, no TV viewing, no conversations with guests and no answering the front door.

“With no money and no way to leave the defendant’s home, (Mathai) felt completely helpless,” the complaint states.

Based on a contract Mathai was said to have agreed to when she was hired, she was to be paid $1,000 per month. Calculations in the filing state Mathai was working between 126 and 133 hours per week ,which works out to be between $1.75 and $1.85 per hour.

During the criminal trial, the assistant district director for the U.S. Department of Labor, a witness for the government, calculated that working 66 months at 17 hours per day plus overtime meant Mathai should have been paid $317,144.09. Less the $25,000 that was said to have been sent per Mathai’s instructions to her sons in India. The witness said Mathai was due $292,144.09.

The lawsuit claims George’s actions violate the Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act, the 13th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, specifically the section on involuntary servitude, and the Fair Labor Standards.

The filing also claims Mathai’s former employer’s actions violate the state’s minimum wage laws, its labor laws, the Domestic Worker Protection Overtime Law, the state’s rules for pay notice and wage statements and breach of contract.

Mathai is seeking compensatory and punitive damages, although no figure was given.

George is represented in the case by Latham attorney John Hartwick, who did not return a call for comment.