Scott, feds reach deal on disputed hospital funding

TALLAHASSEE—Gov. Rick Scott’s administration and federal officials reached a tentative deal Tuesday over a $1 billion pot of hospital funding that derailed Florida’s regular legislative session.

Scott administration officials traded barbs over the past few months with federal officials as they began following through with a phase-out of the Low Income Pool, or LIP, traditionally a mix of federal and local cash used by hospitals to provide indigent care.

Story Continued Below

The program was created in 2005 as part of an agreement with the federal government that allowed Florida to overhaul its Medicaid system. It lapsed, but was renewed in 2013. Federal officials announced last month that they were cutting the program from $2.1 to $1 billion next year, and reducing it to $608 million next year.

This year’s cut blasted a $1 billion hole in the state budget, which necessitated a 20-day special legislative session to craft a state spending plan.

The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services announced Tuesday that it has reached a so-called “agreement in principle” with the state over a model that will dictate how that money flows to state hospitals. Among the stipulations is that the LIP funding can’t be used to pay costs “that would be covered in a Medicaid expansion” under the Affordable Care Act.

“CMS reached an agreement in principle with Florida on the size, duration, and distribution of funds of the state’s Low Income Pool that reflects our best assessment of the appropriate contours for the Florida LIP,” said C.M.S. press secretary Ben Wakana.

Throughout the sometimes tense negotiations, Medicaid expansion played a starring role. At Scott’s urging, Florida Attorney General Pam Bondi, a Republican, sued President Obama’s administration after the state said federal officials were “linking” LIP funding with Florida’s willingness to expand Medicaid.

C.M.S. also required increased reimbursement rates paid to hospitals for providing care to Medicaid patients. The agency said low rates are becoming a hurdle for low-income patients to receive care.

“During the time LIP has been in existence, provider payment rates have been cut by 25 percent, continuing a trend the state started before LIP was created,” wrote C.M.S. director Vikki Wachino, in a May letter announcing the LIP cuts.

In response, the state used $400 million in state funds to boost hospital rates, a move that drew down an additional $600 million in federal Medicaid funding. The $1 billion in LIP funding combined with the new rate money means the total pot of hospital indigent care funding sits at about $2 billion, roughly the same size as this year.

When lawmakers return to Tallahassee next session, they will still have to approve a new LIP model to oversee hospital funding for 2016-17. Wachino said in her letter that next year’s LIP funding will be distributed based on that new model and the amount of uncompensated care given by each provider.

House Speaker Steve Crisafulli of Merritt Island said last week that with the shrinking of the LIP funding, hospitals will have to rework their revenue streams moving forward.

“Hospitals have seen what the futures hold for them,” he said. “They will have to restructure their business models and know that Washington isn’t going to be there for them anymore.”