Bob Stanley’s “Yeah!Yeah!Yeah! The Story of Popular Music from Bill Haley to Beyoncé” is a rare thing: a work of popular music criticism written by a successful popular musician. Although many well-regarded novelists have a sideline in literary criticism and artists since Vasari have written about their peers and forebears, very few pop musicians are also critics of popular music. ( Yes, Chrissie Hynde wrote for England’s New Musical Express, but that was before she joined The Pretenders.)

It’s not hard to see why. Rock critics get no respect; they are regarded as not quite legitimate by their colleagues in the more established fields of literature, classical music and theater. For the popular musician, the rock critic is a pain in the neck, pointing out unacknowledged borrowings and outright thefts, insisting that the musician’s songs, which are rarely more than a lick, a groove, and a few lucky rhymes, possess a deeper meaning. And as the movie “Almost Famous” beautifully showed, the critic by his very existence violates the musician’s sense of cool, his need to be the least-verbal and most- nonspecific person in the room.

This is a shame , because what popular music criticism has lacked from the beginning is the sort of thing that someone like Bob Stanley, who plays keyboards in the bestselling British group Saint Etienne, provides: not just technical knowledge, but also a sense of what creating pop is like from the inside.

Here is Stanley on Phil Collins:

“Collins believed that everything sounded better with gated reverb, which gave the off beat the jackboots-on-Rice-Krispies sound. Most producers agreed. Studios were rebuilt, stripped bare, all Seventies cushioning removed to accommodate this stark, bass-free sound. Collins was a jazz drummer, and his inventiveness could circumvent the brutality of this sound on a 4/4 beat, but most drummers were less talented. Everything got bigger, tinnier, thinner.”

Like most working artists, Stanley finds in the past the tendencies that validate the art he creates. Saint Etienne is a slick synth-pop band fronted by a series of female singers,

all of them young and telegenic, and “Yeah!YeahYeah!!” has a heavy emphasis on glamorous synthetic genres like disco and electronica. Stanley is surprisingly enamored of the testosterone-free rap of the Pet Shop Boys’ “West End Girls,” of Kylie Minogue and KLF. Donna Summers’ “I Feel Love” might be his choice for the best pop record ever made.

Though he’s sharp and original about Elvis, Motown and the California singer-songwriter scene (“the most successful economic model in the history of entertainment. They wrote, sang, frequently performed alone, and sold albums rather than singles”), Stanley is stronger on British pop, which for him always comes out of a particular time and place. About Skiffle, that bizarre, artless British take on American jug-band music, much of it made with washboard, broomstick and a kazoo, Stanley shows its roots in postwar austerity. “Skiffle was an exciting noise,” he writes, “and it was exciting because it was noise.”

In the chapter : It Came from the Suburbs: Glam,” Stanley examines the long apprenticeships and spectacular breakouts of Marc Bolan and David Bowie, both working-class lads from drab suburbs outside of London. About Bowie’s early singles he writes, “Bowie’s early songs smelled of woodsmoke over the suburban fence, of railway stations, platforms, and waiting rooms — the golden road to London Town.”

Stanley perceptively notes that the rise of glam, a fashion- rather than music-based genre that John Lennon dismissed as “just rock ‘n’ roll with lipstick on,” coincided with the introduction of color TV in Britain.

“Yeah!Yeah!Yeah!” was first published in England, and to this American reader, part of its interest is in documentating the divergence of British and American pop tastes.After all, Lonnie Donegan and Glam barely charted in America, nor did ska, the ’60s precusor to reggae, nor did the ska revival of the early ’80s.

Stanley ends his survey in 1999. By his account, the modern pop era ended with the introduction of Napster and the emergence of a new homogeneity in pop, what he calls “the pick ‘n’ mix digital era.” But there is always hope.

As he writes, “All that a musician needs to do is to rearrange the constituent parts of the modern pop era in a way that no one has done before, and I hope that some 15-year-old in Newark, N.J., or Newark, Notts, is working on it right now.”