I went to hear Marco Rubio speak in New York Tuesday about his economic plans for America. It’s quickly easy to see why his political star is ascending — he’s certainly polished and non-bloviating in his demeanor. Compared to his competitors in the GOP race little of what he has to say is notably scary — unless you dig a little deeper below the surface.

Rubio focused his remarks on the on-demand economy — Uber, Airbnb, Handy.com, and others that use online platforms to connect consumers to freelance workers. Rubio said such companies represent the kind of cutting-edge innovation that “only American free enterprise could produce.”

Advertisement

While Rubio was big on platitudes he was lighter on specifics. He railed against “burdensome regulations” but provided little insight into which regulations were so burdensome. Much of what he had to say was standard Republican fare — presenting big, impersonal government as an impediment to economic tranformation and calling Americans “the most innovative, creative, and productive people on earth.”

But it’s what Rubio didn’t talk about that was so striking — actual workers. Now, to be sure, this was a mostly tech-heavy, entrepreneur crowd, but nonetheless in Rubio’s description, the on-demand economy workers appear to be something of an afterthought. Sure, on the one hand they can use services like Handy or Lyft to be independent entrepreneurs, which is all well and good, unless you’re concerned about things like health care and retirement benefits and workplace protections.

Consider, for example, that Obamacare’s greatest impact is in reforming the individual health insurance market and making it possible for freelance workers to buy affordable health insurance. Rubio wants to repeal Obamacare. His criticism of regulation included things like the minimum wage, which he doesn’t want to see raised, and the federal social safety net, which he wants to see scaled back.

Indeed, it’s impossible to talk about the benefits of an on-demand economy without talking about the potential downsides for workers who have almost no job security and no certainty over how much money they will make from year-to-year. Economic innovation is great but without a strengthened safety net, workers are going to see transitory benefits.

Indeed, Rubio claims on his website that he is seeking the presidency because he wants “to make it easier for working families to achieve the American dream,” but based on his comments on Tuesday the only ones who are going to find life easier in a Rubio economy are the mavens of economic innovation — not the people whose labor they’re profiting from.