Lynn Allinger and her husband Gary have owned and operated Craft Company No. 6 on University Avenue since 1980. The couple plans retire to North Carolina. It took a while but they found a prospective owner, Kathy Verzillo, to carry on the business. (Photo: ANNETTE LEIN)

Lynn Allinger has been the person — and the spirit — behind Craft Company No. 6, a highly regarded artisanal gift store in the Neighborhood of the Arts in Rochester, for many years.

But time is the small-business customer that is never satisfied. It just keeps coming.

Allinger is now 66. She and her husband Gary, also a key person in the ascent of the Craft Company during more than 30 years, have property in North Carolina where they wish to retire.

It took a while but they found a prospective owner, Kathy Verzillo, to carry on the business. Ownership is expected to transfer over in February.

Allinger said she still loves the business, as does Gary, who is a woodworker and artist. But, she said, the realities of modern business are different from years ago.

“The Internet. The web. We have a website but it’s hard to keep up,” Allinger said. “This is the electronic age.”

The new owner, she said, is of boomer age but her son isn’t. He will help with the web and social media, which are puzzles, she said, best solved by the young.

Allinger is on the cutting edge of an emerging business trend. According to the online market analyst firm BizBuySell, 68 percent of business brokers queried said they handled more transactions in 2013 than in 2012. Half of the surveyed brokers said retiring boomers were the reason behind half of all the sales of small business in 2013.

The brokers see this trend accelerating in 2014. Eighty-three percent of them said they expect 2014 to be even more active than 2013 in terms of handling the sales of small business, specifically the buying and selling of a firm, and 76 percent of the brokers expect more boomers to retire next year than this.

Age isn’t the only reason there were more transactions last year, BizBuySell reported. An improving economy and expenses related to the Affordable Care Act were reasons cited by those selling businesses.

“Overall, brokers recognize the uncertainty of the economy, but still appear very confident that small business transactions will continue to rise in 2014,” BizBuySell.com and BizQuest.com manager Curtis Kroeker said in a statement. “As more buyers and sellers, including Baby Boomers, continue to flood the market, all the pieces point to another strong year in the business-for-sale community.”

When the brokers were asked what could derail the economy and the transactions market, 35 percent said a national debt crisis could do it while 21 percent cited health-care costs.

Rochester’s small-business environment is characterized by a large number of family-owned businesses. When one generation approaches retirement, the next one, in many cases, steps in to run the business.

Richard Rowe, who will turn 65 next year, is the owner of Rowe Photo, Audio and Video, which has stores in Rochester and Webster as well as Scott’s Photo by Rowe on East Avenue in the city. The business is in its third generation of Rowes, beginning in 1898.

“I still have the passion for the business,’’ Rowe said. “But I don’t want to be 75 years old and trying to come in here to work.”

Sometimes boomers hit the end of the road before they realize the ride is over.

Mark Tepper, president and founder of Strategic Wealth Partners in Ohio, said proper planning is critical.

“Ideally, you should start planning for your exit the day you begin your business,” Tepper said. “If you do that, you’ll manage your business as an investment as opposed to a vehicle that supports your lifestyle.”

TTOBIN@DemocratandChronicle.com Twitter.com/tobin3

Read or Share this story: http://on.rocne.ws/1cnJsnW