More young adults are benefiting from non-emergency hospital care under the Affordable Care Act, student researchers said Friday, but the legislation has resulted in scant improvements to primary care physician access or to reducing emergency room use for non-emergency conditions.

The three topics were discussed at the College of William and Mary's Graduate Research Symposium Friday.

John Snouffer, a student in William and Mary's master of public policy program, studied the effect the legislation's dependent coverage mandate has had on non-emergency hospital admissions for young adults. The ACA requires health insurance to cover dependents through age 25.

Snouffer told the Daily Press that, overall, his findings were "encouraging."

"I hope that in the future this may help legislators make more informed decisions," he said.

Using hospital data from Virginia Health Information, a state-contracted reporting agency, Snouffer looked at admissions before the mandate from 2008 to 2009 and after the mandate, from 2012 to 2014. A second group, Virginians ages 27 to 29, were used as a control group for comparison. Coverage was not expanded to that group, but the patients serve as a useful comparison because the age group has similar health care access and use, Snouffer said.

The research did not include admissions for childbirth.

Snouffer found a 9 percent increase in non-emergency hospital visits among patients 19-25 compared to the control group. Additionally, the mandate increased non-emergency mental illness admissions by nearly 12 percent for those under the mandate, he said.

Virginia Commonwealth University student Tyler Braun also looked at the effect of the employer coverage mandate for young adults. His research focused on the use of emergency rooms for non-emergency conditions.

An emergency department visit can cost up to 728 percent more than a trip to a primary care doctor. People use ERs for non-emergencies, Braun said, because they are required to treat all patients, regardless of coverage.

Using federal health care survey data, Braun compared the years 2007-2009 to the years 2011-1013 and found just a 5 percent decrease among 19-to 25-year-olds in ER use for non-emergencies.

He said he thinks increased coverage only partially addresses the problem with patients using ERs for conditions a primary care physician can treat. Patients also need to be educated about health care use, he said.

"We see a lot of people not understanding or not knowing how to navigate the health care system," he said.

A third researcher, VCU student Mandar Bodas, looked at the legislation's effect on access to primary care physicians. The act increased the amount of Medicaid payments for primary care physicians in 2013 and 2014.

Before the legislation, only 66 percent of primary care doctors across the U.S. accepted Medicaid payments, survey data showed. That's largely because Medicaid pays less than Medicare and private insurers, he said.

Bodas did not find a statistically significant increase in the number of doctors who accepted Medicaid patients during the time period, he said.

Bodas said administrative burdens could be one reason. Another problem could be that the increase was not permanent. Just 15 states continued with the higher payments after the mandate expired, he said.

"The physicians knew after two years they would go back to the old rates," he said.

Ketchum can be reached by phone at 757-247-7478.