Congressman's political track record is unmatched among 2016 candidates

Buy Photo U.S. Rep. John Carney, D-Delaware, speaks at Dover High School on Tuesday. He has has won five statewide elections as lieutenant governor and congressman. (Photo: JASON MINTO/THE NEWS JOURNAL)Buy Photo Story Highlights U.S. Rep. John Carney first staked a claim on the Delaware governorship eight years ago

Congressman John Carney is back in a familiar position – next in line to win Delaware's top political office.

It was eight years ago when Carney, 59, first staked a claim on the governorship, only to end up on the wrong side of a bruising Democratic primary battle.

This time around, Carney's path to power could not be clearer. He has cornered Democratic support in a deeply blue state, quickly raising more than $200,000 and capitalizing on three decades of government experience to secure the backing of virtually all of Delaware's top Democratic officeholders.

Among his most vocal supporters is Delaware Gov. Jack Markell, the same politician who in 2008 rejected pleas from Democratic Party leaders hoping to avoid a primary contest and went on to beat Carney that September and Republican Bill Lee in the general election.

Now, a year from Election Day, no other Democratic candidates seem interested in challenging Carney, a tested candidate who has won five statewide elections as lieutenant governor and congressman.

"The experience, the number of times he's been on the ballot statewide, there is a comfort level that Democratic primary voters in Delaware have with Carney," said Erik Raser-Schramm, a longtime Delaware Democratic operative.

Even Republicans are wary of launching a challenge.

Carney's front-runner status is so cemented that Delaware Sen. Colin Bonini, the favorite to earn the Republican nomination, may walk away from his earlier expressed intentions to seek the Republican nomination for governor. Two Republican sources close to Bonini said he is instead eyeing a campaign for lieutenant governor, where he might have a greater chance against lesser-known statewide politicians.

Buy Photo Sen. Colin Bonini, R-Dover South (Photo: THE NEWS JOURNAL)

Bonini's own internal polling shows him down more than 20 points against Carney, hardly surprising in a state where registration figures show there are 125,000 more Democratic voters than Republicans. Democrats control registration in all but a few conservative districts in Harrington, Selbyville, Greenville and Pike Creek.

In some areas of Kent and New Castle counties, Republicans are outnumbered by voters who do not identify with either of the major parties.

“My message is going to be, if you like things the way they are, vote for John. If you think things need to move in a different direction, I’m asking for your vote," Bonini said recently, discussing his campaign strategy.

Delaware's open 2016 governor race is the most significant, but will likely not be the most competitive, on next year's ballots. Three Democrats and two Republicans already are seeking Carney's congressional seat in Washington. Primary elections are scheduled for Sept. 13, with the general election nearly two months later on Nov. 8.

The Carper connection

Carney's Delaware's political pedigree is unmatched among 2016 candidates – even if his executive branch experience says little about how he would address the political challenges of 2015, including a slow-growing economy and financial uncertainty in Legislative Hall.

He was deputy chief of staff and finance secretary to then Gov. Tom Carper in the 1990s, brokering tax deals and leading the administration's efforts in 1995 to secure the purchase of the Port of Wilmington from the city.

Buy Photo Gov. Jack Markell (from left), Rep. John Carney and Sen. Chris Coons applaud the announcement that JPMorgan Chase & Co. will add 1,800 Delaware jobs by 2019 during an event on Oct. 26. Carney is part of a group of Delaware Democrats who have shaped state government over the past three decades. (Photo: SUCHAT PEDERSON/THE NEWS JOURNAL)

Carney still draws on support from his time in Carper's office, when he worked alongside a tight-knit group of Democrats who have played significant roles in Delaware government and politics over the past three decades.

Carney was hired into state government by Carper's chief of staff, Jeff Bullock, who was later tapped as Markell's secretary of state, a key Cabinet position that protects Delaware's billion-dollar brand as a leading legal home for U.S. corporations.

"I always admired his work ethic and his dedication to the job," Bullock said recently. "When you're in a governor's office, you're asked to do a variety of different roles ... running the government day-to-day and carrying out the governor's agenda. So you need somebody who can take complex problems, figure them out and then implement whatever the solution is. That's John's greatest strength."

Delaware Chief Justice Leo Strine, a lawyer in Carper's governor office, remains close to Carney, too, though he would not be interviewed for this story. He could be a key ally on criminal justice and other issues if Carney wins the governor's office. Two Democrats running to replace Carney in Congress also worked in the Carper administration. Delaware Rep. Bryon Short, a state lawmaker since 2007, was a young constituent relations aide and later a transportation official. Lisa Blunt Rochester served in Carper's Cabinet as labor secretary.

After his tenure as a key Carper aide, Carney won two terms as Delaware's lieutenant governor, presiding over the state Senate and forging deeper bonds in the Delaware General Assembly. Since his defeat in the 2008 governor race, he has won three terms to Congress.

There are critical questions about how Carney would govern in 2016, a time of waning tax collections and exploding costs in health care and public education that are forcing difficult budget discussions in Dover.

His tenure in the Carper administration was vastly different, marked by a wealth of resources and a booming economy.

The DuPont Co. employed more than 20,000 people in Delaware. Gambling taxes poured into state coffers, increasing 371 percent during Carney's time in the Carper administration with the introduction of slot machines to Delaware's racetracks. And a roaring stock market meant millions more in revenue from new Delaware corporations.

During his first year with Carper, in 1994, Delaware state spending rose 11.5 percent. "I've told members of my Cabinet that we're not going to have this kind of spending growth in the future," Carper told reporters after midnight on July 1, 1994, after lawmakers passed the budget in Dover.

Delaware financial records show spending grew on average 8.9 percent through the second half of the 1990s under Carper, with Carney helping lead the charge. As finance secretary, Carney gained favor in the General Assembly by brokering budget deals that included dramatic tax cuts paired with increases in spending.

In 1999, lawmakers and the Carper administration enacted sweeping personal income tax cuts, gave tax breaks to seniors and raised spending 18 percent over two years, directing millions more to public education, Delaware's colleges and universities, prisons and the state bureaucracy.

Predictably, the largesse won Carney friends on both sides of the political aisle in Dover. "He was a good negotiating partner and certainly a man who comes ready to work," said Wayne Smith, the former Republican majority leader of the Delaware House of Representatives who negotiated budget deals with Carney. "He tends to be moderate in his views, which I think makes him more of a centrist. That's what you want in a governor."

Smith noted that, financially, the times have changed. Lawmakers negotiated past 4 a.m. on July 1 to balance this year's budget, tapping more than $30 million in one-time financial settlement money to cover just 2.6 percent higher operational spending.

"The tenor of the times could not be more different," Smith said. "Back then we had more money than we knew what to do with."

Carney would not agree to an interview, saying he remains focused on his work in Washington and is not ready to discuss his plans for the governor's office or his approach to problems in Dover. "The congressman is focused on his work in Washington on behalf of the people who elected him," said Jessica Borcky, a spokeswoman for the Carney campaign. "There will be plenty of time in the future to talk about the governor's race."

Carney had not lost his bug for big spending by his second term in the lieutenant governor's office. During his last bid for governor, Carney proposed a universal health care program, funded with extensive Delaware taxpayer subsidies, but failed to identify a detailed price tag.

His plan included a "major expansion" of Medicaid, additional state insurance assistance for low-to-moderate-income families, and, to help foot the bill, higher taxes on cigarettes and businesses that failed to offer insurance to their employees. Delaware families of four making up to $103,250 might have qualified for new assistance.

With the passage of the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, in 2010, the federal government made similar changes, including a Medicaid expansion paid for primarily at the federal level. "I would hope that after a few years, we would be closer if not fully transitioned to universal health care for everyone," Carney said in rolling out his plan in October 2007.

Electing Democrats they know

Key Carney allies insist he is ready for the job and is uniquely qualified to negotiate deals in Legislative Hall.

"The hardest job in the government is being governor. He's coming back to accept that responsibility. He could have taken that train for the next 20 years," said Robert Gillian, the former Democratic House speaker who worked with Carney in the Legislature. "He understands finances. He knows how to put a budget together, and he knows how to work with people. All those things are going to help him."

Carper said Carney was an important member of his administration in the 1990s. He said Carney built relationships in Dover and was critical in negotiating a 1995 deal that secured the purchase of the Port of Wilmington, a move that had been panned by labor leaders in the city.

“People in Delaware are fortunate that a person with his abilities and his integrity is willing to make this run. I respect him greatly,” Carper said in an interview.

On balance, Carney's political experience looks like an advantage. Delawareans already have a propensity to not only elect Democrats, but Democrats they know.

Former Delaware Gov. Ruth Ann Minner, who served in Delaware’s top office from 2001 to 2009, had been lieutenant governor during Carper’s eight years as governor in the 1990s. Delaware Attorney General Matt Denn was a lawyer for Minner, before winning two terms as lieutenant governor and securing the attorney general's post last November.

Buy Photo Lawmakers attend a session in the Delaware Statehouse on June 30, 2014. (Photo: KYLE GRANTHAM/THE NEWS JOURNAL, KYLE GRANTHAM/THE NEWS JOURNAL)

It is telling that Markell was considered an insurgent, outsider candidate in 2008, even after he served for a decade as Delaware's elected state treasurer.

“It’s a little bit depressing for folks who might be on the outside and what we would call first-generation candidates,” Hoff said. “How do you get to the threshold of name recognition? Or come up with donors who can put you in the big leagues for funding of a serious campaign?”

It's a question that could play out in the 2016 race to replace Carney in Congress. Delaware Sen. Bryan Townsend, a Newark Democrat and corporate lawyer in Wilmington, has rallied the support of younger Democrats, but has less institutional backing than Short and Rochester, both of whom worked for Carper's gubernatorial administration.

Townsend wears his independence as a badge of honor.

"People have reached out to me and said I'm very glad I'm not the next man up on someone's bench. People do want a fresh and independent approach to things," Townsend said.

On the Republican side, the situation is even more difficult for first-time candidates without deep political roots here like those propelling Carney's campaign. When Ken Simpler won the 2014 state treasurer's race, he became the first non-incumbent to win statewide office in two decades.

“It has always struck me that it’s not necessarily beneficial to have a group of people who have not ever worked outside of government, running government,” Simpler said recently. “I think I bring some ideas different to the table because I didn’t grow up around the same water cooler.”

Contact Jonathan Starkey at (302) 983-6756, on Twitter @jwstarkey or at jstarkey@delawareonline.com.

From staff assistant to gubernatorial candidate

Congressman John Carney, 59, of Wilmington, has risen through the ranks of political positions and is now running for Delaware governor.

1986-1989: Staff assistant, Office of U.S. Sen. Joe Biden

1989-1994: Deputy chief administrative officer, New Castle County

1994-1997: Deputy chief of staff, Office of Delaware Gov. Tom Carper

1997-2000: Secretary of Finance, state of Delaware, Cabinet position

2001-2009: Lieutenant Governor, state of Delaware, elected to two four-year terms

2011-current: Representative, U.S. House

Read or Share this story: http://delonline.us/1NSvdPM