White House campaign to end sexual assault on campuses launched in September

Watch CU-Boulder's "It's On Us" video bit.ly/103OKGE

The University of Colorado has created a short video modeled after a White House public service announcement that aims to end sexual assault on college campuses.

In September, the White House launched the "It's On Us" campaign aimed at getting more men and bystanders involved in preventing sexual violence. It released a video featuring celebrities such as Jon Hamm, Questlove and Kerry Washington pledging to intervene before sexual assault occurs.

The CU video features local celebrities such as Chancellor Phil DiStefano and campus student government leaders Lora Roberts, Juedon Kebede and Chelsea Canada, among others.

Buffs quarterback Sefo Liufau also appears in the 1-minute video.

"When you localize the message it helps its effectiveness," said campus spokesman Ryan Huff. "It's one thing when you see a national celebrity in a public service announcement but when you see your chancellor, your student government leaders, your standout student athletes, it resonates. 'People around me are on board so maybe I should get behind this movement too.'"

Various students, faculty members and administrators make cameos in the short video with phrases such as "Never blame the victim" and "It's on us to make sure guys know that if she cannot or does not consent to sex, it's sexual assault."

Campus leaders have been enthusiastically supportive of the "It's On Us" campaign as CU works to end sexual assault more locally. The Boulder campus has been under investigation by the U.S. Department of Education since last summer for potentially violating Title IX, the federal gender equity law that prohibits sexual assault.

The White House campaign shifts the conversation toward what men, bystanders and the community at large can do to end sexual violence. In the past, efforts have focused on what victims can do to protect themselves.

The White House says that campus communities need to create an environment where sexual assault is unacceptable and survivors are supported.

Huff said the campus was "inspired" by the White House video, and decided to interview people across the university. He said he hopes other student groups and organizations will feel compelled to make their own videos to spread the word.

"We just hope that after people watch it, it inspires dialogue among their peers because ending sexual assault can't be solved by one person," he said. "It's really something collectively all of us need to get behind."

Sarah Kuta: 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta