President Barack Obama made few references to health care during his State of the Union address, but one topic in the spotlight was what he referred to as "precision medicine," a way of approaching diseases in a highly individualized way by using patient DNA to predict how one might respond to specific treatments.

"Tonight, I'm launching a new precision medicine Initiative to bring us closer to curing diseases like cancer and diabetes – and to give all of us access to the personalized information we need to keep ourselves and our families healthier," Obama said Tuesday in his address.

Obama did not elaborate on the details of his plan for precision medicine, more frequently referred to as personalized medicine, or which avenue he might take in carrying out the initiative.

To drive his point home, in the audience sat William Elder Jr., 27, a guest of first lady Michelle Obama who was diagnosed with cystic fibrosis as a child. Because of the new health care approach, he, as part of a small subset of patients, was given medication that targets the underlying cause of the disease. "I want the country that eliminated polio and mapped the human genome to deliver a new era of medicine, one that delivers the right treatment at the right time," Obama said Tuesday in his address.

[READ: SOTU Approach to Health Care: Imply, Don't Announce]

Human DNA was mapped through the human genome project, which was funded by the U.S. government and completed in 2003, revealing that there are about 20,500 human genes. Mutations in these genes help doctors understand how susceptible a person might be to a particular illness, and allow researchers to target cures that respond accurately.

"As I was watching [the address] I was delighted," says Dr. Richard Weinshilboum, acting director of the Mayo Clinic Center for Individualized Medicine in Rochester, Minnesota. "The timing is excellent."

Weinshilboum worked with Dr. Francis Collins, now the director of the National Institutes of Health, in mapping human DNA. "The genome project was reported on as if it were a race to the finish line," he says. "But we knew it was a race to the starting line."

The current approach to medicine is one of trial and error, where patients may at times use several types of medications or other treatment methods over courses of several years before finding the one that is right for them. Every person is different, and a treatment that works for one may not work for another.

This current approach can be expensive, lengthy, and cause patients frustration or painful side effects as they wait to determine the efficacy of a treatment. A personalized medicine approach would span all areas of medicine, from psychiatry to oncology. "It's an effort to bring the science to the bedside and individualize it truly for every patient," Weinshilboum says.

[ALSO: Can Minors Refuse Medical Care? ]

Eventually, he says, doctors will be sequencing tumors and trying to understand the biology of that particular patient's cancer. Collins had been the first to map the gene that caused cystic fibrosis, which likely affected Elder's positive outcome.

Dr. Scott Weiss, scientific director at Partners HealthCare Center for Personalized Genetic Medicine, says one way Obama could support an personalized medicine initiative is through NIH, the typical route for this type of project.

"I still think that the major problem here is the NIH budget," he says. "We haven't had an increase in the budget for quite some time."

Collins has made it no secret that the agency is short on funding. He said publicly in 2014 that the reason there was no vaccine against the Ebola virus was because of cuts to the NIH budget.

Whether the initiative takes public or private routes remains to be seen. Weiss, who is also a physician at Brigham and Women's Hospital and a professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School, says several large academic medical centers would be poised to do research in personalized medicine if money were available.