Stepping up: Phil Moss (R) with John Kosmina and Graham Arnold. Photo: Getty Images

It's been a long road to the top for Phil Moss and, on the day he was unveiled as the replacement for Graham Arnold, the new Central Coast Mariners coach said it was a nightmare start to his coaching career that made him determined to stay in the game.

Moss' first coaching experience came unexpectedly 12 years ago, when he was asked to take charge of Northern Spirit's youth team for the 2001 grand final after a sudden coaching reshuffle.

He was thrown in at the deep end and, having not been taught how to swim, it was not surprising he nearly drowned under that pressure. A shattering 5-1 loss could have dashed his coaching dream, but instead it became his motivation to succeed.

''We got our arses spanked 5-1 by Marconi but I walked off that day thinking, 'This is what I want to do','' Moss said.

Advertisement

It was a painful start to his career in the dugout, one that would have deterred many others from remaining in the game.

But the four-goal hammering became the catalyst for a career as a professional coach.

''That motivated me. I knew I had to start at the bottom and do an apprenticeship so I could handle whatever was thrown at me at the top level,'' Moss said.

''I always loved the challenge of being knocked down and having people say that I wasn't good enough to make it. That just motivates me. I'm a winner, I don't take second best, and I walked off the field that day thinking it wasn't a great day in the office but, if this was the challenge coaching throws up, it's for me.''

There is a similarity between the fighting spirit of Moss and that of the Mariners, a club that has historically succeeded against the odds and in the face of adversity.

That said, it's not an image Moss believes exists any more.

He does not see his side just as combative athletes able to punch above their weight, but also as some of the most technically gifted players in the league.

''We love having our backs to the wall and coming out swinging, and that's what we always get from our players and that's what they're going to get from me as a coach,'' Moss said.

''But we don't see ourselves as underdogs. I don't see us as battlers. I see us as a competent football team that's capable of achieving great things.''

He inherits a squad that conquered the A-League last year and made giant strides in the Asian Champions League, losing out to eventual champions Guangzhou Evergrande. The foundations and structures put in place by former coach Arnold will remain.

By his own admission, Moss will ''keep the ship steering in the same direction as Arnie'' but he hinted there would be a distinct trace of his own influence at the club.

''There will be tweaks here and there, and I will put my stamp on things, I run things my own way. I am my own man, I think you have to be as a head coach. I'm a leader of men, and I want that passed through the squad.''

The Mariners' structure will remain intact across the back line, and throughout the spine of their formation, but the fans might be treated to more free-flowing football in attack.

''We're in the entertainment business so I'm certainly not going to put the shackles on them,'' Moss said. ''We work hard defensively - there's no options in defence - but I want them to express themselves going forward and play attractive football.''

When it comes to personality traits, one of Arnold's most distinct characteristics will remain at Bluetongue Stadium.

''I think the main attribute I bring is honesty,'' Moss said. ''I'll always be honest with everyone. Sometimes people won't hear what they want to hear but, as long as I speak my mind and I'm honest, I'll sleep at night.''