Questions and Answers (Photo: frender)

Question:

My husband and I have our 23-year-old son on our family plan, but we want him to get his insurance on the exchange. We do not claim him as a dependent.

He is a freelancer, and his income can vary month to month. For 2013, his income will be about $12,000. He estimates his income next year will range from $14,000 to $18,000.

On the exchange application, if he estimates his income to be $16,000 he is eligible to select a policy with a very good subsidy which makes his insurance affordable. If he estimates his income to be $15,000 he must sign up for Medicaid. But he really doesn’t want to do that because his doctor doesn’t take Medicaid.

If he estimates high and he doesn’t make that amount, what happens with his subsidy?

Answer:

The exchange clearly states that applicants should answer questions truthfully and that there may be implications for giving fraudulent information. However, projected income for 2014 is just that — projected. If the son estimated on the high side and enrolled in the non-Medicaid insurance, he would pay a monthly premium and any required out-of-pocket costs. It’s possible there would be some tax refund/credit due him if his income doesn’t rise to the estimated level, but given the income examples, it should be minimal.

If estimated income changes during the year, the son should update his account with the exchange. This is especially important if income increases because there may be a tax liability at the end of the year he received a higher tax credit amount than he was eligible for.

Children up to age 26 whose employer does offer coverage that meets the Affordable Care Act’s standards for affordability and adequacy, however, wouldn’t be eligible for subsidies on the exchange. Under the ACA, a plan is considered affordable if self-only coverage costs no more than 9.5 percent of a person’s income, and adequate if it pays for at least 60 percent of covered medical expenses.

If a young person is claimed as a dependent and shops on the exchange, he or she will generally be eligible for subsidies only if coverage for an individual in the family’s plan is considered unaffordable based on the family’s income, and then only if the family’s household income is between 100 and 400 percent of the federal poverty level. Similarly, if the young person wishes to apply for Medicaid and lives in New York or another state that has expanded coverage, he or she would generally be eligible if the family’s household income is less than 138 percent of the federal poverty level.

Sources: Healthcare Access Team, St. Joseph’s Neighborhood Center; Kaiser Family Foundation; New York state Department of Health.

Read or Share this story: http://on.rocne.ws/1bSxR2e