ENLARGE Henrik Lundqvist has a history of wilting in the NHL after the Olympics. Reuters

GREENBURGH, N.Y.—The men's hockey team from Sweden won five of six games at the Winter Olympics in Sochi, Russia, riding 31-year-old goaltender Henrik Lundqvist to a silver medal. Lundqvist, whose day job is with the Rangers, played all 360 minutes for the Swedes, allowing only nine goals.

Those numbers are even better than the ones he posted eight years ago at the Olympics in Turin, Italy, when, as a 23-year-old NHL rookie, he led the Swedes to the gold medal by playing all 360 minutes, winning five of six games and allowing 14 goals.

But Alain Vigneault, the Rangers' first-year coach, said Monday he is well aware of what happened to Lundqvist after the Olympics in 2006: Lundqvist lost his first four games, six of nine and four of his last six regular-season games as he dealt with migraines and a hip injury.

He lost three playoff games and was benched for another as the Rangers were swept by the Devils. Four years later, Lundqvist lost six of his first nine games for the Rangers after winning two of three games at the Winter Olympics in Vancouver. The Rangers failed to make the playoffs that year.

So one of the first things Vigneault plans to do when Lundqvist shows up Tuesday or Wednesday at the team's training facility is to ask his goaltender exactly how taxing those six games in Sochi, nine hours ahead of Eastern Time, really were. Then Vigneault will hatch a plan.

"Hank can play a lot of minutes," Vigneault said Monday. "I just want to know how he is mentally and emotionally right now. Obviously, traveling and the different time zones will affect players for some time. Hopefully, we can get him in our rhythm and in our time zone real quick."

The Rangers (32-24-3) are in second place in the Metropolitan Division, but Columbus and Washington, who would fail to qualify for the playoffs now, are only four points behind, with Carolina and the Devils two points further behind.

Every team is facing a mad dash to the end of the regular season—the Rangers, for example, have 23 games in 45 days, starting with Thursday's game at home against Chicago, the defending Stanley Cup champions. Lundqvist proved long ago that he hates breathers.

"Everyone knows Hank likes to play," said Cam Talbot, his backup. "So I think if they give him that chance, I'm sure he'll be right back in there. He doesn't like to leave the net too often. He's a competitor."

Talbot has been impressive standing in for Lundqvist, posting a better goals-against average (1.79 vs. 2.44) and save percentage (.935 vs. .918) than Lundqvist himself.

Vigneault will probably start Talbot on Thursday and on Saturday in Philadelphia, with Lundqvist assuming his role as a starter Sunday at home against Boston, but Vigneault smiled when he said it has been pointed out to him how much Lundqvist struggled in 2006.

"But they've also brought up the fact that he was a rookie at the time, and he doesn't have the same experience he has now," Vigneault said. "He has done it on a couple of other occasions. He's a much more mature player with his experience.

"I think Hank was real focused on the Olympics and on how his team had the best possible record they could have. They came really close to winning the gold. But before he left for that, he was really focused on helping us win some games and helping us get into the playoffs. I believe he'll come back with that same attitude and that same mind-set."

The coming grind may not be so much of a problem for the Rangers at large; this is, after all, a team that played its first nine games on the road. The Olympic break for those who didn't play in Sochi was welcome, but now it is time to resume the push.

"It's been a little bit condensed," center Brian Boyle said. "It seems like we were playing every other night for two months. I know that's not the case, but it seemed like it. And that's the way it's going to be again, hopefully until the season ends—in June."

The Stanley Cup will be on the line then, and that hunk of silver will be worth more than Lundqvist's shiny new medal—especially because he doesn't have one.