American torture hero and semiemployed former congressjerk Allen West is very, very concerned about this “Tammy Duckworth” person having agreed to be on the Big BenghaziPalooza Special Committee, because how can Americans be sure she actually loves America, and is not some kind of legless traitor like Max Cleland?

On Janet Mefferd’s wingnut radio show, which we fear our Editrix may start making us listen to, West said,

I just don’t know where her loyalties lie. You know, for her to have been a veteran, a wounded warrior for the United States Army, she should know that this is not the right thing. And hopefully, you know, she will remember the oath of office that she took as an Army officer and not the allegiance I guess she believes she has to the liberal progressives of the Democrat Party.

Heaven knows, one can’t be both a liberal and loyal to the United States. Doesn’t the military oath oblige you to be a Republican anyway? We’re pretty sure it does. You can just see in this photo of Duckworth in her helicopter in Iraq that she’s already contemplating ways to betray the United States for the sake of protecting the Democrat Party.



If she really loved America, she’d be pimping a book on Hannity and questioning the loyalties of fellow Americans, the way the Founders wanted.

Should you have the stomach for it, here’s the audio, in which West also notes the unfitness of other committee members like Adam Smith (“one of those geeky little debaters that is going to try to micromanage every single detail”) and Linda Sanchez, who is “very whiny.” In fact, since Barack Obama sent emails to House Democrats about the IRS, there probably shouldn’t be any Democrats on the committee, as they are all incapable of being as objective and fair-minded as House Republicans.



Besides, isn’t this Benghazi hearing just a big distraction from the failures of Obamacare?

[MediaMatters]

Follow Doktor Zoom on Twitter. Unless you believe it would compromise your oath as an officer and a gentile.