If you’re ready to celebrate the red, white and blue while whooping it up to some country music, you won’t want to miss the upcoming Toby Keith concert.

Mr. Keith, who was recently inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame, has penned many pro-USA songs including “Courtesy of the Red, White & Blue,” “Call a Marine” and “American Soldier.” And, of course, his songs also celebrate good ol’ summertime fun, as evidenced by “Red Solo Cup,” “Cold Beer Country” and dozens of others.

“I write songs everyday,” said Mr. Keith after his recent induction into the hall of fame. “When someone writes their own things, to me they release their character in their music and that character shines through in all their songs.”

SEE ALSO: Josh Groban on magic, music and his big break

That’s certainly true of Mr. Keith, whose personality is reflected in his songs. At a July concert in Atlanta, Mr. Keith invited members of the U.S. military on stage to spotlight their service as a special tribute to the July 16 shooting in Chattanooga, Tennessee, that resulted in the deaths of four U.S. Marines and one U.S. Navy sailor, according to WSB-TV 2, Atlanta. The report noted that the “most heartwarming” moment at Mr. Keith’s concert was when the mother of one of the four soldiers killed during the shooting also took the stage.

“I’ve met so many great, brave servicemen and -women over the years and had so many wonderful experiences, that I can barely remember them all,” Mr. Keith said in a press statement regarding his work with the USO. “I love our nation’s troops and I won’t ever stop doing my part to extend my thanks.”

What makes Mr. Keith’s shows so popular, though, is that he mixes that flag-waving patriotism with plenty of songs about pure fun. On his current Good Times & Pick Up Lines tour, Mr. Keith has opened concerts with a rendition of the patriotic “Made in America” before moving into other hits including “Whiskey Girls,” “Beer for My Horses” and more that revved up the dancing, singing and partying crowd for his most patriotic songs, including “Courtesy of the Red, White & Blue.”

When Mr. Keith brings his show to the D.C. area this week, don’t be surprised if he rolls out a few new songs too. Mr. Keith just announced the Oct. 9 release of his latest album, “35 mph Town,” which includes “Drunk Americans,” his latest single.

if you go

WHAT: Toby Keith’s Good Times & Pick Up Lines Tour, along with Chris Janson and The Raging Idiots

WHERE: Jiffy Lube Live, 7800 Cellar Door Dr., Bristow, Virginia, 20136

WHEN: Saturday, 7 p.m.

INFO: Tickets $30 to $200 by calling 703/754-6400 or visiting LiveNation.com