Maureen Dowd, star columnist of the New York Times, has a catty and delicious takedown of Hillary Clinton and the feminist establishment today. There is not that much new in calling out the hypocrisy of the feminist movement and its record of supporting Bill Clinton with the “ one free grope ” standard propounded by Gloria Steinem writing about Kathleen Willey in the New York Times . So having MoDo go after Steinem, Albright, and Rodham Clinton is particularly fitting.

Hillary believed that there was an implicit understanding with the sisters of the world that now was the time to come back home and vote for a woman. (The Clintons seem to have conveniently forgotten how outraged they were by identity politics when black leaders deserted them in 2008 to support Obama.) This attitude intensified the unappetizing solipsistic subtext of her campaign, which is “What is Hillary owed?” It turned out that female voters seem to be looking at Hillary as a candidate rather than as a historical imperative. And she’s coming up drastically short on trustworthiness.

Dowd manages to get the number on both Sanders and Clinton in one short paragraph:

Bernie has a clear, concise “we” message, even if it’s pie-in-the-sky: The game is rigged and we have to take the country back from the privileged few and make it work for everyone. Hillary has an “I” message: I have been abused and misunderstood and it’s my turn.

She also accurately characterizes the problem of feminism today: it won, and now is irrelevant.

What the three older women seemed to miss was that the young women supporting Sanders are living the feminist dream, where gender no longer restricts and defines your choices, where girls grow up knowing they can be anything they want. The aspirations of ’70s feminism are now baked into the culture. The interesting thing about the spectacle of older women trying to shame younger ones on behalf of Hillary is that Hillary and Bill killed the integrity of institutional feminism back in the ’90s — with the help of Albright and Steinem.

Face it: things are really falling apart for the Democrats when you have Dowd writing this way on the Sunday op-ed page. Of course, it won’t be long before she turns her poison pen on Trump, Cruz, Rubio, and any Republican who happens to capture her attention,

But the Clinton immunity is well past its expiration date.