BOULDER — Another Colorado football season ended the same sad way they all seem to end.

In tears.

Seniors Terrell Smith and Tony Jones came to Boulder together, all the way from New Jersey, young, naive and full of football dreams. “Tony and I cried on the plane coming to CU, saying bye to our families. Now we’re crying together,” a misty-eyed Smith said Saturday. “I picked him up in the locker room. We hugged it out and got all our tears out.”

With a 38-34 loss to Utah on Saturday, the Buffaloes finished conference play without a victory for the first time since 1915.

Yes, 1915.

For those of you keeping score at home, 1915 was the year Babe Ruth swatted his first major-league home run. For those of you from Colorado, 1915 was the year that Rocky Mountain became a national park. For those of you with a sense of history, in 1915 the Buffaloes got blanked by the University of Denver, which hasn’t fielded a team since before current CU coach Mike MacIntyre was born.

“I think the word I’d used is gut-wrenching,” MacIntyre said.

The Buffaloes won a national championship in 1990. CU running back Rashaan Salaam struck a winning Heisman pose in ’94. But in the past decade, CU has fallen off the college football map. During the past 10 years, the Buffaloes have made a strong case for being the worst football program in a power five conference.

Since 2005, Colorado has won 38 games. Indiana has won 42. Kansas has won 50.

MacIntyre sells progress by reminding us he doesn’t lose as badly as predecessor Jon Embree, the biggest coaching disaster in CU history. That CU is more competitive in the Pac-12. But has MacIntyre really done any better than Embree?

Yes, Embree lost 15 games in the Pac-12 Conference by an embarrassing average margin of 31 points. While going 0-9 in league play, this year’s Buffs lost by an average of 14 points.

But Embree won three conference games in two years. In two seasons, MacIntyre has beaten a conference opponent only once. That’s progress?

Two boneheaded plays told the story of Saturday’s loss and this lost season.

Brain freeze No. 1: With Colorado leading 24-16 early in the third quarter, the Buffs forced Utah to punt. It was a fake. Punter Tom Hackett rambled 24 yards for a first down before being touched by a bewildered CU defense. Momentum shifted.

“That was a little thing that ended up being a big thing,” Mac- Intyre said. It also was a textbook example of a breakdown by a poorly coached team.

Brain freeze No. 2: Give the Buffaloes credit for refusing to quit. They held a three-point advantage early in the final period when CU quarterback Sefo Liufau retreated deep in his own territory and completed a screen pass to a wide open Dominique Hatfield. The problem? Hatfield plays cornerback for Utah, and he returned the interception 20 yards for what proved to be the winning score.

“We played our (expletive) off, excuse my language, in a lot of games,” MacIntyre said. “We were a lot closer in our Pac-12 games this year than last year. We’ll punch through and start winning a lot of games.”

There were 20,000 empty seats in Folsom Field, however, that gave MacIntyre an undeniable vote of no confidence. While the official attendance was announced at 39,155, CU associate athletic director Dave Plati estimated the actual crowd count as closer to 32,000. The people aren’t buying the balderdash MacIntyre is selling.

Fair or not, the pressure is on MacIntyre. It’s pressure that comes with making the big-money jump to the Pac-12. Lose nine or 10 times again in 2015, and MacIntyre will be unable to sell the promise of false hope.

Once upon a time, Thanksgiving weekend was circled in red on the Colorado football calendar. The Nebraska game played once a year and eagerly anticipated the other 364 days. But there are now teenagers in this state with no memory of the Buffaloes playing winning football.

And the saddest part of all? There’s a human cost as quantifiable as a broken heart in defeat. It was the sight of Jones, the senior running back from New Jersey, bent and broken near the CU bench as the crowd filed out of Folsom Field.

Losers cry alone.

Mark Kiszla: mkiszla@denverpost.com or twitter.com/markkiszla