A radical fringe has taken over the Republican Party. The only solace is that this new crew is making its intentions known.



By now, only those who are willfully blind can deny that America faces an inequality crisis.

Worker productivity continues its long climb, but the median wage has dropped as owners haul in record profits. The top 10 percent of earners now take home more than half the national income, the highest portion in more than a century.

The wealth gap is even greater than the income gap. The top 0.1 percent now own more than 20 percent of the nation’s wealth, the biggest share since the Roaring Twenties. And we know how that story played out.



Worst of all, an American born into poverty is now less likely to climb out of it than a poor child born in Canada, France or Germany. The socialists, it seems, have done a better job at protecting the American Dream than we have.

With that backdrop, it is hard to fathom that Republicans have presented a budget that would decisively widen the gap. This is radical stuff that goes far beyond anything Ronald Reagan proposed when he was president.

The latest GOP budget is revealing. It has no chance of passing the Senate or being signed into law by President Obama. But it does tell us what would happen if this new breed of hard-hearted Republicans were to prevail.

Ryan’s plan would start with a whopping tax cut for the rich, dropping the top personal and corporate rates to 25 percent. And how would he cover the cost? Tax cuts, like fairy dust, would boost economic growth.

If that sounds familiar, it’s because President George W. Bush made precisely the same claim. As it turns out, the Bush tax cuts remain the single largest contributor to the national debt that Republicans claim to be so concerned about. But here they go again.

Ryan’s spending cuts expose the fundamental dishonesty of his claim that he wants to expand opportunities for low-income families. How can he square that with his plan to cut college scholarships by $125 billion over 10 years? Is the loss of these scholarship supposed to lift poor students by improving their work ethic?

He would repeal Obamacare, of course, then cut what’s left of Medicaid and turn it into a block grant for states to use as they wish. He offers no plan to provide coverage for this new army of uninsured.

He would turn Medicare into a voucher plan, with no guarantee that the grants would be enough for seniors to purchase adequate care. Again, low-income seniors would be the most vulnerable.

This goes on. Millions of families would lose eligibility for food stamps, or see their allotments cut. Discretionary spending on things like education and transportation infrastructure would be slashed from the historic lows already imposed by the sequester. And, to cap it off, he would increase defense spending by $483 billion over the caps during the next decade, even though America spends more now than it did at the peak of the Cold War, adjusted for inflation.

We are warned. A radical fringe has taken over the Republican Party. The only solace is that this new crew is making its intentions known.