Democratic presidential candidates Bernie Sanders and Hillary Clinton during Tuesday evening’s debate. (Photo: AP File)

The first debate among the Democrats vying for their party’s nomination for president was held Tuesday night (Oct. 13) in Las Vegas. Just as much of the evening focused on just two of the five candidates — former Secretary of State, New York senator, and First Lady Hillary Clinton and Vermont senator Bernie Sanders — when it came to health policy, the conversation was focused around two primary health issues: Expanding the Affordable Care Act to undocumented immigrants and their children and adopting a federally mandated paid family leave.



Here’s what you need to know about both key issues:

Paid Family Leave

Clinton brought paid leave to the forefront of the conversation immediately, making the issue a key point during the two-minutes she was given to introduce herself.

“And I want to do more to help us balance family and work,” Clinton said, “I believe in equal pay for equal work for women, but I also believe it’s about time we had paid family leave for American families and join the rest of the world.”

Sanders also made mention of paid leave. Both times he discussed the issue he explicitly tied it to the need for leave for new mothers.

In explaining his adherence to what he refers to as “democratic socialism,” Sanders mentioned “You see every other major country saying to moms that, when you have a baby, we’re not gonna separate you from your newborn baby, because we are going to have — we are gonna have medical and family paid leave, like every other country on Earth.”

Later in the debate when the question of paid leave was again raised among the candidates, Sanders said, “Every other major country on Earth, every one, including some small countries, say that when a mother has a baby, she should stay home with that baby. … That is an international embarrassment that we do not provide family — paid family and medical leave.”

Sanders’ latter remark was triggered by a question posed to Clinton by CNN debate moderator Dana Bash, who mentioned that “Carly Fiorina, the first female CEO of a Fortune 50 company, argues, if the government requires paid leave, it will force small businesses to, quote, ‘hire fewer people and create fewer jobs.’ What do you say not only to Carly Fiorina, but also a small-business owner out there who says, you know, I like this idea, but I just can’t afford it?”

Related: Doctors ‘Horrified’ by Republican Candidates’ Outlook on Vaccines

Clinton went on to mention California’s paid leave program and “the incredible challenges that so many parents face, particularly working moms,” ultimately culminating in perhaps her most electric moment of the night, in which she told Bash, “It’s always the Republicans or their sympathizers who say, “You can’t have paid leave, you can’t provide health care.” They don’t mind having big government to interfere with a woman’s right to choose and to try to take down Planned Parenthood. They’re fine with big government when it comes to that. I’m sick of it. … I know we can afford it, because we’re going to make the wealthy pay for it. That is the way to get it done.”

“How the question always gets framed is, How can we possibly afford to do this? Everyone will lose their jobs! No one will want to hire women! It’s always very fatalistic,” Sarah Jane Glynn, the Director of Women’s Economic Policy at the Center for American Progress, tells Yahoo Health.

And yet, she notes, “the United States is the only advanced economy that doesn’t have a paid family leave program. We are an outlier among very wealthy countries. So, a lot of other folks have figured out how to do this and it hasn’t destroyed their economies. To say it would be a death knell to businesses — well, just look north to Canada. This hasn’t been the case. It’s ridiculous on its face [to claim that] given how widespread these policies are across the globe.”

California’s paid family program — which provides workers with partial wage replacement and benefits when they take time off work to care for a child, spouse, parent or close family member and has been in place in the state for over a decade — is a perfect domestic case study on the efficacy of such measures, says Glynn. “Prior to implementation of the program in California, the business community was very nervous. They were especially concerned that workers would constantly be out on leave and that businesses would be forced out of state because of the toll that a paid leave mandate would have on their bottom lines.”

Read More