Tom Jackson's baseball card - if he had one - would report he throws left, writes right. In his columns and blog, "The Right Stuff," southpaw Jackson provides insight into the evolving human condition from a distinctly conservative point of view.

When it comes to potential U.S. presidents, Mitt Romney is the guy from central casting. He has everything you’re looking for: hair, teeth, gleam in the eye. The guy is a walking GQ cover. He could give the Empire State Building lessons on standing upright. He could have instructed George Washington on looking the part.

But if the last six years have taught us anything, it’s that we shouldn’t pick presidents based on appearances. Here again, Romney measures up with a 40-year record of achievement in government and the private sector, including an eye-popping rescue of the scandal-rocked 2002 Salt Lake City Winter Olympics.

Indeed, of all the people mentioned as possible successors to Barack Obama, Romney, arguably, has the best credentials, even if he did give us Jonathan Gruber.

The problem is, the fellow who might be America’s best fit for the White House has twice been a perfectly lousy candidate. And lousy candidates never win. Romney himself is Exhibit A, losing the Republican nomination to John McCain in 2008 — my theory on how a local activist made that happen is preserved here — and, after battering a wimpy GOP field in 2012, the general election to Obama.

Nonetheless, the guy who made his reputation as a turnaround genius — while head of Bain Capital, the company famously reversed the foundering fortunes of Staples, Domino’s Pizza, Sports Authority, Brookstone and Sealy — apparently envisions a little turnaround capacity within himself. Having declared himself out of the 2016 race any number of times, the guy with look of a president sounds increasingly like a candidate in waiting.

This is a bad idea on any number of levels, not least of all that a biblical 40 years, let alone just four, would not be enough to inoculate Romney against his horrible, terrible, no good, very bad “47 percent” remark. Yes, it’s not fair all the stupid stuff Obama said/says — 57 states, bitter clingers, who built what business, if you like your doctor, JV team Islamic terrorists — doesn’t stick. That’s the way it goes.

Never mind that an awful lot of what Romney predicted — about Russian adventurism, Iran’s nuclear ambitions, trouble wrought by the Affordable Care Act, problems along the southern border being exacerbated by Obama’s executive order(s) — has come to pass. Candidate Romney was no Nostradamus; much of his foresight reflected mainstream conservative thinking.

Now mainstream conservative thinking goes like this: However tempting, Republicans cannot, and must not, let 2016 be solely a referendum on 2012. The 2014 GOP congressional majority has been assigned the task of relitigating the worst excesses of Obama presidency; let them do their work.

Come the next leap year and the prospect of an open seat behind the Resolute Desk, Americans won’t much care about waging the last war, or going into battle with last century’s commanders. Fair or not, the nation will be interested in fresh voices promoting forward-looking agendas.

Mitt Romney looks the part of the chief executive and leader of the free world, of that there can be no dispute. And his resume remains dazzling. Nonetheless, in almost all likelihood, his moment has passed. Mitt Romney 3.0 is too much like Windows 8: complicated, mystifying, unnecessary and flawed from the get-go.

I say this as someone who witnessed, firsthand, the 1986 Masters won by a written-off Jack Nicklaus, an Olden Bear aged 46 years, two months and 23 days. Sometimes, men of greatness hammer out destiny as though they are blacksmiths working the forge and anvil.

But golf is merely cruel. Politics is cold and heartless.