Just when it looked like proposing menu labelling laws was over, two major announcements from the Ontario and the U.S. government, which are likely to have profound effects on the restaurant franchise industry in North America, were made.

Laws that require specific restaurants to publish nutritional information concerning their menus are rooted in two main policy objectives: To reduce childhood obesity and cut healthcare costs. Both are laudable goals that deserve and have society’s support (a recent University of Toronto research study found 80% of surveyed members want to know the nutritional content of menu items), but compliance with and enforcement of these laws may prove costly for restaurant operators across Canada and the United States.

In Ontario, this all started back in late 2013 when a bill introduced by the NDP proposed requiring all operators of a “food service premise” that was part of a chain of five or more locations in the province and gross annual revenue of more than $5-million to post the caloric and sodium content of all its food and drink items.

In 2014, the Ontario Liberals introduced the Making Healthier Choices Act (MHCA), to require food service premises to post the caloric content of standard food and drink items if that food service premises is part of a chain having a minimum of 20 locations in Ontario.

For those of us following the progress of these bills, it seemed all but guaranteed the MHCA would be pushed through to become law following the majority win by the Liberals in the recent Ontario provincial election. Just last week the MHCA was reintroduced, and few, if any, predict obstacles in its passage into law.

Related

The MHCA will apply to everyone who owns or operates regulated food premises, including any food service provider, restaurant, grocery store, convenience store or other operator that is part of a chain with 20 or more locations in Ontario, operating under the same or substantially the same name, regardless of ownership (meaning that franchised businesses are included) and that offer the same or substantially the same standard food items. Standard food items refer to food or drink items that are sold in standardized portions and content.

Under the MHCA, each subject operator must ensure the number of calories for each standard food item offered for sale is displayed on each menu, and on an identifying label if the item is on display. Menus include signs, boards and other materials provided for at the regulated food premises as well as take-out menus. The calorie posting requirement relates to every variety, flavour and size — combo meals will be treated as a single standard food item.

Despite best intentions, the act contains several drafting issues that will make compliance difficult, and potentially have unintended consequences in its enforcement. First, a “standard food item” is not yet sufficiently defined, so it is not a straightforward exercise to identify which menu items need to comply with the requirements. While this determination may seem at first to be fairly intuitive, try telling that to a pizza restaurant operator whose lone ‘standard’ item might just be a cheese pizza, which consumers can customize to their tastes.

One unintended result of the MHCA may be that franchisors will have to ensure every single ingredient is purchased from a designated supplier so as to be able to say with certainty that the caloric information posted on menus is consistent with that which is known to the franchisor. This is because the bill makes franchisors liable for a franchisee’s non-compliance.

Late last month, the United States Food and Drug Administration also released nutritional labelling rules to clarify and amend the Food, Drug & Cosmetics Act (part of the Affordable Care Act) which similarly provides that any food establishment with 20 or more locations doing business under the same name must provide caloric information for their standard menu items.

While the acts look much the same, it is worth noting that the U.S. legislation applies on a federal level. That is a broader scope, to be sure, but it does ensure consistency across the country and avoids increased compliance costs based on a patchwork of differing regional requirements, which in all likelihood will be the for Canadian franchisors.

It is also important to be aware that both laws will apply to food service establishments that have at least 20 or more locations in the subject jurisdictions, regardless of where the franchisor is based. Accordingly, these legislative developments will result in education for the food service and restaurant industries internationally since foreign franchisors may have crossed that threshold and not be aware these laws also apply to them.

And that’s a lot to chew on.

Chad Finkelstein is a franchise lawyer at Dale & Lessmann LLP (www.dalelessmann.com) in Toronto and can be reached at cfinkelstein@dalelessmann.com or (416) 369-7883.