Buy Photo Kentucky Gov. Steve Beshear at the Big Four Bridge re-dedication in June 2014. (Photo: Jessica Ebelhar/The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

FRANKFORT, Ky. – For most of his eight years as governor, Steve Beshear seemed a man in search of a legacy.

The worst economic recession since the Great Depression made impossible any expensive initiatives or program expansions. It forced deep spending cuts – even in priority areas like education.

A stubbornly conservative Republican majority in the state Senate also blocked Beshear’s 2007 campaign priority to create a rich source of new state revenue by legalizing casinos.

But in the sixth year of his administration, Beshear found a clear legacy that required no immediate state money and could be implemented by executive order.

On May 9, 2013, he announced he would embrace the federal Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, and expand the Medicaid program to cover hundreds of thousands of additional Kentuckians. He called his action “the single-most important decision in our lifetime for improving the health of Kentuckians.”

And as he leaves office, Beshear says the decision has paid bigger dividends than expected since the percentage of Kentuckians without health insurance has plunged from 20.4 percent to 9 percent.

“His legacy is definitely going to be access to health care. The result has been that over 500,000 have gotten coverage because he put the health of Kentuckians as his priority," said Emily Beauregard, executive director of Kentucky Voices for Health.

But many Republicans like Senate Majority Leader Damon Thayer said the move has caused complications for providers and patients, and they reject Beshear’s claim that the move will not cause budgetary headaches for state government.

“Access to health insurance does not always mean access to health care,” Thayer said. “Gov. Beshear has built a very intricate web of challenges for those of us who will be remaining in Frankfort to debate and implement policy.”

The Beshear administration, of course, has been about much more than health care.

In his inaugural address eight years ago, the governor urged that partisanship be put aside. “We can accomplish much over the next four years, but only if we work together for the common good.”

The road was bumpy. He clashed constantly with Republican Senate President David Williams and called six special legislative sessions to tend to unfinished business.

But he found common ground with the Senate on significant bills: combating prescription drug and heroin abuse, building the Louisville bridges, raising the dropout age, resolving a financial crisis in the Unemployment Insurance Trust Fund caused by the recession, raising the tax on cigarettes and alcoholic beverages to help cover a revenue shortage, and pension reform.

But he also leaves office with Kentucky’s public pension systems still saddled with more than $30 billion in unfunded liabilities.

“Reforms passed in 2013 were a step forward. But it has been oversold,” said Jim Carroll, co-founder of Kentucky Government Retirees, a state retiree advocacy group. “One got the impression that they had fixed pensions, which, of course, is nonsense.”

The pension systems' needs for huge additional appropriations next year are the main reason incoming Republican Gov. Matt Bevin said last week that Beshear is “leaving Kentucky burdened with a projected biennial shortfall of more than $500 million.”

Beshear said in a press conference last month that the “unfunded liability was created over 20, 25 years, a little at a time, and a lot of different factors went into creating that unfunded liability.”

He noted that he and the General Assembly twice addressed the larger financial problems of Kentucky Retirement Systems, including a 2013 commitment to begin fully funding the state contribution as set by the systems’ actuaries.

“It took about 20 years to get into this mess,” Beshear said. “It’s going to take about 20 years to get out of it.”

It’s difficult to overestimate the impact of the national recession on state government during the Beshear tenure. A plunging stock market devastated investment returns of the pension funds.

Of more immediate concern when Beshear took office was that the recession was causing tax revenues to plunge far below expectations.

Beshear was forced to impose about $1.6 billion in spending cuts through his first six years. He did more than cut: There were unpaid furloughs for state workers, a tax amnesty program and transfers of hundreds of millions of dollars from small fee-funded independent programs to minimize cuts to education. Beshear and his top staff took 10 percent pay cuts.

Mostly forgotten was passage of a modest tax increase – probably the most politically difficult bill passed while Beshear was governor. The bill, enacted at the pit of the recession in 2009 with crucial support from Williams, raised the cigarette tax by 30 cents per pack and applied the state’s 6 percent sales tax to alcoholic beverages.

Beshear prioritized the spending cuts, sparing public schools from the worst. But some areas saw state funding reduced 40 percent.

Tom FitzGerald, director of the Kentucky Resources Council, said cuts at the Energy and Environment Cabinet have left it "only marginally able to implement the vital protections that federal and state law require for clean air, clean water and uncontaminated, productive land. He (Beshear) will not be remembered for his environmental efforts.”

In February 2013, Beshear spelled out the damage of cuts in an impassioned pitch for raising revenue through tax reform. “We eliminated funding for textbooks. … We cut school safety. … We cut funding for our universities. … We reduced aid to needy students. … We cut funding for child-care assistance.”

The House chamber was somber as Beshear continued. “Our schools aren’t treading water. They are slowly sinking.”

But Beshear’s argument that tax reform was needed to repair the damage and adequately fund pensions fell on deaf ears. Lawmakers ignored his tax plan – which was a significantly reduced version of a massive reform suggested by a commission that the governor had appointed to study the issue.

Beshear told reporters last month his biggest regret was “not being able to make any meaningful progress in tax reform.”

Rep. Rick Rand, a Bedford Democrat who chairs the House budget committee, said, "Gov. Beshear navigated the recession brilliantly, basically keeping vital services like education and public safety going. ... But tax reform is simply the absolute hardest thing to ever try to get passed."

Another regret Beshear mentioned was failure to expand legal gambling – his 2007 campaign promise that also would have eased the lingering budget problems.

Rep. Larry Clark, D-Louisville, said Beshear successfully pushed for passage of many important bills but gambling was one area where the governor could never find common ground with the Senate – particularly with the horse industry never unifying behind a specific approach.

“The Senate was adamantly opposed to any form of gaming,” Clark said. “The House took it up a couple times but eventually our members felt unless both chambers could support it, there was no sense going on with that.”

By the beginning of 2015, state revenues were growing again, and growing a bit better than expectations. The pension funding crisis remained a dark cloud, but in an election year with chances of passing a tax or gambling bill long gone, Beshear had a different tone in his annual message to the General Assembly.

“My friends, we can hold our heads high once again because Kentucky is back. And we’re back with a vengeance.”

The coda for the Beshear administration was a year dominated by the governor continuing to nurture and defend his health care accomplishments while dealing with the same-sex marriage issue amid the election of his successor.

Thayer credited Beshear for driving negotiations on the 2013 pension bill. And he said he likes Beshear, but he said the governor was a relentless political fundraiser who shouldn't be given too much credit for being non-partisan.

“I would say he’s more hyper-partisan and more liberal than people realize. ... After all, in his first term he told the EPA, 'Get off our backs.’ But after winning re-election ... he enacted Obamacare and told Republicans, ‘Get over it.’ ”

And on same-sex marriage, Beshear made decisions that upset the LGBT community by deciding to appeal a federal court ruling that recognized gay marriage, and later the Christian right by failing to come to the rescue of Rowan County Clerk Kim Davis when she was jailed for refusing to issue marriage licenses to same-sex couples following the Supreme Court’s ruling on the matter.

In his talk with reporters last month, Beshear repeated his earlier explanations for appealing the case.

“If I hadn’t appealed that decision, I’ll bet we would have 80 or 90 Kim Davises in this state because we wouldn’t have any Supreme Court decision telling us what the law is,” he said.

And reporters, who for months had asked for Beshear’s feeling on same-sex marriage, got this answer: “As for my personal feelings, I’ll get around to that one of these days. Just not today.”

Reporter Tom Loftus can be reached at (502) 875-5136 or tloftus@courier-journal.com.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1QiidmU