Dark-money mailer attacking House candidate Bob Littlefield. (Photo: Laurie Roberts)

It's no secret that dark-money forces across the state are using Barack Obama to scare off Republican voters from candidates they oppose.

I've seen campaign mailers with a picture of Corporation Commission candidates Vernon Parker and Lucy Mason mugging with the president (never happened). I've seen signs supporting Tom Forese and Doug Little, assuring us that they'll be "fighting Obama" on the Corporation Commission.

But hands down, the scariest hide-the-children-it's-an-Obama-lover-in-GOP-clothing mailer is making the rounds in Scottsdale.

The Arizona Free Enterprise Club is attacking Republican Bob Littlefield, who is running for the House, along with Effie Carlson, Rep. Michelle Ugenti, Jay Lawrence.

"When he wanted Obamacare passed, he called upon his liberal allies in Congress," the ad says, next to the most sinister mug of Obama I've seen this campaign season. "And when he needs Obamacare funded in Arizona, he will call on liberal Bob Littlefield."

Heck, the lords of darkness even threw in a Nancy Pelosi pic for good measure. I'm guessing this means Littlefield is leading in the polls.

He's drawn the ire of the Arizona Free Enterprise Club because he agrees with the Republican legislators who supported Medicaid expansion last year.

As did Gov. Jan Brewer. As did the business community.

They understood that that the state already had to find a way to pay for most of the 300,000 Arizonans who would be added to AHCCCS under Medicaid expansion. This, because voters expanded Medicaid eligibility in 2000.

The state suspended that voter-approved expansion during the recession years but now it must, by law, find a way to add those people back into AHCCCS.

Our leaders can pay for it out of the state treasury, prompting a hit to public education, public safety and every other state responsibility. Or they can take the feds up on their offer to fund 90 percent of it through the Medicaid expansion plan. Meanwhile, the state's portion of the tab is funded through a hospital fee, one that can't be passed along to patients.

Cue the mailer: "Obama and Pelosi created Obamacare. Liberal Bob Littlefield supports funding it HERE IN ARIZONA! ... And how does Littlefield want to pay for expanding Obamacare?" WITH HIGHER TAXES!"

It's almost funny to watch their hysterics. If you follow Scottsdale politics, you know that Littlefield, a city councilman, can be downright stingy with the public's money.

Medicaid expansion, he says, was simply the best way to handle a massive bill coming due.

"It was the right thing to do and the responsible thing to do," Littlefield told me. "I tell people, hey, you, the voters voted back to 2000 to extend Medicaid to a larger population. Now the chickens are coming home to roost. How we going to pay for it?"

No word on that score from the dark forces. Whoever they are.

. (Photo: Laurie Roberts)

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1rNECOk