The Washington Times on Wednesday announced a new email marketing partnership with Viguerie Political Lists that includes the introduction of a brand new email list into the political marketplace in time for the 2016 election.

The Washington Times Engaged Patriots email list is composed of more than 500,000 conservative leaning political activists who regularly read Times content, and is being exclusively managed by Viguerie Political Lists.

The new Patriots file brings to a dozen the total number of email lists the Times offers in the marketplace. The lists span the gamut from gun rights enthusiasts and Hispanics to Christian voters and engaged activists.

“We are thrilled to be working with Viguerie Political Lists in bringing this new list to the marketplace in time for the 2016 election,” Times President and CEO Larry Beasley said. “We couldn’t think of a better partner to help us launch this new opportunity.”

Viguerie Political Lists, a division of American Mailing Lists Corporation, is an industry leader in political donor and activist list management. Founded by Richard Viguerie, VPL has been America’s best source for lists used by right-of-center campaigns, advocacy organizations, and charitable institutions for over 50 years.

David M. Keene, Managing Director of VPL said, “We at Viguerie Political Lists are incredibly excited at the opportunity to work hand-in-hand with an organization as venerable as The Washington Times. We look forward to adding this powerful new list to our online offerings.”

Richard Viguerie, Chairman and Founder of VPL, expressed his enthusiasm for the all-new list.

“For over 50 years I’ve been doing my best to keep up in a changing world, and managing such an exceptional list for The Washington Times keeps us at the forefront of the direct-response marketing world.”

Mr. Viguerie continued, “E-mail and other online targeting methods are increasingly important in the dynamic world of direct-response advertising; working with The Washington Times will ensure that we have the very best lists and data available to meet our clients’ needs.”

For rental inquiries, or for additional information, please contact Chris Matzke, List Manager, Viguerie Political Lists via email chris@politicaldonorlists.com or by phone at 571.292.5806 ext. 2121.