Topics: amnesty, Conservatism, David Lane, Donald Trump, Editor's Picks, Election 2016, Evangelicals, GOP 2016, Immigration, Immigration Reform, John McCain, Rush Limbaugh, smarm, Tea Party, Elections News, Media News, News, Politics News

Now that Donald Trump’s presidential campaign is no longer a bizarro mid-summer distraction but a real-life thing that is actually happening, the response of the political class is beginning to change. At first, they treated “The Donald’s” candidacy as a welcome distraction from Hillary Clinton. But then Trump broke one of their cardinal rules — “Thou shalt not take cheap shots at Sen. John McCain” — and from that point forward, the relentless snark has been traded for “smarm” as far as the eye can see.

And with Trump still holding a small but significant lead over his rivals in national polling, the smarm is only getting worse. The smarm coming from Republicans is easy enough to explain; if he wins the nomination or runs as a third-party candidate, the GOP will lose in 2016. But elite media is getting rather smarmy, too; and it’s hard not to conclude that elitism is part of the reason why they write about Trump’s fans as if they were anthropological curiosities. After all, how are Trump supporters any weirder than those who’ve decided to back eccentric amateurs like Ben Carson or Carly Fiorina?

Which isn’t to say their incomprehension is fake. However smarmy their questions about his fans may be, the media’s complete inability to puncture Trump’s bubble shows that they come by their cluelessness honestly. They seem to think that if Trump backers are shown proof of his inconsistent conservatism, they’ll abandon him. So we get articles cataloging Trump’s “flip-flops” and heresies, and are expected to be surprised when they fail to make an impact. But this fundamentally misunderstands why so many people find Trump so appealing.

It’s not what Trump’s for that makes his fans love him. They love him instead because of what he is against. Even more specifically, it’s who he’s against — and who is against him — that, in Trump’s backers’ eyes, makes him so great. Obviously, when it comes to the “haters” and “losers” who comprise Trump’s enemies, Mexicans and other immigrants are at the top of the list. After all, these are the “criminals, drug dealers, rapists, etc.” who are taking American jerbs and bringing in “infectious disease.” But it’s not only Latinos who are to be hated; it’s China and Japan, too.

Racism and xenophobia are operative here, no doubt. But Trump’s brand of populist rage is rather free-floating; and his supporters seem to be even more passionate about his domestic foes. As Elspeth Reeve put it in the New Republic, some Trumpites love him because he is so aggressively politically incorrect. “He doesn’t know what ‘PC’ means,” as one New Hampshire supporter raved. For these people, Reeve writes, Trump is appealing because “he violates social taboos but not their own political sensibilities.” He says what they believe but don’t have the guts to say for themselves.

Granted, this sounds like a pretty frivolous metric to use when deciding who should be president. But humans can be exceedingly tribal and frivolous things! And because Trump’s fans believe that political correctness is primarily enforced by an ill-defined group of elites, his willingness to say things that most of us would consider grotesquely uncouth and bigoted is understood as a more wide-ranging opposition to the powers that be. Look, for example, at how Rush Limbaugh, another veteran practitioner of political resentment, recently defended Trump. He focuses almost exclusively on the billionaire’s critics, rather than the man himself: