Two years ago I was deployed to the Persian Gulf in support of Operation Enduring Freedom.

As we were leaving theater to return to our families at home, we received word that Syria had used chemical weapons on their own people.

We turned around. We were ready. Ready to respond to this atrocity in any way that was deemed necessary.

ADVERTISEMENT

Back at home, our families, our friends, our neighbors were calling for justice. Justice for these poor innocent civilians. For the mothers who lost children. For the husbands who lost wives. For the friends. For the lovers. For our fellow human beings who had been mercilessly attacked.

We were angry. The nation was angry.

Today, Syrian refugees are on our doorstep. They are seeking shelter. They are seeking food. They are seeking security. They are seeking compassion.

These people are not terrorists.

These are mothers whose babies were taken too soon. They weep into their empty arms. These are children. Children who have no one to hold them when their dreams turn to nightmares and even sleep offers no solace. They are husbands, friends, lovers. These are our fellow humans.

They left their homes. They left all they have ever known. Their lives to this point have been full of violence and war, and they seek refuge. They cannot go back.

When their government attacked them with sarin gas we stood together and cried out for justice. Now they are alone. Scared. Hurting. Hungry. Cold. What has become of our anger? What has become of our resolve for justice? What has become of our compassion for humanity?

I hear your reasons. I understand your fears. I know first hand that it is hard to give of what you have when you struggle to provide for your own. It is even harder when we don’t know what tomorrow might bring.

Tomorrow will always be an unknown, and the unknown will always be scary.

There are so many what ifs. We have no way of knowing what will happen if we open our hearts and our communities to these people.

We do, however, know what will happen if we shut them out.

Shutting the refugees out will neither remove nor reduce the threat of terrorism. Evil will still exist in the world. Evil will always exist. We will remain vigilant. Evil will still threaten to destroy our way of life. The thousands of men and women standing watch will protect it. They will continue to risk their lives every day to protect us.

Turning these people away tells them that our compassion is nothing but an empty promise. That we only pretended to care while they remained at home under attack. While the fire remained on them.

Now they have decided to act. To fight for their right to life. For their humanity. They risk everything to ask for our help.

The decision to turn them out sends the message that they do not have the right to live. They have no right to humanity. Turning them away says we do not care whether they live or die.

We are telling these children that we will not love them. We will not even love them enough to keep them from dying, cold and alone. They are not worth it. They have no value.

If we turn these people away, we give in to fear.

We must base our decisions on strength. Not fear.

We must change our message.

Yes. We will love you. No matter the risk.

Halvorson served in the U.S. Navy for six years as a nuclear electronics technician. She completed her active duty contract in October 2015 and is currently active in the U,S. Navy Reserve.