For years, Marin resident Jorge Magana suffered from debilitating hip pain. He reached a point where he could barely walk; work was out of the question.

The situation went on for a long time. Why? Because he didn’t have medical insurance to cover expensive surgery.

Two years ago, through our partnership with Novato Community Hospital and Robert Mayle, MD, Jorge was able to have surgery – at no cost. Today, he is back at work and enjoying activities with his family, including fulfilling his dream of taking his children to Disneyland.

Jorge’s story is not unusual – even in Marin.

Since the advent of Obamacare and Covered California, there has been frequent media coverage about the difficulties many patients face in finding specialty care. The reality is that this has been a challenge for Marin Community Clinics patients since it was founded over 42 years ago.

Frequently, a physician or dentist knows that their patient would benefit from being referred to a professional with expertise in a focused area. (Examples are orthopedists, gastroenterologists, oral surgeons, orthodonists and physical therapists). That’s when the challenges begin.

In the past, when patients needed specialty care, we relied on local physicians who generously donated their time. As we have grown, we have been able bring a small number of specialists onto our medical staff. Still, there are many times when a patient needs specialty care that we don’t provide.

What if a patient has debilitating headaches, requires shoulder surgery, or needs stroke rehabilitation? Our Referral Department goes into action; it makes about 1,200 referrals a month.

Organizations like Operation Access facilitate free outpatient surgeries and Kaiser Permanente donates some specialty evaluations and outpatient procedures. But, it’s the dedicated individual volunteers who make a difference, day in, day out.

• Tim Sowerby, MD, a board-certified gastroenterologist, has volunteered his time at the clinics for over 12 years. Once a month, he comes to our clinic to see uninsured patients. If a patient needs a procedure, he often does it himself at the Endoscopy Center of Marin or at Marin General Hospital — usually through Operation Access.

• Patrick Bennett, MD, a urologist, and Michael Star, MD, an orthopedist, are examples of other physicians who provide hours of volunteer assistance.

• Larkspur resident Leslie Cunningham, a Stanford University-trained physical therapist, volunteers four to six days a month, providing free care to uninsured patients recovering from surgery, injuries and stroke, or suffering from chronic pain.

Advertisement

• John Boland, DDS, a retired pediatric dentist and chair of the clinics’ board of directors, has volunteered at our Dental Clinic since its inception. When children are very young, need extensive work, have behavior management problems or special dental needs, we often call upon Dr. Boland, who volunteers two full days a month at our San Rafael clinic.

Every year, at the clinics’ June Summer Solstice fundraising event, we celebrate the work of Community Health Champions like Leslie Cunningham and Dr. Boland. They are just a few examples of the specialist volunteers who are making a difference in our patients’ lives. Without their efforts, many of our patients would be in continuing pain, unable to work and support their families – or even put food on the table.

But the challenges remain. Marin has shortages in a number of medical and dental specialties, such as neurology, dermatology, oral surgery and endodontics (root canal treatment). The result: delays in care, sending the patient out of county for care — or rarely (thankfully), no care at all.

For more information or to become a clinical volunteer, visit www.marinclinics.org/support-us/

Mitesh Popat, MD, of Novato is the chief medical officer of Marin Community Clinics. Connie Kadera, DDS, also of Novato, is the clinics’ chief dental officer.