Topics: 2016 GOP primary, 2016 Republican primary, Conservatives, Donald Trump, Jeb Bush, John Kasich, Marco Rubio, republican voters, Republicans, Elections News, Politics News

The Jeb Bush “Don’t Panic, Everything Is Fine” campaign is up and running. With his poll numbers in decline, Jeb is rolling out endorsements and assuring reporters that he’s meeting fundraising targets and will have plenty of money to take the Jeb 2016 machine all the way through the primary season. The arc of Jeb’s campaign is following a very Bush-like trajectory – he started the nominating contest with a “shock and awe” strategy of winning the primary early by scaring off all other pretenders; now he’s fighting off an unexpectedly resilient insurgency and promising that everything will work out in the end because he’s prepared to, ahem, stay the course.

To justify Jeb’s continued presence in the race, his campaign is making the argument that Bush’s path to victory is to wait for all the other candidates to fade or implode, which will clear the way for him to win the nomination through attrition:

But Bush’s financial team and strategists argue that he should now be judged by a different benchmark. Their mantra: He’s built to last. Using phrases like “go the distance,” ”marathon” and “long haul,” they argue that the former Florida governor is uniquely positioned to outlast other candidates, regardless of the fundraising number he posts for the third quarter.

It’s not the worst strategy ever devised – that’s basically how Mitt Romney won the nomination in 2012. But Romney had the benefit of running in a field stuffed with dopes and jokers who had no business running for president. He could outlast people like Newt Gingrich and Rick Santorum because they were unserious candidates who never really posed any threat to Romney’s establishment support. Jeb doesn’t have that luxury. Right now he’s digging up oppo on two candidates who could conceivably siphon away his donors and establishment backers: Marco Rubio and John Kasich. And while Romney was viewed as “good enough” by conservatives, those same voters have made it pretty clear they have little respect or patience for another Bush.

That helps explain why Jeb, in the latest poll out from Pew, pulls in an absurdly low 4 percent of the Republican vote. That’s a worrisome enough sign for Jeb’s campaign, but when you dig into the poll’s internals, you start to see just how much trouble Jeb is in.

Let’s start with comparing Jeb’s numbers to those of front-runner Donald Trump. The Donald is pulling down 25 percent of the Republican vote, powered in large part by the anti-immigrant sentiment that is dominating the Republican electorate. According to Pew, 66 percent of Republican voters say immigration is “very important” when deciding whom they’ll vote for in 2016, and 43 percent of Republican voters are more likely to support a candidate who promises to deport every undocumented immigrant in the country. Trump – who has made immigrant-bashing the hot, angry core of his campaign – is the runaway favorite among those voters. Jeb, who is a relative moderate on the issue and preaches tolerance for immigrants, barely registers among this group.