The senator is funding his suit through personal and campaign funds. | John Shinkle/POLITICO Johnson sues over Obamacare

Sen. Ron Johnson is taking the Obama administration to court over what he calls egregious special treatment for members of Congress under Obamacare.

He hopes that a ruling in his favor, which would potentially eliminate the government’s subsidy of members’ and staffers’ health plans, will provide a “long overdue check on presidential power” in light of several administrative changes that the executive branch has made to the health law since its passage.

Story Continued Below

Johnson is funding his lawsuit through personal and campaign funds, which he says was approved by the Senate Ethics Committee.

( Also on POLITICO: Pol to sue OPM over Obamacare)

“I’m hoping to be able to, quite honestly, raise funds through my campaign committee,” he said at a news conference in a Senate meeting room Monday, shortly after the case was filed. “Now, an awful lot of members wouldn’t do that. If you’re running for reelection, those can be some pretty precious dollars. But I think this is such an important issue that I think I’m more than willing to either fund it personally or utilize those limited campaign funds.”

In suing the Office of Personnel Management, Johnson argues that its decision to allow the government to make employer contributions to lawmakers’ health coverage on the insurance exchanges violates the Affordable Care Act as well as rules surrounding the Federal Employee Health Benefits Program.

The health law didn’t authorize the agency to offer exchange plans through the FEHBP, he contends, and the government isn’t a small business so it cannot buy coverage on the D.C. SHOP exchange. Johnson also argues that the OPM policy violates the equal protection clause of the Constitution because it treats members of Congress and their staffs differently than other Americans.

( Also on POLITICO: Sensenbrenner hits Johnson suit)

“Neither the ACA nor any other applicable statute or rule permits the OPM to provide group health insurance to government employees who do not participate in the FEHBP,” Johnson’s lawyers wrote in the complaint.

Johnson said he’s trying to achieve equality between lawmakers who lose the government’s employer coverage because of Obamacare and other Americans who may lose their own private employer coverage because of the law. While Obamacare doesn’t require anyone besides congressional lawmakers and their staffs to cede employer coverage, Johnson predicted that many companies will take employees off their health plans when the employer mandate takes effect in 2015.

“The next wave of lost policies are going to be those individuals getting their health care coverage through their employers,” Johnson said. But only members of Congress and their staff will still be able to have their employer subsidize their new health coverage, he said. Such a “tax-advantaged contribution” is the “special treatment. That’s completely unfair. That’s completely unjust.”

Defenders of OPM’s decision argue that most large companies have a similar employer contribution to health plans and that without the contribution, quality staffers would leave Capitol Hill.

Johnson’s first obstacle will likely be proving that he has a right as a lawmaker to file the suit. In most cases, the courts have said that lawmakers can’t sue over legislative policy issues.

“He seems to be suing because of something Congress did,” said Stan Brand, founder of Brand Law Group in Washington, who is not involved in the litigation. If so, the courts may say that “he doesn’t have standing because he’s basically suing his colleagues.”

The court’s remedy in such cases has traditionally directed the person to go back to Congress, Brand said. Johnson’s attorney considers this situation different.

”What we think gives somebody, and Sen. Johnson and his staff members in particular, standing to raise an objection is … this is not an abstract concern. This is a provision that specifically affects how Sen. Johnson and his office get their health care,” said Paul Clement, a high-profile Washington attorney who represented 26 states in litigation against the health law’s individual mandate and is working on Johnson’s suit. “This is a challenge to the implementation of a statute that is specifically directed to the Senate, Congress, their offices and how they get health care.”

Johnson said his wife tried to buy coverage through the D.C. small-business exchange but was stymied by the website and concern over security questions. He said he eventually opted to buy coverage through a private broker in Wisconsin and turned down the government’s employer subsidy, which would have amounted to up to 75 percent of the insurance plan’s cost.

Johnson pushed back on criticisms, including some from fellow Wisconsin Republican Rep. Jim Sensenbrenner, that the lawsuit could rob staffers of deserved employer contributions and takes attention away from Obamacare’s larger problems.

“I’m a little puzzled by his reaction,” Johnson said. “I don’t believe in any way, shape or form that this is trivial, this is frivolous, this is a stunt. This is, I think, a very important constitutional question. It’s an important issue that deserves a full airing, its day in court and quite honestly, a very full public discussion as well.”

Johnson filed the lawsuit in U.S. District Court in the Eastern District of Wisconsin with one of his staffers, Brooke Ericson.

Authors: