Forget back of the bus, cattle or economy class, a boutique airline company in France has launched an exclusively all-business class flights at comparatively budget prices.

Trying to make business class more accessible to everyone, French airline La Compagnie offers passengers a round trip from Paris to New York for just £945 (€1200) - more than £2000 cheaper than the same trip with Air France.

Launched by L'Avion founder Frantz Yvelin and former Swissair and JetAirways COO Peter Luethi in July, the company sets to bring business class service 'back to where it belongs.'

Scroll down for video

Welcome on board: The La Compagnie team on board the luxury aircraft with budget prices

'With French style and American dependability, La Compagnie will become the choice of the current generation of hard-working business travelers who demand something more from air transportation' says Yvelin.

The airline's website states that their promise 'is for those who want to enjoy and exclusive business-class cabin at a smart price'

La Compagnie will operate a fleet of redesigned Boeing 757-200 aircraft, with 74 seats, that recline 180 degrees, set in a 2x2 formation throughout the aircraft.

On board there is complimentary wi-fi and all passengers will be provided with personal Samsung tablets loaded with a range of films, music, books and magazines.

On board, menus have been devised by Christophe Langree, the Michelin-starred chef at Hotel Matignon in Paris and amenity kits are by expensive cosmetic brand Caudalie.

There is also complimentary wifi and all passengers will be provided with personal Samsung tablets loaded with a range of films, music, books and magazines.

In the airport all passengers will receive fast track priority access on arrival and will have access to the Icare lounge when departing from Paris, and the 'Art & Lounge' space at Newark.

There are 74 seats onboard, all of which recline 180-degrees, with just two seats either side of the aisle

La Compagnie customers will also have complimentary check-in of skis, surfboards, bikes and golf clubs.

Plus, for those who live in France, the entire crew, consisting of 13 in the cockpit and 20 in the cabin, are all native French speakers.

During the summer, La Compagnie was offering a rotation of four to five flights per week, but they're expecting numbers to rise, especially after a second aircraft expected to be ready in December.

La Compagnie: The discount all-business-class airline that began flying a single Boeing 757 between Paris and Newark this summer

Flights from Paris Charles de Gaulle Airport will leave at 5.50pm and arrive in Newark International Airport at 8.30pm; return flights will depart New York at 9.45pm and arrive in Paris at 11.15am.

The launch of La Compagnie's flights follows the announcement that newly created Odyssey Airlines is to start all-business-class flights between London City Airport and New York from 2016.

British Airways already offers all-business-class flights on that route and Qatar Airways all-business-class flights between London and Doha began this summer.