Topics: aca, Affordable Care Act, Birth Control, Church and State, contraception mandate, Obamacare, Religion, Religious Freedom, Republicans, Women's Rights, Life News, News

Two major legal challenges currently threaten the contraception mandate of the Affordable Care Act, and both are really important.

The first of these cases was filed by the Little Sisters of the Poor Home for the Aged, a religious nonprofit based out of Detroit. Despite already being exempted from the requirement to provide employees with contraception coverage, the Little Sisters have argued that signing the form for the exemption — which would trigger a third-party administrator to provide and pay for the coverage the Little Sisters object to — is itself a violation of their religious beliefs.

The second case was brought by Hobby Lobby, a private, for-profit craft company with stores throughout the country. In this case, lawyers for Hobby Lobby have argued — with some success, so far — that the contraception mandate violates the religious liberty of the corporation itself. The implications of the Hobby Lobby challenge — for women’s equal access to healthcare and for corporate personhood — would be major.

If you think these cases only matter to women who use birth control, you’re wrong. Here’s why:

Contraception is basic healthcare, period.

Contraception isn’t a medical luxury, a “special” benefit or any of the other things that opponents of the insurance mandate have called it. Women take birth control for all kinds of reasons — none of which are or should be anyone else’s business.

So much of the rhetoric against guaranteed coverage of contraception is predicated on the assumption that preventing unwanted pregnancy is somehow unrelated to women’s overall health, but this is just wrong. Controlling one’s own fertility is a perfectly legitimate medical reason — and the main reason — that women use birth control. In the United States, 42 percent of women use oral contraceptives exclusively to prevent pregnancy, but a majority of women — 58 percent — use birth control for this reason and for reasons other than pregnancy prevention. Fourteen percent of women use the pill for purely non-contraceptive reasons, including preventing migraines, regulating periods and treating endometriosis.

None of these reasons are more valid or medically significant than the others, but they all make access to contraception important. The courts should recognize that allowing employers to decide what is “necessary” healthcare versus what is not is an incredibly dangerous precedent.

There is no such thing as “free” contraception.

As Jodi Jacobson at RH Reality Check recently noted, much of the coverage of the Affordable Care Act (even progressive coverage, including some of what I’ve written at Salon) says that it guarantees women “no-cost” or “free” birth control, but this is actually misleading.

If you have insurance, it’s probably because you pay for it. Overwhelmingly, women either pay for it out of their own pockets on the private insurance market or through their compensation package, which is akin to wages. Any health services rendered through your insurance plan are paid for, in some form, by you. So birth control and other contraception are not “free” under the new mandate, a point Jacobson makes quite clearly:

No one can walk into any pharmacy today and get the pill without a prescription, which in any case first entails a visit to a doctor’s office. No one without insurance can walk into a doctor’s office and get an IUD for for free, nor any kind of contraception, unless they pay out of pocket or meet the means test for and are covered by Medicaid, an increasingly difficult enterprise in itself but the subject of a different article. Ten percent of women in the United States who work full time are currently uninsured and without coverage, they do not have access to “free” birth control. Nor do other women without insurance, or those whose plans are, for logistical reasons or because they were grand-fathered, not yet compliant with the ACA on preventive care. None of these women have “free” birth control now, and they will not later even if they get insurance. Why? Because if you have insurance, you pay for it, either by virtue of your labor or out of your own pocket, or, depending on the situation, both. And under the ACA, it is now mandated that your insurance plan cover certain benefits without a co-pay. This does not make them “free.” It means that you are paying for that service as part of your premium. You earned it, you paid for it, it is yours. If you pay for it, you deserve to get it.

Allowing employers to refuse coverage means that women will have to pay extra for healthcare they are already paying for. You don’t have to be a legal expert to realize that is unfair.