The University of Michigan Health System (UMHS) has become an Epic success story after implementation of the popular EHR, coupled with a tight focus on patient experience and hospital quality, has raised revenues across the organization as healthcare reform initiatives take hold. After barely breaking even in 2013, UNHS saw a 4.3% increase in patient care activity and a $17.3 million revenue surplus on its operating budget of $2.52 billion.

“Thanks to the hard work of more than 22,000, including physician faculty, leaders and staff, we continue to grow and strengthen our ability to provide value to those we serve, including patients from every county of Michigan and beyond,” said Tony Denton, the chief operating officer of UMHS, and Executive Director of University Hospitals. UMHS began its EHR adoption process in 2010, signing an agreement with Epic in July of that year. The system didn’t go live until June of 2012, and UMHS executives credit the long preparation period, along with clinician engagement in the project, for avoiding some of the most common pitfalls in EHR implementation.

“A wide range of other projects and initiatives have also helped keep UMHS finances on target during fiscal year 2014, including stepped-up efforts to manage expense growth, improve productivity and provide ideal patient experiences,” Denton added.

Chief Financial Officer Paul Castillo credits the health system’s participation in the Physician Organization of Michigan Accountable Care Organization, launched at the beginning of 2013, for improving care coordination and services for more than 120,000 Medicare patients. “We can be very proud of achieving our financial target during a year of such change,” Castillo said. “But we’ll continue our focus on operational efficiencies and all aspects of our revenue cycle.”

UMHS opened a new children’s hospital in 2013, which strained revenues initially, adding to the initial costs of implementing Epic that hit the coffers hard. “We knew for five to eight years that we were building a new facility and that would push our operating margin down to less than normal, and then it would gradually climb back up again,” UMHS CEO Doug Strong said in 2013. “What happened during this year was in addition to that, the investment in [Epic] MiChart had a greater negative impact than we expected. It was kind of a double dip.”

The organization is beginning to recoup its investment, however, and will also be expanding to open several new facilities in 2015, including a new 60-physician clinical care center and an emergency critical care center that will bring in more patients and, hopefully, more reimbursements from payers. While the health system provided more than $152 million in free care during its 2014 fiscal year, the board expects to be compensated for a greater proportion of those services thanks to increased insurance covered from patients taking advantage of the Affordable Care Act.