PLF asks Supreme Court to strike down racial preferences at UT-Austin



SACRAMENTO, CA; September 18, 2015: In a friend of the court brief recently filed with the U.S. Supreme Court, Pacific Legal Foundation asks the justices again to accept the case of Fisher v. University of Texas at Austin, and rule that the university’s race-based admissions policy violates the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.

At issue is UT-Austin’s practice of considering the race of applicants, with favoritism for African-Americans and Hispanics. Abigail Fisher, who was denied admission, is challenging the policy because she was not evaluated on an equal basis with students from other racial backgrounds.



The latest amicus brief marks the eighth brief that PLF has submitted to courts at various stages of this case, and the second time that PLF has supported Supreme Court review of Fisher’s constitutional claims.



The Supreme Court first took her case two years ago, and held that the lower courts should not have automatically accepted the university’s claim that racial preferences were its only effective option for achieving a diverse student body. The case was remanded with instructions that the Fifth Circuit apply meaningful scrutiny to the university’s race-based admissions policy. However, the Fifth Circuit sided with the university again, agreeing with the administrators on the supposed necessity of their race-based policy.

UT-Austin hasn’t made a case for color-coding its students

Ms. Fisher has now asked the Supreme Court to review that decision. In support, PLF’s amicus brief explains the many ways in which the admissions policy runs afoul of the Constitution. For example, the university made no attempt to define or quantify the “educational benefits” that it claims are served by its race-based policy. Further, the university has not taken into account the harsh costs of racial preferences — costs that range from the stigmatizing and stereotyping of students to the fostering of factionalism among the student body.

Finally, the university failed to prove that race-neutral measures are not sufficient to promote its diversity goals. Indeed, before the discriminatory admissions policy started, more than 20 percent of the student body already consisted of individuals from “under represented” racial groups. Ironically, the race-based policy hasn’t increased that percentage markedly.



“The Supreme Court should take this case not just to vindicate Abigail Fisher’s civil rights, but also to protect students nationwide from being color-coded and discriminated against by university bureaucrats,” said PLF Principal Attorney Joshua Thompson. “Unfortunately, universities across the country continue to employ racial preferences. We’re asking the High Court to call a halt to this injustice once and for all, and instruct universities that equal rights are owed to all students, as a matter of fairness and as a command of the Constitution.”

PLF filed its brief on its own behalf and also representing the Center for Equal Opportunity, American Civil Rights Institute, National Association of Scholars, Project 21, Individual Rights Foundation, and Reason Foundation.

The case is Fisher v. University of Texas at Austin. More information, including PLF’s latest amicus brief, may be found at PLF’s website: www.pacificlegal.org.



About Pacific Legal Foundation

Donor-supported Pacific Legal Foundation (www.pacificlegal.org) is the leading watchdog organization that litigates for limited government and equal protection under the law, in courts nationwide.