Former Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney said Friday that he disagreed with the House tactics to try to tie the Affordable Care Act to passing the continuing resolution to fund the government, which expires at the end of the month.

"We're more effective tactically not to use a shutdown of some kind to pursue the ... anti-Obamacare objective. I don't think that will be as effective," Romney said, as quoted by CNN. He added that he preferred a one-year delay to the individual mandate or getting more House and Senate Republicans elected to repeal the law, though he also gave Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas) credit for his "quasi filibuster."

Despite his apparent praise for Cruz, Romney's words will likely fall on deaf ears among congressional Republicans eager to use the budget to try to extract concessions from the health care law. Despite Romney's harsh criticism of the Affordable Care Act, many conservatives blame Romney's 2012 loss on his not being conservative enough. Among them is Cruz, the leader of the anti-Obamacare charge, who said in a Federalist Society speech right after his 2012 election that Romney "french-kissed" Obama.

The Senate passed a continuing resolution Friday afternoon to fund the government for two months without any Obamacare provisions. The House of Representatives is set to be in session Saturday and Sunday, in order to pass a resolution. House Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio) said Thursday that he did not see the House passing a clean resolution from the Senate, but added that he had no interest in seeing the government shut down.

Also on HuffPost: Mitt Romney, Regular Guy Mitt Romney, Regular Guy

1 of 14 At A Basketball Game Republican presidential candidate and former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney and wife Ann Romney are seen in attendance for the game of of the Boston Celtics against the Atlanta Hawks in Game Four of the Eastern Conference Quarterfinals during the 2012 NBA Playoffs on May 6, 2012 at TD Garden in Boston, Massachusetts. (Photo by Brian Babineau/NBAE via Getty Images) Share this slide:

Getty Images