Pratt & Whitney executives don't talk much about job totals in Connecticut as they describe the company's new engines, market strategies and technologies.

In the long run, it's a sensitive topic, as employment in the home state has slipped slowly — now about 9,000 in East Hartford and Middletown, down from 11,000 in 2009. The total is split about evenly among hourly Machinist union members, engineers and other staff.

But lately, the byword is stability — or at least "relative stability," as one executive put it this week in a break during the company's annual gathering of aviation reporters. By most accounts, the figures will remain where they are, more or less, for the foreseeable future.

It could be worse, for several reasons. And it could have been better.

The much anticipated ramp-up of production in the F135 engine for the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter has been slower than expected, as Pentagon spending has been hit by sequestration and political pressure to slow the planned acceleration of the nation's largest military hardware program.

Pratt, which assembles in Middletown the F135s destined for the U.S. armed services, delivered 51 of the engines in 2014 and plans to make 64 this year.

Based on 2009 projections, annual totals would now have been more than double the current build rate, executives said.

Still, that 100-plus figure could be just a couple of years away.

"You'll see the ramp start to really happen," Bennett Croswell, president of military engines for Pratt, said in an interview Thursday. "But I am concerned about sequestration. … We will lose some production volumes."

Pratt & Whitney, a division of United Technologies, has been a fixture in Connecticut for close to 90 years. Here's a look back at their history.

Pratt doesn't break down employment by program, and the company does not, and probably cannot, say where employment would have been if the original schedule were still in force.

On the commercial side, engineering and development on Pratt's next generation PurePower geared turbofan is largely done. "We are going to ramp our E&D down, there's no question about that," said Paul Adams, the Pratt president.

That might seem ominous for East Hartford engineering staff levels, but Adams and other executives said it's not safe to assume that the hometown ranks of designers and development people will thin.

"I really don't want to make any employment predictions for us, short term or long term," Adams said. "We like the skill set that we have here in Connecticut, it's where we do the majority of our engineering … but we will always be looking at and understanding, do we have the right skills in the right quantity in the right locations?"

The geared turbofan has an order backlog of 6,300 engines, and that means that Middletown's new moving assembly line will remain busy for years. And Pratt, which won the latest Pentagon engine war against General Electric with sole sourcing on the F-35, and is touting the geared turbofan as revolutionary, is of a mind to keep innovating.

Even as the F135 ramps up, "We're looking at the next generation of propulsion systems," Croswell said. "It would be a whole new platform. We are in the design phase of that program right now."

Among the innovations, Pratt is developing something called "adaptive cycles," which are basically ways to vary engine running rates based on conditions.

Adams even danced around the issue of Pratt's developing a geared turbofan model for jumbo jets, despite recent comments by Greg Hayes, CEO of parent company United Technologies Corp., that that won't happen. The largest geared turbofan currently generates 33,000 pounds of thrust, for the single-aisle Airbus A320 line.

"Not wanting to too much correct my boss in public, I would say that the technology is easily applicable to a wide body," Adams said. "It's going to be contingent on us getting on the right program with the right airframe."

Pratt, which is preparing to break ground on a new head office and engineering center, financed with state tax credits under a deal with Gov. Dannel P. Malloy, is at what executives describe as a time of several "inflection points." One of those is dangerous, as the number of commercial engines in service recently bottomed out at about 12,500. That means that the normally lucrative business of selling spare parts could suffer until the geared turbofan programs mature.

The company says it has an answer for that, in the form of a push toward maintenance contracts that give Pratt a larger role in maintaining engines for airlines — moving away from "transactions," such as the sale of spare parts, toward contracted payments for making sure a fleet of engines stays in good working condition.

That's what many reformers in U.S. health care want to see — a move away from "fee-for-service" toward overall payments to insurers, doctors' groups and hospitals to keep large populations healthy.

I didn't ask Adams whether he's conferring with Obamacare officials who are behind that evolution.

He did tell reporters that Pratt's total sales, $14.5 billion in 2014, should reach $24 billion by 2020. That's certainly good for the network of in-state Pratt suppliers.

A lot has to go right for that dramatic sales jump to happen, and Pratt has suffered some well-publicized engineering glitches in both the F135 and geared turbofan programs, as rival General Electric is developing its own new engine to compete on single-aisle commercial aircraft.

Connecticut always needs to worry about Pratt's constant search for lower-cost locations. But it's fair to say that Pratt's aggressive stance toward innovation, combined with the overall health of the airline industry — five straight years of profits with signs of continued health — bodes well for stable employment in the state where the company started 90 years ago.

And in the long sweep of history, stable isn't bad.