By of the

Gov. Scott Walker put his own take on the Affordable Care Act, partly expanding the state's Medicaid program while rejecting federal dollars to pay for the expansion.

In contrast, Democrat gubernatorial candidate Mary Burke has said she would take the federal money available under the law.

Walker's approach doesn't lend itself to a simple explanation, but a lot of money could be at stake.

The Legislative Fiscal Bureau estimates that Walker's approach, which was approved by the Legislature, will cost the state a total of $467 million to $521 million in the current and following two-year budgets.

Here's an attempt at explaining an important, though complicated, issue in this year's gubernatorial campaign.

Q.What federal money is available through the Affordable Care Act and why did Walker not take the money?

A.The law expands insurance coverage in two ways. One is subsidizing the cost of health plans sold on the state and federal marketplaces for people who aren't offered affordable health insurance through an employer and who have low or middle-class incomes. The other is to expand the Medicaid program to include all adults with very low incomes.

The federal government will pay 100% of the cost of states expanding their Medicaid programs for the first three years, through 2016. The federal government's share of the cost then gradually drops to 90% by 2020.

Walker contends the federal government eventually will renege on that commitment, given the federal budget deficit and fiscal challenges facing the country. That would force the state to make up the shortfall in a program that already is the second-largest expense in the state budget.

The governor also cites other advantages to his approach that we'll get into later.

Q.Is the governor right that the federal government eventually will renege on its commitment?

A.Certainly, the federal government faces fiscal challenges in the coming decade. And 23 states, including Wisconsin, have turned down the federal money.

Still, Ohio, New Jersey and Arizona, all led by Republican governors, are taking the money available through the Affordable Care Act and are expanding their Medicaid programs. So, too, have Republican-dominated states like Kentucky and West Virginia.

Arkansas, Iowa, Pennsylvania and Michigan have won approval from the federal government to use the federal money to try different approaches to expanding coverage. Indiana is in discussions with the federal government to do the same.

So some Republican governors and legislatures have decided to take their chances.

Q.If Walker rejected the federal money, how can the state afford to expand its Medicaid program?

A.One reason is that the federal government will pay about 60% of the cost of providing health insurance to the people who gain coverage.

That's the same share the federal government has always paid toward the program's cost, although it can vary over the years by one or two percentage points depending on the health of the state's economy.

Q.So the state is accepting federal money to expand its Medicaid program but not federal money allocated under the Affordable Care Act?

A.Yes. The difference is that the state is paying 40% of the cost instead of none of the cost for the first three years that it would pay under the Affordable Care Act.

More people with very low incomes also would be eligible for the Medicaid program if the state accepted the federal dollars, giving them better coverage at a lower cost.

Q.What's the basis for the Legislative Fiscal Bureau's estimate on the cost to the state?

A.The Legislative Fiscal Bureau, whose work is respected by lawmakers in both parties, estimated in August that the state would have saved $206 million in the current budget and would save an addition $261 million to $315 million through June 2017 if it had accepted the federal dollars available through the Affordable Care Act.

The money still would come from taxpayers — only federal taxpayers, not solely Wisconsin taxpayers.

Q.How can the state afford to pay 40% of the cost of expanding its Medicaid program?

A.This is where it begins to get complicated.

Wisconsin was among the few states with Medicaid programs that covered adults with dependent children and household incomes up to 200% of the federal poverty threshold — $39,580 for a family of three and $47,700 for a family of four this year.

The federal government paid about 60% of the cost.

Wisconsin also had a limited program that provided basic coverage for some low-income adults who did not have dependent children. But that program covered only about 25,000 adults before the Affordable Care Act expanded coverage.

Under Walker's approach, adults previously covered by BadgerCare Plus who lived in households with incomes above the poverty threshold — $19,790 for a family of three and $23,850 for a family of four — will buy subsidized private health plans on the federal marketplaces set up through the Affordable Care Act.

Remember, the state previously paid about 40% of the cost of providing health insurance to those adults with dependent children.

The money saved by having them get coverage through the marketplace was used to expand coverage for adults who previously were not eligible for BadgerCare Plus.

Q.How many people lost their coverage through BadgerCare Plus?

A.The Department of Health Services' most recent estimate is that 57,000 people had to sign up for private health plans sold on the marketplaces. But there's a nuance here that Walker's opponents don't mention.

The Affordable Care Act expected people with household incomes above 138% of the poverty threshold — $16,104 for an individual, $27,310 for a family of three — to get subsidized coverage through the marketplace.

That's what is happening in nearly all the states — Minnesota and Connecticut are exceptions — that are expanding coverage through the Affordable Care Act.

Remember, Wisconsin previously covered adults with dependent children who had household incomes up to 200% of the federal poverty threshold.

This means that if the state had expanded coverage under the Affordable Care Act, those with incomes above 138% of the poverty threshold probably would have been expected to get coverage on the marketplace anyway.

The people affected by Walker's approach are those with household incomes between 100% and 138% of the federal poverty threshold.

Q.How many people are in that income group?

A.The Department of Health Services has estimated about 27,000 people were in this group.

Q.How many people previously covered by BadgerCare Plus didn't buy subsidized health plans on the federal marketplaces?

A.About 26,000 adults previously covered by BadgerCare Plus, the state's largest Medicaid program, did not sign up for subsidized health plans on the federal marketplace, according to an estimate released by the Department of Health Services in September.

Q.Why do you refer only to adults? How are children affected?

A.The BadgerCare Plus program still covers children and pregnant women with household incomes up to 300% of the federal poverty level — or $71,550 for a family of four.

Q.What about people with severe disabilities or who are elderly?

A.People with severe disabilities or who are elderly and impoverished — two groups that account for more than 60% of the Medicaid budget — are not affected by any of the changes.

Q.More than 100,000 people in the state become eligible for BadgerCare Plus under Walker's approach, right?

A.That's right. The governor has lowered the number of people without health insurance in the state and took a different approach than other states that haven't expanded coverage.

In those states, people with incomes above the poverty threshold can buy subsidized health plans through the federal marketplaces, but adults with very low incomes can't get coverage.

Q.So everyone who is a U.S. citizen and was uninsured can get coverage, either through BadgerCare Plus or through the federal marketplace in Wisconsin?

A.Yes. But there are some drawbacks to Walker's approach. The health plans sold on the marketplaces typically have monthly premiums and deductibles.

Under the Affordable Care Act, people with household incomes below 250% of the federal poverty threshold — $29,175 for an individual — receive additional cost-sharing subsidies in addition to subsidized premiums.

But even with the additional subsidies, coming up with $250 or more for a deductible for a person living on $13,000 a year or the parent of two children living on $21,000 a year can be difficult. They also typically have to pay a monthly premium.

If the state had expanded coverage through the Affordable Care Act, about 27,000 more people would be eligible for BadgerCare Plus.

Even though the number of people without health insurance will decrease, the Wisconsin Hospital Association successfully lobbied the Legislature to allocate $73.5 million — about $30 million in state funds, the balance in federal dollars — to hospitals in the current budget to offset the expected increase in people without health insurance from those who lost their coverage through BadgerCare Plus and don't sign up for subsidized health plans on the federal marketplaces.

Q.You mentioned that Gov. Walker's approach has other advantages. What are they?

A.People who buy subsidized private health plans on the marketplaces get to pick the plan of their choice instead of getting coverage through BadgerCare Plus. Some doctors don't accept or limit the number of patients covered by Medicaid because of the program's low reimbursement. So people may have a wider choice of doctors than they would with BadgerCare Plus.

Q.Are there other advantages?

A.What Medicaid pays doctors and hospitals typically doesn't cover their costs. In contrast, the private health plans sold on the marketplace pay doctors and hospitals much higher rates than those paid by Medicaid. This will benefit doctors and hospitals that provide care to a large percentage of low-income patients.

But Arkansas and Iowa have negotiated agreements with the federal government to accept the additional federal money available through the Affordable Care Act and use the money to subsidize the cost of private health plans sold on the marketplaces rather than expanding their Medicaid programs.

Q.What about Gov. Walker's contention that his approach lessens individuals' dependence on the government?

A.Roughly 27,000 people with incomes between 100% and 138% of the federal poverty threshold will be covered by private health plans instead of BadgerCare Plus under Walker's approach. But most of the cost of those plans still will be paid by for by the federal government.