MORRIS – Although no action was taken regarding the vacant Morris Second Ward alderman seat or the potential medical marijuana dispensary location, other topics were addressed at Monday night’s city council meeting.

The Morris City council voted, 6-0, to renew health insurance coverage for city employees with BlueCross BlueShield for July 1 through June 30, 2016. Alderman Bill Martin was absent because of work.

The Finance and Administration Committee recommended June 5 the renewal of the plan after a meeting with Account Executive Alex Edwards, who said the plan is rare, was grandfathered in and no longer is offered to new employers.

“At this point in time, it makes sense to stay grandfathered in,” Morris Mayor Richard Kopczick said Monday. “We are keeping an eye on things in regards to the Affordable Care Act, but the city will never pay the ‘Cadillac Tax.’ ”

The ACA’s “Cadillac Tax” waits in the wings. For taxable years beginning in 2018, the ACA imposes a 40 percent excise tax on high-cost group health coverage.

“Benefits are very important these days,” City Clerk Carol Adair said. “I think city employees are aware of how good the policy is and are appreciative of it for their families.”

In other news, on a recommendation from the Judiciary and License Committee, the City Council voted, 6-0, to increase the number of Class D liquor licenses in the city from 12 to 13.

The city then voted, 6-0, after a committee recommendation to grant a Class D liquor license to David Bzdill, who applied for it to do business as S.20, at 224 Liberty St., and operate a private club.

Class D licenses are for a full bar, but no carry-out sales.

Bzdill said to the committee the first group to gain membership would be invite only, and following members would gain entry on a sponsorship basis. The club will have a manager.

The demographic Bzdill has in mind is a 35-and-older crowd looking to have a drink and relax in quiet, a departure from aiming at the 21- to 25-year-old bar crowd, which he said tends to be a bit noisier.

The committee unanimously made the recommendation in hopes of increasing business downtown.

“I think it sounds like a great use of Liberty Street real estate,” Alderman Don Hansen said to Bzdill.

Bzdill, a local attorney, said when he began practicing law in Morris 20 years ago, there was more foot traffic.