Exhibition offers 300 years of French art, music and a chance to create

"Monet Painting in Garden at Argenteuil" by Pierre-Auguste Renoir will be on exhibit in "Passport to Paris" at the Denver Art Museum through Feb. 9. (Special to Go)

GO & DO "Passport to Paris" When: Now through Feb. 9. Where: Denver Art Museum, 100 E. 14th Ave., Denver. Admission: Show included with general admission: $10-$13 adults, $8-$10 college students and seniors, $3-$5 ages 6-18, and free to age 5 and under. Free general admission on the first Saturday of every month. Info: Call 720-865-5000 or visit denverartmuseum.org.

Enter the world of French art elegance with "Passport to Paris," an immersive cultural experience now on display at the Denver Art Museum until Feb. 9. Spanning 300 years of history, this series of exhibits features more than 80 paintings and a room full of drawings from French art masters, all positioned around period French furniture and costume pieces.

"This was a little bit of a perfect storm," Passport to Paris curator Angelica Daneo said. "The first one, 'Court to Café,' is a loan of 50 paintings from the Wadsworth Atheneum in Hartford, Conn."

Because the paintings were not prepackaged for exhibition, the Denver Art Museum curators used imagination to create the presentation space for the show.

Advertisement

"The paintings are a wonderful selection that span many years of art," Daneo said. "So we decided to take the opportunity to go deeper into the art. We have a set of drawings that are 39 works of French masters that are roughly the same works as the Wadsworth collection. Many of the artists in the 'Court de Café' are in the drawings. So we are able to show these artists not only in the medium of painting but also in drawing. And then impressionist painting is so popular.

"Beach at Trouville" by Claude Monet. (Special to Go)

We wanted to see how we could go deeper into that period. We also wanted to highlight the development of landscape."

The curators decided to present the artwork with French relics to show art in the context around the paintings.

"We talk about art according to style and technique, but there is a lot to the social history of art," Daneo said. "Art is never created in a bubble. It is a reaction to historical events. So we wanted to create a complex and narrative experience to show how art mirrors society. Hanging paintings on the walls didn't seem enough."

Nicolas Poussin, Franois Boucher, Edgar Degas, Camille Pissarro, Auguste Renoir, Paul Cézanne, Vincent van Gogh, Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec and Claude Monet all make artistic appearances at "Passport to Paris," and this exhibition combination is the first time all of these art pieces have been grouped together for show, including many pieces from private collectors.

"An opportunity like this one, to have such a depth of representation in a particular school of art, it doesn't happen very often," Daneo said. "This is the chance to appreciate the richness of French art. French art is creation. Rome was the artistic capital of Europe until the 1600s. But in the 1700s, it was Paris. The fulcrum shifted. The collection is wonderful."

To foster an immersive community experience, the Denver Art Museum has partnered with the Colorado Symphony through recorded and live venues. The symphony recorded a soundtrack of French composer music for the audio tour portion of "Passport to Paris," and every Saturday at 1 p.m. until Feb. 9, rotating ensembles from the Colorado Symphony will present 45-minute live performances at the museum. For the 2013-14 season, the Colorado Symphony integrated French influenced music and digital imagery into several of its concerts, including a "Return to Paris" concert running Jan. 17-19.

"As a conductor, the period of art history represented by "Passport to Paris" offers a very rich opportunity," Colorado Symphony resident conductor Scott O'Neil said in a press release "It was the one time in history that the noteworthy artists and composers, the practitioners of visual and auditory art that we now know as masters, were alive and working at the same time."

Further community engagement is provided by the Denver Art Museum's first floor studio, a space where all guests are encouraged to make art. To mirror the "Passport to Paris" focus, several drawing stations are available for creative play. These stations include easels for drawing traditional staging of objects (or for imagination inspired works) as well as a community mural and several drawing machines people can wind up and put to paper. Local artists also come in to lead group workshops on the weekends to instruct in drawing techniques such as gesturing or modeling.

"People can come in and focus on some traditional or experimental techniques," the museum's manager of studio and artist programs Jenna Madison said. "Our hope is that after or before viewing these amazing pieces of art, folks will be inspired to be creative. They will have an opportunity to learn a new technique from watching demonstrations or just have the creative space to experiment with the materials and space that many of the French artists had to create the foundations of the pieces they saw on view. The crux is also for them to come and have fun. We want to create a place where family and people can come and experiment with art. We really are open to everyone. We want people to come and experiment with their own creative impulses."