Mouth.com Mouth Foods founder and CEO Craig Kanarick

Mouth Foods Inc. raised $1.5 million in Series A funding to sell what it calls “indie” food online. Vocap Ventures led the investment joined by VegasTechFund and angel investors Joanne Wilson and Jason Calacanis.

Included in the “indie food” category are artisan, small batch, handmade, organic, gluten-free and other packaged specialty foods that are “made by people not corporations, and typically involve a recipe,” said Mouth’s founder and Chief Executive Craig Kanarick. “It’s about the art of the food, instead of the art of the farmer. We don’t sell things like carrots and milk,” he added.

The New York company is bucking two recent trends in food technology and venture capital: It doesn’t deliver groceries within a day (like Farmigo, GoodEggs, Instacart, or Relay Foods) nor is it a marketplace that sells, but doesn’t hold food inventory (like Goldbely or Food-Hub).

The Mouth team scours the country for the best food makers and products, buying select tasty treats in bulk, then photographing, warehousing, marketing, packaging and shipping them directly to customers. “We’re not Etsy. We’re not a magazine. And we’re not an open marketplace. But we curate very seriously, and think our customers benefit from our attention to every detail of the experience,” the CEO said.

The site typically features 700 products at a time, and today about 10% of these are sold exclusively online via Mouth.com, Mr. Kanarick said. His company also has a small brick-and-mortar store in New York, which isn’t yet open to the public but has secured a liquor license.

Mouth.com offers individual items–like Gracious Gourmet’s spiced sour cherry spread ($9), Rick’s Picks’ kosher organic dill pickles ($14) or the port wine caramel bar by Sweeteeth ($7)–along with monthly subscriptions, gift boxes, and a V.I.P. concierge service for customers with a large number of orders.

According to a 2013 report by the Specialty Food Industry Association, total specialty food sales in 2012 topped $85.87 billion. Online sales of specialty foods comprised a small but growing portion of those sales, said Mr. Kanarick.

An investor in several consumer packaged goods and retail startups, Joanne Wilson, said she invested in Mouth partly due to the founders’ excellent track record in business. For his part, Mr. Kanarick was the co-founder and former chief strategic officer of still-thriving digital agency Razorfish.

Ms. Wilson views Mouth as a digital brand able to stand alongside iconic specialty food stores and farmer’s markets in the U.S., like Pike Place Market in Seattle or the Greenmarket Farmers Markets in New York.

The investor believes the company should pursue an “80-20 strategy,” making 20% of its revenue offline and 80% online. She pointed to e-commerce companies like JAand Inc., better known as Warby Parker, and Bonobos Inc. that have generated a meaningful portion of sales via brick-and-mortar stores over time.

Mr. Kanarick said the company will use the funding to continue to find and add products to its site, market its own brand, and vendors’ products across the U.S., and to continue to improve its Internet and mobile websites. The company does not currently have a native mobile app.

Write to Lora Kolodny at lora.kolodny@wsj.com. Follow her on Twitter at @lorakolodny

(UPDATE: An earlier version of this story said Mouth Foods has a brick-and-mortar store in New York selling products, in the fifth paragraph. The store is not yet open to the public.)