Buy Photo Karen Raffone, right, is joined by Max Fitness owner Randy Leib in the July 18 world-record attempt. (Photo: Doug Hood)Buy Photo

How many push-ups does it take to change the world? Jim Raffone is trying to find out.

The Manalapan dad’s quest to save his 6-year-old son from the grip of Duchenne muscular dystrophy, a rare and fatal disease, has inspired thousands of people to drop to the ground. By collecting $10 for 10 push-ups, the family’s JAR of Hope Foundation has raised $70,000 for Duchenne research.

Now Raffone is taking the campaign to another level.

On Aug. 23, the foundation is coordinating an attempt to break the world record for most people doing push-ups at once. The gathering, called “Strength in Numbers,” takes place at the Manalapan Recreation Center.

Raffone is expecting a huge turnout, including former New York Giants cornerback Mark Collins, former Rutgers football running back Joe Martinek and an adjudicator from Guinness World Records.

“I’m getting the chills just thinking about it,” he said. “I believe we can raise close to $50,000 on one day. It’s been absolutely amazing, the support and understanding we’ve received.”

All hands on deck

Duchenne muscular dystrophy is a genetic condition that results in a progressive loss of strength. Eventually the weakness leads to paralysis and fatal heart and lung problems. Life expectancy is in the 20s.

Jamesy Raffone was four when he was diagnosed with a mutation of Duchenne that affects just 120 boys in the United States. Because there are so few cases, there was no movement to find a cure. Jim created one, going from gym to gym throughout the region, enlisting roomfuls of fitness fanatics to do 10 push-ups for $10.

Along the way Jim met Joe Lisi, a fellow Manalapan resident and college football analyst who hosts a show on Yahoo Sports Radio Network. Lisi connected him with the football community. Collins -- a key player on the Giants’ 1986 and 1990 championship teams -- got on board right away. Others too.

“I fell for the story and I feel for Jim’s son because I have kids too,” said Lisi, a lymphoma survivor. “Some people just give money (to a cause) but don’t utilize the resources they have.”

Like networking. As word spread about Jamesy Raffone, JAR of Hope started holding larger-scale events. On July 18, more than 1,100 people showed up at iPlay America in Freehold to break the world record for simultaneous push-ups. The current record of 615 was set earlier this year in India.

Jamesy Raffone with parents Jim and Karen. (Photo: Tom Costello)

The event netted $21,000, but not the record. Guinness has rigorous certification standards. Without a Guinness rep on site, Raffone had to supply aerial photos of the event. He enlisted the use of a drone, but rain prevented its launch.

The record chase could have ended there. It didn’t.

A second chance

Raffone’s very first JAR of Hope fundraiser was running the New York City Marathon. He did it with no prior training. So organizing a second attempt at the Guinness record, bigger and better than the first, was a no-brainer. Pazzo Restaurant and Frogbridge gave him a boost by signing on as sponsors.

“Duchenne has never had such a spotlight shined on it,” he said. “To get the word out there to so many people, this will solidify everything I’ve been trying to do for my son.”

To ensure the record’s certification, sponsors kicked in $7,000 to bring a Guinness adjudicator to Manalapan Aug. 23. Participants must do push-ups at their own pace for one minute.

All told, Raffone expects crowd of 2,000, including ex-NFL linebacker Morlon Greenwood and motivational speaker Lee Rubin, a former Penn State football captain. Like “Jersey Joe” Martinek, who spent 2012 on the New York Giants’ practice squad and now works as an IT recruiter in Matawan, people with no prior connection to the Raffones are drawn in by their story.

Buy Photo Joe Martinek says he sees the Raffones as “role models.” (Photo: File photo)

“I can’t wait to meet Jim and his family,” Martinek said. “They’re role models with what they’re doing. You always want to be around people like that.”

One group has not responded to Raffone’s movement, at least not yet. He invited 10 families dealing with Duchenne to last month’s event. None came.

“I’ve invited 20, 30 families now for this Guinness attempt,” he said. “As parents, we should let these kids see that people are coming out to benefit them and really make an impact, screaming to the world that this disease has to stop.”

It’s a tall order, but Raffone sees progress. Jamesy gets treated by a groundbreaking mix of therapies, including three-hour stints in a hyperbaric chamber several days a week.

“He handles it like a champ,” his dad said. “He knows this is what he needs to do to save his muscle tissue. I believe we’re changing the trajectory of this disease by simply seeing his stamina get better. He’s able to run and play with his friends longer than he used to.”

“I’m hoping we can keep this going until a cure’s found.”

To preregister for “Strength in Numbers” by making a donation to JAR of Hope, visit www.crowdrise.com/23august. Participants also can register on site at Manalapan Recreation Center Aug. 23 starting at 9 a.m. The event gets underway at 10 a.m.

Carino’s Corner appears each Monday in the Asbury Park Press. Contact Jerry Carino: jcarino@gannettnj.com.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1NAuHTF