U.S. doctors and teaching hospitals received nearly $3.5 billion from pharmaceutical companies and medical device manufacturers over the last five months of 2013, according to a partial set of data released Tuesday by the federal government.

The data mark the first disclosure of anything approaching comprehensive information on the once-confidential financial ties between doctors and drug- and device-makers.

The data include 4.4 million payments and other transfers of value by drug- and device-makers to some 546,000 U.S. physicians and 1,360 teaching hospitals made between Aug. 1, 2013, and Dec. 31, 2013.

But it is significantly incomplete, and physician and industry groups have raised concerns about accuracy and context.

About 40 percent of the information was "de-identified" — essentially redacting a doctor's name and other information — because federal officials could not confirm the information's accuracy.

Patient advocates and lawmakers have long pushed to make the data public, saying such arrangements are rife with potential conflicts. Several studies have shown that payments or gifts, however small, alter doctors' prescribing patterns and influence how they practice medicine.

The data were released as a requirement under the federal Physician Payments Sunshine Act, a lesser-known provision of the 2010 Affordable Care Act.

Federal officials hope publication of the data will help consumers make better health care decisions by better understanding their doctors' relationship with industry, said Dr. Shantanu Agrawal, Medicare's deputy administrator and director of the Center for Program Integrity, in a conference call with reporters.

"We are taking a big step forward in shining the light on these financial arrangements," Agrawal said. "Using this new data, it is now possible to conduct a wide range of analyses of payments made by drug and device manufacturers that were never possible before."

Nearly 40 pharmaceutical and medical device companies in Illinois paid more than $100 million to doctors and teaching hospitals across the country, including Illinois, according to the Tribune analysis.

Illinois doctors and teaching hospitals received about $75 million, more than 60 percent of which was related to research, a Tribune analysis of the federal data found. Of that amount, the vast majority of payments or transfers of value — or $55 million — went to recipients who were not identified.

Illinois doctors and their immediate family members also hold ownership stakes in pharmaceutical companies and device-makers worth another $29 million.

Some of the biggest named recipients were in orthopedics and neurology.

For example, Dr. James McGee, a radiation oncologist based in Peoria, received $582,000 in in-kind items or services for research from Merck for a radiation and chemotherapy medical trial, records show. McGee could not immediately be reached for comment.

A top recipient of payments not related to research was Dr. Richard Berger, an orthopedic surgeon based in Chicago. Records show he received nearly $330,000 in licensing payments from Zimmer Holdings, a device manufacturer that specializes in artificial joints. Berger also could not immediately be reached for comment.

Dr. Donald Sanders, an Elmhurst ophthalmologist who was also among the top recipients named, received $175,000 for consulting he did on behalf his contact lens company.

"That's all I do is consultancy," Sanders said. "I have an MD and this is a company that makes medical devices, so I'm required to report it. … It's not like I'm a doctor in practice receiving gobs of money from a company and I'm touting their products."

Dr. Jaishankar Raman, a Chicago heart surgeon, said he was paid $141,259 by the pharmaceutical company Biomet for his development of a new way to heal the chest bone after surgery. Roughly 75 percent of the payments he received were in royalties for the newer plates he developed, he said.

Dr. Richard Penn, a Chicago doctor and adjunct professor in the University of Illinois at Chicago's bioengineering department, said his payout of $131,413 came from the sale of a successful company he co-founded.

Penn said he co-founded CNS Therapeutics, a company that developed an implantable pump to deliver drugs to the central nervous system to treat neurological disorders. He sold the company in late 2012. The $125,032 in royalties in 2013 came from the release of funds from an escrow.

"That represents the payment to me from selling the company," said Penn, who added that he is a supporter of the Sunshine Act. "There are a lot of doctors who get huge amounts of money from companies for things that might or might not be questionable depending on your stance on this."

Another top recipient, Dr. Brian Cole, a Chicago orthopedic surgeon, received $274,000. Most came from Arthrex for a device he helped develop for use in soft-tissue repair of the shoulder. Cole said he discloses relationships to companies with his patients through his website and does not receive any royalties or fees for the implants he uses on his own patients or when his colleagues use them at the hospitals where he works.

"It eliminates the conflict of choosing a device that we might personally gain from," Cole said. "It assures that we always use the best possible implant for the patient whether it is something we designed or a different implant."

Other top recipients could not be reached.

In releasing the data, officials cautioned that the government has not drawn any conclusions about the disclosed payments, nor should anyone else.

"Financial ties and relationships between medical manufacturers and health care providers do not necessarily signal wrongdoing," Medicare's Agrawal said.

"The open payments program does not identify which financial relationships are beneficial and which could cause conflicts of interest."

Another 190,000 payments were not released because they involved research for investigational drugs or new uses for drugs that had not yet been approved for sale, according to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, the federal agency overseeing the release of the data.

Companies were allowed to delay reporting those payments for competitive reasons.