News 12 at 6 o'clock / June 9, 2014

AUGUSTA, Ga. (WRDW) -- News 12 investigated Consumers' Choice Health Plan just 6 months ago, and found incorrect providers listed on its website. We were promised the misleading information would be fixed, but that does not appear to be the case.

When Vivian Snitker signed up for a $400 a month health insurance plan under the Affordable Care Act, she had hoped it would cover her daughter's medical expenses.

"She wears glasses and she's getting headaches again, so I figured her eyesight is getting worse," said Snitker. She said she figured it would be no problem scheduling an appointment with her daughter's optometrist in North Augusta. "She wanted to go back to her old doctor, and I said if he's in the network I'll make an appointment," said Snitker.

She said she found him listed as a provider on her insurance with Consumers' Choice Health Plan. "I said awesome," said Snitker. She said when she tried to make an appointment, she got a rude awakening. While her doctor is listed on Consumers' website, he does not take the insurance. She said neither do two other nearby optometrists. Snitker feels she was misled.

"I can't be the only one," said Snitker. In fact, she is not. In January, Beth Reider told News 12 many of the providers listed under Consumers' Choice did not take the insurance, or had never even heard of the company. "Horrible, horrible experience and nobody should have to go through this," said Reider.

At the time, a spokesperson for the company told News 12 that "we did have a technical glitch a few weeks ago that may have caused incorrect providers to be listed on our website."

Our investigation has found the problem still exists 6 months later. Once again, we informed the company about the ongoing problem.

"I told them I was going to take this to the news," said Snitker. She said her daughter was eventually able to get that eye appointment, and it is covered with her original doctor.

If you are having problems with your national health insurance plan and cannot resolve it with the insurance company, you can file a complaint with Healthcare.gov, your state's insurance commission or attorney general's office.