Although most nurses say they are satisfied with their jobs, many believe professional conditions are taking a turn for the worse, according to a new survey from Jackson Healthcare, Care Logistics and Jackson Nurse Professionals.

Sixty-four percent of the 1,333 hospital-based registered nurses (RNs) consulted for the survey report they were satisfied or very satisfied with their jobs, a small, statistically insignificant decrease from 2012. However, almost 75 percent of the dissatisfied respondents believe nursing has changed for the worse, as do 39 percent of satisfied respondents.

RNs cited numerous concerns within their profession that are inhibiting time, including short-staffing, increased peripheral duties and regulatory requirements. RNs said other personnel could do many of their time-consuming required tasks, such as restocking supply areas or looking for equipment. Sixty-seven percent of respondents said such activities negatively affect their bedside time, according to the survey.

RNs also expressed concerns about poor communication among nurses, nursing assistants, doctors and hospital administrators, according to the survey. Forty-eight percent of respondents said they had wasted time due to lack of communication, while 42 percent reported losing time to fatigue.

Respondents also identified their most time-consuming indirect care duties. Fifty-one percent named coordinating patient care--including giving or receiving clinical reports, arranging tests and consulting with clinicians--as their most time-consuming responsibility, but only 25 percent of RNs said care coordination negatively affected time with patients. Twenty-eight percent of respondents said indirect care took up two to three hours of their shifts, while 20 percent said it took three to four hours.

To learn more:

- here's the survey (.pdf)

- read the statement

Related Articles:

As market worsens for hospital jobs, nurses look elsewhere

Fewer patient deaths linked to more four-year nursing degrees

Internationally educated nurses could help meet healthcare demand

24 strategies nurses need for evidence-based care