Buy Photo Some are questioning why William Bucco (pictured), who served as Freeholder Director Lillian Burry’s 2011 campaign treasurer, was appointed as an acting assistant director in Monmouth County Mental Health and Addiction Services. (Photo: Doug Hood/ Asbury Park Press)Buy Photo

The ascent of a Monmouth County freeholder’s former campaign staffer to a top job serving mental health and addiction is being derided as “politics at its worst” and prompted two members of an advisory board to resign in protest.

Democratic freeholder candidates Larry Luttrell and Joe Grillo called the appointment of Freeholder Director Lillian Burry’s treasurer for her 2011 campaign “blatantly political” at a time when the county and nation are gripped by a heroin crisis.

Luttrell and Grillo, as well as two former Addiction Services board members, question whether William Bucco, 28, of Aberdeen is qualified for the role of acting assistant director role that pays him $50,000 per year. Addiction Services board members Ronald Povolo and James A. Wallace resigned in June.

“This affects people’s lives. This heroin epidemic in Monmouth County is nothing like we’ve ever seen before,” Luttrell said, who is running with Grillo this year against Burry and Freeholder Gary Rich. “They should care more about the people facing that epidemic than rewarding their friends and campaign staffs with political patronage jobs.”

Monmouth County had 69 deaths from heroin last year and 14 confirmed as of early March. The antidote Narcan was used this year on 30 people to revive or attempt to revive them from heroin overdoses.

County officials contend Bucco’s appointment as an acting assistant director of the Division of Mental Health and Addiction Services is a part of a larger move to restructure county departments and save taxpayer dollars by eliminating duplicate internal roles.

Burry touted Bucco’s performance as Monmouth County adjuster, a job he’s had since December 2011, and said in a statement she expects him to do the same in the new position.

“Bill Bucco has worked diligently to improve the County Adjuster’s office. I expect that he will evaluate and improve the operations of the County’s Division of Mental Health and Addiction Services in a manner that continues to meet the needs of the clients and helps make the division more efficient and effective in the delivery and funding of those services,” she said in an emailed statement.

“Bill Bucco is continuing his duties as the County Adjuster as well as taking on new responsibilities. He has a proven track record of success with the work he has done to improve the Adjuster’s Office. I believe he will also improve this division.”

In three similar moves, Monmouth County has saved nearly $450,000 in salary and rent by combining and relocating departments.

“The philosophy here is these changes all add up through the course of the year,” Monmouth County spokeswoman Laura Kirkpatrick said. “The county is seizing these opportunities, with retirements, to reorganize and make things more efficient.”

Bucco’s new job, however, is a new position. The division already has two assistant directors, one who oversees the county’s mental health services and the other who oversees the addiction services. The services were once separate offices, but were merged into one county division several years ago.

About a month after Burry won the 2011 freeholder election, Bucco was appointed as Monmouth County adjuster, a position required by state law that was vacant because of a retirement. The adjuster oversees preparing paperwork for residents with mental illness and developmental disabilities being placed in state facilities, and works with police departments on mental health background checks for gun purchases.

He received a raise in February, boosting his pay from $42,600 to $50,000, according to county records. At the same time, Bucco was named as assistant director, a position that falls directly below Mental Health and Addiction Services Division Director Barry Johnson.

Bucco, who was married last weekend, was on vacation and could not be reached for comment.

Bucco still serves as the county adjuster. In his 2 ½ years there, Bucco implemented a new records retention system, which maintains records electronically, allowing the county to save storage space and consolidate physical offices, according to Monmouth County Administrator Teri O’Connor, who initially interviewed and recommended Bucco for the job in 2011.

He also reviewed psychiatric hospital billing going back to 2005, which netted Monmouth County an additional $200,000 in reimbursements it was due from the state.

Bucco’s new role would not include any expectations that he provide services or counseling directly to clients, Kirkpatrick said. He will provide administrative support in the division.

He also will have a role developing a new competitive process that the county will use to award funding to nonprofit agencies that deliver services to residents, Kirkpatrick said.

“How we can do the job over there better,” she said. “That’s what he’s been made responsible for.”

By at least May, the appointment began causing concerns for some people within the addiction services realm, according to resignation letters submitted by former board members Povolo and Wallace.

In their letters, which mostly are identical, Povolo and Wallace said Bucco lacked of first-hand knowledge and professional credentials in addition and mental health services.

“My opposition is not aimed at Mr. Bucco personally, as I don’t know him,” Povolo wrote in his letter. “But clearly, Mr. Bucco is underqualified to serve as Deputy Director.”

Bucco’s LinkedIn profile, a business-oriented social media forum, lists a bachelor’s degree in international business from Richard Stockton College of New Jersey. His work experience includes time as an autism fundraiser chairman, an intern for a software development company and a diner manager, in addition to several stints working on political campaigns and his job as county adjuster.

Povolo and Wallace, both former division employees before being named to the board, wrote in their letters that it would by hypocritical for them to stay on the board.

Povolo, a Republican, declined to comment on his resignation. Wallace, a Democrat, said his objection came because Bucco was hired for the job over Gary Abraham, the assistant director of addiction services.

“I was disappointed in the fact this gentleman was being hired when there was a qualified person in the position who is a clinician in addiction services,” Wallace said.

Susanne Cervenka: 732-643-4229; scervenka@app.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1tvZJ61