My friend John Gierach and I went fly-fishing last week. There's nothing unusual about that. We've been fishing together for the past 40 years.

It's not every week or even every month, but whenever I come up to Lyons for a visit we almost always plan it around what's happening on one of the local streams.

This time we decided to fish the Big Thompson River below the dam in Estes Park. It required some thought because last year's flooding scoured out and rendered troutless many of the places we've fished together over the years.

We decided on the Big Thompson because there was a chance that an early season blue-winged olive hatch might come off, and John said the cool summer seemed to already be shutting down the high country fishing. I always rely on John's judgment because he knows the fishing in the drainages from Lyons to the Continental Divide as well as anyone.

That holds true right now in the post-flood era, too. I know that he spent a number of days in August systematically fishing various sections of the St. Vrain Creek drainage just to see for himself the impact of the floods.

Neither one of us was in a hurry to get up to the Big Thompson. I wanted to see what the South St. Vrain Creek looked like, so we drove up Colo. 7 out of Lyons toward Allenspark and then over to Estes Park. It was the first time I've seen "the South" since the flood, and it looks rough and fishless in the lower reaches.

Advertisement

The water looks better above its confluence with the Middle Fork, but I can't report objectively on that because somewhere along that section of highway we saw two huge mule deer bucks alongside the road. Right before we saw them, a car going down the canyon had flashed its headlights signaling the universal warning that there was a State Patrol speed trap up ahead or an accident or some other danger. In this case, the warning was for the safety of those two magnificent bucks.

Ed Engle, Great Outdoors

When we made it to the Big Thompson, there were plenty of fly-fishers directly below the dam, so we headed downstream a bit and pulled off the road.

"This is a good spot," John said.

We suited up and then waded across the stream. I may have fished there before, but it's been three or four years since I fished anywhere on the Big Thompson, so it's hard to say. There was a deep trough along the opposite bank flanked by inviting pocket water and some fishy-looking "seams" where faster-moving water merged with slower currents.

There weren't any blue-winged olives in the air, so I decided to go with a large elk hair caddis and a size 18 pheasant tail nymph dropper. John sort of nodded in agreement then said he'd downsize the elk hair caddis to a size 18.

I took that advice and cast the flies toward the soft water side of a nice seam. I think a small trout flashed it, but I didn't hook up. The same thing happened a time or two more before a nicely colored 7-inch rainbow trout took the pheasant tail dropper.

We moved upstream a little later and noticed a few "olives" in the air. We both switched over to dry fly imitations. There were a couple of rising trout, but they were more interested in inspecting my dry fly than actually taking it. I took a break and walked over to talk to John, who said the same thing. We both thought we might have missed a strike or two, but the takes were so lackadaisical that we didn't achieve any solid hook-ups.

You also have to remember that the Big Thompson may look like a small mountain stream, but it is a tailwater here and fishes like one. In addition, this section of the river receives fishing pressure pretty much 365 days a year, so even the smaller trout can be tough to catch at times.

After lunch, we drove downstream a ways. The effect of the flood was more apparent here. There was debris from what had been a house or part of a house along one bank. Midstream toward the opposite bank, passersby had built cairns out of river rock. A single metal piece of a bed frame, wedged upright by the flood, stood just upstream of the cairns. John said the cairns seem to have "popped" up along the river since the flood.

The fishing here was slow, too, although John managed to entice a brown trout to take his dry fly. We looked at each other with a "have you had enough" kind of glance, and we nodded our heads and headed back to the truck.

"We've both caught a fish. You don't have to fish all day, but when your home waters go through something like that flood, you just want to check up on them and see how they're doing," John said.

Of course, if the trout had been all over a blue-winged olive hatch, we would have stayed longer. I mean, we are fishermen, and along those lines I wouldn't be surprised if the "olives" are on by the time you read this.

Check EdEngleFlyFishing.com to see Engle's blog, "The Lone Angler Journal."