— St. Pete always held an odd charm for Marina Williams.

She grew up eating out at The Chattaway, the tropical, British-themed burger joint lined with colorfully painted claw foot tubs on the south side of downtown.

The city’s historic relics fascinated her, like Doc Webb and his “World’s Most Unusual Drug Store,” with its dancing chickens and mermaid shows.

Her mother, a Realtor, drove Marina around the bricked streets of the Old Northeast and other urban neighborhoods where she admired the well-preserved craftsman style architecture that marked St. Petersburg’s first boom time.

Like many of her generation, though, Williams didn’t really plan to stick around forever.

There were college internships in New York City and Spain, then graduate school in London. She was in the epicenter of the arts and fashion scene, helping stage major exhibitions.

“I always loved St. Pete, but, you know, I was one with the world, nomadic in a sense, and really open to opportunity,” Williams recalls.

“It was a weird thing. It was like, when I was here, I loved it, but I thought, ‘Oh, there’s bigger and brighter things,’ and then I got away and I was like, ‘Oh my Gosh! What have I done?”

In 2008, Williams found herself spending a meager amount of savings to open the first incarnation of ARTPool on First Avenue North, an art gallery that has since moved into an old auto garage on Central Avenue and now offers an eclectic array of handmade jewelry, paintings, vintage clothing, vinyl records and an outdoor café.

Quirky fashion parties are scheduled once a month on Saturday nights, such as a Day of the Dead-themed “Abnormal Formal” coming up this weekend.

“That’s unfortunately — or fortunately — what happened for me. I was in London and I was like, I love all the fashion and the art, but I really miss St. Pete and I miss what’s going on there and what can be going on there,” said Williams, 30.

Whenever Williams would help arrange an art exhibition in Chelsea or a fashion show in London, she wondered why she couldn’t create the same thing back in her home town, only perhaps with a little less pomp and pretension and a little more fun and eccentricity.

“I traveled a lot and got great inspiration. All these other cities, they have ‘art pools’ or creative, inspirational spaces for people, but I really felt this void, and I was really close to my family, and I just thought, you know, why not create this mecca in St. Pete?” said Williams, who runs her business with the help of her mother, Becky Williams, and significant other, Evan Williams.

❖ ❖ ❖

Step into one of the slick bars, coffee houses or microbreweries that have rapidly popped up around downtown in the past few years and the owner may have a similar homecoming story to tell.

But many of the young business owners now investing in their hometown didn’t see the same potential when they were youths.

As teens at Gibbs or St. Petersburg high schools, they hit the beach every weekend, but dreamed of skipping out on “God’s Waiting Room” to live in a real city, like Manhattan or Philadelphia.

“Almost everyone I can remember growing up thought they were going to move somewhere else,” said Nathan Stonecipher, 33, co-owner of Green Bench Brewing Company.

“For me, personally, since I was doing finance, I thought I would be in Charlotte, which is kind of the southern part of the banking industry, because there just wasn’t much going on here.”

Stonecipher remembers playing manhunt, a nighttime version of tag that involves flashlights, with friends at what is now the Vinoy Golf Course.

“It was closed and that was just a vacant piece of land, so we used to play manhunt or whatever else on this old golf course that hadn’t been used in 20 years, all boarded up and shut down and roped off,” he said.

Few people hung around downtown in those days unless there was a special event going on.

Heading into a construction career out of college, Stonecipher’s childhood friend and now business partner, Steven Duffy, didn’t initially expect to come back to St. Pete.

“On the day we graduated high school, it was pretty much, ‘Who is going away to college? How far are they going and are they going to stay there?’ ” said Duffy, 32.

“No one said,‘Right after college, I’m moving straight back here.’”

❖ ❖ ❖

Sarah Perrier grew up nearby in Seminole but attended Gibbs High School to study dance, which would take her to college in Philadelphia and eventually into a career with a professional dance company.

She left for the north in 1994, probably for good, she thought then.

In Philadelphia, she would gain an affection for “coffee culture” during the long, cold winters, and also for a man who happened to be in the coffee business.

Over the course of many trips with her husband, Raphael, to visit family back in St. Pete, Sarah began to warm up to the idea of coming back home.

“You could just see things were happening here,” Sarah Perrier said.

The Renaissance Vinoy had been restored, her father and uncle built up the adjacent Vinoy condos, and the Perriers could see a momentum growing.

“My husband said, ‘We should move here. There are so many opportunities,’” she recalled.

In 2008, the couple opened its first Kahwa Coffee shop on the ground floor of a condo building at Fifth Avenue and Second Street North.

At the time, there still weren’t many people walking the streets.

“We had an idea of what we wanted to create: a gathering place, the coffee shop where you would see all your friends there in the morning. There would be artists, there would be business people, there would be moms there with their kids, kind of a cross-section of different people,” Sarah Perrier said.

“We thought that would work, but you don’t really know.”

In a city without a significant local coffee culture, the Perriers have seen their freshly roasted coffee brand grow into six locations in St. Petersburg and Tampa, with more in the works.

❖ ❖ ❖

There’s a T-shirt popular among the young artists and entrepreneurs that reads: Paris, London, Tokyo, St. Pete.

Many of the city’s young business owners say they wouldn’t have the same creative drive if they hadn’t left the Sunshine City for a while to experience a big, global city.

Matt Kaye spent a decade managing bars and night clubs among the hip and artistic in Brooklyn’s Williamsburg neighborhood.

“New York was the most creative place I’ve ever been. It was amazing,” said Kaye, 37.

After 10 years he watched the neighborhood become so cool that housing prices drove out many of the creative types, and Kaye felt an urge to return to the Sunshine City.

In 2012, he opened The Bends bar at 919 First Ave N. with his fiancée and a group of long-time friends.

The bar, known as “A Classy Dive,” offers modestly priced specialty cocktails, displays canvasses and sculptures on the walls from local artists, and its décor is almost entirely made of recycled materials Kaye collected around the area — the bar, made of wood from the old Johns Pass pier, the old Edison-style light bulbs found in the ceiling of the property.

“I kind of came back like a grown up. I went up there and got all my knowledge and creativity and came back here to let it all loose,” said Kaye.

❖ ❖ ❖

As Stonecipher and Duffy saw the mecca St. Petersburg was becoming, not just for aging snowbirds, but for young entrepreneurs and families, both say they knew they’d found the place where they wanted to invest their lives.

“I think deep down I always thought ‘I’m going to move back to St. Pete,’” Duffy said.

Their Green Bench brewery, near Tropicana Field off of Central Avenue, is named for the historic green benches that lined downtown streets in the city’s 20th century heyday.

They, like the other city natives, feel they have a stake in making their hometown flourish again for their families and the community at large.

“If we’re going to live here forever, we want to make this community the best it can be, selfishly, since we live here,” said Stonecipher.

“We’re not going anywhere and hopefully it encourages younger people to come and do the same thing.”

jboatwright@tampatrib.com

(727) 215-1277