More than 500 economists, including three Nobel laureates, have signed a letter warning lawmakers of the “serious consequences” of raising the federal minimum wage to $10.10 an hour, a policy being pushed by President Barack Obama and most congressional Democrats.

“One of the serious consequences of raising the minimum wage is that business owners saddled with a higher cost of labor will need to cut costs, or pass the increase to their consumers in order to make ends meet,” the letter states (PDF). “Many of the businesses that pay their workers minimum wage operate on extremely tight profit margins, with any increase in the cost of labor threatening this delicate balance.”

The economists point to the recent Congressional Budget Office (CBO) report on the $10.10 minimum wage proposal. The CBO estimated that such a significant increase in the minimum wage would cost the economy 500,000 jobs, perhaps as many as 1 million, over the next two years. “Many of these jobs,” the letter notes, “are held by entry-level workers with limited experience or vocational skills, the very employees meant to be helped.”

The economists explain that the minimum wage is “a poorly targeted anti-poverty measure,” noting that [e]xtra earnings generated by such an increase in the minimum wage would not substantially help the poor,” again pointing to the findings of the CBO report.

“As CBO noted, ‘many low-wage workers are not members of low-income families,’” the economists explain. “In fact, CBO estimates that less than 20 percent of the workers who would see a wage increase to $10.10 actually live in households that earn less than the federal poverty line.”

“For these reasons, we encourage federal policymakers to examine creative, comprehensive policy solutions that truly help address poverty, boost incomes from work, and increase upward mobility by fostering growth in our nation’s economy,” they added.

The Nobel Prize winning economists who signed the letter are Vernon Smith, Edward Prescott, and Eugene Fama. Other signers include Donald Boudreaux of George Washington University, Greg Mankiw of Havard University, and Glenn Hubbard of Columbia University.

The federal minimum wage hike proposal appears to be dead on arrival in Congress. President Obama and congressional Democrats have sought to make it a campaign issue, though media coverage has been drowned out in recent weeks by the ongoing Obamacare debacle and foreign policy issues.

Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-NV) was recently forced to delay a vote on the minimum wage proposal because of a lack of support from his own caucus.

H/T: Cafe Hayek