When U.S. presidents leave office, their official papers don’t go with them. A federal law requires that, with certain exceptions, these valuable historical documents be made public over time.

But when Supreme Court justices leave office, whether through through retirement or death, no law governs how their papers should be handled. The papers are regarded as the property of the justices, even though they shed light on decisions that have had momentous impact on the public. And the Freedom of Information Act does not apply to the federal judiciary.

As a result, justices are free to do whatever they want to with these valuable materials. The fate of documents that could reveal how landmark rulings came about is left entirely to the whims of the justices and their families or executors.

Recent developments have highlighted this baffling differential treatment. When Justice Antonin Scalia died suddenly on Feb. 13, nearly 30 years of Supreme Court history may have gone with him. Scalia was the longest-serving member on the current court, ruling on hot-button issues from gay rights to the Affordable Care Act. And wouldn’t you like to know more about what went on behind the scenes regarding Bush v. Gore? Scalia’s papers could answer vital and legitimate questions about how the court arrived at decisions in these historic cases.

But the status of Scalia’s files is uncertain. Though he had discussed with friends what to do with his papers, he did not make a final decision before he died, according to his longtime friend and co-author Bryan Garner.

When President Obama nominated federal appeals judge Merrick Garland to replace Scalia, justices’ papers again became an issue. Nearly 40 years ago Garland worked as a law clerk for the late Supreme Court Justice William Brennan Jr. Brennan's papers, available at the Library of Congress, have provided a rich resource for historians writing about his outsized influence on the court.

But before he died, Brennan specified that some of his papers, including his law clerk files, would not be made public until July 2017, 20 years after his death. So the Garland file will not be released before then, whether or not the Senate gives him a hearing.

Those familiar with Brennan’s papers say the folder might not reveal much about Garland, except for correspondence he had with Brennan in the years after his clerkship. But Garland is under consideration for a seat on the nation’s highest court, so it is hard to understand why this file should be secret.

Brennan’s proviso is far from the most outlandish restriction justices have placed on their papers. Justice David Souter, who retired in 2009, stipulated that no one could see his papers until 50 years after his death. When he lodged his papers with the New Hampshire Historical Society he told the director, “I’ve got an incinerator outside my house, and either you agree to 50 years after my death, or they go into the incinerator.”

POLICING THE USA: A look at race, justice, media

That was not an empty threat. Justices including Hugo Black and Byron White have burned or shredded their papers to prevent circulation, according to University of Washington court scholar Kathryn Watts. On the other end of the spectrum, the late Justice Thurgood Marshall’s papers became public immediately upon his death in 1993. Because he died so soon after he retired in 1991, the release revealed details about very recent cases.

The ensuing controversy led to a Senate hearing on whether a consistent rule for justices' papers should be enacted into law. The committee invited then-Chief Justice William Rehnquist to testify. He refused, but told the committee, “We have no hesitancy in expressing the opinion that legislation … is not necessary.”

Skittish about ruffling judicial feathers, Congress soon dropped the idea of legislation and no action has been taken since. But Congress was not reluctant to act when, in the wake of the Watergate scandal, it enacted the Presidential Records Act that established rules for access to presidential papers.

In an era when the public demands maximum transparency and accountability, the time has arrived for Congress to keep justices from shielding — or torching — documents the public deserves to see.

Tony Mauro, a member of USA TODAY's Board of Contributors, is Supreme Court correspondent for The National Law Journal and the Supreme Court Brief.

In addition to its own editorials, USA TODAY publishes diverse opinions from outside writers, including our Board of Contributors. To read more columns, go to the Opinion front page and follow us on Twitter @USATOpinion.