DUBLIN--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Research and Markets (http://www.researchandmarkets.com/research/kcbvxr/north_american) has announced the addition of the "North American Healthcare Cloud Computing Market - Analysis & Forecasts to 2020" report to their offering.

Cloud computing helps store, manage, and process data from disparate locations, and delivers hosted services over the internet. In the healthcare industry, cloud computing as a technology is offered in four forms, namely, computation, storage, memory, and networking. Cloud computing is increasingly being adopted in the healthcare industry owing to the increasing pressure to curtail healthcare costs, while maintaining the quality of care provided to patients.

In 2014, the U.S. accounted for the largest share of the North American Healthcare Cloud Computing market and is expected to witness the highest growth rate. The market for healthcare cloud computing in the U.S. is expected to rise in insurance enrollments triggered by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (March 2010), inadequate IT infrastructure among payers, and conference, symposia, and seminars conducted on cloud computing in the U.S.

The North American Healthcare and Life Sciences Cloud Computing market witnesses high competitive intensity as there are several big and many small firms with similar product offerings. These companies adopt various strategies (agreements, partnerships, collaborations, expansions, and new product launches) to increase their market shares and to establish a strong foothold in the North American Healthcare Cloud Computing market.

Companies Profiled:

Athenahealth, Inc.

Carecloud Corporation

Carestream Health, Inc.

Cleardata Networks, Inc.

Dell Inc.

Global Net Access (Gnax)

Ibm Corporation

Iron Mountain, Inc.

Oracle Corporation

Vmware, Inc.

Topics Covered:

1 Introduction

2 Research Methodology

3 Executive Summary

4 Premium Insights

5 Market Overview

6 North American Healthcare Cloud Computing Adoption Assessment

7 North American Healthcare Cloud Computing - Deployment Outlook

8 By Application

9 By Deployment Model

10 By Component

11 By Pricing Model

12 By Service Model

13 By End User

14 By Country

15 Competitive Landscape

16 Company Profiles

For more information visit http://www.researchandmarkets.com/research/kcbvxr/north_american