Topics: aol_on, Bernie Sanders, Donald Trump, Editor's Picks, Elections 2016, George W. Bush, Hillary Clinton, isis, Paris, Terrorism, News, Politics News

Paris changed American politics, though no one can say how much, or for how long. Republicans hope to turn the 2016 election into a referendum on “national security.” House Republicans got the ball rolling with a bill to effectively bar all Syrian refugees from entering the United States. As a public safety measure, it’s an odd first step, given how few Syrian refugees we resettle and the microscopic threat they pose to our security. But no one familiar with the facts thinks Republicans act out of concern for our safety.

In five years of civil war, 200,000 Syrians have died and 9.5 million have fled their homes. Germany has taken in 38,500 of them. The United States: 1,854. Half are children. Most of the rest are women or elderly. Two percent are single men of combat age, the demographic from which most terrorists hail. (The 9/11 hijackers’ average age was 24. The elder Boston marathon bomber was 26.) Vetting a refugee takes up to two years and produces a fat dossier, which is why so few terrorists try to get in that way. We say the world looks to us for leadership, but every other nation that might join a coalition against ISIS is doing more than we are to meet this crisis. They no longer want our “leadership” — just our soldiers, our arms and our money.

Since the attack, feckless Republicans have hatched one hare brained scheme after another: closing borders to Muslims (Ted Cruz); opening them, but only to Christians (Jeb Bush); closing down mosques and even requiring Muslims to register with the federal government (walking, talking ISIS recruitment poster Donald Trump). And yet they’re winning the debate. All evidence says the GOP bill won’t make us safer, that even debating it makes us appear foolish and weak. But if it dies in the Senate it will be by parliamentary maneuver, not popular mandate.

A year ago most Americans supported the Iran nuclear pact and opposed sending troops back to Iraq. Today they oppose the pact and narrowly support sending the troops. In a September Pew poll, a bare majority backed Obama’s plan to take in more refugees. In a Friday Bloomberg poll, 64 percent opposed it. Trump’s approval ratings rose this week. Obama’s fell.

Democrats say this is a natural reaction to a severe trauma. They argue that the fever’s confined to the Republican wards; when we recover our senses, we’ll want a tested leader at the helm, or at least an adult. In other words, it will all work itself out. Perhaps. Meanwhile, Trump’s numbers are rising in general election as well as primary polls. The public reversed itself on the Iran pact and Iraq troops long before Paris. It can’t all be a passing mood.

Democrats have been losing the national security debate for years. Most aren’t any good at it. Some don’t even try. Few have the courage or conviction to challenge failed doctrines. So they crouch in the cellar praying the storm will soon pass. If this one doesn’t, its blood-dimmed tide may sweep a Republican into the White House and the country into a limitless, trackless war. To keep that from happening Democrats must find the courage and skill to lay out a clear, credible alternative to the reflexive militarism of the past. As things stand, they aren’t even close.

The first obstacle they must overcome is their fear of national security issues. Republicans use real wars to fight culture wars (See Karl Rove and Iraq) and never fight fair. (See Karl Rove and Swift Boat Veterans for Truth.) Show maturity or restraint and they paint you as weak. It’s a hustle, but frightened voters make easy marks. Democrats are the real prey, so when talk turns to national security they talk as tough as they can and move quickly on to other topics.

Democratic consultants tell their clients to stay off their opponents’ turf which is one reason why at the Iowa debate, Bernie Sanders allotted just two sentences of his opening statement to Paris. But national security shouldn’t be Republican turf, and wouldn’t be if Democrats challenged them on it relentlessly, with facts and fearless logic. Their consultants say that in an age of “messaging” no one has to explain anything, but in reality the reduction of defense issues to mere themes and tropes is what enables Republicans to use them as political cudgels.

Democrats no longer know how to make a case let alone on issues as complex and tender as these. They once exposed illegal military and intelligence operations. No more. Republicans have issued seven reports on Benghazi; Democrats not one on the lies that lured us into Iraq. The Center for Public Integrity found 260 false statements made by Bush in the ramp up to war. He told Congress “our intelligence sources” told him Saddam tried to buy aluminum tubes “suitable for nuclear weapons production.” Our intelligence sources said no such thing and our nuclear weapons experts said the opposite. His claim was thus a lie. Pardon him if you like, but establish the record, and with it the principle that henceforth, lies of such magnitude and consequence will be deemed impeachable offenses.

After 9/11 Democrats should have played every point. When Bush said “they hate us for our freedom” Democrats should have said, “No, they hate us because we arm rulers they are at war with’.”When he said “we fight them there so we don’t have to fight them here” they should have said, “No, they’re here because we’re there, propping up petrol states with guns and bribes.: When he said “the world’s a better place without Saddam in it,” they should have said “not for the hundred-thousand Iraqi dead or hundreds of thousands of Iraqi Christians who fled their homes; not for our killed or wounded soldiers or their loved ones. Nor is America better off as a bankrupt, nor is the Middle East better off in a permanent state of bloody chaos.”

Bush was wrong about everything. When experts told him the key to defeating Al Qaeda was law enforcement not military power, he presumed to ridicule their “pre-9/11 thinking.” Iraq laid bare the vulnerability of our military to the asymmetrical tactics of jihad, but 13 years later Democrats have yet to make a solid case for junking what we no longer need. The reorganizations of intelligence and homeland security were bipartisan boondoggles. The tragic mistake was of course the invasion of Iraq. It’s worth recalling that a majority of Democrats voted against it, but also that most did so quietly.