So much is said about what Sept. 11 did that we sometimes forget what it undid. For his 9/11 tribute this year, comedian Anthony Atamanuik, a “30 Rock” regular, made “The Tony Show,” an artificial re-creation of a show from Sept. 4, 2001, complete with silly blather about George W. Bush, Gary Condit, shark attacks and Andrea Yates.

After Tuesday’s performance at the Upright Citizens Brigade East, we talked with him about pre- and post-9/11 comedy. Edited excerpts:

The Wall Street Journal: What’s it like digging into the past to remember what we were talking about that week?

Mr. Atamanuik: First you’re just like, oh, Aaron Brown! I remember him! But after that, you realize: It’s so hard. That’s the crazy thing. You can’t even find Connie Chung’s interview with Gary Condit. Even when people talk about something that happened beforehand, they only do that in the context of “pre-9/11.”

What struck you the most?

We were in such a navel-gazing malaise of riches. Nothing was happening. The stories were “What is Bush going to do with the surplus?” And Michael Jordan, this basketball legend, coming back to the sport. And the NYPD being strained by a Michael Jackson concert. And Britney Spears. And George Clooney. I mean, we had two Americans kidnapped in Afghanistan, and that was like the fifth page of the newspaper. Nobody cared.

There’s a moment where you mention the Taliban, and you describe them as “the people who blew up the twin…Buddha statues.” I had totally forgotten about those.

It’s so, so, so, so easy to forget. It’s easy to remember “never forget” because that’s a short little phrase. But to actually never forget is hard. Look back at the covers of Time magazine. It was “the summer of the shark” because, like, a guy got bit in Florida or South Carolina.

You had one sketch that was very on-the-nose, a fake audition you did for “MADtv” about a cartoonishly evil Arab who wants to learn how to fly a plane but not how to takeoff or land.

We did that because it could’ve been on the air. That’s how naïve we were. We would make jokes. It was almost tempting fate.

Like that eerie ad about how the Twin Towers could withstand a plane crash.

Exactly.

You worked on “30 Rock,” which brilliantly satirized the post-9/11 mentality in a season-two episode. It’s not as if 9/11 can’t be funny, that you can’t find the humor around it. So why avoid it?

I was going to do just a normal show. You know, our whole thing here is we do a different show every week. Last week was all about Syria. Next week is about weed. The week after that is a “Sleep No More”-style retelling of “Tootsie.” But I feel like we’re in that same malaise. The president is just beating the drum on Syria, and we’re using Facebook and Twitter to talk about twerking. It’s sort of like how Columbine feels like it was generations ago. So that’s how we get these new disasters.

Creatively, it must be hard to think of a new approach to 9/11 every year. It’s sort of like, well, how many different ways are there to do Mother’s Day or Thanksgiving?

This is going to sound sick, but I enjoy 9/11 in this way: In the footage, you hear in the reporters’ voices the fear, but also the excitement and adrenaline. There’s something big and fiery. And literally they’re replaying the footage within 20 minutes. If we really didn’t like 9/11, if it really traumatized us that much, we wouldn’t rebroadcast that footage for four hours. It’s “Shark Week” now. And, look, I had a family friend in one of the towers. It shouldn’t be “Shark Week.” It deserves better.

Corrections & amplifications: An earlier version of this blog post called Anthony Atamanuik a writer on “30 Rock.” He portrayed a writer on the program.