The new buzzword these days amongst nerds is “bullying.” Basicly it means that if someone is better then you at beating you up or when Im way more popular or louder then you in a bar- now that’s bullying I guess and apparently it’s a bad thing. It use to be called being a alpha-male or being sexually agressive and it was something to be admired.

Well now the Bully-Brigade have their sites set on South Beach folks, and lovable scamp Richie Incognito in particular. Remember how the Dolphins OT Jonathan Martin quit on his teammates last week? Well apparently it’s because he claims Richie and the others were “bullying” him by forcing him to pay for $30,000 dinners (we call that a Vince Young brunch) and $15,000 trips to Vegas.

All it takes is one look at the situation to see where the real problem is,, does Richie Incognito look like a bully to you? Didn’t think so folks it just doesnt pass the eyeball test. Richie does the right thing here and challenges that nerd Adam Schefter to a fight:

@AdamSchefter Enough is enough If you or any of the agents you sound off for have a problem with me, you know where to find me #BRINGIT — Richie incognito (@68INCOGNITO) November 3, 2013

If convincing folks to do stuff because your threatening them with trouble is bullying, you know who else were bullies?

-Greg Schiano and Jesus Christ

-Obamacare

-The girl who accused BigBen of sexual assault and the other girls who also did the same thing on another occasion where he kidnapped a chick in good fun

Folks are saying that Martin felt bullied into giving Incognito $15,000 to go to Las Vegas out of fear that Richie woudn’t invite him to his birthday party or whatever. This makes absolutely no sense. It sounds like Richie’s being persecuted for being a excellent salesman. Martins trying to have it both ways here- he wants to give his buddy money so he can stop getting picked on and he also wants to have money of his own to spend on strippers and possibly cocaine too.

Lets put this in perspective here. These guys make like a million dollars a year so that’s like 1% of there salaries. So basically thats like a average American buying his coworker lunch one day and then complaining about it like a chicken later. And speaking of lunch- The Dolphin’s are also accused of just a little cafeteria shananigans and having the guys from the O-Line play a prank on Martin by refusing to eat lunch with him all the time.

Its kind of ironic considering that when the entire Dolphins line decides to leave one guy to fend for himself it’s usually called “third down.” Reading between the lines we can figure out that maybe if Martin wasnt to busy throwing his cash around buying the most expensive lunches they had for sale and trying to add shrimp to everything probably, he would of been on time to sit down with the other guys who brought their own lunchpail from home. I dont know why everyone has to wait on Martin to eat, and wouldn’t that be bullying too if you made your blue collar teammates sit around to watch you eat your caviar and Cristal or whatever your rubbing in their faces? Technically yes it is.

Predicatbly, Coach Ditka had the most measured response to the BullyB.S. and said you need to punch a bully in the mouth. The only way to stop a bully is by being a bigger bully- its called life actually, some people used to live it back in the day. I bet if Ditka was President you wouldnt hear about Iran or Benghazis bullying us because we’d be too busy taking THERE lunch money. It really is that simple.

Plus if your going to cry or whine to someone just because I bully you it just makes me more convinced that I was absolutely correct to pick on you in the first place, stand up for yourself or else I’m going to do it again because it was fun and easy. Thats the problem with America these days- your all encouraging bullies by being so hilarious when you get bullied.