I love it when an event happens and then the candidates comment on the same situation because it gives us insights which allow us to better compare them. I did this a few days ago comparing Ted Cruz's solid answer on global warming to Carly Fiorina's considerably more tepid one , and today we have another opportunity when both Ted Cruz and Donald Trump have commented on the case of the jailed Kentucky county clerk who went to jail rather than issue marriage licenses to homosexual couples.

Today, for the first time ever, the government arrested a Christian woman for living according to her faith. This is wrong. This is not America. I stand with Kim Davis. Unequivocally. I stand with every American that the Obama Administration is trying to force to choose between honoring his or her faith or complying with a lawless court opinion. Those who are persecuting Kim Davis believe that Christians should not serve in public office,” he said. “That is the consequence of their position. Or, if Christians do serve in public office, they must disregard their religious faith – or be sent to jail.”

So basically, what Cruz is saying is that this issue is not about gay marriage, it's about religious freedom. Cruz also portrays the Supreme Court as lawless, not Kim Davis.

I partially agree and partially disagree with Cruz. When a person holds public office, they have to uphold the duties of the office even when it conflicts with their religion. So I disagree with Cruz on that.

However, even people not in public office, like bakers and florists, are being forced against their will, under threat of fines and other penalties, to participate in gay marriages, and Cruz's discussion of religious freedom being curtailed is perfectly correct for such cases, which are becoming more and more common.

I also fully agree that this was a lawless decision, as lawless as Dred Scott and Plessy vs. Ferguson, and Cruz is 100% correct, again to label the real lawless party--the Supreme Court.

So Cruz did pretty well. How did Donald Trump do ?

Republican front-runner Donald Trump said Friday that he wished a Kentucky county clerk, Kim Davis, was not jailed for refusing to issue marriage licenses to same-sex couples, but he added that the Supreme Court has ruled and it is "the law of the land." "You have to go with it. The decision's been made, and that is the law of the land," the real estate mogul said Friday on MSNBC's "Morning Joe."

Most conservatives agree that the Supreme Court's gay marriage decision was not based on constitutional law. But Donald Trump seems to feel that the Supreme Court has the last word, and can never be wrong or in error.

That's a little troubling because if Trump becomes President, it is very likely he will have to battle an increasingly statist Court who will try to thwart his initiatives. His showing deference to the court and an unwillingness to fight signals either one of two things:

1) that Trump doesn't really believe or care whether marriage is limited to one man and one woman

or

2) that Trump believes the Supreme Court is the ultimate authority in our country. Which it isn't.

What will Trump do as President the first time the Court strikes down a section of his border fence, or his attempt to deport illegals? His uncharacteristic obedience is not an encouraging sign.