Sioux Falls, SD

Students are getting used to a new schedule at Sioux Falls Public Schools as the classes started after Labor Day this year. This is making a difference in Advance Placement classes. The start of school gave AP students two less weeks to prepare for the test in May.

One group of students at Washington High School are working on putting commas in the right spot for their AP Language and Composition class. For Junior Maham Shah, it's one of the many AP classes she takes. She plans on following her parent's footsteps and become a doctor.

"Pressure to live up to their expectations and I feel like AP classes help with that. Challenging myself, knowing that I'm capable of doing hard classes will help me in college knowing I can complete something," Shah said.

Students like Shah are dealing with a different workload this year. Tami Brown has been a teacher for 22 years. She taught AP classes last year, and this year she had to change up her lesson plan.

To make up for lost time in the classroom, students brought more assignments home with them for the summer.

Brown says she expected her students to come into class with a basic level of knowledge.

"Do extensive work with literary analysis and terms so they would be familiar with them when we came to them. They did read a novel on their own which last year we did in class and then I did have them follow current events," Brown said.

Once classes actually started, Shah noticed more homework than usual from her AP classes, but she doesn't feel overwhelmed.

"Not really yet, I haven't had so much homework where I need to put more attention to my AP. So far, so good," Shah said.

That's not the case with some of her classmates.

"I've noticed with friends who haven't taken AP classes before and they've said 'Oh my gosh this a lot of homework,' but I was kind of used to it and I know how to handle my AP classes and I know like the main thing is to prepare for May for the AP test," Shah said.

Brown says she's doing what she can to get through all the information, but it's hard to predict exactly what will happen once her students approach the May tests.

"No this is all new I terms of timing, but truth be told, schools all over the country do it this way. I think there's just a learning curve," Brown said.

There might be a learning curve for parents as well. Brown says parents might notice a student being overwhelmed by work before teachers do. There's a few ways parents can help.

"I would say help your student with time management. Remind them that things done in small pieces are a lot easier than cramming the night before so do a little bit at a time," Brown said.

Brown also says you need to make sure your students stay well rested as they deal with homework, extracurricular activities, and jobs.

For Shah, she has a plan on how she handles her workload.

"I always give my full attention to my AP classes and then my harder accelerated classes and then my easier classes," Shah said.

It's a heavy workload, but it could be worth it. Brown believes taking AP classes are helpful for students, even if they don't get the results they want.

"I think even if students take the exam in May and don't get the score that they want or don't get a score that earns them credit, they will still do much better in a college class," Brown said.

Some new challenges that could still benefit the student.

Eye on KELOLAND {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.