Q: What’s behind those federal charges against supplement manufacturers?

A: Federal officials recently announced a crackdown on the dietary supplements industry, targeting firms that falsely claimed their pills could help people lose weight, build muscle or even kick drugs.

Dietary supplements are used by more than half of U.S. adults, according to the Council for Responsible Nutrition, which represents the $35 billion industry.

The Justice Department said it had filed criminal charges against Dallas-based USPlabs, known for workout and weight-loss supplements such as Jack3d and OxyElite Pro. USPlabs allegedly told some retailers its products contained natural plant extracts, but the company actually used a synthetic stimulant manufactured in a Chinese chemical factory, according to the department’s complaint.

“The USPlabs case and others brought as part of this sweep illustrate alarming practices the department found — practices that must be brought to the public’s attention so consumers know the serious health risks of untested products,” said Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General Benjamin C. Mizer.

Justice officials said the department had worked with other agencies, including the Food and Drug Administration, Federal Trade Commission and the U.S. Anti-Doping Agency, over the past year to bring civil and criminal cases against more than 100 makers and marketers of dietary supplements.

The FTC said it had filed a federal lawsuit against Florida-based Sunrise Nutraceuticals, accusing it of falsely claiming that its supplement Elimidrol could help with opiate withdrawals. The company allegedly said Elimidrol was the No. 1 opiate withdrawal supplement and the only opiate withdrawal product “guaranteed to work,” according to the FTC.

The industry has been criticized for some time. In April, more than a dozen state attorneys general asked Congress to launch an investigation into herbal supplements. A recent study in the British Journal of Cancer found a potential connection between men who took muscle-building supplements and the risk of testicular cancer. The New York attorney general’s office ordered four retailers — GNC, Target, Walgreens and Wal-Mart — to halt sales of some supplements after DNA tests apparently showed that they did not always contain the herbs advertised.

Health experts have long complained that supplements are too loosely regulated and pose a safety hazard. Companies are required to ensure that products are safe and accurately labeled, experts say, but there is little federal oversight. The industry has countered that problems are contained among a few bad actors.

The FDA does have some authority to oversee dietary supplements, but not nearly the strict regulatory power it has over pharmaceutical drugs. One critical difference is that supplements do not need FDA approval before hitting the market. Except in rare cases, firms do not need to provide the agency with evidence showing that supplement ingredients are safe or actually work.

Manufacturers have to adhere to labeling requirements, such as including the name of the manufacturer, listing ingredients and identifying the product as a “supplement.” They also have a legal responsibility to ensure safety. But when problems arise, the FDA is responsible for showing that a dietary supplement is unsafe before it can pull it from store shelves.

— Renae Merle and Brady Dennis, The Washington Post