Andre Caldwell arrived in Denver last season with proven NFL production, a popular nickname and a decent contract.

He finished the season with one catch.

“That wasn’t the plan,” Caldwell said. “Not at all. I had a mulligan. Didn’t dress most of the time. I told myself I wasn’t going to be in that position again, watching on Sundays.”

He matched his 2012 total in the Broncos’ opener by catching a 28-yard touchdown pass from Peyton Manning early in the third quarter in a 49-27 victory against Baltimore.

Caldwell is known among his teammates more by his nickname “Bubba” than his given name. He had emerged as a solid No. 3 receiver for the Cincinnati Bengals from 2009-11, catching 113 passes and six touchdowns in those seasons.

He signed a two-year contract with the Broncos, but 25 days later the team brought back Brandon Stokley to become Manning’s No. 3 receiver. When Manning invited Demaryius Thomas, Eric Decker and Stokley’s replacement, Wes Welker, to a passing session at Duke University in April, Caldwell communicated through Twitter he felt slighted.

The Broncos liked that. Caldwell’s touchdown catch against the Ravens wasn’t vindication, exactly, but a reward.

“It showed that hard work paid off,” Caldwell said. “I never gave up. I always kept fighting and kept working. I knew if I ever got a chance again that I would make the most of it.”

Have potential, will travel. On Aug. 22, linebacker Adrian Robinson was a member of the Pittsburgh Steelers, who played him in 10 games as a rookie last season to use up his practice-squad eligibility.

On Aug. 23, Robinson was traded to Philadelphia.

On Sept. 1, Robinson was claimed off waivers by the Broncos. Three teams in 10 days. He played special teams in the Broncos’ season opener Thursday.

“It makes me feel like the NFL still wants me,” Robinson said. “A lot of people see something in me. I’m happy I’m in the NFL. I’m happy God gave me a second and third chance.”

Footnotes. It will be Giants tight end Adrien Robinson and Broncos linebacker Adrian Robinson Sunday at MetLife Stadium in New Jersey. … Manning is 2-0 in head-to-head games against his younger brother and Giants quarterback Eli Manning. Peyton and Eli are tied in Super Bowl appearances, each with two. But Eli has a 2-1 edge in Super Bowl victories. … The Broncos have won 12 regular-season games in a row, six of them on the road.