Regulation: To understand how far Dodd-Frank set back the financial industry, look at the first bank to open in the country since that legislation became law in 2010. It is literally a horse-and-buggy operation.

Dodd-Frank was sold as the salvation of America’s wayward financial system. President Obama hailed the “reform” as a measure that would prevent another crisis like the 2008 meltdown.

Despite the promises, Dodd-Frank fixed nothing. As we predicted in 2010, it was simply “2,319 pages of unintended consequences for the economy.”

Of the many negative effects of Dodd-Frank, one is its disincentives for opening new banks.

In fact, the only bank that has opened since Obama signed the bill is the Bank of Bird-in-Hand located in Bird-in-Hand, Pa., a small village in Amish country. A second bank was approved last month by the FDIC and will open in May or June in Bedford, N.H.

Dodd-Frank’s compliance burden is heavier on small banks than larger ones, which are better financed and staffed to handle the costs and complexities. Given this difficult environment, why would anyone open a small bank — which is to say, why would anyone open a bank at all, since no one starts out opening a large bank?

Yet there is a new bank in Bird-in-Hand.

And while it doesn’t, according to the Wall Street Journal, “offer online banking … its sole branch does have a drive-through window that can accommodate a horse and buggy.”

Let’s make that horse-and-buggy image a metaphor for the state of today’s banking system in the era of Dodd-Frank.

Yes, there are still plenty of big banks, which are getting larger through regulation-driven consolidation.

But community banks are disappearing , often because they’re being bought by big banks. Their demise is particularly hard on small businesses, which get half their loans from community banks.

A Harvard University study released this year found that “community banks’ share of assets has shrunk drastically — over 12%” since Dodd-Frank. Separate data from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. show a 9.5% decline in the number of small banks in just three years after Dodd-Frank’s passage. It’s been a disaster.

Rather than move the banking industry forward, Dodd-Frank has put it in reverse. As is too often the case in Washington, “reform” is actually regression.