Contribution

Salvator J. La Mastra V is a political author, commentator, and campaign strategist. Salvator specializes in millennials and the youth vote. His first book "2012 for Twentysomething's: A Young Voter's Guide to the 2012 Elections" was endorsed by Karl Rove. Mr. Rove, the architect, stated "La Mastra's guide is a great tool to help these young adults educate themselves on the issues, mobilize, and get involved." Salvator is featured as an opinion editorialist on The Daily Caller and a guest editorialist for Investors Business Daily. He believes his 80 million strong generation requires a new train of thought when it comes to beltway politics and campaigning and he offers this unique perspective where others cannot.

Since the catastrophic, amateur and pathetic implementation of Obamacare, millennials have come to realize that the man who proclaimed himself their savior is nothing more than another cheap politician.

President Barack Obama, his campaign, and Democrats in general have successfully been able to swindle millennials out of their votes and support, but like all pyramid schemes it must eventually crumble. A wise woman once said, “people always announce their complete triumph a moment before their crushing defeat.”

In November 2012, Democrats shouted from the rooftops that liberal government was here to stay and conservatives better accept it and fall in line. But then the millennials’ self-proclaimed messiah – I mean president – started implementing his signature liberal policy. Healthcare.gov was shortly launched and simultaneously deteriorated thanks to the “hard work” of the theoreticians in the Obama Administration.

Millennials have had enough of this hypocriscy. Share:

The resounding failure of Healthcare.gov casued millennials to begin to realize that Obama and his amateur administration are taking their future and their freedoms away from them. The current administration has destroyed all ground gained by the Democratic Party in a few decades. They have left the most powerful voting block in American history out in the cold.

There are 10 major reasons why millennials have abandoned the Obama ship, the USS ‘Win the Future’ (or WTF, if you will) in search of a life raft capable of saving them from forever living in their parents’ basements.

Obamacare

Obamacare is the number one reason millennials are fleeing the realities of liberalism and figuring out that nothing in the world is free. They are the ones footing the bill for this massive government infringement on one-sixth of the economy. The inability of the Obama Administration to create a functional website – which every out-of-work actor in Los Angeles is capable of doing – and the skyrocketing premiums they now face are forcing young Americans to question Democrat ideology. A whopping 59 percent now disapprove of how the president is handling health care reform.

National Security Agency

The NSA and their data mining and spying scandal has casued millenials to realize that the government is infringing on their Fourth Amendment rights. They are beginning to realize the perks of libertarianism and the idea that less government is better government. This has created a divide between overreaching liberalism and millennials.

Youth Unemployment

Unemployment for those 18-29 is still at 15.8 percent; more than double that of the national average. The numbers for minorities are even more appalling; for African Americans and Hispanics 18-29 unemployment is at 23.8 percent and 16.6 percent. Young Americans are so unhappy with how the president is handling youth unemployment that his disapproval rating on handling the economy is curently at 61 percent.

Cost of Education

Student loan debt has skyrocketed over the past few decades and has reached an all time high under President Obama. The average young American has around $30,000 in student loan debt. Nationwide, outstanding student loan debt has increased to over $1 trillion. Young Americans have lost faith in the president to accomplish any kind of student loan reform. They disapprove of his handling on this issue by 60 percent. Recently, Mark Cuban has warned that this outstanding debt held by many millennials will become the next housing bubble.

Immigration

Immigration is an issue that millennials, especially minority millennials, are paying attention to. With young minorities experiencing devastatingly high unemployment, the influx of “dreamers” will destroy the small hope they have of gaining employment and establishing a career, not to mention draining the few years of solvency social programs have left.

National Debt

A generation that came of age during the dot-com meltdown and financial crisis of 2008 has evolved to be the most financially conservative generation since those who experienced the Great Depression. Young Americans are dumbfounded that the president cares more about getting his golf score down than the nation’s debt. They have given him a 66 percent disapproval rating on handling the federal deficit.

Foreign Affairs

Millennials want the United States to stay out of other countries’ business. Young Americans believe the United States needs to stop being the world’s police force – at least until it has dug itself out of the debt-ridden hole it is in.

Gridlock in Congress

Congressional gridlock is yet another failure of the president to deliver on his campaign promise to end partisanship in Washington. Millennials have been raised to accept and get along with others. The president frequently expressed how he would work with Republicans, but he has failed to attend meetings with GOP leadership or compromise on issues even when Republicans agree to raise taxes. Millennials want to see compromise, something the presdient appears incapable of doing.

IRS

The IRS targeting of conservative groups is yet another Obama scandal that has millennials nervous about the overreach of the federal government. Millenials believe everyone is allowed to voice their beliefs and opinions. This has led 80 percent of millennials to distrust the federal government.

Hypocrisy

The double standard set forth by the president and his administration has reached an all time high for a politician. They exempted themselves from Obamacare and issue lawless executive orders to bypass Congress. Obama has repeatedly brought Air Force 1, four escort jets, 25 squad cars, and a mile long motorcade to places like University of California Irvine to speak on how humans are the cause and cure for global warming. Millennials have had enough of this hypocriscy.

It is great to have passion and the capability to inspire through speeches but in politics, at the end of the day, scoring is all that matters. The president was up in 2008 and close to a tie in 2012; currently he is losing badly when it comes to millennials and their trust. Today just 21 percent of millennials believe the country is on the right track and 52 percent disapprove of Obama’s overall job performance.

The fact is the president and his amateur administration have lost millennials, not only for themselves, but for Democrats in general.

Salvator La Mastra is a youth vote and millennial expert. Follow @SalvatorV. For media inquiries email Sal.LaMastra@gmail.com

–

TheBlaze contributor channel supports an open discourse on a range of views. The opinions expressed in this channel are solely those of each individual author.