WASHINGTON – The House is poised to vote this morning on a measure that both keeps the government running for three more months and cuts off funding to implement Obamacare.

Partisans on both sides have taken to the House floor today, among them Rep. Kay Granger, R-Fort Worth. As chairman of the Appropriations subcommittee that controls billions in spending for foreign aide and U.S. diplomatic efforts, called it vital to keep the government funded.

“The world has never been a more dangerous place and to cut back our diplomatic activities at this time would be irresponsible,” she said. “Failure to get a CR [continuing resolution] enacted would impact key posts, including Israel, Egypt, Jordan, Pakistan, Afghanistan and Iraq. This would mean dramatically reduced influence in key regions like the Middle East and Asia.”

Democrats call the measure a cynical effort that threatens to trigger a government shutdown, because Republicans know the Senate and White House won’t agree to defund the health care law.

Granger entirely sidestepped that issue.

Freezing foreign aid could jeopardize the military readiness of U.S. allies, she said, and “this could also impact US jobs of the men and women producing American-made equipment.”

Failure to keep the government running would delay security upgrades recommended after the attack on a US outpost in Benghazi that left the ambassador to Libya dead a year ago, she added, and would generally undermine the security of US diplomats overseas.

“It’s a basic function and responsibility of Congress to keep the government open and working for the people who elected us. This bill simply does that,” she said.

Another Texas Republican, Rep. Ted Poe of Humble, spoke earlier Friday on the House floor, devoting his entire speech to blasting Obamacare. He cited a letter from a single mother who blamed the health care law for a breakdown in her family; forced to work two part-time jobs, because her main employer refused to give her enough hours to qualify for insurance, she has been forced to send her son to live with relatives.

“Real person, real tragedy. It’s time to free Americans from the shackles of Obamacare,” Poe said.