The Times’ Upshot team has posted a fascinating chart, derived from the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office’s data, which shows that the cost of Medicare is rising more slowly than analysts had expected. In 2006, the C.B.O. projected that annual Medicare outlays per person would rise from a bit more than nine thousand dollars to about fifteen thousand dollars by 2016. In a new report that was published on Wednesday, the C.B.O. predicted that the actual outlays per person in 2016 will be close to eleven thousand dollars.

That’s a big difference. We are talking about an increase of about twenty per cent in spending per person as opposed to the initial prediction of more than sixty per cent. (The figures are all inflation-adjusted.) And the C.B.O. reckons that the slowdown in spending growth will continue. Its forecast for the over-all Medicare budget in 2019 is ninety-five billion dollars lower than it was four years ago. “That sum is greater than the government is expected to spend that year on unemployment insurance, welfare and Amtrak—combined,” the Times’ Margot Sanger-Katz and Kevin Quealy point out. “It’s equal to about one-fifth of the expected Pentagon budget in 2019.”

In the world of health-care economics, there’s a vigorous debate going on about why the rate of spending growth has slowed so dramatically. Some analysts attribute much of that to the Great Recession and its aftermath, which reduced the demand for all sorts of goods and services, including medical treatments. The slowdown in spending growth started around 2007, so it coincided with the onset of the recession. But it has persisted since the recession ended, in 2009, which suggests that something else might be going on.

Understandably enough, the Obama Administration is keen to claim some of the credit for the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, which was passed in 2010. “While this marked slowdown likely has many causes, and these causes are not yet fully understood, the available evidence suggests that the ACA is contributing to these trends, and, moreover, is helping to improve quality of care for patients,” the White House Council of Economic Advisers wrote in a report published last November.

Conservatives and Republicans challenged this argument, and it’s fair to say that the issue remains unresolved. In a separate study published last year, Michael Levin, of the C.B.O., and Melinda Buntin, of Vanderbilt University, concluded that neither the recession nor Obamacare was responsible for the slowdown in spending growth. Although Levin and Buntin didn’t provide a definitive alternative reason, they pointed to a series of structural changes in the health-care industry, including changes in payment rates to doctors and other providers, and a shift away from in-patient care, which is very expensive.

Obviously, it matters a lot who is right. If the slowdown is a product of the Great Recession and its aftermath, we can expect spending growth to pick up again. If the slowdown is a consequence of structural factors, or policy changes, it might well sustain. In any case, it is worth stepping back and considering the bigger picture.

If you’ve been following the debate about the U.S. budget policy over the past few years, you will have the basic story down pat: thanks to tax increases, spending cuts, and a recovery in G.D.P. growth, the short-term deficit picture has improved considerably. (In 2010, the deficit was more than ten per cent of G.D.P. This year, it will be 2.9 per cent of G.D.P., according to the new C.B.O. report.) But that’s only a temporary reprieve. With the aging of the boomers and the coming explosion in Medicare costs, the U.S. Treasury will soon be submerged in a sea of red ink. Unless the government takes drastic actions to reduce health-care spending, the United States will eventually go the way of Argentina and other deadbeat debtors.

At least, that it is the story that deficit hawks such as Pete Peterson, Robert Rubin, and Laurence Kotlikoff have been telling us for decades. And I mean decades. During the 1988 election, I helped to arrange a seminar in Washington about the policy challenges facing the United States, and I recall when Barry Bosworth, an economist from the Brookings Institution, terrified the attendees with some long-term projections about the impact of rising outlays on Social Security and Medicare. I was as unnerved as anyone. In 1996, when Peterson wrote the first of his jeremiads, “Will America Grow Up Before It Grows Old?,” I picked some holes in his dire warnings about the Social Security trust fund, which has always been fixable, but I didn’t challenge the argument that Medicare and Medicaid spending were on an unsustainable path, and that disaster beckoned. Nobody—or virtually nobody—did. Now that may be changing.

The long-term projections for Medicare spending are still alarming. In their latest annual report, which was released last month, the trustees who oversee the government-financed health-care system projected that, over all, outlays would rise from 3.5 per cent of G.D.P. in 2013 to 6.9 per cent in 2088. If this increase were to be realized, the trustees noted, dryly, it “would substantially increase the strain on the nation’s workers, the economy, Medicare beneficiaries, and the Federal budget.”

What’s new is that the problem no longer appears to be a hopeless one. The experience of the past decade shows that the rate of growth of health-care spending doesn’t have to accelerate from year to year; it isn’t an immutable law of political economy that Medicare must always grab a bigger slice of government spending. “In a break from the historical pattern, net Medicare spending is projected to be a roughly constant share of the federal budget and the nation’s economy in the coming decade,” the Kaiser Foundation wrote in a recent fact sheet. That doesn’t mean that we’ve solved the challenge of financing the aging of the boomers: we haven’t. Even if the recent trends persist, we’ll still need to raise extra revenues or trim spending. But, for the first time in a long time, there’s reason for guarded optimism.