Republican presidential candidate Ted Cruz called out Hillary Clinton last week for trying to hide her radical position on abortion behind fake “war on women” rhetoric.

“Hillary Clinton embraces abortion on demand in all circumstances up until the moment of birth. Partial-birth abortion with taxpayer funding, with no notification for parents in any circumstances – 91 percent of Americans say that’s nuts,” Cruz told an Iowa crowd last Monday, according to CNN.

“So what do they do, they try to shift it. The war on women wasn’t that, it was contraceptives,” Cruz continued. “Now listen, I have been a conservative my entire life. I have never met anybody, any conservative who wants to ban contraceptives.”

The so-called “war on women” was “concocted” by the Democratic Party to attack conservatives and pro-lifers and divert the public’s attention away from the party’s radical stance on abortion, Cruz said.

SIGN THE NEW PLEDGE: I Pledge to Vote for a Pro-Life Candidate for President

“Imagine for a second you’re Hillary Clinton,” Cruz said. “You’re trying to think, ‘How do I run?’ Well you can’t run on the economy because we have the lowest percentage of Americans working any year since 1977. You can’t run on Obamacare because millions of people have lost their jobs, lost their health care, lost their doctors, seen their premiums skyrocket. You certainly can’t run on foreign policy because every country you touched as secretary of state is a disaster.”

“So what do you do? You go, ‘Ah, ha! Condom police. I’m gonna make up a completely made up threat and try to scare a bunch of folks into thinking someone’s going to steal their birth control,’” Cruz said. “What nonsense.”

Cruz is correct that Clinton’s abortion stance is out of touch with most Americans. A May 2015 Gallup poll found that 54 percent of Americans want all or most abortions to be illegal. Only 29 percent, like Clinton, said abortion should be legal under any circumstances, according to the poll.

A 2014 CNN poll also confirmed that a majority of Americans want all or most all abortions made illegal.

Cruz has been a vocal opponent of abortion and Planned Parenthood, the nation’s largest abortion business. Last Thursday, Cruz voted with fellow Republicans in the U.S. Senate to de-fund the Planned Parenthood abortion business after it was caught selling the body parts of aborted babies.

“The vote we took today is a significant step towards repealing every word of Obamacare,” Cruz said in a statement after the vote. “This bill repeals as much of that failed law as we can under arcane Senate rules and the narrow guidelines of the budget. I am also encouraged that this bill prohibits taxpayer funds from going to abortion-providers.”