Your kitchen is about to get a lot smarter. New startup Innit is selling refrigerator cameras and sensors that can send live feeds right to your phone.

The SEC is investigating how Alibaba is doing business. Alibaba says the S-E-C is specifically looking into consolidation practices and the company’s reporting of operating data on Singles’ Day.

Hasan Minhaj took time on The Daily Show to take a look at the gender pay gap in U.S. soccer. The women’s team has been more successful than the men’s team in almost every possible measure, yet they are paid thousands of dollars less. Gavin McInnes is a professional troll for FOX News - think Ann Coulter but with a Williamsburg costume. He tried bringing up the points against equal pay for the women’s team. He was quickly refuted by Hope Solo, Becky Sauerbrunn, and Ali Krieger.

The United States switches on an $800 million missile shield in Romania, saying it is aimed to protect against threats from Iran, not Russia. Rough Cut (no reporter narration).

The FOMC goes into their cute little huddle today. We won't hear from them until tomorrow afternoon. How to raise rates in an economy that probably isn't strong enough to sustain a rate hike? Oh, how it's got to hurt when you know that you missed your window—by a few years. Truth is, gang: there is peripheral noise out there today, and a lot of macro piled on top of that, but earnings are what you'll focus on. Tons of them.

Die-hard fans eager to see the Vikings’ new stadium can now get in line! The Star Tribune reports that U.S. Bank is selling tickets for tours in August, Jason DeRusha, Kim Johnson and Matt Brickman report (1:39). WCCO This Morning – May 18, 2016

April 28 -- Davis Love III, U.S. team captain for Ryder Cup 2016, and professional golfer Darren Clarke discuss this year's Ryder Cup, Tiger Wood's involvement with the team, and lessons learned from previous years' competitions. They speak on "Bloomberg Markets."

The dollar is soaring against other currencies, which will eventually reduce U.S. exports, since stuff made here is getting more expensive overseas. This brings to mind one of President Obama’s biggest—and most wayward--economic promises, from back when he was a newbie in his first term: Doubling exports between 2010 and 2015.

During his State of the Union speech on Jan. 27, 2010, Obama laid out a list of priorities to jump-start a still moribund economy. This was number three: “We need to export more of our goods,” Obama declared. “So tonight, we set a new goal: We will double our exports over the next five years, an increase that will support two million jobs in America.”

During the next 12 months, exports jumped by 17%, a growth rate that would have nailed Obama’s target (thanks to compounding) had it held up for 5 years. The following year produced a 14% gain, also impressive. After that, however, the export boom stalled, as this chart shows.

View gallery . Source: IHS Global Insight

Forecasting firm IHS Global Insight is projecting a slight decline in exports this year. If that forecast is right, the total gain in exports from 2010 to 2015 will end up being a scant 24% -- just one-fourth of the 100% gain Obama aimed for. “I thought that goal was extremely ambitious,” says Doug Handler, chief U.S. economist at IHS. “Exports did not go well.”

Exports matter because most companies need to hire more as they export more — particularly in manufacturing. While job growth has been strong, at least in terms of raw numbers, the types of jobs typically associated with robust exports haven’t materialized. The manufacturing sector has added nearly 900,000 jobs since the low point in early 2010, for example, but total manufacturing employment is still 1.4 million jobs below pre-recession levels of late 2007. Here's the weak bounceback in manufacturing jobs:

View gallery . Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics

The main reason exports have stalled is a global economy much weaker than Obama and his advisors expected (or wished) back in 2010. The top destinations for U.S. exports are Canada, Europe, Mexico and China. Demand is particularly weak in Europe, parts of which are trying to crawl out of a triple-dip recession. Canada is beginning to suffer from plunging oil prices and an overdependence on energy. China’s economy is slowing too, as many industries work off excess debt, which could go on for years.

[Get the Latest Market Data and News with the Yahoo Finance App]

The U.S. economy has outperformed most other developed nations, partly because of aggressive monetary stimulus by the Federal Reserve beginning in 2008, which central banks in Europe and Japan have only recently begun to mimic. The relative health of the U.S. economy is great for American companies selling here, but lousy for U.S. firms trying to export overseas. One reason the rising dollar has led to a stock-market pullback is profit concerns regarding big U.S. exporters, whose goods are becoming more expensive overseas.



Overpromising on the economy

Obama can legitimately claim some success on the economy, with employers creating 3.3 million jobs during the last year—the best pace of job growth since the boom years of the late 1990s. Obama’s many critics point out that the job-market rebound occurred much later into the recovery than usual, as if Obama’s policies somehow held it back. More likely, the 2007-09 recession was so severe that no set of policies plausible in the current political environment would have sped up the recovery.

Obama’s biggest mistakes on the economy, in fact, have involved overpromising rather than lousy policies. At the very beginning of his tenure, for example, Obama said the huge stimulus plan passed in 2009 would keep the unemployment rate below 8%. It peaked at 10% in 2010, giving critics ammunition they fired for years and helping Republicans win back the House of Representatives in the 2010 midterm elections. Fine print in the White House report accompanying the 8% projection included all the necessary caveats (such as underlying assumptions could turn out better or worse, etc., etc., etc.) which matters not at all in the wrestling wring of Washington politics.

The one statement Obama probably regrets the most is this one: “If you like your health care plan, you can keep it.” As Obama’s signature accomplishment, the Affordable Care Act, went into effect in 2013 and 2014, that turned out to be demonstrably false, with insurance carriers cancelling several million policies that didn’t conform to new ACA standards. Obama’s loose words earned him the uncoveted “Lie of the Year” award from Politifact, the diligently nonpartisan fact-checking site.

Since then, Obama seems to have learned what most economists already know: If you make predictions that include both figures and dates, you’re setting yourself up for a gleeful takedown at the hands of your enemies. His 2015 State of the Union address, for instance, included virtually no specific goals or promises, even though he listed many policy priorities.

There’s also this consolation: On the current course, U.S. exports should double, from 2010 levels, by 2022 or so. Had Obama not said “over the next five years” back in 2010, nobody would have anything to complain about.

Rick Newman’s latest book is Liberty for All: A Manifesto for Reclaiming Financial and Political Freedom. Follow him on Twitter: @rickjnewman.