Secretary of State John Kerry must have been exhausted. It was a bit more than a year ago, and Kerry, who was filling in for the president as the headline speaker at the annual Gridiron journalists’ dinner in Washington, had just returned that afternoon from France, where he had been engaged in tense discussions over the situation in Ukraine. He started out acknowledging his backup role, noting that he was standing in for President Barack Obama, so he knew he wasn’t “your first choice.” “Or his,” Kerry added, a startlingly self-deprecating reference to reports that national security adviser Susan Rice had actually been Obama’s first pick for the State Department post, until congressional opposition led him to name Kerry instead. For someone who was supposedly not Obama’s first choice to replace Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, Kerry has proven he is not just adequate to the role, but born to it. Years in the Senate and a failed run for president had built a profile – a caricature, really – of Kerry as a patrician, elitist stiff, lacking the gregariousness and approachability of his longtime Massachusetts colleague, Sen. Edward M. Kennedy. But Kerry, during his term at State and especially after the historic announcement of a framework for a nuclear deal with Iran, has shown what a patient and effective negotiator he truly is.

Kerry never really got credit for a lot of the bridge-building and in-the-weeds work he did in the Senate, especially during his last years there. He worked with GOP Sen. Lindsey Graham of South Carolina on a sweeping, excruciatingly detailed climate change bill – a measure that did not become law, but which showed a willingness to put a great deal of time into an effort that was not a headline-getter or a vote-getter, but an important element of public policy. As a senior member of the Senate Finance Committee, he was a key point person for the White House on the Affordable Care Act. As chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Kerry had a very cooperative relationship with ranking GOP member Sen. Richard Lugar.

Rice is a seasoned diplomat, but Kerry brings skills that are critical to international diplomacy. As a former elected official himself, he knows the domestic political pressures foreign leaders are under, and negotiates accordingly. As someone who endured so many long negotiations in Congress, and witnessed the damage when the negotiations fell apart because neither side got exactly what it wanted, Kerry understands that a good deal, even a pretty good deal, is much better than no deal at all. And in the case of Iran and its nuclear program, the question of a deal or no deal is also a question of life or death, even of whether there will be a devastating regional war in the Middle East.

Thursday’s announcement of a tentative deal with Iran is a big, legacy-building moment for Obama. But it’s also a huge victory for Kerry. The recent meeting was the 19th round of talks on the matter. It represented the longest period of time a U.S. secretary of state had negotiated in one place on a single issue since the negotiations with Israel and Egypt at Camp David in 1978, and it was the longest period of time a secretary of state had spent on foreign soil in negotiations since the Treaty of Versailles a century ago. That’s what it means to be an effective diplomat. And Kerry is showing he was the right pick all along.