Player to embed in JSonline stories





By of the

To critics carping that Black Friday isn't even on Friday anymore and that the retail industry is intruding on families' Thanksgiving gatherings by opening their doors earlier each year, Lisa Cross isn't buying it.

"They can stay at home. There's more room in the stores for everyone else," said Cross as she shopped at Kohl's at Bayshore shortly after the store opened at 6 p.m. on Thanksgiving. "To each his own."

Plenty of shoppers and bargain hunters in the Milwaukee area left Thanksgiving dishes in the sink to head out into the cold Thursday. A $99 32-inch TV or $49 Blu-ray player will do that.

While a few stores opened the morning of Thanksgiving, like Kmart at 6 a.m., most big retailers waited until the early evening — Toys "R" Us and Best Buy at 5 p.m. and Boston Store, Walmart, Target, Kohl's, Sears and Macy's at 6 p.m. That's two hours earlier than last Thanksgiving for many stores.

Shortly after shoppers began streaming through the doors of Kohl's, heading toward the electronics near the shoe department — except for Black Friday door-busters, Kohl's normally doesn't sell electronics — they began queuing at the cash registers. Like a holiday gift wagon train, carts filled with puzzles, games, toasters, griddles, clothing, TVs, heated plush blankets, toys and other merchandise snaked through an aisle at Kohl's.

Angela Lawson stacked two huge boxes containing folding gaming chairs with onboard speakers into shopping carts at Kohl's around 6:15 p.m. She was also in the market for a TV and tablet. Lawson moved up her family's Thanksgiving dinner to accommodate the earlier start to Black Friday shopping.

"You know what? I cooked my turkey dinner earlier today. I sat around for family time and now my husband is at Boston Store while I'm here," said Lawson.

Now that Black Friday no longer begins at midnight at many retailers, Lawson said she appreciated getting a start on her holiday shopping at a decent hour. "I don't have to worry about safety either," she said.

Morrie Carroll got into the line outside Boston Store at Bayshore an hour before doors opened at 6 p.m. and only three people were ahead of her. Unlike many shoppers who come armed with ads listing door-busters, Carroll said she wasn't hunting for anything in particular. She just liked being caught up in the excitement.

"The hustle and bustle. I just love to be out with the crowds and everything," said Carroll, who also rescheduled her family's Thanksgiving dinner start time.

The most Carroll has waited in a Black Friday line is eight hours. She prefers the old days of midnight opening times. "This isn't Black Friday anymore," said Carroll.

The average Black Friday consumer spent $407.23 in 2013, according to the National Retail Federation, making for a total of $57.4 billion nationwide.

It seems almost quaint now to think of the Friday after Thanksgiving as the start of the traditional holiday shopping season.

But with a growing number of shoppers buying their gifts online from retailers that have no doors to close, brick-and-mortar stores are doing anything they can to encourage folks and their wallets to step inside. That means opening earlier and offering fantastic deals to entice shoppers.

And shoppers responded, even if it meant skipping Thanksgiving dinner entirely.

For Matthew Wolak a 50-inch Panasonic flat-screen TV trumped turkey and stuffing. Saving as much as $350 made it worth it for Wolak to line up outside the Best Buy in Greenfield around 10 a.m. despite temperatures in the low 20s.

"Over the last couple of years, there's been rumors that they'd have something of quality in 50 inches at about $200, but it never happened, so when I saw this, I said: 'It's time to get a flat screen,'" Wolak said.

At Walmart in West Milwaukee, Lisa Saffold was among the 140 people in line when the store opened at 6 p.m.

The Milwaukee police officer from District 7 was spending her day off to buy toys for a police program that sponsors 50 Milwaukee families affected by violence. Each family gets Milwaukee Bucks tickets and children's toys.

Saffold was buying toy scooters, dolls and action figures for the families.

"I've been in line since 9:30 this morning. I enjoy doing this. We've got a small budget, and I can't beat the prices for today's deals," said Saffold.

Gitte Laasby of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.