Vote Now:

Do You Approve of Gay Marriage?

Vote Now:

Was the Supreme Court Right to Strike Down the Defense of Marriage Act?

In a landmark decision, the Supreme Court legalized same-sex marriage on June 26, and the country has not been quiet about it. In the midst of the 2016 presidential race, candidates voiced their opinions while other lawmakers shared their thoughts on the decision as well.Here are some of the most noteworthy quotes from lawmakers.“This week in response to both of these decisions, I have called for another constitutional amendment — this one that would make members of the Supreme Court subject to periodic judicial retention elections.”— Presidential candidate Sen. Ted Cruz, National Public Radio , on his plans following the Supreme Court decisions upholding Obamacare and legalizing same-sex marriage“This ruling is a victory for America. This decision affirms what millions of Americans already believe in their hearts. When all Americans are treated as equal, we are all more free.” President Barack Obama, Huffington Post , on the Supreme Court’s decision“No Texan is required by the Supreme Court's decision to act contrary to his or her religious beliefs regarding marriage.” Texas Gov. Greg Abbott, USA Today , on the implications of the Supreme Court’s decision on Texas“In a country as diverse as ours, good people who have opposing views should be able to live side by side. It is now crucial that as a country we protect religious freedom and the right of conscience and also not discriminate.”— Presidential candidate and former Gov. Jeb Busch, CNN , on the Supreme Court’s decision“Thank you, Anthony Kennedy.” Colorado State Sen. Pat Steadman, The Denver Post , showing gratitude for the justice who wrote the majority decision“I will not acquiesce to an imperial court any more than our founders acquiesced to an imperial British monarch. We must resist and reject judicial tyranny, not retreat.”— Presidential candidate and former Gov. Mike Huckabee, in a statement about the next move following the Supreme Court’s decision“It really means equal means equal, not some are more equal and some have got something better. That’s what this is all about.” Sen. Elizabeth Warren, CBS Boston , on the ruling of the court“I think it is wrong for the federal government to force Christian individuals, businesses, pastors, churches, to participate in wedding ceremonies that violate our sincerely held religious beliefs. We have to stand up and fight for religious liberty. That’s where this fight is going.”— Presidential candidate Gov. Bobby Jindal, NBC News , on how Louisiana will comply with the ruling and where the future of the debate is going