The Wilkes Social Services Board on Thursday afternoon agreed to interview two people who applied for the position of Wilkes Department of Social Services (DSS) director and also named an interim director.

Board members voted to interview the two applicants after a closed session was held during the meeting for personnel matters.

The two are the only fully qualified people who have applied, said Keith Elmore, a county commissioner and member of the Wilkes Social Services Board. He said they currently work for social services departments, one in Rutherford County and the other in Cumberland County.

Minimum qualifications for the job include having a master’s degree in social work or at least three years of supervisory work experience in a department of social services. Elmore said experience with child protective services is preferred.

Elmore said the other two applicants, both Wilkes DSS employees, aren’t fully qualified under these standards.

Bill Sebastian, retiring on Sept. 30 as Wilkes DSS director, said the two applicants from outside Wilkes are being contacted for interviews with the full Wilkes Social Services Board the week after next.

The board voted to designate Kevin Brown, current Wilkes DSS program director, as interim director after Sebastian retires. As program director, he is considered second in charge of Wilkes DSS.

The board also voted to employ Donnie Bumgarner, Wilkes DSS director for 26 years before Sebastian, as a consultant to assist Brown. Elmore said compensation for these services, paid on an hourly basis, are being discussed with Bumgarner.

Under state regulations, he added, Sebastian can’t work as a consultant at Wilkes DSS for the first 30 days after he retires. He said Sebastian will be contacted about assisting Wilkes DSS as a consultant after the first 30 days.

Elmore said the board also agreed to spend about $1,500 more on advertising the position in newspapers and elsewhere statewide. It has a salary range of $61,000 to $100,000.

The job opening has been advertised since June in local and state newspapers, on the Wilkes County government website, by email to directors and other administrators in county departments of social services statewide and elsewhere. The deadline for applications was extended to Aug. 13.

Fifteen people applied for the job in 2010 before Sebastian was hired.

Statewide, said Sebastian, more county DSS directors and supervisors have retired recently and applications for filling these positions are down.

He said this likely was partly related to uncertainty caused by more county commissioner boards assuming DSS governing responsibilities and backlogs of food stamp and Medicaid cases because of technical problems with NC FAST, a new computer system used to process these cases.

The Wilkes County commissioners discussed becoming the governing board for Wilkes DSS and the Wilkes Health Department in early May and in early June discussed assuming this role for Wilkes DSS only. On both occasions, commissioners agreed to gather more information.

House Bill 438, signed into law by Gov. Bev Perdue in June 2012, lets a county board of commissioners replace the county social services board, county board of health or both by becoming the governing body of DSS, health department or both.

Gary D. Blevins, chairman of the county commissioners, said he and some other commissioners felt an obligation to investigate options allowed under House Bill 438 and after doing so decided against making these changes.

Sebastian said the latest backlog of cases related to NC FAST is with people waiting to see if they qualify for Medicaid and, if not, if they qualify for insurance with reduced premiums through the federal Affordable Care Act.

He said a backlog of 400 to 500 such cases at Wilkes DSS has been reduced to five, partly by employing two former NC FAST consultants on a temporary basis at Wilkes DSS. Sebastian said he expected Wilkes DSS to meet a deadline, set by the state, of eliminating backlogs of these cases by the end of August.