This year, the Golden Globe Awards will showcase some of the best performances by the top film actresses in Hollywood. The Golden Globe Awards unites the film and television industry for one night of celebration, but this year’s leading ladies of the silver screen will most definitely have plenty to offer, including some hardcore neck-and-neck competition, at the ceremony.

The coveted title of Best Actress in a Dramatic Motion Picture is being pursued by five incredibly talented women, all of varying skillsets. Julianne Moore is nominated for her complex role in Still Alice while Jennifer Aniston is up against her in Cake. Felicity Jones is also in the running for her performance in The Theory of Everything and so are the likes of Rosamund Pike in Gone Girl and Reese Witherspoon for Wild. Audiences are saying that this trophy is Moore’s to lose as her role calls for her to delve into the mindset of a middle-aged woman who is diagnosed with early-onset Alzheimer’s disease. Even though Moore seems to be a strong competitor, Aniston seems to be the dark horse in the running and very well may surprise the nation by taking home the Globe.

The next category, Best Actress in a Musical or Comedic Motion Picture, is also filled with a variety of women, all worthy of multiple Golden Globe Awards. Amy Adams is up for her role in the biopic Big Eyes as is Emily Blunt for her role in the Stephen Sondheim musical Into the Woods. Helen Mirren is up for The Hundred-Foot Journey, the young Oscar nominee Quvenzhane Wallis for her recreation of the iconic orphan in Annie and Julianne Moore, again, for Maps to the Stars. This category is a very tough one to call, although much is being said of Adams’ performance as the artist Margaret Keane in Tim Burton’s latest endeavor and she could possibly be the one to grab hold of the award. Although, the Golden Globe Awards have not had as many musical competitors in the past so Blunt or even Wallis may have steady chances as well.

Rounding out the categories for women in film at the Golden Globe Awards is the Best Supporting Actress in a Motion Picture. The multiple-Golden-Globe-and-Oscar-winning Meryl Streep is nominated yet again for her role as the wicked witch in Into the Woods and she is joined by Jessica Chastain for A Most Violent Year, Patricia Arquette for the Richard Linklater-directed Boyhood, Keira Knightley for The Imitation Game and Emma Stone for her performance in Birdman . Although Streep always poses a strong threat each awards season, Arquette is definitely giving the Into the Woods star a run for her money as she has garnered an immense amount of critical praise for Boyhood in which she filmed over a period of twelve years. Stone is also receiving rave reviews and being considered as the category’s dark horse so the trophy is truly up for grabs by any of the aforementioned ladies

The Golden Globe Awards have a beautiful selection of actresses representing the best in film this year. One can tune in for the awards show live on NBC tomorrow, Jan. 11.

See Also:

Golden Globe Awards – Best TV Actors of the Year

Golden Globe Awards – Best TV Actresses of the Year

By Cody Collier

Sources:

Washington Post

Beta News

NY Daily News

Share this: Print

LinkedIn

Pinterest

Pocket

Reddit

Email

Twitter

Google

Facebook

Tumblr