People Moves of the Week: Carlyle, Sidley Austin, Duff & Phelps

Carlyle taps former Wal-Mart CEO Mike Duke; Duff & Phelps names new managing director; Sidley Austin hires cross-border specialist

Carlyle Group (Nasdaq: CG) — The Washington, D.C.-based alternative asset manager recently named Mike Duke, former CEO of Wal-Mart Stores Inc. (NYSE: WMT), to the position of operating executive in the global consumer and retail group. Duke, who joined Wal-Mart in 1995, went on to lead the company's logistics, distribution and administration divisions. He oversaw the company as CEO from 2009 to 2014 and continues to serve as chairman of the executive committee of the board.

CohnReznick LLP — The New York accounting and advisory firm hired John Bautista as a principal. He will be a part of CohnReznick's valuation advisory services practice. Prior to joining CohnReznick, Bautista was with Ernst & Young LLP, GE Private Equity, Arthur Andersen LLP and Panda Restaurant Group Inc.

Credit Suisse Group AG — The Zurich-based investment bank appointed Mike Paliotta as global head of prime services. He replaces Paul Germain, who held the position for five years and is now leaving Credit Suisse to pursue an entrepreneurial endeavor. Paliotta was previously co-head of equities for the Americas and has been with the firm for roughly 15 years.

Duff & Phelps Corp. — Michael Brill joins the New York financial advisory firm as a managing director from investment bank Canaccord Genuity, where he was head of fixed income. Before that, Brill was a managing director and group head at Barclays plc and Lehman Brothers.

Houlihan Lokey — The Los Angeles-based investment bank has made three additions to its due diligence practice. Richard Forgione has joined as a director, while Carl Ashqar and Matthew Petrillo have each joined as vice presidents. All three hires were previously with Ernst & Young, and will be based in the firm's New York office.

Jackson Lewis PC — The Memphis, Tennessee, law firm has poached two attorneys from Fisher & Phillips LLP: Craig Cowart and Sally Barron. Cowart and Barron join Jackson Lewis as shareholder and of counsel, respectively. They each specialize in representing employers when it comes to labor and employment-related litigation.

Scivantage — The Jersey City, New Jersey, financial services firm hired Christian Farber (pictured) as executive vice president. Previously at State Street Corp. (NYSE: STT), Farber is now overseeing all of Scivantage's client relationships, especially within the financial services and technology space. Sidley Austin LLP — Wenseng (Wendy) Pan (pictured) has been hired as a partner at the Chicago-based law firm's New York branch. Her practice is focused on transactions between China and the U.S., specifically within the life sciences and technology sectors. Pan will work out of Sidley Austin's Shanghai office. Previously a partner at O’Melveny, Wan she advised the 2013 sale of genome technology company Complete Genomics Inc. to BGI-Shenzhen for $118 million.

For more information on related topics, visit the following: