Device targets substance in patient's blood and transmits healing energy

It's far, far more than just another fashion statement: Google has now introduced a cancer-detecting wristband.

In January, Google's Life Sciences lab unveiled plans for a wristband which would work with nanoparticles that circulate around the body looking for cells. To assist with their research, the scientists made moulds of human arms using both synthetic and real human skin from donors. Highlights By Catholic Online (NEWS CONSORTIUM) Catholic Online (www.catholic.org) 3/18/2015 (1 year ago) Published in Health Keywords: Wristband, analyte, Google, aging, cancer

LOS ANGELES, CA (Catholic Online) - Earlier testing for the wristband used molds of human skin. Google has since been awarded a patent for the technology that will "automatically modify or destroy targets in the blood that have an adverse health effect."



The wearable wristband could target these cells using an "external energy source" such as ultrasound or radio frequencies.



Be the one who gives the perfect gift for your loved one's First Holy Communion.





Google's patent explained its wearable (illustrated) could target any substances or objects that, when present in the blood, may affect the health of a wearer by transmitting energy into the vessels. This could include infrared signals, a radio-frequency or acoustic pulse, or a magnetic field.

It would scan the blood for so-called analytes, or chemicals, in the blood such as the presence of 'enzymes, hormones, proteins, cells or other substances.' Google said it could target certain proteins that have been implicated as a partial cause of Parkinson's disease, for example, or cancer cells.

After travelling around the body, these nanoparticles would then be collected, using a magnet, to reveal what cells they encountered. The nanoparticles would cause the cancer cells to light up, for example, allowing the wristband to record whether there are dangerous cells in the body.

"A number of scientific methods have been developed to examine physiological conditions of a person by detecting and measuring one or more analytes [chemicals] in a person's blood," explained the Nanoparticle Phoresis patent."Analytes could...be indicative of a medical condition or health of the person" and could include "enzymes, hormones, proteins, cells or other substances."The wearable targets any substances or objects that, when present in the blood, may affect the health of wearer by transmitting energy into the vessels.Google Ventures' president Bill Maris recently made the claim that it's possible to live to be 500 years old. This, he told Bloomberg, will be helped by medical breakthroughs as well as a rise in biomechanics.Maris has already ploughed money into genetics firms and cancer diagnostic start-ups."We have the tools in the life sciences to achieve anything that you have the audacity to envision. I just hope to live long enough not to die," Maris said. He founded Google Ventures in 2009 and oversees all of the fund's global activities.Maris has also worked in the development of Google's Calico project.Calico is a research and development company set up in 2013 by Google and Apple to tackle "ageing and associated diseases."Google co-founder Larry Page said the project would focus on "health, well-being and longevity" and last September Calico collaborated with AbbVie to open a research center into neuro-degeneration and cancer.This could include infrared signals, a radio frequency or acoustic pulse, or a magnetic field. Said energy used would depend on what the band is targeting, but it would be designed to alter the chemical composition of the analyte."In one relevant example, certain proteins have been implicated as a partial cause of Parkinson's disease; the development of Parkinson's disease may be prevented or retarded by providing particles functionalized with a bio-receptor that will selectively bind to this target," the files.

---





Copyright 2016 - Distributed by THE CALIFORNIA NETWORKRespect for Women: That in every country of the world, women may be honored and respected and that their essential contribution to society may be highly esteemed.Holy Rosary: That families, communities, and groups may pray the Holy Rosary for evangelization and peace.