Boyd Lake State Park offers a nature scavenger hunt each month during the summer season

Greeley resident Robert Jones, middle, explains the steps for the Habitat Bingo scavenger hunt Saturday at Boyd Lake State Park. With him are Payton Jones, 3, left; Cassidy Jones, 8; Lucas Jones, 1; and Alexes Grigg, 8. ( Shelley Widhalm / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

A trip to the swim beach at Boyd Lake State Park on Saturday became a scavenger hunt for 8-year-old Cassidy Jones.

Cassidy and her siblings and friends broke up into four sets of pairs and threesomes to look for trees, plants, nests, insects and birds, more specifically a bird flying, preening or eating, a nest and nest materials, and hazards to birds, such as overhead wires or windows, as part of an event at the park.

The 10 children were playing Habitat Bingo, where they crossed off squares for every item they saw or heard to get a diagonal, vertical or horizontal row for a prize or a blackout for a prize and candy.

"It's just fun," Cassidy said about "finding things we haven't found in a long time, like leaves and feathers."

Angie Allison, park naturalist for Boyd Lake State Park, right, explains to Kali Jones, 11, of Greeley, how to play Habitat Bingo Saturday during a scavenger hunt activity at the Loveland park. (Shelley Widhalm / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

Cassidy's father, Robert Jones, told Cassidy, Alexes Grigg, 8, and Payton Jones, 3, all of Greeley, "Go see if you can find two kinds of leaves."

Cassidy and Alexes ran a few feet in the sand and quickly found two dried leaves that allowed them to cross of the box for "two kinds of leaves."

Jones told the group, "We haven't seen any birds on the beach. There are no gulls right now," and within a few minutes, he saw a white bird on a light pole he pointed out.

"They're excited. They're focused, concentrating and intrigued," Jones said. "Just watching them have fun is what's exciting for me."

Advertisement

Park naturalists Angie Allison and Dominique Blanchard set up a table near the park shelter for two hours Saturday afternoon to hand out bingo sheets and distribute prizes. The park, a part of Colorado Parks & Wildlife located at 3720 N. County Road 11C, holds monthly scavenger hunts during the summer season May to September of bird habitats and general habitats of plants, animals and birds.

"It's a quick and easy way to teach people to observe nature," Allison said.

The scavenger hunt helps participants "to actively look at the outdoors instead of glancing over it," Blanchard said.

Typically, 10 to 30 people participate in the scavenger hunt. Halfway through the hunt Saturday, 23 people had taken part.

The scavenger hunts are held 11 a.m.-1 p.m. or 1-3 p.m. on Saturday or Sunday.

At the scavenger hunt table, the youth also could earn junior ranger badges for completing booklets with questions and activities centered on the park.

"It's a way for kids when they come to the park to connect with the park and understand environmental issues and conditions that we have at the park," Allison said.

The park offers other summer programs, including fishing and archery clinics, campfire educational programs and environmental education.

For a list of the summer, and also winter, programs at Boyd Lake State Park, visit http://cpw.state.co.us/placestogo/parks/boydlake/Pages/Activities.aspx.

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm