ENLARGE Ted Cruz at his primary watch party in Hollis, N.H., on Tuesday night Photo: Luke Sharrett/Bloomberg News

MYRTLE BEACH, S.C.— Ted Cruz has a simple message for South Carolina: I’m the only candidate who can stop Donald Trump.

Before addressing a raucus crowd of about 200 in this beach resort, Mr. Cruz told reporters that his third place finish in New Hampshire made it clear “the only candidate who can beat Donald Trump is me. The other candidates are unequal to do so.”

Why just him, given that Ohio Gov. John Kasich finished in front of him in New Hampshire and former Florida Gov Jeb Bush finished just a smidgeon behind?

Mr. Cruz argued establishment candidates have no chance because Mr. Trump will beat them up on issues like immigration reform. “You cannot beat Donald Trump from the left,” he said.

Sen. Cruz said he would use the issue of health-care reform to bludgeon Mr. Trump, who he claimed backed “Bernie Sanders socialized medicine.”

When Mr. Trump was exploring a run for president around 2000 on the Reform Party ticket, he made several statements in favor of universal health care. In his 2000 book, “The America we Deserve,” for instance, he wrote, “I’m a conservative on most issues but a liberal”on health and he backed universal health care.

But since then, Mr. Trump has rejected those positions and now says he would repeal the Affordable Care Act, as would Sen. Cruz.

Politifact, the political fact-checking website, looked into a similar charge against Mr. Trump made by then candidate Rick Perry, a former Texas governor. Since 2000, Mr. Trump has occasionally made statements that indicated sympathy for a big government role in health care. Overall, Politifact rated the charge against Mr. Trump as “half-true.”

When Mr. Cruz repeated the charged about a half-hour later during his rally, the audience roared its approval. Afterwards, Phyllis Maloni, who co-owns an elevator installation business in Myrtle Beach, says she had been convinced to vote for Mr. Cruz by his rousing speech. Part of the reason, she said, is that she believes Mr. Cruz will be able to repeal Obamacare.

More

Focus in GOP Nominating Contest Will Soon Shift to South Carolina

Donald Trump Bounces Back With Broad Support in New Hampshire

Chris Christie Expected to Suspend Campaign