The government is spending $30 billion to encourage the health care system to go digital. Health records firm Epic raises profile

The U.S. government is spending $30 billion to encourage the health care system to go digital. Now, the founder and chief executive of the country’s largest vendor of digital medical records is fighting back against what she calls incorrect perceptions that her company is creating obstacles to creating a national system where health records can be shared.

The sharing of health records is a critical but elusive goal, one that’s getting the attention of policymakers and K Street, as well as the health care industry. Some critics say industry giant Epic Systems is part of the problem.

Story Continued Below

Epic’s CEO Judy Faulkner is now ready to engage.

“If we don’t speak up, people will believe what others say about us, and an unanswered accusation becomes seen as the truth if you don’t respond,” Faulkner told POLITICO in a rare interview. “We’re now in a position where we have to.”

( Also on POLITICO: What can D.C. get done in Obama's last two years?)

Her Verona, Wisconsin-based company has ridden high on the wave of federal incentives, transforming itself from a company with revenue measured in the tens of millions in the 1990s to an estimated $1.5 billion a year today.

With success has come attention, much of it negative.

Epic has become the lightning rod for everything that doctors and IT experts don’t like about electronic health records. While industry ratings have ranked Epic above many other EHRs in terms of physician usability, critics charge the company fails to easily share patient records and throws its weight around in the market.

In health care markets where large EHR vendors like Epic make it difficult or expensive for users of other systems to share data, smaller hospitals and doctor doctors’ offices may feel pressure to get the same software — or to join the larger networks.

( Also on POLITICO: Christie: CDC behind on Ebola)

Rep. Phil Gingrey (R-Ga.) singled out Epic during a July hearing of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, saying it’s possible “that fraud is being perpetrated on the American people.”

The Federal Trade Commission recently said it would monitor the EHR vendors to spot any that impede progress toward “interoperability,” industry jargon for sharing patient records electronically. Other reports, including one by the RAND Corp. this summer, have called the company a “closed system.”

Through all of this, Epic has kept a low public profile. But the issue of sharing medical records is becoming more visible. Records that can be accessed by all of a patient’s doctors or hospitals are a staple of health reform and the Affordable Care Act. That’s one reason these programs are garnering attention of from Congress and federal regulators.

Epic is getting some of that scrutiny.

Faulkner, a self-described introverted computer software developer and one of the world’s wealthiest self-made businesswomen, hasn’t talked much about the criticisms of the company she built. She has kept her focus on her product and her customers.

( Also on POLITICO: Reid's daughter undergoing surgery)

But Epic — unavoidably — keeps drawing attention. It started in 1979 as three half-time workers in an apartment building basement. Now it has more than 7,400 employees occupying a sprawling 1,000-acre campus outside Madison. Epic’s software touches the lives of about half the people in the U.S.

Epic has mostly declined comment — until now.

“Lots of other things we simply haven’t attacked. And now, in retrospect, I wish we had,” said Faulkner, 71. “We’ve just shrugged and said, ‘Well, forget it.’ And moved on. Now, we’re not doing that, and I’m actually glad we’re not.”

Faulkner called her company’s name drop by Gingrey at that House hearing a “shock” and “realization we can’t hide anymore.”

Epic hired lobbyist Brad Card in early August, after never having a lobbying presence in Washington before. Card has met with various congressional offices in the past few months, talking up the company’s track record, which he says doesn’t reflect its reputation.

During a 90-minute interview last week, Faulkner frequently mentioned a recent report from KLAS, a market research firm that produces influential annual surveys on interoperability.

The report listed Epic as the top vendor for interoperability in 2012 and 2013. KLAS graded Epic this year as having the highest score for health information exchange among EHR vendors.

The concept of openness and ability to freely share information was a quality baked into Epic when she was just writing its code, Faulkner says. “The whole concept of being open and allowing users … to be able to use the exits to do whatever they want was in there from the very, very start,” she said.