By

In its second year, the Obama administration’s Affordable Care Act cost Blue Cross and Blue Shield parent Health Care Service Corp (HCSC) and other insurers a lot of money, giving critics more ammunition against President Barack Obama’s so-called “Obamacare” plans.

For 2015, HCSC’s losses in ACA plans were significantly worse, as the company lost $1.5 billion in its individual business. That’s almost twice the company’s losses of $767 million in 2014, the first year of the informally-dubbed Obamacare’s state exchanges for purchasing insurance.

Expecting bigger losses in 2015 in relation to ACA products, HCSC earmarked close to $400 million in 2014, effectively raising reserves to $680.9 million. The company then spent almost all – $657.3 million – of those reserve funds to shoulder medical expenses in relation to ACA products in 2015.

“2015 was not a good year as far as the ACA went,” said health insurance specialist Stephen Zaharuk, senior vice president at Moody’s Investors Service. “Insurers had no idea what to expect.”

In what has been a big blow and arguably serious pain point for Obamacare, several large insurance firms, HCSC included, have reported significant losses on ACA plans. The overarching Affordable Care Act has allowed greater access to health insurance by expanding Medicaid and subsidizing insurance costs with tax credits. This has allowed more consumers to take advantage of insurance policies, but a lot of the growth has been empty, not earning much profit and suggesting unexpected medical expenses and regulatory pitfalls.

There may, however, be a light at the end of the tunnel for HCSC and other firms. According to HCSC divisional senior vice president Carl McDonald, the company did not earmark any reserves for potential ACA-related losses in 2016. This could hint at HCSC’s business potentially breaking even this year. Still, the company has decided to play it cagey.

“Our not booking (reserve funds for ACA losses) for 2016 does not indicate nor imply an anticipated level of profitability for the year,” wrote HCSC spokesman Gregory Thompson in an email to the Chicago Tribune.

Meanwhile, stakes are also high for health insurance co-ops, which were battered by rough financial waters in 2015 resulting from ACA products. These co-ops have had a hard time attracting customers to the fold, and have also had to deal with expenses that went over forecasts. Experts such as HealthCare.gov CEO Kevin Counihan believe that 2016 will be a very important year for co-ops, as they will be forced to “move from startup to stability” and become more financially solvent than they were in previous years.

Laugh of the day: