Ileana Morales of Boulder searches for a job at Workforce Boulder County on Wednesday in Boulder. For more photos of activity at Workforce Boulder County go to www.dailycamera.com. ( Jeremy Papasso / Daily Camera )

Initial economic forecasts for Colorado in 2015 have been favorable, with job growth expected to occur across a wide swath of industries and consumer confidence projected to remain positive.

On Tuesday, two of the state's leading economists will provide in-depth looks at how the next months could fare for not only the economic health of the Boulder region, the state and nation, but also Colorado's fiscal future.

If you go What: The Economic Forecast Boulder & Beyond When: 4 p.m. to 7:30 p.m. Tuesday, Jan. 13 Where: UCAR Center Green Auditorium, 3080 Center Green Drive, Boulder Cost: $55 general admission, $45 Boulder Chamber members, $35 Boulder Economic Council members, $65 at the door More info: bouldereconomiccouncil.org

Richard Wobbekind, executive director of the Business Research Division at the University of Colorado's Leeds School of Business, and Phyllis Resnick, lead economist for the Colorado Futures Center at Colorado State University, are scheduled to speak at The Economic Forecast: Boulder & Beyond event taking place Tuesday evening in Boulder.

Both Wobbekind and Resnick spoke at last year's local economic forecast, which is hosted annually by the Boulder Economic Council.

Past iterations have included a panel discussion from business leaders across a variety of industries in addition to Wobbekind's keynote address; however, this year's event was restructured to include both Wobbekind's forecast and Resnick's expanded and updated look at Colorado's budget challenges.

Local challenges and opportunities

Tracy Gardner of Boulder, at right, gets help with her cover letter from Claire Benton, employment specialist, while searching for employment at Workforce Boulder County on Wednesday. (Jeremy Papasso / Daily Camera)

The event will allow Wobbekind to expand on the data released by CU last month in the Colorado Business Economic Outlook and provide greater context about projected job growth and potential concerning elements such as stock market volatility, the increasing costs of living in Boulder and Colorado, and, even, low gas prices.

"We have the same positive beliefs for a lot of (indicators and industries)" as projected in the Colorado Business Economic Outlook report, Wobbekind said last week in an interview with the Daily Camera.

The concerns also have not gone away.

Low oil prices have become a double-edged sword.

As the price of crude continues its slide — recently dropping below $50 a barrel — the result is a boon to consumers' pocketbooks. Alternatively, Wobbekind noted that the low prices also could soften production in the energy market, which was projected to have upward of $16 billion in gross revenue statewide next year and has helped to drive some job growth in the state.

"If it stays in the doldrums for a while, how much is that going to impact the state, and where it impacts the state the most?" Wobbekind said. "I think there are some intriguing questions to be asked."

The volatility of the stock market also could shake consumer confidence, he added.

On the local level, Wobbekind said another area of concern is the cost of living and the cost of doing business in Colorado. Higher residential and commercial rents, coupled with some incomes not rising quick enough to catch climbing housing prices, could put pressure on some residents and businesses, he said.

"This is something that can give us a little bit of angst in terms of remaining competitive and remaining able to draw in a broad base of businesses and a broad base of workers," he said. "An economy's not just made up of one industry, it's made up of a variety of industries and businesses that provide services (to workers in those industries)."

Michael deLeon, left, and Adam Casias work on projects at Sopher Sparn Architects on Thursday morning in Boulder. (Paul Aiken / Daily Camera)

Wobbekind added that one of the most-striking sentences to him in the economic outlook report noting the average wage in health care was lower than the statewide average wage figure.

"There are plenty of people who make below-average wages in that industry," he said. "And you need those people, and we need those people as an economy and as a society."

Overall, health care as well as energy, agriculture, technology and professional services will continue to add jobs in 2015, he said.

The strength of the technology community in Boulder and Denver also likely would attract people from outside Colorado as well as local residents, he said. Additionally, the construction industry is expected to continue to add jobs and have wages rise as much as 7 percent, well above the inflation rate, he said.

Optimism growing

During the recession, the local architecture industry was one of many trounced as the housing market crashed. Amid lacking financing and work stoppages, firms folded and jobs were lost.

A few years later, the picture is far less dreary.

"Colloquially, from members of the profession, people seem busy and we're all grateful for that because we've certainly seen otherwise in the last few years," said Adrian Sopher's of Boulder-based Sopher Architects LLC. "That certainly has been the case for us."

In the four years since departing Architecture Incorporated and starting his own firm, Sopher's company has experienced exponential growth. As the fledgling firm's workload doubled every year, Sopher encountered a dilemma about how to handle future growth.

"It just got to the point where I (had to make) a decision of whether or not to expand," Sopher said.

Sopher ultimately decided to pair up with another longtime local architect in, Stephen Sparn, and the two veterans merged their respective firms in a deal completed at the turn of the year. Helping head the 15-employee Sopher Sparn Architects LLC, Sopher said he remains cautiously optimistic about 2015.

Last year, Workforce Boulder County saw 11,044 job-seeking. In 2012, the employment and training centers' client tally was 15,828.

Job postings are even more favorable with the organization recording 44,323 jobs posted, nearly four times that in 2012.

The recent numbers are far cries from the whirlwind of activity at the job service center's operations in 2008 and 2009. During the recession, Workforce Boulder County saw 13,000 job-seeking clients in a two-month period and only 3,300 jobs posted in a nine-month period.

"It's a lot better environment for the job seeker right now, period," said Erin Jones, workforce manager at Workforce Boulder County.

The top industries that make up Workforce Boulder County's job postings in this employer-driven environment are: professional and scientific services, which account for about 12,000 of the 44,000-plus postings; information technology, with more than 7,000 posts; manufacturing with more than 4,000 posts; and then health care, with about 4,000 posts, she said.

Opportunities have grown more plentiful, but the current job market is not without challenges.

"We are still seeing the long-term unemployed individuals," said Erin Jones, workforce manager.

Boulder County's job market is competitive, with many of the open positions both requiring high education and garnering attention from out-of-state job-seekers, she said.

"Sometimes people who have been unemployed for a longer period of time may not be connected with the state-of-the-art training that's needed," she said.

In addition to participating in Workforce Boulder County's slate of workshops and training opportunities, Jones recommended, job-seekers should receive "specific, in-demand training." She also suggested job-seekers take actions such as networking and conducting informational interviews with employers to gain a firmer grasp on the current labor market.

Jones added she remains optimistic that, considering the activity in the job market, employers also may promote from within to fill vacancies, resulting in potential career opportunities for others.

"In the future, I think there will be more entry-level openings," she said.

Changing fiscal dynamics

At last year's Boulder Economic Council forecast event, Phyllis Resnick presented Colorado Futures Group research that indicated Colorado's budget was not fiscally sustainable.

Tuesday, Resnick plans to expand on her past presentation and provide some additional insight based on emerging trends.

"We've started to do a fair amount of work around sales tax, both demographic and economic trends that we're calling 'headwinds,'" she said.

Colorado's population, proportionally, is getting increasingly older, she said, noting the share of households over 65 years of age are expected to be in the 18 percent to 19 percent range in 2030.

The spending habits of those individuals are teetered more toward services rather than goods.

Additionally, members of the Millennial generation are spending differently as well, she said.

In some cases, the now 20-somethings who came into economic maturity during the recession have delayed "household formation," and have not paired up, bought a house and had children as quickly as past generations. Millennials and others also have adapted to a "sharing" economy, conducting business in areas such as ride-shares, clothing swaps, eBay, Craigslist and AirBnb, she said.

"We have a tax system that is mismatched to the current economy," Resnick said.

Resnick on Tuesday also will delve deeper into the potential effect on the state budget if refunds are handed out under provisions of the Taxpayer's Bill of Rights. TABOR, approved by Colorado voters in 1992, restricts the state's revenue growth and requires excess tax collections to be refunded to taxpayers.

Alicia Wallace: 303-473-1332, wallacea@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/dc_alicia