ENLARGE A Unesco member records the damage at Cairo's Museum of Islamic Art, which was recently bombed. Associated Press

For good reason, the man in charge on the ground sounds profoundly tired, and angry, over the phone. Ahmed Sharaf, the chief of museums at Egypt's Antiquities Ministry, is taking stock of the latest heritage catastrophe to strike his country, yet another in the region's tragic tally of such events in recent years. He has strong feelings about the truck bombing that severely damaged Cairo's Museum of Islamic Art at about 7 a.m. on Jan. 24. Intended for the police headquarters nearby, it killed four people, injured 76 and sent a storm of debris through the museum, shattering windows and glass cases and wrecking priceless objects. "Yes, maybe it wasn't their target. But what do they think? They know the museum is right here. Something like 500 kilograms of TNT. They don't care what they destroy. They hate culture and heritage, even their own."

Generally considered one of the world's great Islamic collections, the museum features mosque lamps, jewelry, coins, wooden mosque mihrabs, decorative tiles and marbles, ivories, inlaid boxes and heraldic shields, carpets and the like. It spans golden ages from the seventh-century Ummayad period, through the medieval Fatimid and Mameluke periods, to the Ottoman era—close to 98,000 pieces in all, most of which are warehoused in the basement, so far in safety. The 1903 building is, in itself, a celebrated monument with its neo-Orientalist pillared facade of limestone, now cracked in several places.

According to Unesco experts, the structure remains fundamentally sound, the walls being deep and solid. But the toll inside makes Mr. Sharaf's voice shake. Out of some 1,470 objects on display, 74 were destroyed and an additional 90 damaged, most notably two wooden mihrabs (prayer niches) and several exquisite mosque lamps. Wooden objects were fragmented and then soaked by water from a wrecked pipe supplying the sprinkler system, while a lot of the glass and ceramics were pulverized. When asked which pieces he mourned the most, he answers: "The mihrabs—maybe we can save them—showed how the medieval Islamic craftsmen put things together so exactly and geometrically. But some lamps are destroyed, from old palaces and mosques, some from Sultan Hassan in the Mameluke time—he made many monuments in Cairo—you could see how they used light, so beautiful with calligraphy and decoration." Many of the lamps had been suspended from a purpose-built hanging ceiling that collapsed from the blast. The museum had undergone eight years of renovation and reopened in 2010 with that new ceiling.

The debacle illustrates the widespread vulnerability of heritage sites in the region, and some of the improvements occurring in response. In Egypt alone, the Museum of Islamic Art is one of several museums to suffer from the recent upheavals.

The city's main Egyptian Museum housing the country's renowned archaeological artifacts was looted early in the Tahrir Square events. The Institut d'Egypte scholarly archives, founded by Napoleon during his invasion, was torched in 2011, while elsewhere historic mansion-museums also suffered arson. The regional Mallawi Museum, full of Pharaonic treasures in Minya on the Southern Nile, was invaded and looted in 2013. And that's apart from the wrecking of churches and full-blown scouring of ancient terrain in the countryside, even with bulldozers, by heavily armed looters in search of buried treasure. Yet in the case of the Museum of Islamic Art, some things went right, notably in the disciplined procedural response to the event. The second-floor national-archives library, with rare manuscripts on display, sustained minor initial damage but survived the aftermath intact because the personnel knew what to do. According to conservator Regine Schulz, a member of the Unesco team that has just completed the initial damage assessment, "you have to sort the debris carefully, because with a blast everything flies around. You have to observe what belongs to what without being hectic. You block the area and reconstruct the space."

As so many disasters have shown, the initial incident often triggers further immediate damage by an invasion of looters, uncontrolled volunteers, firemen, curious bystanders and others. Chaos begets chaos. The Museum of Islamic Art avoided that fate, not least because of a professionally trained volunteer emergency-response team headed up by Abdulhamid Salah.

Any system that must depend on heroes is clearly in trouble. But here it proved crucial. Mr. Salah, who studied archaeology at Cairo University, hails from a middle-class family. Soon after the initial depredations hit Cairo's main Egyptian Museum, he used his own money in 2011 to enroll in a newly designed emergency course in Rome at the Unesco-funded International Centre for the Study of the Preservation and Restoration of Cultural Property. In 2012, back in Egypt, he founded a nongovernmental organization to train volunteers, state employees and conservators in the same techniques. He itemizes some of the steps: "You learn how to do risk-management studies before anything happens. Then, in the event, you make sure the building is stable, you document everything, you mark out areas, you establish storage sites. Then you fill boxes and take them to safety."

When he heard of the blast at the Museum of Islamic Art, he rushed over with several members of his team. "It was good that they had isolated the area," says Mr. Salah. "The staff recognized us, and when we got in we helped with initiating an ordered procedure." Meanwhile, outside contacts were asked to purchase a large supply of extra boxes, and particularly rubber gloves to sift the glass. "We're lucky because this is a newly renovated institution," adds Mr. Salah. "It has conservation facilities inside, and they have already started work." But, alas, data storage was kept in the building, too—computers, discs and the like that, according to Unesco, were wrecked by the debris and water.

Here, as in so much of the region, some lessons are coming clear through hard experience. International funding and training matters critically. Cultural ministries in ancient lands are forever underfinanced and bureaucratically paralyzed. Expert volunteers fill the gaps and, as Mr. Salah says, "good officials now realize to integrate this help."

The Egyptian state's predicament illustrates several region-wide problems. Three successive administrations have governed Egypt from the time of Hosni Mubarak to the present. From the culture minister on down, officials keep changing. Outsiders don't know whom to deal with. Cultural policies also change: In places like Iraq, Syria and Libya, sectarian considerations confuse matters. In each case, economic collapse has narrowed the state's efficacy anyway. Faced with a multiplicity of challenges, the international community hasn't yet come up with a holistic solution—if one exists. Meantime, Mr. Sharaf says desperately, "Please help. This heritage belongs to all of us."

Mr. Kaylan writes about culture and the arts for the Journal.