Part of the reaction to my essay last week regarding the latest preposterous pronouncements from Michigan Republican National Committeeman Dave Agema was an accusation from a friendly acquaintance that my opinion springs not from good sense, but instead from having gay friends.



Well guilty, to some degree. But that’s part of the good sense. Familiarity with the people being maligned is an excellent source of evidence against the allegations being made against them. Mr. Agema and his acolytes should get out more and see the reality of the people they’re talking about. Stereotypes are like battle plans: They never survive contact with the enemy.



Former Michigan House Majority Floor Leader Chris Ward, R-Brighton, recently wrote about an “uncomfortable truth” Agema’s supporters must consider.



“Some of, if not the most, effective and successful strategists our party has are people who Dave Agema would consider "filthy" or in a more polite term, live an alternative lifestyle,” he said.

For every Michigan political hack who pulled more than his or her share of the burden toward GOP policy victories over the last two decades, this isn’t even a remotely controversial statement.



Creation and expansion of school choice, Right to Work, business tax cuts, budget reform, defeat for the worst of Granholm’s economic agenda, and much more were all accomplished with irreplaceable help from a very talented, small army of political professionals who prefer to lay their head down at night next to somebody of the same gender.



The GOP social agenda doesn’t keep them on the job, and neither does a delusional committeeman publicly declaring them to be disease-riddled insurance cheats.

Ward notes their real motive: “They believe in smaller government and free markets…”



Yup. In 2009, when thousands of tea party demonstrators gathered at the Michigan Capitol to support those principles, the gay staffers were there, smiling, joining the crowd at lunchtime, and snapping photos from their offices. The tea party was then their movement too.



They were the professionals behind the scenes who worked tirelessly during the 2010 election to create the massive GOP majorities in the House and Senate that made wins like Right to Work even thinkable. They are also the loyal soldiers who soberly took one for the team, saluted quietly, and did what they were told when a (soon to be shrinking) Republican House majority tried (and failed) to vote a proposal to ban gay marriage onto the 2004 ballot.



Another irony: Just like their straight coworkers, they often find their way into stable, committed relationships. And they’re living healthy lives, often well past 40, contrary to what Mr. Agema would tell you when he cites his neo-Nazi “expert” regarding homosexuals. Indeed, while Agema was on the floor of the Michigan House, doubtlessly in his early stages of worrying over how gays have sex, many of them were dutifully helping him get his bills passed and his image enhanced.

Today, Michigan’s tea parties often derail from their once reliable march against ObamaCare and dance to Agema’s gay bashing drums instead. Not surprisingly, gay GOP operatives now see the tea party with more critical eyes. And the tea party can hardly draw much of a crowd anymore, despite ObamaCare being more hated than ever. (Hm… coincidences?)

Many Republicans owe these people a “thank you” AND an apology. But the gay GOP professionals are just that: Professionals. They’ll get by if the movement they love just shows some class and stops supporting charlatans who accuse them of being rabid, disgusting pests.

“We … are the party of the individual,” says Ward. “Let’s treat individuals with some respect.”

Ken Braun was a legislative aide for a Republican lawmaker in the Michigan House and worked for the Mackinac Center for Public Policy. He has assisted in a start-up effort to encourage employers to provide economic education to employees, and is currently the director of policy for

InformationStation.org

. His employer is not responsible for what he says here ... or in Spartan Stadium on game days.