If dealing with your health insurance company leaves you with a giant headache, you’re far from alone.

This year, consumers’ satisfaction with health insurance providers hit a 10-year low to a score of 69 out of 100, according to a report from the American Customer Satisfaction Index released Tuesday, in which more than 9,200 randomly selected consumers were surveyed. Now, out of the nearly 43 industries the ACSI ranks, health insurance companies rank in the bottom five (even the airlines get higher marks from customers). “There’s lots of frustration on the part of consumers,” says ACSI managing director David VanAmburg.

While it might be tempting to blame the Affordable Care Act, as it led to an influx of new consumers (and thus some ensuing headaches and slowdowns), that may not be what is primarily driving the increased dissatisfaction. Indeed, people who have individual policies tend to be more satisfied with their health insurance companies (ranking them a 71 out of 100) than those who have group policies (68 out of 100), which are typically provided through their employers. VanAmburg says this is largely a function of those consumers feeling they have more choice in a plan.

Instead, some of the main issues driving this rising annoyance at health insurance companies are high premiums, deductibles and copays, as well as slow claims processing, the report reveals. A report released this year by the Kaiser Family Foundation found that average premiums for employer-sponsored plans increased 4% in just the past year (meanwhile, wages increased by just 1.9%) to $6,251 for single coverage and $17,545 for family coverage. For their part, workers pay an average of 18% of the premium for single coverage and 29% for family coverage, though this varies widely.

Furthermore, copays are common and deductibles are also on the rise. Nearly seven in 10 workers have to fork out for a copay for office visits with either their primary care doctor or a specialist in addition to the annual deductible their plan has, the KFF report revealed; copays can run upward of $30. And the average deductible for workers in 2015 is $1,077, up 67% from $646 in 2010, according to the KFF report.

The complexity of health insurance, which leads consumers to have a lot of questions about what is and isn’t covered — and why — also plays a role in this dissatisfaction, VanAmburg adds.

While the report notes that “there is no area where health insurance companies show outstanding performance,” there are some areas that are better than others, namely access to primary care physicians, specialty care doctors and hospitals.

Furthermore, other research shows that consumers are happier with health insurance companies. For example, J.D. Power’s 2015 survey of member satisfaction of 134 health plans showed a 10-point increase in customer satisfaction to a 679 out of 1,000. “Health plans have come a long way since last year as the focus has shifted toward better serving member needs and building trust,” said Rick Johnson, senior director of the health care practice at J.D. Power, in a statement.

A spokeswoman for America’s Health Insurance Plans notes that “individuals are overwhelmingly satisfied with their coverage and benefits, and health plans continue to work with consumers to make sure they know what benefits are available to them and how they can navigate the health systems.”

More from MarketWatch