Print Email Font Resize Font Resize Boulder's Community Cycles gives away refurbished children's bikes

Maria Almeda's 10-year-old and 5-year-old had their bikes stolen this summer, but both got replacements this morning thanks to Community Cycle's eighth annual Kids Holiday Bike Giveaway.



“They're really excited to get bikes,” Almeda said as her two ran through rows of refurbished bikes to find the perfect new ride. “This really helps. Bikes are expensive. They grow so fast, you can't keep up with them. They love to ride. They spend all their summer bicycling.”



Community Cycles gave out about 150 children's bikes, about half of the bikes that volunteers brought to a warehouse in east Boulder. For the remaining bikes, the organization is planning a second giveaway in the spring, possibly to coincide with bike to school day. Anaia Nelson, 4, tries out her new bike as her mom, Kari, watches on Sunday. Boulder's Community Cycles gave out about 150 refurbished bikes at its eighth annual bike giveaway. ( Cliff Grassmick )



“We want to get more kids on bikes and get the bikes out in the community,” said Community Cycles spokeswoman Sue Prant. “A lot of the families can't afford to buy their kids a new bike each year.”



Along with a refurbished bike, each child also got a new helmet courtesy of Boulder Community Hospital, plus a bike light donated by and Nite Ize and socks donated by SmartWool. Throughout the year, Community Cycles collects kids' bikes, which are refurbished by volunteer mechanics.



Those mechanics also volunteered at the giveaway, giving each bike one last check, adding air to the tires and making adjustments to ensure a good fit. Advertisement



“When I was a kid, my bike was my source of freedom and adventure,” said volunteer Mat Wolford. “We want to get kids on bikes and let them explore Boulder. That's our inspiration.”



Volunteer Chad Smith added that he appreciates the idea of recycling bikes.

“You don't want to see all these bikes go to the dumpster when you can give them to the kids who need them,” he said. Mateo Fowlkes, 19-months, is excited to test drive bicycles on Sunday. Boulder's Community Cycles handed out about 150 refurbished bikes at its eighth annual bike give away. ( Cliff Grassmick )



Nathaniel Torres, a 13-year-old who lives in Boulder, brought his 10-year-old sister because she didn't have a bike. They got there when the doors first opened at 8 a.m.



“We go here really early, so we got first pick,” he said.



Both found bikes, then he told friends in his neighborhood about the event and encouraged them to go.



He said he was starting to outgrow his old bike, making getting a new, sleek black bike even better.



“When I go somewhere, I always use my bike,” he said.



P.Q. Compean, 10, and his 9-year-old brother, Jacob, live in Denver but were in Nathaniel's neighborhood with their grandmother when he told them about the bike giveaway.



Jacob said he was borrowing his dad's bike and called getting his own, a BMX bike, “pretty cool.”



Added P.Q., who had outgrown his bike, “I'm always on the bike. I love bikes. You can go fast and do so many things.”









Maria Almeda's 10-year-old and 5-year-old had their bikes stolen this summer, but both got replacements this morning thanks to Community Cycle's eighth annual Kids Holiday Bike Giveaway.“They're really excited to get bikes,” Almeda said as her two ran through rows of refurbished bikes to find the perfect new ride. “This really helps. Bikes are expensive. They grow so fast, you can't keep up with them. They love to ride. They spend all their summer bicycling.”Community Cycles gave out about 150 children's bikes, about half of the bikes that volunteers brought to a warehouse in east Boulder. For the remaining bikes, the organization is planning a second giveaway in the spring, possibly to coincide with bike to school day.“We want to get more kids on bikes and get the bikes out in the community,” said Community Cycles spokeswoman Sue Prant. “A lot of the families can't afford to buy their kids a new bike each year.”Along with a refurbished bike, each child also got a new helmet courtesy of Boulder Community Hospital, plus a bike light donated by and Nite Ize and socks donated by SmartWool. Throughout the year, Community Cycles collects kids' bikes, which are refurbished by volunteer mechanics.Those mechanics also volunteered at the giveaway, giving each bike one last check, adding air to the tires and making adjustments to ensure a good fit.“When I was a kid, my bike was my source of freedom and adventure,” said volunteer Mat Wolford. “We want to get kids on bikes and let them explore Boulder. That's our inspiration.”Volunteer Chad Smith added that he appreciates the idea of recycling bikes.“You don't want to see all these bikes go to the dumpster when you can give them to the kids who need them,” he said.Nathaniel Torres, a 13-year-old who lives in Boulder, brought his 10-year-old sister because she didn't have a bike. They got there when the doors first opened at 8 a.m.“We go here really early, so we got first pick,” he said.Both found bikes, then he told friends in his neighborhood about the event and encouraged them to go.He said he was starting to outgrow his old bike, making getting a new, sleek black bike even better.“When I go somewhere, I always use my bike,” he said.P.Q. Compean, 10, and his 9-year-old brother, Jacob, live in Denver but were in Nathaniel's neighborhood with their grandmother when he told them about the bike giveaway.Jacob said he was borrowing his dad's bike and called getting his own, a BMX bike, “pretty cool.”Added P.Q., who had outgrown his bike, “I'm always on the bike. I love bikes. You can go fast and do so many things.”