We just picked up a copy of “Double Down,” the Mark Halperin –John Heilemann account of the 2012 presidential elections, and have found the root of Herman Cain’s downfall on Page 211: Jon Huntsman, the other Mormon candidate from Utah:

"After getting a tip from a donor, Huntsman's researchers had dug into Cain's past, discovered the first two sexual harassment claims, and fed the story to Politico. Not that Cain was seen by Team Huntsman as a particular barrier to their man. But the Utahan’s people were increasingly desperate, looking for any opportunity to upend the prevailing dynamic.”

Back in the day, Cain’s campaign had accused Texas Gov. Rick Perry of spreading the info that ultimately forced the former pizza executive from McDonough out of the contest.

Cain discussed the matter this morning on AM750/FM95.5 NewsTalk WSB, crowing just a bit at Huntsman's dismal showing in the race:

"I still continue to vehemently deny the claims and in the upcoming commentary on HermanCain.com I will detail some of the information and the facts that show these claims were in fact false. ...

"Jon Huntsman said I should drop out of the race. Maybe it has something to do with the fact that after the P5 [straw poll] vote in Florida is when my campaign took off and I moved to the top of the polls. By the way it is a fact, it is a fact that in that P5 vote in Florida that really energized the Herman Cain campaign, Jon Huntsman came in dead last and Herman Cain came in first place by a long shot. That is a fact."

Not quite. Cain did in fact win and Huntsman did do poorly, but according to a tally of the straw poll published by the Tampa Bay Times, Michele Bachmann finished last.

***

Just in case you weren’t listening Monday, the magazine Site Selection gave Georgia some sort of kudo:

In an elaborately staged Statehouse event, Deal stood side by side with Republican lieutenants and corporate executives from Home Depot and UPS as he portrayed the magazine’s endorsement of Georgia as the top place to do business as validation for his first term in office. He quickly followed with a not-so-subtle pitch for a second. “We’re just at the beginning,” Deal said. “We’re going to continue to grow, and we’re going to continue to get better.”

***

Certainly, they didn’t intend to step on the governor’s good news, but last week the Technical College System of Georgia reported that 11,471 of their students lost the HOPE grant as the result of a new requirement, passed by the Legislature in 2011, that required a 3.0 grade-point average rather than a 2.0.

The change proved a huge, unexpected hit to a system designed to produce skilled workers for a state looking to expand its manufacturing base. Earlier this year, Gov. Nathan Deal supported, and the Legislature approved, a return to the 2.0 requirement.

But on Monday, Deal said numbers issued by the tech school system are not the "absolutely correct statistics" and that a clarification is forthcoming. We're not sure when to expect them, and there was no word from his office on the timing.

***

The Georgia Hospital Association's decision last week to back Medicaid expansion offered by the Affordable Care Act added some high-profile heft behind the push for broader coverage for the poor.

It also led to more speculation that it's only a matter of when -- and not if -- Gov. Nathan Deal will endorse a change, perhaps even as soon as 2015. When that was put to a question on Monday, the governor did as he has long done: He left himself a sliver of an opening.

"I am not inclined to change my mind at this point in time. This is a changing landscape, however. I think Congress is going to be forced to reexamine the issue and set different parameters for eligibility for either federal assistance or the Medicaid program itself. But under the present context, I don't think it would be a wise move for the state of Georgia."

***

Rolling Stone magazine today takes a look at a post-Section 5 world when it comes to the Voting Rights Act – using Georgia as an example. A sample:

The city of Athens, for instance, is considering a proposal to eliminate nearly half of its 24 polling sites in favor of creating two early voting centers – both located inside police stations. Madelyn Clare Powell, a longtime civil rights activist in Athens, worries that some voters cannot regard police stations as neutral territory. "There is a major intimidation factor here – these police stations are seen by some in the community as hostile territory," says Powell, citing historical tension between white police forces and minority communities in the region. Local activists also fear that the poll closures disproportionally impact neighborhoods with higher shares of minorities and college students, requiring three-hour bus rides for some public-transit dependent voters.

***

Last week, WSAV-TV in Savannah had a report on congressional travel paid for by third parties. The most salacious portion was the fact that newly re-elected U.S. Rep. Mark Sanford, R-Charleston, obtained approval to take his mistress-turned-fiancee on a trip to Israel.

But a WSAV reporter also questioned U.S. Rep. Jack Kingston, R-Savannah, about taking his daughter on a trip to the Middle East. Perhaps because of the congressman's status as a U.S. Senate candidate, someone was kind enough to post this exchange on YouTube:

Kingston: When business people travel, generally they're allowed to take a spouse with them. WSAV: But would the company pay for it? Kingston: Yes, the companies do pay for it.

Thousands of left-behind spouses are suddenly shaking their heads.

***

The AJC’s Politifact Georgia today looks at this statement from Branko Radulovacki, the Democratic candidate for U.S. Senate: “I am the only U.S. Senate candidate who spoke out against bombing Syria, and who challenged Georgia’s governor and insurance commissioner over obstruction to the Affordable Care Act.”

***

In the race to replace Rep. Paul Broun in the 10th Congressional District, pastor and radio talk show host Jody Hice got a boost Monday from the Family Research Council. Connie Mackey, the president of FRC Action PAC, told us that the PAC would probably buy some print and broadcast media on Hice’s behalf.

“We have a strong belief that there are reinforcements needed of strong cultural conservatives up on the Hill and he certainly fits the bill,” Mackey said. “He’s got a great base following and we think he can be elected and be not only a conservative voice but an active participant.”

FRC Action PAC also endorsed Hice in his 2010 race in the 7th District, when he lost a primary runoff to Rep. Rob Woodall.

Mackey said the PAC does not often get involved in primaries, but it is fully behind Hice and Barry Loudermilk, who is running in the 11th District to replace Rep. Phil Gingrey.

***

Mayoral contests (such as they are) in Atlanta and New York will be settled this evening, as well as a governor’s race in Virginia. But if you’re a Republican, the contest you’ll pay the most attention to is down in Mobile, Ala., where a GOP congressional runoff has pit a chamber favorite against a tea party champion. From Politico.com:

Despite a fierce, last-minute push from House GOP leaders and the business community to supply cash and endorsements to Bradley Byrne, public polling shows the former state senator in a tight race with Dean Young, a flame-throwing tea party contender with a penchant for controversial remarks. A Wednesday poll conducted by the Republican consulting firm Cygnal showed Young, a wealthy real estate investor, with a 43.2 percent to 40.2 percent lead over Byrne among likely voters. Sixteen percent of those surveyed said they were undecided. The results were within the survey’s 3 percentage point margin of error.