Health insurance premiums for 2014 are so low in many parts of Minnesota that some consumers aren’t qualifying for tax credits through the state’s new health insurance exchange.

Access to tax credits has been widely cited as a key reason for shopping on MNsure — the new government-run health insurance website — so some consumers have been confused by the vanishing subsidies, April Todd-Malmlov, the MNsure executive director, said during a board meeting Wednesday in St. Paul.

Paraphrasing a common question asked at MNsure’s call center, Todd-Malmlov said: “I think there’s something wrong with the system — I’m supposed to be getting a tax credit, but I’m getting a zero.”

The calculation is correct, she said.

“The premiums are so low that some people at higher income levels and some in lower age groups — they don’t qualify for the tax credit,” Todd-Malmlov said in an interview.

“But they still are getting coverage that is more affordable than what they would get in other states.”

The tax credit discussion came during a meeting in which MNsure’s directors officially set at 1.5 percent the amount of premiums the state agency will “withhold” from all health insurance policies sold through the exchange.

Republicans promptly dubbed the assessment a “premium tax,” saying it was too high for what consumers are getting.

They criticized figures released Wednesday by MNsure that show while more people are selecting coverage options through the health exchange, enrollments with commercial health insurers still haven’t been finalized.

“Hardworking taxpayers can’t afford to pay even more for the implementation of Obamacare by Gov. Dayton and Democrats,” state Rep. Tara Mack, R-Apple Valley, said in a statement.

Obamacare is the name used by some to describe the Affordable Care Act, a federal law past in 2010 that called for the creation of health exchanges for all 50 states.

Minnesota is one of 16 states, plus the District of Columbia, that are creating their own health exchanges, while the federal government is running an exchange that covers Wisconsin and the other remaining states.

Legislation passed this year for Minnesota’s exchange allowed MNsure to withhold up to 1.5 percent of premiums. Depending on whether shoppers purchase policies with lower or higher costs, it will raise anywhere from $3.2 million to $4.6 million, according to MNsure projections.

The money would cover a sliver of MNsure’s operating costs in 2014 — $1.2 million out of a total $76.3 million, with the bulk of funding coming from the federal government. The remaining funds would be held in a reserve account.

Todd-Malmlov’s comment about tax credits followed a study released this week by the California-based Kaiser Family Foundation that projected 90,000 people in Minnesota will be eligible for tax credits through the exchange.

That’s a much smaller number than in similarly sized states such as Wisconsin, where about 300,000 people likely will be eligible for tax credits.

Low premiums in Minnesota are one factor that explains the difference, said Cynthia Cox, a researcher with the Kaiser Family Foundation.

The health law offers tax credits to people at certain income levels if they can’t buy a benchmark policy for less than a set percentage of their income.

Consumers with income at 400 percent of the poverty level — a threshold that works out to $46,000 for an individual, or $94,000 for a family of four — are not supposed to pay more than 9.5 percent of their income for a health insurance premium, according to the law.

The law doesn’t set a cap for the share of income that people at higher income levels should pay, but lower-income people are expected to pay a lower percentage — someone with incomes at 200 percent of the poverty level, for example, is required to pay a premium of no more than 6.3 percent of his income.

To determine if an individual gets a tax credit, the government takes a consumer’s affordability cap and compares it with the cost of the “second lowest-cost silver” health insurance policy that’s available for the consumer.

When the dollar value of the premium exceeds the affordability cap, a consumer can get a tax credit to make up the difference.

In low-premium regions like much of Minnesota, some consumers are finding that their benchmark premium is lower than the affordability cap. So, they don’t need a tax credit to get affordable coverage.

A second factor is Minnesota’s decision to expand the Medicaid health insurance program and maintain MinnesotaCare, a state-run program that provides coverage for people with slightly higher income than those who qualify for Medicaid. The programs will catch Minnesotans with incomes below roughly $23,000.

In both cases, Minnesota’s decision means that those consumers will be covered through a government program. In other states, they will be tapping tax credits applied against the cost of a policy purchased on a health exchange.

“Less people are getting tax credits,” Todd-Malmlov said. “But the end result of that is that we have more people with affordable coverage, and more comprehensive coverage than in any other state.”

Tom Forsythe, a MNsure board member, said he wasn’t surprised to hear that consumers are confused. But in an interview following the board meeting, he stressed that the low premiums “is a good thing.”

Board member Pete Benner noted that higher premiums in the Rochester area mean that more consumers in the southeast portion of the state will need tax credits to make their out-of-pocket premium costs affordable. And across the state, older people and those with lower incomes will be more likely than younger people with higher incomes to receive the federal subsidies.

Christopher Snowbeck can be reached at 651-228-5479. Readers can follow him at twitter.com/chrissnowbeck.