'Like his predecessor, Obama threw all his weight behind GMO agriculture.'

Street artist Shepard Fairey, who created the iconic "Obama Hope" poster, has jumped on board the Bernie Sanders train and claims US President Barack Obama did not meet expectations.

LOS ANGELES, CA (Catholic Online) - According to Info Wars, Fairley stated Obama went "quiet on a lot of things" originally promised during his campaign.



"I think history will be fairly kind of his presidency but I want things to move further in the direction that he promised as a campaigner," Fairey explained. "He's been more outspoken in the last 18 months.





The artist famous for the Obama Hope poster now claims the US President has failed to meet expectations (Shepard Fairey/ilustkreation).

"I think he's going out having done some good things and said some good things, but there were about six years there where I think he could have done more."Back in 2008, Obama said he would get the United States on track to "end our dependence on oil from the Middle East" and said he would "tap our natural gas reserves, invest in clean coal technology, and find ways to safely harness nuclear power. I'll help our auto companies re-tool, so that the fuel-efficient cars of the future are built right here in America. I'll make it easier for the American people to afford these new cars."Obama has nearly completed his second term and none of these issues have been addressed."I'll invest in early childhood education," Obama continued. "I'll recruit an army of new teachers, and pay them higher salaries, and give them more support. And in exchange, I'll ask for higher standards and more accountability."Since this statement, funding was increased - marginally - across both public and private sources."If you have health care, my plan will lower your premiums. If you don't, you'll be able to get the same kind of coverage that members of Congress give themselves ... Now is the time to help families with paid sick days and better family leave, because nobody in America should have to choose between keeping their job and caring for a sick child or an ailing parent."Since Obamacare was implemented, most health care premiums have increased; however, insurance companies are no longer legally able to deny coverage for anyone suffering from pre-existing conditions. There are several loopholes insurance companies have taken advantage of, but at least the president tried.Fairey blames Obama's silence on the failure of some of the president's promises: "If he had been as outspoken as he was a campaigner, I would give him a pass on not being able to push through some of the progressive things I hoped he would, but he was quiet on a lot of things. That to me was unfortunate."German Journalist Klaus Faissnet agreed with Fairey, saying: "Obama signed more orders for drone assaults than Bush Jr. had done in the entire eight years of his presidency. These were drone strikes which caused catastrophic levels of non-combatant casualties, which America simply wrote-off under the euphemism of 'collateral damage.'"Like his predecessor, Obama threw all his weight behind GMO agriculture; he didn't give the slightest thought to his promises to close Gitmo; he showed no interest whatsoever in improving relations with Russia, and he worked actively on destabilizing the situation in the Middle East."Both Fairey and Faissnet pointed to Obama's failure to address promises made during his campaigns and agree Obama is not a member of the Democratic Party - he is a member of the Establishment Party.

---

The California Network is the Next Wave in delivery of information and entertainment on pop culture, social trends, lifestyle, entertainment, news, politics and economics. We are hyper-focused on one audience, YOU, the connected generation. JOIN US AS WE REDEFINE AND REVOLUTIONIZE THE EVER-CHANGING MEDIA LANDSCAPE.