Photo

WASHINGTON — The Obama administration touched off a tempest on Wednesday with its plan to test new ways of paying for prescription drugs under Medicare, widely seen as the administration’s first serious attempt to rein in drug spending.

Groups representing Medicare beneficiaries welcomed some of the proposals but expressed concern about others. Drug manufacturers and some cancer doctors criticized the initiative, saying it placed too much emphasis on saving money and too little on ensuring patients’ access to treatment.

“I deal every day with people fighting for their lives, and I am more sympathetic to them, their desire to live and to get the right treatment,” said Ellen V. Sigal, the founder and chairwoman of Friends of Cancer Research, a public education and advocacy group, even as she noted her concern about rising drug costs.

Under the proposal, announced Tuesday, Medicare would try a half-dozen new ways of paying for prescription drugs in Part B of Medicare, under which $20 billion was spent last year on medications administered in doctors’ offices and hospital outpatient departments.

The announcement is only a proposal for a test, but it has huge implications for the pharmaceutical industry, especially for the big, fast-growing category of specialty drugs known as biologics. The proposal could, for the first time, link Medicare payments to the effectiveness of a drug and the cost of comparable medications — factors not normally considered in the current reimbursement formula, which is based on the average sales price of drugs, with an additional 6 percent allowance for storage and handling costs.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

For decades, Congress has legislated Medicare payment rates in minute detail. But the Affordable Care Act authorized the secretary of health and human services to test new “payment and service delivery models” and adopt them nationwide if they save money without harming the quality of care.

Sylvia Mathews Burwell, the health secretary, has shown she is willing to make aggressive use of this power, with the blessing of President Obama.

The Republican chairmen of three powerful congressional committees denounced the administration’s plan on Wednesday, describing it, in a joint statement, as “another troubling example of unelected bureaucrats making decisions behind closed doors.” The proposal could limit access to care for some of the sickest Medicare beneficiaries, said the statement, issued by Senator Orrin G. Hatch of Utah, the chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, and Representatives Fred Upton of Michigan, the chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, and Kevin Brady of Texas, the chairman of the Ways and Means Committee.

The Obama administration said its proposal would not interfere in any way with the “medical judgment” of doctors or their “ability to order reasonable and necessary Part B drugs as appropriate.” It did say, “We intend to achieve savings,” though officials could not say how much. The administration said it expected to change the “prescribing behavior” of doctors by giving them financial incentives to choose less expensive drugs that are at least as effective as more costly medications.

Stacy J. Sanders, the federal policy director at the Medicare Rights Center, a consumer advocacy group, welcomed the proposal, saying it would reduce the incentive for doctors to prescribe drugs that are expensive and ultimately unaffordable for low- and middle-income people who have no supplemental insurance.

Other advocates were cautious in their initial reactions.

Leslie B. Fried, a health lawyer at the National Council on Aging, a service and advocacy group, said: “If this is a way to take account of the value of treatments and control Part B costs, that’s a good thing. But we also have to be concerned about access to care for beneficiaries. It’s a balance.”

In a notice to be published in the Federal Register on Friday, the administration says it wants to require “mandatory participation” for doctors and hospitals that provide Part B drugs to Medicare beneficiaries in geographic areas selected for the test, a large part of the country. In three-fourths of the nation’s 7,000 “primary care service areas,” Medicare would pay for Part B drugs using reimbursement formulas different from the ones in the Medicare law.

Congress has provided broad bipartisan support for Mr. Obama’s plan to collect genetic data on one million volunteers so scientists can develop drugs and treatments tailored to the characteristics of individual patients. Some of the most enthusiastic supporters of this “precision medicine initiative” expressed concern about the new Medicare drug payment model.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“We are moving into an era of personalized medicine,” said Leslie Ritter, a vice president of the Society for Women’s Health Research, a nonprofit advocacy group. “The primary focus should be on the patient, not on costs. In many cases, we don’t know what works best for patients because women and members of minority groups were not adequately represented in clinical trials.”

Two influential lobbies, the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America and the Biotechnology Innovation Organization, strenuously opposed the administration’s plan, saying it could put Medicare patients at risk. Prices for new cancer drugs often exceed $100,000 a year, and it is not unusual to see television commercials and magazine advertisements promoting such treatments.

Dr. Allen S. Lichter, the chief executive of the American Society of Clinical Oncology, which represents cancer doctors, said the administration had identified a real problem, “the skyrocketing prices of drugs.” But he added, “Doctors did not create this problem, and it will not be solved by putting pressure on physicians.”