It’s Oct. 14, 2014, and I’m standing in a hotel conference room in Providence, Rhode Island. The room is filled with immunologists, microbiologists, virologists — people who study the things that make us sick, and what happens to us when we get sick. And most of them are more worried about flu than Ebola.

Dr. Annie De Groot, convener of the 8th Annual Vaccine Renaissance Conference — also director of the University of Rhode Island’s Institute for Immunology and Informatics, and founder and scientific director of the GAIA Vaccine Foundation (an NGO working toward HIV prevention in Mali) — can’t wait to go back to West Africa. She just has to convince her family. Eliza Squibb, GAIA’s executive director, nods in assent. Both women look wistful, and a little pissed off.

The United States of America is two days into the diagnosis of Nina Pham, the nurse who contracted Ebola while caring for Thomas Eric Duncan in a Dallas hospital. When I woke up yesterday morning, Pham’s diagnosis was being subjected to incantation by newscasters on all the cable news channels:

Do we know if Ebola is airborne? Do you support the closing of U.S. borders? Will this issue be used politically in the upcoming elections? What went wrong?

By the time I got downstairs to get my name badge for the conference, there were two local affiliates interviewing people about Ebola vaccines. De Groot had been working on one for the past five years, and a U.S. Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases researcher named Les Dupuy told the cameras that scientists were trying to do as much as they could as quickly as they could — trying to find therapeutics for people already infected, trying to figure out applications for drugs already approved for other purposes by the FDA. This sounded familiar. The reporter, echoing the voices I’d heard on the TV in my room, called the process sluggish. This also sounded familiar.

The exchange sounded familiar because the images and words being used to serve up the story of this Ebola outbreak were strikingly similar to the ones that had been used in the early years of the AIDS epidemic. With Ebola, the pitch had been increasing since two American medical missionaries had arrived stateside for treatment. Now, with the first transmission in the U.S., the response was deafening.

As with AIDS, the information was confused. On Oct. 9, Centers for Disease Control director Tom Friedan laid a little of what he later called “the messaging” on the public: “I’ve been working in public health for 30 years. The only thing like this has been AIDS. And we have to work now so that this is not the world’s next AIDS.” Already like AIDS? Or in danger of becoming the next AIDS?

* * *

In April 1982, National Cancer Institute acting director Dr. Bruce Chabner spoke to the House Subcommittee on Health and the Environment about “Kaposi’s sarcoma/opportunistic infections/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.” This was almost a year after the CDC first reported the appearance in the United States of a “new syndrome” that was also being referred to as the “4H disease” (it seemed to target heroin users, hemophiliacs, Haitians and homosexuals) and “GRID” (gay-related immunodeficiency); it was three months before the CDC settled on the name AIDS. Can you see the confusion? “While the illness seems to be concentrated among homosexual men, bisexual and heterosexual men, as well as women, are involved as well. Therefore,” Chabner said, the new syndrome was “of concern to all Americans.”