After the total chaos and volatile nature of the market this week, Cramer can't blame investors who have lost faith in stocks, but he urged them not to give up.

"Here I am telling you, yet again, that if you protect yourself with limit orders, if you use weakness to put some of your capital to work, not run from the market, you can use your money to make money in stocks, and that's not something you can say about cash," the "Mad Money" host said.

The market is now faced with the end of the Fed's period of accommodation, and it could happen as soon as next month. And unless China totally implodes or there is some horrendous credit event that brings down brokerages around the world, Cramer is tempted to say to just get the rate hike over with so investors can go back to focusing on the fundamentals of companies.

Until then, the market will hang on every word about the Fed, and it will only get worse before it gets better. With this in mind, Cramer shared his game plan of events and stocks he will be watching next week.

Friday: Nonfarm payroll report

Cramer considers this to be the single most important piece of domestic data before the Fed's open market committee meeting on Sept. 15 and 16.

If the market is strong going into this number and there is strong job creation and no turmoil overseas, then Cramer expects to hear an outcry from members of the Fed that the Fed's hand is forced. That means the market could tank when this happens.

Read MoreCramer game plan: Prep for more selloff next week



Metal and mining stocks also took a horrendous beating this year, and even after they rebounded this week they are still in rough shape. However, Cramer saw that there was one portion of the metals complex that could have been overshot to the downside and could have a pulse again.

"I'm talking about perhaps the most hated group in the market, now that oil has taken off. I am talking about—are you ready skeedaddy—the steel makers," Cramer said.

That is why he turned to Bruce Kamich, a chartered market technician who is a professor at Baruch College and a colleague of Cramer's at RealMoney.com.

Kamich thinks this sector is worth watching because the steel makers have come down to such low levels. Significantly lower share prices and big layoffs convinced Kamich that these players could be close to a bottom.

Looking at the daily chart of the Market Vectors Steel ETF, called SLX, Kamich pointed out that the SLX just retested its 2009 lows of $22 this week. However, that low held and the ETF started to bounce back. And while the steel ETF has been on a downtrend, Kamich thinks that if the SLX can rally above $26 and hold, then that could be a very good sign.