Time to reunite and do something good for the community.

A bunch of people will be gathering for an all-class reunion from John F. Nuner School from 6 to 11 p.m. Saturday at the Potawatomi Park Conservatory, Mishawaka Avenue.

The organizers are Teresa McChesney Cook, Janet Yeager Maciulski, Paula Yeager Canarecci, Sue Yeager Hubler, Jan Scott Rhodes, Linda Sterchi-Grimes and Linda Wilson Pierson.

About 75 people attended the reunion last year. They raised about $1,000 for the Botanical Society.

"You never forget the kids you grew up with," Teresa said. And the River Park neighborhood was one big happy family. That's why the reunion was so popular.

How do you follow a successful evening? Why not another reunion? It is $15 per person, $25 for a couple. Food and beverages will be available for a small charge. Throw in raffles, music from Bryan Barr and photo displays.

The funds raised will be used to develop a sensory garden in the park. Janet Maciulski is a member of the reunion committee and secretary for the Botanical Society. Janet came up with the idea for the garden, which will be named for D.J. Milliken, a special needs adult who lived in River Park. D.J. died in February.

Janet said D.J.'s father, Kenneth "Doc" Milliken is a South Bend police officer and he has patrolled River Park for years. Everyone knows Doc.

RSVP by Wednesday by calling 574-235-9442, or join the Nuner Knights Reunite Facebook page.

• • •

Two local students were recently selected to the National Society of High School Scholars. Nicholas R. Blasko, of Marian High School, and Benjamin M. Wachs, of Penn High, were recognized for their leadership, scholarship and community commitment.

Nicholas is the son of Angela Blasko, of Bristol, and Ryan Blasko, of Mishawaka. Nicholas is a junior and enjoys science and medicine. He was also selected for the National Academy of Future Physicians and Medical Scientists Award of Excellence.

Benjamin is a junior at Penn and the son of Ron and Melissa Wachs, of Mishawaka. His goal is to enter the animation field and to work for Disney, Pixar or another giant in that field.

• • •

James G. Hiatt, president and CEO of First State Bank of Middlebury, will be retiring at the beginning of 2015. He will continue to serve on the board of directors of the corporation and the bank.

James has served as president since 1982. Under his leadership, the bank grew in assets and offices. There will soon be an office in South Bend.