They open the box

Jessica Scheerer and Jack Staley discuss their woes in "Once Upon a Pandora's Box." (Republican Eagle photos by John R. Russett)

Just five weeks in to a new school year and the Red Wing High School is set to deliver the fall play. “Once Upon a Pandora’s Box” debuts Wednesday Oct. 8 at 5:30 p.m. The play continues Friday Oct. 10 with a final performance Sunday Oct. 12.

Described as clever and cute by director Tim Bowes, the children’s comedy written by Monica Flory dabbles into the mythical characters of fairytales – all coming to life through a child’s perspective.

“Pandora’s Box, if you will, is where the characters come to life,” Bowes said.

Once upon a time in New York City, a young girl named Tabitha and her brother, Louis, discover a box sitting in the hall of their apartment. Curious, she opens the box allowing five imprisoned fairy tale villains to escape.

Free at last, the dastardly villains begin to wreck the apartment, but when they discover that writing in Tabitha’s notebook will give them control of other fictional characters, things get really dicey.

In charge of the play are Bowes and directing partner Greg Grinager. The two high school English teachers are tag-teaming the production. The play marks their directing debut.

Bowes has a background in theater, working with both the Sheldon and Phoenix Theatres. This play marks the first time Grinager has done anything with theater, Bowes said, noting directing the fall play was Grinager’s idea in the first place ; he wanted to try something new.

“We picked it up and ran with it,” Bowes said. “It’s pretty vibrant, it’s alive and well.”

Thrilled with the play choice, Bowes said the experience has been hilarious and just a lot of fun amongst the chaos of a new school year.

“You may know Grinager as the mythology instructor,” Bowes said. “That obviously tapped a vain for us.”

The story is about a little girl writing stories, he explained. “As English teachers we liked the concept about children writing stories.”

Within the dialogue there is commentary about what makes a good story and Bowes added it just fit the English teacher concept pretty well.

“It’s really a witty play,” he said. “I’m well over 50 and a children’s play is making Grinager and I laugh at every rehearsal.”

Sixteen students auditioned the second week into the school year and 16 students complete the cast. “The performance will be fantastic with the dedication of some of our seniors that are in this production,” he said. “They are wonderful.”

Tickets are $2 for adults, $1 for students.

Cast List:

Tabitha- Jessica Scheerer

Louis- Jack Staley

Big Bad Wolf- Foster Johnson

Evil Queen- Maria Pearson

Wicked Witch- Alice Bygd

Rumplestiltskin- Calli Owens

Fairy- Krista Emery

Esperella- Mandie Gade

Angella- Emma Cory

Beautella- Erin Jezierski

Translator/Reporter- Kennedy Kerins

Chorus- Rachel Jacobsen, Lexie Christianson, Zoey Adams, Dakota Erickson

If you go...

What: The Red Wing High School present the fall play “Once Upon a Pandora’s Box.”

When: Wednesday Oct. 8 at 5:30 p.m.; Friday Oct. 10 at 7 p.m. and Sunday Oct. 12 at 1:30 p.m.

Where: Red Wing High School Little Theater

Cost: $2 adults, $1 students