A Southern institution, where teenagers used to circle their cars as a place to been seen on Friday and Saturday nights, is getting a new look.

Shoney’s will revamp its menus and remodel its restaurants as part of a revitalization effort spearheaded by new Chairman and CEO David Davoudpour.

Davoudpour bought the company in 2007 and immediately halted franchising efforts, Director of Franchise Sales Terri Harof said.

“He stopped franchising because he wanted to fix the brand before he franchised it,” she said.

Shoney’s had only 282 restaurants nationwide when Davoudpour bought the company. During its peak years in the late 1990s, the chain had over 1,300 locations.

Harof said Davoudpour systematically improved integral parts of the brand, such as the menu, buffet bar and general layout.

“He started from the bottom and worked his way up,” she said.

The changes to the Shoney’s brand focus on store appearances and the menu.

“The brand achieved its place as an American icon with fresh quality food at a great value and we cannot wait to show it off to a new generation,” Davoudpour said in a press release.

Shoney’s will add chicken wings, chicken club sandwiches, chicken florentine, and grilled white fish to its menu, and remove turkey burgers and chicken salad sandwiches.

Harof said the changes fit naturally into the Shoney’s brand.

“Really our theme is American food with southern hospitality. That’s who we’ve always been,” she said.

Some of the changes come from customer requests, Harof said.

“Eric Cleveland, our executive chef, keeps his pulse on trends, and we also listen to our customers. If they’re on Facebook saying, ‘I miss this’ or ‘Why don’t you have that,’ we’re listening,” she said.

Harof said the restaurant will also focus on providing healthier options.

“It’s not freezer to fryer, it’s fresh, great food,” she said.

The property where Shoney’s Columbia restaurant is located was sold in 2014 for $1 million to Steve Bostleman, who owns several other properties on Carmack Boulevard.

Bostleman said he had no comment on his plans for the property.

Harof said the change in ownership will not affect Shoney’s.

“There’s been no discussion. We’ve been there and we plan on staying there,” she said.

The Columbia location will be updated in the future.

“The ultimate goal is for all restaurants to be remodeled,” Harof said. “Not all will be updated right away and it depends on demographics. We’ll be going store by store.”

Plans for the redesign include a full bar and flat screen TVs.

“The plan is to bring a whole new look to Shoney’s. The colors are vibrant and it’s modern,” Harof said. “Our customers love the new look, and we love the new look.”