As more potential patients have become eligible for mental health coverage under the Affordable Care Act a nationwide shortage of psychiatrists has become more apparent, especially locally.

“More people are seeking care now that they are insured. They have access to it and that’s stretching doctors’ case loads,” John Jansen the Director of Kenosha County Human Services said.

The shortage is worse in Kenosha than Wisconsin as a whole, data shows. The ratio of mental health providers to population is 1 to 1,075 in Kenosha. Statewide that ratio is better at 1 to 623.

Dr. Vanessa Chang, a psychiatrist with Aurora Behavioral Health Services said the demand has been steady even before the health care law changes.

“There are not a lot of psychiatrists who want to come down to Kenosha and Racine. The ones that are already here, they’ve been practiceing for decades. They have patient loads built up for decades,” Chang said.

Providers have been trying other methods of stretching resources, including having psychiatrists advise primary care doctors who have patients with mental issues and telepsychiatry, using technology like Skype to video conference with patients.

“The patients don’t like to talk to someone on the television,” Chang said. “There is the option and the resource when they can’t get into see someone.”

Jansen recently advised the County Board on the shortage and wanted to emphazise that people have options and access to care.

“I didn’t want people to be left with the impression that because of our stretched resources that folks do not have access to care. If you have been identified as someone who needs help, we’re going to get you that help,” Jansen said.

The County Board has been waiting to act on the shortage pending a study by Human Services, expected later this year. Kenosha County needs other people besides doctors. Over the last 10 months Human Services has been conducting a nationwide recruiting effort for psychiatric nurse practitioners. Allowing allied professions like physician assistants who have psychiatric training to prescibe mental health medications also helps.

Supervisor Anita Johnson wants the county to partner with Gateway Technical College for a fast track certification for people who already have medical training to go into psychiatry and be a resource for the county.

A shortage in psychiatrists was news to Jasmine Zeidan, a senior at Tremper High School who also serves as the youth in governance member for county board. Zeidan had considered a psychology degrees as a dead end.

“I know a lot of people don’t like to major in psychology because they don’t know what to do with it,” Zeidan said. “A lot of high schoolers, that I know, are trying to get a job that is more practical that they know will get them income.”

In fact, psychiatrists are less likely to accept private insurance, medicaid or any kind of health coverage opting to take private pay, according to Sita Diehl, Director of State Policy and Advocacy the National Alliance on Mental Illness.

“The reimbursement doesn’t reflect the added time and documentation needed that other doctors don’t have to do,” Diehl said.

For Kenosha psychiatrist Dr. Ashok Shah, the reimbursement is an issue, but it doesn’t discourage him from from practicing.

“If you didn’t love it you wouldn’t do it,” Shah said.