AUSTIN — Supporters of a state-federal program providing health coverage for children of the working poor have their fingers crossed that Congress will keep it alive.

Funding for the Children’s Health Insurance Program expires in the fall.

If Congress fails to act, the families of 335,000 Texas youngsters who currently enjoy enviable benefits and a wide choice of doctors under CHIP would have to seek coverage for their children in the Affordable Care Act’s state health insurance exchanges, child advocates have warned.

They said benefits packages offered in the exchanges, or marketplaces, are not so kid-friendly. Also, marketplace plans probably would charge low-income families a lot more for the children’s coverage than the modest premiums and co-pays they pay now, said CHIP proponents.

Congress’ inaction poses a problem for state budget writers and health care providers. They said that while CHIP has strong political backing, they can never be sure what will happen in Washington’s bitterly divided atmosphere.

From the state, there have been no cries for Congress to kill the program. Begun in 1997, it allows states either to add children to their Medicaid programs or cover them using private insurance. Texas does the latter.

While state GOP leaders fiercely opposed adding more poor adults to Medicaid as the federal health law encourages, they have mounted no resistance to Congress’ funding CHIP beyond Sept. 30.

Last fall, before he left office, former Gov. Rick Perry wrote to congressional leaders in support of continued funding.

“States have considerably more flexibility in operating their CHIP programs than Medicaid programs,” he said.

In a wave at Obamacare’s marketplace plans, Perry said “there appears to be no immediately viable alternative proposed for covering CHIP recipients.”

While Gov. Greg Abbott hasn’t taken a position on continued federal funding of CHIP, Senate Finance Committee Chairwoman Jane Nelson, R-Flower Mound, expects it to happen.

Nelson said through a spokeswoman that while the Affordable Care Act “is unsustainable,” she expects Congress to extend CHIP funding, “at least for now.”

Texas legislative leaders and health care providers said failure by Congress to act would put a nearly $2 billion dent in the next two-year state budget.

House and Senate Republican leaders assumed in their initial budgets that not only would federal funding of CHIP last through 2017, but a special bump in federal funding that starts this fall would continue as well. The increase is part of Obamacare.

In Texas, it would make 94 percent of the program federally funded. In the current state budget cycle, Washington covered 71 percent of CHIP’s cost.

“We’re hopeful,” said Anne Dunkelberg, a former Texas Medicaid official who has strongly promoted CHIP as associate director of the Center for Public Policy Priorities. It advocates for low- and middle-income Texans.

“If history is our guide, we always get much more bipartisan support for the Children’s Health Insurance Program,” she said.

In Washington, Senate Finance Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, said continued funding for CHIP is “must-do” legislation. Hatch was one of the program’s original authors.

GOP Rep. Joe Barton of Arlington, chairman emeritus of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, through which a CHIP bill would pass, said renewing the funding should be “pretty plain vanilla.”

Spokesman Sean Brown, while cautioning that deliberations have yet to begin, said Barton “is supportive of CHIP reauthorization.”

Staff writer Michael Marks in Washington contributed to this report.

Follow Robert T. Garrett on Twitter at @RobertTGarrett.