SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

While giving a speech to commemorate Iran’s Defense Industry Day on Saturday, Iranian President Hassan Rouhani declared that the nuclear deal agreed upon by world powers (US, UK, China, France, Germany) and the regime in Tehran only faces opposition from “warmongers” and “Zionists.”

“By our own political power, we reached an agreement, which all countries around the world confirm,” he said. “Only the Zionist regime (Israel) and warmongers in the US are against it.”

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Rouhani’s accusatory comments follow the same theme as the remarks uttered by President Obama in defense of the deal as of late.

He said earlier this month:

“Now, when I ran for president eight years ago as a candidate who had opposed the decision to go to war in Iraq, I said that America didn’t just have to end that war. We had to end the mindset that got us there in the first place. It was a mindset characterized by a preference for military action over diplomacy, a mindset that put a premium on unilateral U.S. action over the painstaking work of building international consensus, a mindset that exaggerated threats beyond what the intelligence supported.”

Obama, like Zarif, has also singled out Israel for its unified opposition to the deal. The President said earlier in August that “every nation in the world – with the exception of the Israeli government – has expressed support” for the accord.

American Jewish leaders have criticized the President’s comments, which the Anti-Defamation League said could be interpreted as “fueling and legitimizing anti-Semitic stereotypes out there that Jews are warmongers.”

Separately, during his speech on Saturday, Rouhani pledged to purchase and sell weaponry in direct violation of international sanctions against his country.

“We will purchase weapons from wherever we deem necessary and we are not waiting for anyone’s permission; if we deem necessary we will sell our weapons and we will do this without paying attention to any resolution,” he said in his address.

The Tehran regime’s President threatened war should the nuclear accord crumble under the weight of scrutiny. “Iran’s strategy is based on defense and deterrence… Diplomats should be backed by generals. If they fail, it is the generals’ turn to come forward,” he stated.

As part of Defense Industry day, Rouhani unveiled a new ballistic missile, called the Fateh 313, which has a 300 mile range and features sophisticated guidance technology, Iran’s state-run Sepah News reported. Regional officials have expressed concerns that the new missile technology could get into the hands of Iran’s proxies, including the Lebanon-based Hezbollah terror group, which could use the ballistic technology to hit any target in Israel.