UnitedHealthcare, the nation’s largest health insurer, which announced that it will likely leave the Affordable Care Act marketplace due to losses under the law, announced that it will stop paying sales commissions to health insurance agents who sell the company’s policies under the ACA.

The ACA marketplaces are the hallmark of President Obama’s signature health insurance law, and provide federal financial subsidies to attract uninsured people and low-income applicants.

UnitedHealthcare’s new corporate policy was emailed to insurance agents on Friday, and will go into effect Jan. 1 for most of the sates where the insurer sells ACA coverage.

Three weeks ago, UnitedHealthcare

The news means that insurance agents will not be paid for enrolling customers into ACA policies.

The public will still be able to enroll with Minnetonka, Minn.-based UnitedHealthcare for next year on their own or through the help of a volunteer “navigator.” However, insurance agents will have to decide whether they will work for a 2 percent commission through the end of December, and work for free next year to promote UnitedHealthcare insurance products.

Last week UnitedHealthcare’s CEO Stephen Hemsley signaled that entering the ACA marketplaces was a mistake. The company in November lowered its earnings forecast, stopped marketing ACA plans and warned it might stop selling ACA coverage in 2017.

United’s e-memo told agents it’s ending sales commissions for ACA plans as well as for individual plans sold off the exchange. The latter are identical to ACA plans but customers can’t receive federal subsidies. The changes do not affect UnitedHealthcare’s Medicare plans or its other lines of health insurance.

The following is the text of the UnitedHealthcare memo sent to agents:

Additional Changes Effective Jan. 1, 2016

Although UnitedHealthcare’s individual On-Exchange plans remain available in all 34 states marketed for 2016, it has been determined we need to further adjust commissions paid on these products.

Effective January 1, 2016, no commissions will be paid for any new UnitedHealthcare Individual On-Exchange (and Off-Exchange mirror plans*) enrollments received on or after this date, in most states. Please see state exceptions below.** The new commission schedules will be available on our Broker Portal on January 1, 2016.

Please keep in mind:

These changes do not affect UnitedHealthcare Medicare agreements or any other lines of UnitedHealthcare business. Only On-Exchange (and Off-Exchange mirror plans) individual health is affected.

UnitedHealthcare will continue to pay according to the commission schedule in effect at the time a plan was sold for all new 2016 On-Exchange plans (and Off-Exchange mirror plans) received December 31, 2015 and prior.

This change does not affect 2015 renewal commission rates which are unchanged from the 2015 schedules.

These changes do not affect our members, their networks, plan benefits or the servicing of their plans.

As insurance companies across the nation make adjustments in response to the evolving Marketplace, it is our sincere hope that you will continue to remain active in the health insurance market. Your knowledge and professional services are valued by consumers and carriers alike.

Thank you for your business and also your patience as we implement these changes.

*Mirror plans are those plans that are identical to On-Exchange Plans (same license, benefits, etc.) and are required to be offered Off Exchange.

**On-Exchange Individual health plan enrollments through UnitedHealthcare Benefits Plan of California, and UnitedHealthcare of New York, Inc. have no commission changes. Health Plan of Nevada, Inc. will move to no commission’s payable for Exchange business starting with business received on February 1, 2016 and after.