President Obama is hailing his Clean Power Plan as “the single most important step America has ever taken in the fight against global climate change.”

Obama is posing as the environment’s savior, just as he did in 2008, when he promised his presidency would mark “the moment when . . . the rise of the oceans began to slow and our planet began to heal.” Seven years later, that messianic claim is unmet, and Obama is scrambling for an environmental legacy.

Obama’s Clean Power Plan never had legislative support, even when his own party controlled both houses of Congress. Now he’s trying to impose it without Congress, an audacious ploy his old Harvard Law professor Laurence Tribe condemns as “burning the Constitution.”

As his presidency wanes, Obama is desperately trying to burnish his eco-credentials with environmental zealots and the leftists at the United Nations and in the European Union. But here at home, his plan would be a disaster economically, which explains its failure in Congress.

Hillary Clinton is pledging to support the plan, while Republicans vying for their party’s presidential nomination are vowing to oppose it.

The Clean Power Plan will be a fiercely debated issue in coal-consuming swing states like Ohio, Illinois and Pennsylvania — where the race for the White House is usually decided.

Obama’s Environmental Protection Agency is imposing the Clean Power Plan on all 50 states, requiring each state to close down coal-burning electric plants and shift to other sources of electricity — natural-gas-burning plants, nuclear plants, solar- and wind-power generators — in order to reduce carbon emissions by one-third.

New York will be less affected because it gets almost all its electric power from nuclear, natural gas and hydro–electric plants.

But nationwide, about 40 percent of electric power is produced by coal plants. Forcing these utilities to close will burn consumers with higher electric bills.

It will also send hundreds of thousands of jobs a year up in smoke, as employers pay more to operate their businesses, according to Heritage Foundation economists.

And for what? The purported benefit is to avoid an imperceptible 0.02-degree-Celsius increase in global temperatures by the year 2100. That’s the official EPA estimate of the benefits of this Clean Power Plan. You’ve got to be kidding.

That’s what as many as 25 governors are saying, and they’re expected to file a lawsuit challenging the plan. They have a strong case.

Although the EPA bases its authority on the Clean Air Act of 1970, nothing in that law authorizes the agency to do more than require plants to use the best-available technology — like scrubbers — to reduce emissions.

Congress never authorized the EPA to force states to close coal plants and move on to nuclear, wind and solar-energy substitutes.

The president’s defenders say he has to act alone because the Congress is gridlocked. Nonsense. It’s not gridlock. It’s sanity that prevented Congress from acting. Lawmakers on both sides of the aisle are against the plan.

Obama’s EPA has tried several end-runs around Congress, creatively interpreting the 45-year-old Clean Air Act to suit its agenda.

But it hasn’t always gotten away with it. In a stinging US Supreme Court rebuke of the administration’s attempt to restrict mercury emissions, Justice Antonin Scalia wrote that “it is not rational, never mind ‘appropriate’ to impose billions of dollars in economic costs” when the benefits are so uncertain.

It’s likely the court would say the same about the plan announced on Monday.

Defenders of the new regulation predict the price of renewable energy will fall, but so far that is pie-in-the-sky speculation. Like the president’s prediction that the average family would save $2,500 because of ObamaCare.

But long before the Supreme Court weighs in on this new plan, presidential politics is likely to determine its fate. Another example of how high the stakes are in 2016.

Betsy McCaughey is a senior fellow at the London Center for Policy Research and author of “Beating Obamacare.”