Dena Mendelsohn

December 24, 2014

Over 15 million Americans stand to benefit from a strong health insurance rate review system, with the number growing each year. But in many states the rate review laws—and how they are carried out—fall short. Health insurance is one of the most expensive purchases consumers make, it is vital to the financial and physical health of their families, and it is required under the Affordable Care Act.

Therefore, it is important for insurance regulators to ensure that consumers pay a fair price for their coverage. At the recent National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) meeting, we, along with two other organizations, presented a set of recommendations designed to strengthen the rate review process at both the state and federal level so that all consumers will be assured fairly priced health insurance.

The Affordable Care Act introduced new, important protections for consumers, while at the same time retaining a large role for state policy and regulation. This framework resulted in inconsistent policies across states. States that expanded Medicaid sit adjacent to states that did not. Some states operate their own insurance Marketplace, while consumers in other states use the federal Marketplace.

Health Insurance Rate Review Across States

The process of health insurance rate review is even harder to track across states. The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) designated all but five states as “effective rate review states.” Although this suggests the health insurance rate review process is working in most states, the fact is that truly effective rate review only happens when strong laws are enacted and carried out assertively and openly on behalf of consumers. In fact, very few states have strong laws and review processes, and HHS has not stepped in to perform oversight or supersede state authority when necessary.

In some states, regulators have politicized the health insurance rate review process. In Florida, the state legislature prevented the insurance department from reviewing the rates of Marketplace plans for two years. In Ohio and Florida, press releases describing 2015 rates were widely criticized as biased and misleading.

Both of these states are designated “effective rate review” states by the federal government and HHS has not stepped in. Not only is the designation of “effective” too lenient, but HHS is not complying with its obligation to make rate filings public so that consumers and others may comment before the rates go into effect. Consumers deserve better.

To start, we encourage immediate expansion of the number of health insurance rate proposals that are reviewed by the states and by HHS. According to federal regulation, proposed rate increases above ten percent must be reviewed, but states have the option of selecting a lower threshold, subject to HHS approval.

California and Oregon have enacted laws that give them authority to review all rates, but most states use the federal threshold. Ten percent is a very high ceiling (Figure 1), and long-term annual growth in per capita health spending growth is well below ten percent, as is wage growth for consumers. It’s time for the federal government to lower the review threshold and raise the bar on rate regulation.

Figure 1: Review Should Occur at a Lower Threshold

We believe that transparency is best for consumers. True to that belief, in states with prior approval authority and an active review process—such as Oregon, New York, and Maryland—final health insurance rates were in many cases lower than those initially proposed. Alternatively, an active purchaser state Marketplace can also provide robust scrutiny of rates.

In California, for plan year 2015 the state’s exchange, Covered California used an actuarial consultant and aggressively negotiated with carriers before choosing products. Rates proposed included some reductions from 2014, and on average rates increased only around 4 percent.

The Public’s Access to Rate Review Information

We also urge HHS, the states, and the NAIC to review practices that limit the public’s access to rate review information and inhibit public participation in the rate review process. Currently, most states and HHS allow a trade secret exemption by carriers wishing to shield their rate filing from public scrutiny.

On the basis of this exemption, HHS withheld 2015 rate filings from the public despite its legal obligations and a Freedom of Information Act request from Consumers Union and over-seventy co-signors; this refusal is now the subject of a separate lawsuit. The trade secret exemption is designed to protect businesses from having key business and manufacturing details revealed to competitors for fear they will be stolen. Rate setting is far different from product development and actuarial calculations are not trade secrets.

The fact is that several states, including New York and California, do not permit rate filings to hide “trade secrets,” but instead require public disclosure of the complete justification for rate increases. These states feature robust, competitive health insurance markets.

We urge the NAIC to examine and report evidence regarding withholding or redacting filings for trade secret reasons, including documenting the experiences in states that do not permit this exemption. We are confident that use of the exemption in this context only protects insurers from public scrutiny but not from any actual threat from competitors.

We need a rate review system that is transparent and open, regardless of whether the state or federal government is conducting the review. Ensuring fair health insurance rates and public confidence in them requires transparency and accountability. To that end:

We support state or federal regulatory authority requiring prior approval of premium rates before they go into effect and/or an active purchaser review process by the Marketplaces.

The standard for rate review must permit rate approval or disapproval based on a range of factors designed to determine if rates are excessive or underpriced.

Rate filings should be standardized for all insurers and should provide detailed justification and supporting documentation for all rate increases or decreases.

We call for a state commitment to transparency for the public that includes: policyholder notification at the beginning of the rate review period, access to the full rate filings as well as consumer-friendly summaries, a public comment period, and public hearings where appropriate and viable.

HHS must make publicly available all rate review justifications, and underlying data, submitted to it.

There must be a commitment to complete transparency on all levels—state and federal—which means prohibiting the use of the trade secret exemption by carriers.

The integrity of the review process and public confidence in the validity of health insurance rates depend on it.

Author’s note: Dena Mendelsohn, JD, MPH, is a Health Policy Analyst at the West Coast Office of Consumers Union, the advocacy and policy division of nonprofit Consumer Reports. Her health insurance rate review work in California is funded by a grant from the California Department of Managed Health Care (DMHC), as part of the federal Health Insurance Premium Grant Program.