ARTICLE SPONSORED BY LINFIELD COLLEGE

As the Affordable Care Act of 2010 continues to produce sweeping changes across America's health care industry, one development has been an increasing reliance on nurses to not only deliver care to patients, but to also accept higher levels of leadership responsibility within their respective organizations.

"Changes are happening in the healthcare system that require nurses to practice with a focus on care coordination, health promotion, and disease prevention," says Dr. Melissa Jones, Associate Professor of Nursing at Linfield. "Advancing their education is an important way that nurses can prepare for expanded roles in managing health, improving access to quality healthcare, and enhancing health outcomes."

The largest segment of the nation's healthcare workforce, the more than 3 million nurses in the U.S. have the largest collective impact on care delivery. After the ACA's passage, the national Institute of Medicine (IOM) published its influential "Future of Nursing" report, prescribing the advancement of the nursing profession to establish expanded roles for nurses in delivering care, and in developing and managing healthcare systems and policies governing their use.

A key IOM recommendation was for nurses to achieve higher levels of education and training. Linfield College, already a leader in nursing education, responded to this challenge by offering a rigorous curriculum that emphasizes leadership and professional growth in the online . The BSN, or Bachelor of Science in Nursing, enables registered nurses to expand their career opportunities by equipping them with the knowledge and skills needed to succeed in a complex healthcare environment that is constantly changing.

Linfield's RN to BSN program is designed for those currently working in the nursing profession. The nurses attending the program are licensed Registered Nurses and many are working in acute care and community-based care settings. The bachelor's completion program contains a focus on community, population health, and leadership, building on their existing nursing foundation. One of only two colleges in Oregon offering an RN to BSN program, Linfield's approach is unique, as it includes liberal arts courses, along with advanced nursing courses. "The liberal arts emphasis teaches critical and reflective thinking which we know are essential in nursing," explains Jones.

Designed to keep pace with constant changes in healthcare, Linfield's curriculum is developed based on key recommendations from the IOM and the American Association of Colleges of Nursing. In addition to treating illness, a major focus is on promoting health and preventing disease, while also coordinating and improving the care of individuals with chronic conditions. Jones says, "Improving the care for chronic conditions and their complications is a critical global health issue. Education and coordination of care is a tremendous challenge and opportunity, and that's where nurses can help make the process more efficient."

Linfield also emphasizes learning while serving vulnerable, disadvantaged populations, both domestically and abroad. All Linfield nursing students are encouraged to perform their clinical, experiential work in areas of healthcare for which they have a passion, and relationships with international organizations enable Linfield to place students in valuable service learning experiences in countries like Costa Rica, Peru and Guatemala.

The RN to BSN program requires four semesters of nursing courses, with 6 credits per semester. A balanced credit requirement and flexible, online format allows working nurses to maintain their employment while attending the program.

"We really want each BSN student to find the right fit for themselves," says Jones. "We focus on community health, liberal arts and international learning, and we try to inspire strong critical thinkers who can contribute in every situation."

The BSN educational track also accomplishes an important step toward becoming a Nurse Practitioner, which requires a master's or doctorate degree. With a nationwide shortage of primary care physicians, particularly in rural areas, Nurse Practitioners are filling the void.

With the opportunity to engage in local or international service learning experiences in the community, Linfield's RN to BSN students can focus on promoting health in a variety of diverse settings. Their future career growth will benefit from a broader understanding of how health is impacted by socioeconomic status, education, culture, the environment, and more. As they take that knowledge into their practice, they make influential changes that can be transformative for health in the community.

Those interested in more information or applying for admission can visit www.linfield.edu/dce/rn-to-bsn.html or call 800-452-4176.