McLaren's acquisition of Karmanos expands reach, lifts cancer center's finances

The addition of Detroit-based Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute to McLaren Health Care, with its 10 hospitals scattered over eastern, central and northern Michigan, is expected to create one of the state's largest oncology hospital providers, with more than 12,000 patients and 165,000 outpatient visits per year.

The acquisition means patient referrals for advanced cancer care to Karmanos in downtown Detroit from McLaren hospitals and 14 outpatient centers could significantly increase — primarily with stem cell and bone marrow transplants, rare and complex cancer surgeries, and patients involved in early human phase-one clinical trials, said hospital officials and outside experts.



"We will have a significant influx of patients coming downtown," said Gerold Bepler, M.D., Karmanos' CEO.



For Flint-based McLaren, the addition of Karmanos is expected to help further develop its lucrative oncology program, which has been a major focus the past several years. To Karmanos, the deal is a financial lifeline because it comes with pledges for capital improvements and a way out of its ailing financial position.



The deal with McLaren has been blessed by the Karmanos family, and doctors and downtown staff likely will welcome the $80 million McLaren has pledged to upgrade facilities downtown and in two suburban clinics.



The business model



Bepler said McLaren also will help Karmanos expand its geographic reach for patients seeking advanced patient care by referring cancer patients to Karmanos' cutting-edge research programs not generally available at community hospitals.



Under the agreement signed last week, Karmanos — one of the nation's 41 comprehensive cancer centers — agreed to be acquired by McLaren for an unspecified amount. The transaction also provides Karmanos with "a substantial capital investment over a multiyear period" to fund clinical trials, basic and translational research programs, said Bepler.



"We will jointly develop care plans so patients who are not able to come to Detroit will be cared for (at McLaren hospitals)," Bepler said. "It is difficult for (extremely sick) patients to travel more than 30 or 40 miles."



Finding opposition



But the plan doesn't come without opposition; board members of Detroit Medical Center and Wayne State University, which have business and clinical relationships with Karmanos, have voiced dissent. Sources say Wayne State and DMC may react to the change by expanding relationships with other health organizations.



The agreement, though, is based on Karmanos continuing its long-standing relationships with the WSU School of Medicine and the DMC, from which it leases space. Karmanos does not plan to move from the DMC campus, Bepler said.



DMC CEO Joe Mullany said DMC, which sold its oncology operations to Karmanos in 2005, will explore developing additional oncology affiliations with other providers. DMC was acquired by for-profit Tenet Healthcare Corp. in June after Vanguard Health Systems, another for-profit chain, took over DMC in 2012.



"We are very disappointed in the decision of the (Karmanos) board and the way it was handled," Mullany said. "We are aware several board members are opposed. (The affiliation) is detrimental to cancer care in Detroit."



Sources have told Crain's that Wayne State medical school officials were not consulted about the deal and felt blindsided by it.



Voting against the agreement were Karmanos' Wayne State board members: Valerie Parisi, M.D., Wayne State's medical school dean; M. Roy Wilson, Wayne State president; and Debbie Dingell, Wayne State Board of Governors' chair, sources told Crain's.



Wayne State officials declined to comment, as did several other large cancer hospital providers in Southeast Michigan. They include Henry Ford Health System and the University of Michigan Health System, which operates the state's only other comprehensive cancer center.



Sources also told Crain's that Wayne State could explore a closer relationship with Henry Ford. But sources said it was unlikely Wayne State would sever its ties with Karmanos or withdraw its comprehensive cancer center institutional sponsorship.





"Some people are afraid of the future, the unknowns," he said. "This is a step forward" for Karmanos.



Opportunity for growth



Incarnati said the nation's only multihospital system with a comprehensive cancer center can now grow financially stronger and offer patients care alternatives as pharmaceutical and medical device companies contract with the system to test their products.



Cancer is the second-leading cause of death in the U.S., and some 20,570 people are predicted to die this year in Michigan from cancer. In 2013, the American Cancer Society estimates, 57,560 people in Michigan will be newly diagnosed with cancer, including 8,140 with breast cancer, 9,490 with prostate cancer, and 8,250 with lung cancer.



Sources told Crain's that McLaren has pledged to spend $80 million over four years to also upgrade Karmanos' downtown hospital and expand its two outpatient centers at the Weisberg Cancer Center in Farmington Hills and the Monroe Cancer Center, a joint venture with Mercy Memorial Hospital System and Toledo, Ohio-based Promedica.



"We will double the size of the Weisberg Center, add new radiation oncology equipment and make major investments in clinical trials," Bepler said.



Nick Karmanos, the son of Barbara Ann Karmanos, said his family fully supports Karmanos' decision to join McLaren. Karmanos' mother is Barbara Ann Karmanos, the cancer center's namesake, who died from breast cancer in 1986.



"Our commitment to Detroit has never been stronger. The efforts will be centered here forever," Karmanos said. "My family is excited, and this (affiliation will) strengthen the mission for advanced cancer care in Detroit."



The acquisition isn't McLaren's first attempt at combining forces with another organization to expand its cancer care business.



Justin Klamerus, M.D., president and medical director of McLaren Cancer Institute, said McLaren has been building its systemwide cancer program the last decade with Michigan State University, but it was really only the past three years when everything began to gel. The MSU partnership ended last year.



"Our cancer service line is the most integrated one we have with McLaren," Klamerus said. "Most of our oncologists are employed (22). We are aligned with best practice guidelines" and electronic medical record systems.



Klamerus said McLaren has a growing network of 14 outpatient centers that provide medical oncology. Centered around its hospitals, other centers are planned, he said.



"This partnership will add great quality and infrastructure," he said. "Patients will get care where they live, and we will integrate that with academic programs through Karmanos" and Wayne State.



On its own, Klamerus said, it might take two decades for a community health system like McLaren to build what Karmanos brings with its subspecialty expertise, clinical trial portfolio and Wayne State affiliation.



"All the physicians are excited about this because it allows us all to take care to the next level of opinion," he said, adding it is much easier to collaborate on medical consultations.



"You are talking with your partners, you are sending emails, making a phone call" and conducting video conferences, Klamerus said.



Why now?





Related Links