Point guard added 13 pounds during offseason

It's been only four months since the Colorado men's basketball team last played a game, but the changes in Dominique Collier are noticeable.

The Buffaloes' sophomore point guard is more muscular than he was in March.

He speaks with more confidence, too.

And, on the court? Some within the program say that Collier's playing better than at any time since coming to CU a year ago.

Coming off a 16-18 season, CU is in the midst of a pivotal offseason. It's a pivotal one for Collier, in particular, as he hopes to be the standout point guard this team needs.

"I think it's gone pretty well," Collier said of his offseason. "I've worked a lot on trying to get my weight up and just worked a lot on my skills ... and trying to elevate my game as much as I can before the season starts."

The 6-foot-2 Collier had a trying freshman season, going through typical freshman bumps, and then some. His year included a couple of off-the-court disciplinary issues and two injuries (ankle and wrist) that bothered him for much of the season.

Collier finished the season averaging 4.7 points, 1.7 rebounds and 1.5 assists — all numbers the Buffs hope improve dramatically this season. In an effort to improve those numbers — and CU's win total — Collier's first priority was adding muscle to his wiry frame.

This past week, he weighed in at 185 pounds, a 13-pound gain from the end of the season.

Advertisement

"It was a big leap and (strength coach James) Hardy helped me a lot with gaining my weight," Collier said. "He told me to eat a lot and he's been pushing me as hard as he can in here. I've been working and trying to improve on that because it was a big setback for me last year, because I feel like the physicality was overwhelming for me last year."

Collier said he hasn't lost any of his quickness with the added weight, but certainly feels a difference.

"In practice, I feel like I'm stronger and not getting pushed around as much," he said. "It's just allowing me to get where I want to go on the court."

On the court, Collier has worked tirelessly on his shooting and ball-handling.

CU was 11th in the Pac-12 in assist-to-turnover ratio the last two years after ranking last in 2012-13. So, ball handling is a point of emphasis for everybody on the roster. It's of particular important to Collier, though, since he could have the ball in his hands more than anyone else.

"Dom could be one of those guys with a three or four-to-one assist-to-turnover ratio," CU head coach Tad Boyle said. "I think he's that good and has that kind of potential.

Although coaches have limited time with players in the offseason, Boyle has been impressed with Collier's play this summer.

"He's being more aggressive with the ball and he's looking to shoot it, looking to score it a little bit," Boyle said. "I want you to have an aggressive mentality and you have to be a threat to score, whether at the rim or shooting the 3 and he's shown that.

"Confidence is a key for any player, but especially for Dom. When he plays with confidence and he plays with aggressiveness, he's as good as there is."

Some of Collier's confidence and aggressiveness has been gained through workouts at the Chauncey Billups Elite Basketball Academy. He has worked with Billups, a former CU and NBA star, and trainer Nick Graham, as well as older players, such as Jimmer Fredette of the San Antonio Spurs and Iowa State point guard Monte Morris.

"It's been a lot of great competition and a good test for me to show what I can do and then evaluate how I go against those players," Collier said. "I'm going to be going against good players like that when the season starts."

Seeking advice from Billups, who was a point guard, and others, Collier believes he's emerging as a leader, too.

Collier still has more than three months to get ready for his sophomore season, and it's time he needs, he said, but so far, he likes the path he's on this offseason.

"I still need to work on my body more and my game more," he said. "That's what the rest of the summer and the fall is for in the next couple of months. I'm just taking this time and using it as much as I can to get better before the season starts."

Perhaps just as pleasing to Collier is that his teammates are putting in just as much work as he is this offseason.

"We're just all working hard together this year and I think it's showing on the court," he said.

Brian Howell: howellb@dailycamera.com, on Twitter: @BrianHowell33.