Today the national pro-life political action committee the Susan B. Anthony List Candidate Fund announced its endorsement of Mitch McConnell for U.S. Senate in Kentucky.

“The contrast between Mitch McConnell and Alison Grimes on life couldn’t be more stark,” said SBA List Candidate Fund President Marjorie Dannenfelser. “Alison Grimes is so extreme on abortion that she even supports painful late-term abortions after five months – more than halfway of pregnancy. It’s no wonder Alison Grimes has been endorsed by extreme abortion groups who only back candidates who support abortion on-demand, for any reason, paid for by the taxpayer.”

“Leader McConnell has a 100 percent pro-life voting record and has pledged to bring the Pain-Capable Unborn Child Protection Act to the floor for a vote when he becomes Majority Leader. This compassionate legislation is supported by the majority of Americans – women in higher numbers than men,” continued Dannenfelser. “Mitch McConnell will always stand up for Kentucky values and we are proud to endorse him in his re-election bid.”

McConnell is endorsed by National Right to Life and Kentucky Right to Life.

“No U.S. senator has done more for unborn children than Sen. Mitch McConnell,” said Carol Tobias, president of National Right to Life.

“Mitch McConnell is a stalwart defender of innocent human life and a tireless advocate for pro-life principles,” said Margie Montgomery, executive director of Kentucky Right to Life. “Pro-life voters need to come together to re-elect pro-life Sen. Mitch McConnell and defeat pro-abortion Alison Lundergan Grimes.”

Click here to sign up for daily pro-life news alerts from LifeNews.com

As reported by National Right to Life, “McConnell has been a key supporter of every major pro-life initiative to come before the U.S. Senate during his tenure, including current legislation to protect unborn children at 20 weeks, a point by which the unborn child is capable of experiencing great pain when being killed by dismemberment or other late abortion techniques.”

McConnell’s general election opponent Alison Lundergan Grimes is endorsed by EMILY’s List, a pro-abortion PAC that backs female Democrats who support abortion-on-demand. EMILY’s List labeled McConnell an “anti-choice obstructionist” for fighting back against the pro-abortion Obama agenda.

The 2012 elections were barely over before Planned Parenthood turned its attention to attacking McConnell. They recognize the asset he is to the pro-life movement in the Senate.

In February 2013, Planned Parenthood began running ads blasting McConnell for his support for Hobby Lobby in their legal challenge to the Obama Mandate.

However, despite McConnell’s proven record, some have falsely alleged that McConnell is somehow weak on pro-life issues. Nothing could be further from the truth.

McConnell’s GOP primary challenger Matt Bevin has misrepresented McConnell’s record, even claiming on his website that McConnell voted in favor of federal funding for abortion. Yet, time and time again, McConnell voted against abortion funding.

(McConnell’s voting record on pro-life issues is available here.)

McConnell voted for the pro-life Mexico City Policy. He voted to cut off funding to the UN Population Fund (UNFPA), which participates in the carrying out of China’s One-Child Policy that relies on forced abortions. He also voted to cut funding to Planned Parenthood, America’s largest abortion provider. McConnell has stood resolutely from the beginning against funding of abortion in Obamacare and its mandates that violate rights of conscience.