Whatever their reasons for returning to school, older students face different calculations when deciding how to pay for their education and what they can afford.

"If you are talking about changing careers and going to back to school to change careers, you have to run the numbers on it and determine the break-even point—how many years would it take you to get ahead compared to if you stay in your career," Jennings said.

Related: Credit Cards at College: Making Smart Choices from Day one

For people leaving the workforce to attend school, that calculation needs to include the income they will forego in addition to the direct tuition costs.

But not all the calculations are financial. For some older workers, returning to school is intended to enable them to pursue work that is fulfilling in nonfinancial ways. For those people, the calculations are more about what they can afford.

There are a number of financing and saving options for older students. Rich Polimeni, director of education saving programs at Bank of America Merrill Lynch, points out that 529 savings plans are for students of all ages. The contributions are even deductible from state taxes in over 20 states. Older students can also use any money remaining in children's 529 plans after they are finished with school, he said.

For people who are staying in their jobs and attending school part time, employers often have tuition assistance programs. Some lucky students may even get their full costs covered.

Older students may also have accumulated savings they can tap for school. And there are plenty of scholarships that are not based on financial need, and even some geared toward older students, at sites like studentscholarshipsearch.com.

Related: 4 Steps to Make College More Affordable

There is no age limit on applying for financial aid, so would be students can certainly complete the Free Application for Federal Student Aid when they apply. Tax credits like the Lifetime Learning Credit can also help if an older student meets the income requirements.

As a last resort, older students can take out loans, although the time horizon for repayment should be much shorter. There is nothing to be gained from carrying student loans into retirement. That said, federal Stafford loans may offer terms that are more favorable than private loans, and a nondependent student can borrow up to $12,500 for college and $20,500 for graduate school.