AMONG the gifts that come our way during Christmas, there is one that stands out as the most special. Hosts of the hit early morning program Unang Hirit on GMA now celebrating its 15th year, share with us the best Christmas gifts they have received.

Arnold Clavio

My dad, Alfredo, gave me a vinyl 45 record of Celeste Legazpi’s song “Gaano Kita Kamahal” in 1979 as a Christmas gift. It was also during that time that I started to play the guitar. My dad wanted to sing Celeste’s song to my mother, Nanay Julie, and he asked me to play the guitar as accompaniment. My dad died at the age of 50 due to liver cancer and there’s a part in the song that reminds me of him, “Ang ating buhay, mailkli aking hirang, kung kaya kailangan ang pagsuyong wagas kailanman (Life is short. Love with all your heart so there are no regrets later.).”

Rhea Santos

“I think the best gift my husband and I received for Christmas was the gift we gave ourselves—a Power Mac computer—where we store beautiful memories of the family. We don’t mind spending a lot on this because our computer holds photos and videos of us when we were starting out as a couple until now that we have two kids. We have decided to give something for the house that we will both use than giving personal gifts.”

Suzi Entrata-Abrera

“Anything that my husband gives me because I know how hard it is to think of a gift for me. Sometimes he texts our friends to ask around. I appreciate the effort.”

Ivan Mayrina

“I remember receiving a bicycle as a Christmas gift when I was nine years old. That was the beginning of my love affair with two-wheeled machines. Bikes just give you that sense of freedom. Feeling the wind on your face and the feeling of gasping for breath after pedaling fast is just pure pain and bliss at the same time. To this day I love bikes and I own three.”

Lyn Ching Pascual

“Every Christmas that I’m with my family is already a gift. As long as they are healthy, safe, and that we are together, I am happy and fulfilled. No material possession can replace that feeling of satisfacaction and happiness.”

Susan Enriquez

“Family get together is the best Christmas gift for me.”

Connie Sison

“Although my mom passed away just last April 23 of this year… I will always be grateful to God for giving us seven more wonderful years with her from the time she woke up from her coma. It will forever be the best Christmas gift from God to our family.”

Love Añover

“It may be a cliché, but for me, everyday is Christmas. And my life is the best Christmas gift God has given me. I am grateful and blessed that my journey has been a wonderful one. And I am always in awe each day. Thank you Lord for everything and Merry Christmas to you, too.”

Luane Dy

“My mom would be the best gift ever plus the turntable which Carlo gave as Christmas gift last year. Super tagal ko nang gustong magkaroon noon, nung bata pa ako gusto ko na ng turntable because I love jazz and blues. Mga lumang music (I've wanted one since I was a kid because I've always loved old music.).”

Lhar Santiago

“I really can’t think of the best Christmas gift I have received but even simple gifts like frying pans and a dozen hangers can make me happy. Spiritually, the best gift I have received is the saving grace of Jesus Christ, the reason why we have Christmas.”

Tonipet Gaba

“My best Christmas gift happened earlier this year when my only sister, her husband and my new baby niece arrived for a vacation. Well, God made it happen. It was also a serendipity in a way because everything sort of fell into place. We all knew it would take some time for people to get together again. That reunion happened at the right time for all of us and we enjoyed every minute of it.”