Is there any battle in contemporary politics being waged with more indignity and less prowess than the tug-of-war for twentysomethings over Obamacare?

With the success of the Affordable Care Act hinging on the ability of the health care exchanges to attract a critical mass of young, healthy people, America’s youth find themselves in the crossfire of a high-stakes, comically ill-fought partisan fight for their hearts and minds.

On one side, amateur models dressed in outdated frat boy costumes pose doing keg stands as they urge their peers to sign up for “brosurance.” On the other, a strangely proportioned, nightmarish Uncle Sam sneaks into doctor’s offices wielding a speculum and threatens something resembling sexual assault as the TV screen fills with dire warnings about letting the government play doctor.

The pandering has become an amusing subplot in the Obamacare wars, and a frequent target of mockery on the internet, but it’s symptomatic of a broader problem that afflicts the “youth outreach” efforts that so often come out of D.C. Namely, the ambitious twentysomethings best positioned to extract cash from gullible political donors on the promise that they are “down with the kids” are, in fact, not. Often, when these Great Young Hopes of the political class realize they don’t know how to connect with their generational peers, they resort to dubious social media metrics and hazy claims of “being in the conversation” as proof of success. And so political donors, PACs, and partisan operatives of a certain age keep chasing the ever-elusive youth vote with marketing stunts that the Brooks Brothers-clad young strivers who concoct them promise will “go viral.”

In the Obamacare marketing war for “millennials,” as the marketers know them, “virality” has become an end unto itself.

Take, for example, the “Got Insurance?” campaign launched in October by the Colorado Consumer Health Initiative. Tasked with raising awareness among the 18–35 demographic, the nonprofit set about making a series of ads designed, ostensibly, to resonate with young, single people. But the final product was ham-handed and cartoonish, featuring bros in Bermuda shorts saying things like, “Yo mom, do I got insurance?” and young women, mouths agape, exclaiming, “OMG, he’s hot! Let’s hope he’s as easy to get as this birth control.”