Ben Carson, a retired neurosurgeon-turned-GOP Presidential hopeful, has been slowly winning people over with his quiet campaign.

This low-key strategy to get to the White House might have just come to an end with a recent appearance on NBC’s “Meet the Press” where he said that he would be against a Muslim president.

"I would not advocate that we put a Muslim in charge of this nation. I absolutely would not agree with that," said Carson, who went on the say that the Islamic religion was incompatible with the Constitution.

With the aforementioned remark, Carson might be upping his game in a way that could appeal to a set of potential voters who have so far kept Donald Trump at the top of the list of conservative candidates.

As Carson attracts more interest, it is probably a good time to take a look at where he stands on some core issues.

Immigration Reform

Carson believes that mass deportation is moral low road and thinks a guest worker program is a good idea. In his book “America the Beautiful,” Carson seems to question the motives and morality behind the U.S.’ reliance on migrant labor. He wrote, "Is it moral for us, for example, to take advantage of cheap labor from illegal immigrants while denying them citizenship? I'm sure you can tell from the way I phrased the question that I believe we have taken the moral low road on this issue."

Same-sex Marriage

As reported in On the Issues, Carson disagrees with the decision to legalize same-sex marriage but respects that it is now the law of the land.

Obamacare

Carson, whose opinion as medical professional lends some authority to his view, sees

Obamacare as all about restriction and control. "You know Obamacare is really I think the worst thing that has happened in this nation since slavery," Carson said back in 2013. As quoted in the Washington Post, he elaborated that “it is making all of us subservient to the government, and it was never about health care. It was about control."

Gun Laws

Carson believes that law-abiding citizens have a right to have guns without any registration.

Poverty

Carson’s plan to get rid of poverty seems to be to get rid of dependency. "I'm not interested in getting rid of a safety net, I'm interested in getting rid of dependency," Carson said, as quoted in On the Issues.

Abortion

Carson would like to ban abortion 20 weeks after fertilization. “My entire professional life has been devoted to saving and enhancing lives,” said Carson in an Op-Ed piece for the Washington Times, “Thus, the thought of abortion for the sake of convenience does not appeal to me.”