CarePredict's activity tracker. CarePredict's activity tracker.

Startup Health has announced its newest class of 16 companies at various stages of development. That brings the incubator's total number of companies to 63, three of which have been acquired, including, most recently, Basis Science, which Intel snapped up. Between them, StartUp companies have raised $130 million, the incubator reported.

StartUp Health also announced that Nadeem Kassam, the original founder of Basis Science, has joined as an entrepreneur in residence. The new position is called "Health Transformer in Residence," and it will involve mentoring existing startups and helping to scout for additional companies.

“To be surrounded by such an extraordinary network of entrepreneurs and innovators and have an ongoing support infrastructure to navigate challenges has been invaluable. I am honored to coach this amazing group of Healthcare Transformers and help StartUp Health continue to find the next generation of innovators,” Kassam said in a statement.

Here are the 16 companies joining StartUp Health:

Althea Health, founded by Greg Cohen, Manu Kodiyan, and Sanjay Raghu, is developing a software platform for patients with rare or neglected diseases. "Rather than being centered on pharma and healthcare providers, Althea's business model is patient-centric and aligned with the interests of rare disease groups," the founders write on their website. They plan to eventually expand the platform to other disease groups.

Fort Lauderdale, Florida-based CarePredict is a startup focused on seniors who want to age independently. Using a wrist-worn activity tracker and journaling software, the system learns the daily patterns and rhythms of seniors so it can notify family or friends when the senior deviates from those patterns. Satish Movva and Krishnatej Vedala are the founders.

Health123 is a tracking-based health behavior change platform. Seattle-based founders Rachel Lanham and Rebecca Norlander are pitching the app as both a direct to consumer and an employer-facing offering. The company's website describes it as a "car dashboard for your health" with social media connectivity.

Hindsait, named for a combination of hindsight and AI, is a healthcare data analytics software as a service company. The system draws in structured and unstructured data from the healthcare system and uses machine learning and artificial intelligence to return insights to provider systems. The startup is based in Englewood, New Jersey and founded by Pinaki Dasgupta and Adrish Sannyasi.

Bridgeport, Connecticut-based Inbox Health is focusing on healthcare payments. The company, founded by Blake Walker and Simon Kaluza, "is creating software that simplifies patient billing and payments to make health care providers more efficient," according to its website.

LifeDojo, an NYC-based company founded by Chris Cutter, Varun Vummidi, and Patricia Bedard, is an employee wellness company. The startup makes a series of behavior change training apps for health or wellness areas including stress reduction, healthy eating, exercise, brain science, and happiness. The annual subscription fee is $10 for individuals and $50 for groups.

Mobile Health One makes a physician communications platform called MDChat. It's a mobile, HIPAA-compliant online communications platform designed to help doctors correspond with colleagues at their same hospital or other institutions. The software is already available for iOS and Android devices. David Crane and John Abrahams founded the company in New York City.

Philadelphia-based PHmHealth is using near-field communication technology in the hospital and the home to improve care. According to a release from StartUp Health, the company's goal is "ensuring compliance in provider-patient interactions by making home healthcare as trackable as a UPS package." Dirk Rassloff and Michael Mittelman are the co-founders.

One of three international companies on the list, Pocket Anatomy is based in Galway, Ireland. The company makes interactive, 3D iOS apps to educate patients about their bodies. Products include Pocket Anatomy, Pocket Brain, and Pocket Heart. Mark Campbell and Thomas King founded the company, which sells its namesake app for $14.99 in the AppStore.

Punctil promises "punctuality solutions for healthcare." The NYC-based startup, founded by Ben Picard and Denis Abrams, is a bundle of software that aims to help providers hold patients accountable for missed appointments. The company facilitates secure storage of credit card information, allowing providers to charge for late and no-shows at appointments.

MobiHealthNews wrote about Denver-based RxREVU in our API roundup last month. The company offers healthcare app developers a dataset to facilitate savings on medication. The dataset includes 12 strategies for saving on medications including generic alternatives, pill splitting, and over-the-counter options. In one case study, the company managed $387 million in savings in a populations of 10 million patients. Carm Huntress, Kevin O’Brien MD, Dan Caron, and Peregrin Marshall co-founded the company.

Shift Health, based in Toronto, Ontario in Canada and founded by Sandy Whitehouse and Daniel Penn, is working on improving patient-doctor communication. Shift's software TickiT replaces the patient history form in the lobby with an iPad application which both collects patient information and gives the patient information to prepare for the visit. The data is structured and standardized so doctors and hospitals can make better use of it later.

The third and final international company in the new class is SmartRx, from Bangalore, India (founded by Anil Kumar, Vishesh Rohatgi, and Vijayakumar Kannan). SmartRx is a cloud and mobile platform for for patient engagement, health monitoring, online consultation, e-consult and hospital marketing functions.

Personalized medicine company Tute Genomics, based in Salt Lake City, Utah was founded by Reid Robison and Kai Wang. According to its website, the company has "developed the most advanced analytical methods for genome analysis by incorporating proprietary machine-learning algorithms into a cloud based application that allows researchers to analyze and interpret entire human genomes and discover genes and biomarkers at an unprecedented rate."

VhedaHealth, based in Columbia, Maryland and founded by Shameet Luhar and Philip Rub, is a care management startup aiming to reduce readmissions by helping high risk populations to improve compliance. The company's high-touch, high-tech approach includes both care teams and mobile devices.

Finally, Wellthie, founded in New York City by Sally Poblete, is developing mobile software to help people learn about, and make the most of, the Affordable Care Act as it pertains to health insurance.