By STEVEN KURUTZ, The New York Times

"I was retired for 30 years, until at the age of 90 I got swept up in this commercial bit," Morty Kaufman said.

He was referring to the popular TV spots for Swiffer, the maker of household cleaning products, which he stars in with his wife, Lee. In a series of unscripted 30-second ads, the couple discuss their blissful 44-year union and their division of household labor (Lee does the cleaning; Morty the napping), and marvel at the Swiffer Sweeper and other supplies that have been left on their doorstep.

In one spot, Morty addresses the camera, saying: "There's only two of us. How much dirt can we manufacture?"

He and his wife answer in unison -- "Very little" and "More than you think" -- in a perfect encapsulation of the male-female cleaning divide that has no doubt existed since before the invention of the broom.

After the commercials began airing six months ago, the Kaufmans became Lee and Morty, TV personalities. The couple, whose names and alternating one-liners have the ring of a Catskills comedy duo, have appeared on the "Today" show and "The Ellen DeGeneres Show," and were honored by the Senior Pops Orchestra of Long Island.

Last week, they greeted a reporter on the set where the commercials were filmed: their tidy one-story ranch house on suburban Long Island.

"I bought it 62 years ago," Morty said from his favorite leather recliner in the living room. "It was new. I paid $15,000 for the house and another $1,000 for the garage."

The commercials were filmed over two days last winter.

"Two days of work," Morty said, shaking his head. "After that, it was all residuals and personal appearances."

The ads' success lies less with the magic of the Swiffer WetJet than with the Kaufmans, who project an appealing picture of marriage and old age.

They are both 91 and still in their home, and they appear loving and physically spry on camera.

"Well, on the TV we look viable," said Morty, who has twice battled cancer. "They're not going to show me hobbling around."

Nevertheless, he drives two days a week to Nassau Community College, where he helps supervise a seniors learning program. And Lee said she is active in the alumni association of Hunter College, her alma mater.

"Make no mistake, we are goers and doers," she said. "We are not stay-at-homes. We see a lot of opera in Manhattan."

Though the couple come across as lifelong companions, they married in their 40s, after their previous spouses died and left them with children. He had four; she was raising a son and daughter and was the reading teacher for his youngest son, Scott.

They met at a parent-teacher conference, Morty said.

"The second time I went I said: 'I didn't come to discuss Scotty. Would you care to go out with me?'" he recalled. "From there it blossomed. We fit like gloves."

These days, they are asked as often about their relationship as they are about the Swiffer ads. People see them as oracles who hold the secret to a happy marriage.

Myra Allen, who is Lee's daughter (although the couple doesn't differentiate between his and her children), said she has observed the way they compromise.

"Each one at any given moment is willing to let the other one take the day," she said. "I don't think anyone has a vested interest in standing their ground."