Broker and President Joseph Boniakowski of ERA Boniakowski Real Estate in Green Brook congratulates his 2014 Top Producers, Tom Boniakowski, Millie Correa, Cristina Burke, Barbara Seif, Jeanne Pisciotta and Joe Maso. (Photo: ~PHOTO COURTESY OF WOODSIDE MEDIA)

ERA Boniakowski Real Estate has announced the names of its highest producing sales associates who achieved the 2014 NJAR Circle of Excellence Awards at a company sales meeting on Feb. 3.

The recipient of the 2014 NJAR Circle of Excellence Sales Award Gold Level is Thomas Boniakowski. Mildred Correa, Joseph Maso and Jeanne Pisciotta achieved the Silver Level, while Cristina Burke and Barbara C. Seif were awarded the Bronze Level.

Historically, low interest rates and competitive pricing has made the dream of homeownership a realty for many.

“At ERA Boniakowski Real Estate the agents focus on the positives and as a result they have achieved considerable success,” explained Joseph Boniakowski, president/broker of the agency.

“Through our agents’ dedication, these professionals lead our local real estate market by providing each client the most comprehensive products and services. I thank and salute each one of our top producers especially in this current market which presents new challenges daily. They truly exemplify ERA Boniakowski Real Estate’s commitment to hard work and customer satisfaction. Housing is driven by need, and a top agent recognizes the market for what it is and adjusts accordingly. From agents with over 25 year’s experience to new agents, the ERA Boniakowski Real Estate guides each agent individually so that they can achieve success,” Boniakowski added.

“As an ERA office, we fortunate to have the best agent training in the industry as well as the best tools to help sellers and buyers come together.” Boniakowski said.

The office is located at 929 N. Washington Avenue, Green Brook, NJ 732-968-0700 and serves the entire Central Jersey area west to the Delaware River.

— Dot Fitzsimmons

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1AjuMqC