Bernie Sanders came to Atlantic City on Monday, and wasted no time before punching The Man squarely in the jaw.

"Carl Icahn and Donald Trump, you are not going to get it all!" he said. "We are going to create an economy that works for the dishwashers."

If you have a heart, you have to love this guy. He is a warrior for the millions of people who don't get a fair shake from the American economy. They are financing his campaign with tiny donations, a homemade antidote to the corrupting influence of big money in our politics.

And while he's given voice to a growing anger across the land, he's done so with dignity and substance. He is no Donald Trump. He is a serious man who has moved the debate.

But I am begging you: Don't vote for him.

The terrifying prospect that Donald Trump could beat him in November is reason enough on its own.

Sanders is ahead today, beating Trump in national polls by an average of 13 points. But don't be fooled – that lead could easily melt away in the heat of a general election campaign.

Sanders calls himself a democratic socialist and has promised to raise everyone's taxes. Hillary Clinton hasn't pressed that point, but Trump and independent conservative PACs surely would.

If Trump has any prayer to win a national election it lies in his appeal to working-class white voters. Sanders provides just the lever Trump would need to capitalize on that appeal in big swing states like Ohio and Pennsylvania.

In a Gallup poll last year, Americans were asked to identify traits that would disqualify a presidential candidate. It showed that 8 percent would not vote for a woman, 25 percent would not vote for a gay candidate, and 40 percent would not vote for an atheist.

But the most radioactive label of all was "socialist," named by a staggering 50 percent of voters. Add a hefty tax hike into this mix, and Trump would have an opening.

Consider, too, that Sanders would be 79 years old by the time he finished his first term. He's six years older than Ronald Reagan was at this stage, a legitimate concern for voters on the fence.

But let's suppose Sanders could win. That brings us to the second problem with his candidacy: During his long career in Washington, he has shown no talent for building the kind of broad coalition he would need to govern the country.

His talent is to capture the imagination of liberal voters, to give voice to the urgent frustration that they feel. He says he wants a revolution, not the incremental progress we've seen under President Obama.

So on health care, it is not enough to expand coverage by 20 million through Obamacare. Sanders wants to replace it with a single-payer system like Canada's.

The goal is sensible, but how would he reach it? Republicans in Congress are all opposed, as are most Democrats. So why not try to expand coverage gradually by tweaking Obamacare?

When Sanders is pressed on this, he says we need a revolution, as if that answers the question.

He makes the same mistake on the minimum wage ($15 an hour everywhere), Wall Street reform (break up the banks), and college affordability (free tuition for all.) He stretches so far left that he cannot hope to take the country with him.

Sanders is a good man, but he'd make a mediocre president. He's a quirky politician who has scored few big wins during his long career in Washington.

Worse, his nomination would open a pathway for Trump to reach the White House. At one of the most perilous moment in America's modern history, he is a risky choice.

Hillary, whose record we will examine as the June 7 primary nears, is the safer choice by far. Our hope is that the polls are right and she beats Sanders soundly in New Jersey.

More: Tom Moran columns

Tom Moran may be reached at tmoran@starledger.com or call (973) 836-4909. Follow him on Twitter @tomamoran. Find NJ.com Opinion on Facebook.