Don Henderson, president and CEO of Central Florida Health Alliance, is overseeing construction projects and new challenges as Leesburg Regional Medical Center and The Villages Regional Hospital experience a growth spurt — something that is unique compared with many other states.

“Nationwide, I would say that it is unusual, absolutely,” said Henderson, who will mark his second year on Feb. 1. “Overall our market is growing; and the growth of The Villages especially is one of the fastest-growing areas in the country, so we are trying to respond to that and keeping up with the growth is challenging.”

The challenges are most prevalent from January to April, he said, when both hospitals experience a 30-percent upswing in population from seasonal residents in Lake and Sumter counties.

“The winter continues to be very challenging for both hospitals, especially with the big snowbird population that comes in,” Henderson said. “What we try to do is to make sure that the resources at both hospitals are adequate to meet the community demand, and sometimes the demand is so sudden.”

As a result, the CEO said the both hospitals have worked hard to streamline emergency room operations; added additional nursing and doctors; and have worked closely with EMS personnel in both counties to meet patient demands.

About 60 percent of both hospitals’ patients are Medicare recipients, and it plays a role in the services that are provided.

“Medicare is changing the rules and I would like to think it is for better patient care, but it is probably for cost reasons and they are classifying more and more regular admissions by what they call observation admissions,” he said, noting it’s also a reflection of technology for the length of patients’ hospital stay. “The length of stay for most patients is usually four to five days but Medicare basically says if you stay less than two days now, you’re classified as an observation.”

To meet this new category of patients, Henderson said the LRMC plans to add 29 private/observation rooms on the ground floor of the hospital, site of what is the current administrative offices. The administration staff will be moved behind the Urgent Care Center on the LRMC campus that is currently under construction.

“The Urgent Care Center is a new service that we have never offered to the community at the Leesburg campus,” Henderson said. The facility will feature an in-house lab, X-ray, and other services.

“We plan to do a lot of our preoperative work there, and also function as a preoperative testing facility, and that will be very convenient,” he said.

Over in The Villages, he noted the TVRH is preparing to add on to its facility with more patient rooms.

“Our best information is that The Villages, which has crossed the 100,000 (population) mark and it may get up to about 120,000 in the next three to five years, so that’s a 20 percent increase in population,” Henderson said. “Early next year in 2015, we are going to open our first phase of our expansion at The Villages Hospital, which we’ll add 60 beds to the facility.”

He said TVRH could eventually go as high as 310 in the second phase of construction.

“We think that once we get up to the 280 to 300 beds that we will be adequately sized to serve the growth of the community,” he said.

Currently, both hospitals have 560 beds, including the rehabilitation hospital, and about 3, 0000 employees, including more than 350 medical staff members. There also is a community board of 16 members who govern operations, including eight from Leesburg and eight from The Villages.

“More than 30 percent of our current board is practicing physicians in the com munity,” he said. “The physicians have a lot of say so and input into our leadership structure.”

Henderson said emphasis is place on allowing the sister hospitals to provide a range of services that complement each other,” he said.

“Our cardiac surgery program continues to grow, and that’s our leading service at the Leesburg hospital. We were very excited in that last year we performed over 760 open-heart procedures, which my by account, ranks us as the No. 3 largest heart program in the state, and that volume continues to grow.”

The orthopedics program continues to be very strong, too, he said.

“One of the things that you can look for us to do in the near future, is to offer partial-knee replacement in both communities,” Henderson said, noting this could be within three months as an putpatient procedure. “Partial-knee replacement is very exciting. It’s a much less invasive procedure than the traditional knee replacements. You can actually get in and get out and have your procedure done within a day; and it’s a big breakthrough and we are very excited about it.”

The women and children’s area of LRMC also is growing.

“We have two main obstetrical programs, but we do more deliveries at the hospital (LRMC) than anywhere in Lake County, and we are excited because we have been working with the two local medical groups in having more obstetricians come to the area,” he said. “The demand is there to grow the obstetrical program.”

Henderson said LRMC delivered 1,700 babies last year, which was 200 more than the previous year.

“We think that it could go even higher. We do twice as many deliveries as the closest hospital to us,” he said. “Women’s health care is a very big thing.”

Henderson said LRMC also is focused on its pediatrics program.

“We have the only pediatricians that stay in-house 24/7. This is the only hospital in the region where the doctors are actually staffing the hospital on a 24-hour basis, so that gives us a level of care for both the babies that are being born as well as the children who get the winter respiratory diseases.”

The CEO also expressed his views on the Affordable Care Act and how it will affect families, small businesses and how own employees.

“I think the big impact for Obamacare is yet to be felt because so many of the provisions were deferred until 2015, but I am a bit worried because I think that insurance premiums for many of the small businesses will go up and that has got me significantly concerned,” Henderson said. “And as a large employer, we don’t know what will happen with our premiums because the law brings in new requirements...

“The stories that we are hearing from the Lake County community especially, is that people are seeing much higher premiums. We’re seeing higher premiums and we are seeing higher out-of-pocket deductibles across the board, and that causes concern because the deductible are so high from $5,000 to $10,000 per family that it’s creating issues for us and we’re are concerned. The question is ‘Are people going to be able to afford these new higher requirements?’”

Henderson recently met with a community group about the Affordable Care Act, and he heard from small business employers.

“There were folks jumping up from the audience saying ‘If I have higher premiums, I’m goi ng to have to pass higher deductibles on to my employees,’” he said.

“So yeah, we worried about it,” Henderson said. “It’s a challenge to make sure that all of the local residents get the health care that they need.”