BIRMINGHAM, Alabama – A federal grand jury is investigating the financial dealings of a federally-funded community health center that was at one time a pioneer in the care of the homeless in Birmingham, sources tell AL.com.

Birmingham Health Care, started in 1985 as a nationwide pilot project with federal and private foundation backing, is the object of an investigation into how it has used federal funding, much of it under the leadership of former CEO Jonathan Dunning.

AL.com and The Birmingham News have reported in 2012 that Birmingham Health Care (BHC) and Central Alabama Comprehensive Health (CACH) in Tuskegee paid more than $2 million to Dunning's companies for contracting services, including while Dunning was CEO of the companies.

One example of a contract Dunning executed with BHC was for the creation and distribution of emergency kits for the poor and the homeless. As a contractor to the agencies he recently oversaw as CEO, Dunning, through his company Synergy Medical Solutions, bought 3,000 kits for $107,130 in federal money (for each agency) and then sold it to BHC for $181,650, a difference of $74,520. Double that, 3,000 for each agency, and the margin was close to $150,000.

AL.com has also reported that the FBI and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Inspector General have been investigating BHC and CACH.

Terry Burney, chief administrative analyst under Birmingham Mayor William Bell, is a Birmingham Health Care board member who received a subpoena recently. He said the subpoena asked him to bring records to federal court in Birmingham and be prepared to testify starting next week, Aug. 26.

Another person formerly connected to BHC told AL.com the Internal Revenue Service is asking for records in its request by subpoena to deliver on the same date as Burney.

Other sources tell of a grand jury inquiry earlier. In April, contractors who did business with BHC and former employees were asked to bring records to a grand jury, including pay documents related to Dunning's private companies.

Birmingham Health Care, originally named Health Care for the Homeless, was part of a 19-city pilot project seeded by Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and Pew Memorial Trust money. It is now one of about 1,300 community health centers nationwide.

The health centers have been called the backbone of the Affordable Care Act, providing a broad safety net for those who are unable to gain health insurance or don't qualify for Medicaid.

Dunning, his lawyer Ken Dowdy and current BHC CEO Jimmy Lacey didn't respond to an email regarding this investigation.

U.S. Attorney spokeswoman Peggy Sanford said she could neither confirm or deny an ongoing investigation.