Can you tell a pronoun from a participle; use commas correctly in long sentences; describe the difference between its and it's?

If not, you have plenty of company in the world of job seekers. Despite stubbornly high unemployment, many employers complain that they can't find qualified candidates for the jobs they do have.

Often, it turns out, the mismatch results from applicants' inadequate communication skills. In survey after survey, employers are complaining about job candidates' inability to speak and write clearly.

On Friday, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported there were a net 204,000 new jobs created in October, though the unemployment rate rose to 7.3 percent. The numbers easily topped economist expectations of 120,000 new nonfarm payroll jobs for the month.

Experts differ on why job candidates can't communicate effectively. Bram Lowsky, an executive vice president of Right Management, the workforce management arm ofManpower, blames technology.

REALTED: TAKE THESE CLASSES TO GET A JOB AFTER COLLEGE

"With Gen X and Gen Y, because everything is shorthand and text, the ability to communicate effectively is challenged," he said. "You see it in the business world, whether with existing employees or job candidates looking for work."

Others say colleges aren't doing a good job. In a survey of 318 employers published earlier this year by the Association of American Colleges and Universities and conducted by Hart Research Associates, 80 percent said colleges should focus more on written and oral communication.

William Ellet, an adjunct professor teaching writing at Brandeis International Business School, says the problem starts even earlier. He points out that when the Department of Education in 2012 published what it called "The Nation's Report Card: Writing 2011," just 24 percent of eighth and 12th graders were proficient in writing. From colleges on down, he said, "nobody takes responsibility for writing instruction."

Ellet, who previously taught writing at Harvard Business School, says the problem persists even into business school— and he believes the problem isn't related to technology. "Most new technology is text based," he said, adding that a majority of his students report working with people they have never met and communicating with them largely through email.

"Thirty or 40 years ago, using writing for that wouldn't have been possible," he said, and that makes writing that much more important. "Businesses get that, but I don't think universities do."

RELATED: MORE PROOF HIGH SCHOOL GRADS AREN'T READY FOR COLLEGE