Politicking politics

By Editorial Board | Thursday, October 9 2014

“North Carolina is this year’s ground zero in American politics,” Dan Balz of the Washington Post said. With less than a month before Election Day, political gurus across the country are tuning in to the U.S. Senate race in North Carolina, where Democratic incumbent Kay Hagan and Republican challenger Thom Tillis, current Speaker of the N.C. House, are locked in a tight race. According to a USA Today and Suffolk University poll released Wednesday, Hagan leads Tillis 46.8 percent to 45.4 percent—less than two percentage points. The results in North Carolina could rebalance the partisan majority in the Senate, and students should tune in and engage as the candidates sprint towards the November 2 finish line.

A recent Chronicle article reported that international affairs and national defense rank as the most important issues for the state’s electorate this election cycle. As the situation with ISIS continues to escalate in the Middle East, those on the political right criticize Hagan for her inaction and failure to voice dissent against President Barack Obama. Yet, foreign policy is only one of several divisive issues galvanizing the debate. On education, Hagan has criticized Tillis for opposing a bill that would allow students to refinance loans, while Tillis emphasizes job creation for recent graduates. Healthcare is another contentious topic, with Tillis opposing and Hagan supporting the Affordable Care Act.

Yet, for all the debate on these policies, the increasingly partisan political climate has shifted focus away from the issues. Election campaigns have become more about politicking than about ideas; more about the letter “D” or “R” beside the name on the ballot rather than the name itself. In this partisan climate, a check at the ballot box is not so much a choice between Hagan and Tillis as it is a vote for a potential Democrat or Republican majority in the Senate.

Recent campaign attack ads have further fueled partisanship and redirected focus away from the important, relevant issues. On one hand, these ads often present numbers and facts out of context in a deceptive way. A recent ad paid for by the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, for example, accused Tillis of cutting nearly $500 million from the state's public education system. Yet, Tillis’ campaign refuted these claims, explaining that, while the legislature did delay increases to the state's public school budget, spending toward public education increased by $700 million over Tillis’ tenure. These ads appeal to voter’s emotions rather than tackle issues relevant to the US senatorial race. Issues like state public education, for example, are largely dealt on the state rather than on the national level. Altogether, $11 million has been poured into TV ads from both sides. It is questionable how much such campaign ads affect Duke students, as most do not own or watch TV regularly. However, the increasing politicization of politics is problematic and should be judged critically.

As Election Day looms closer, here are some things to keep in mind before heading to the ballot box. First, reflect on what relevant issues are most important to you, and take the time to understand both sides thoroughly. Second, think about where you will cast your ballot. Voting absentee offers the ability to vote in local elections like mayoral races in your home state. Duke is a home away from home, but few stay in the state for more than four years.

This Friday is the last day to register to vote in North Carolina. Bring your ID, sign yourself up and get educated for the election season.