Ben Carson might be soft-spoken, but when he hits back against accusations he’s an “Uncle Tom” or some kind of traitor to black Americans, his message speaks volumes.

And he brought that message to the heart of Harlem on Wednesday.

“What I feel, instead of people pointing fingers at each other and just creating strife, what we need to be talking about is how do we solve the problem in the black community of murder,” Carson told reporters in front of the landmark Sylvia’s Restaurant.

“For a young black male, in the inner city, homicide is the most likely cause of death. That’s ridiculous.

“I’d say they need to actually listen not only to what I’m saying, but look at my life and look at what’s been done,” the retired neurosurgeon told reporters. “It is the things that have been done that elevate people. Not things that impress people and make them dependent.”

Carson has received world-wide acclaim for decades as a brilliant neurosurgeon. He first gained attention politically with a keynote address he delivered at the 2013 National Prayer Breakfast by destroying President Obama’s sacred cows — from political correctness to Obamacare — with the commander in chief seated only 10 feet away.

Within a week of his speech, the ultra-liberal “Daily Kos” pounced with a hit piece headlined, “Dear Ben Carson, When A Person Has to Deny Being an Uncle Tom, It Usually Means They Are One.”

Despite his laid-back personality, Carson’s message and the sense of humor he displayed at the Fox News-Facebook GOP presidential debate last week elevated him in the polls.

Carson, who was raised by a single mother in a poverty-stricken section of Detroit, told reporters at the Harlem news conference why the black community so strongly votes Democratic, and what the GOP needs to do to to win it back.

“Well, I think it is because the Democratic Party has ascribed to the Lyndon Johnson philosophy. I don’t know if you know, but Lyndon Johnson said, ‘If you give those N-words such and such, they’ll vote for us for the next 200 years,’ “ he said.

“What the Republican Party needs to do is come out and discuss more the kinds of relationships and the programs that will actually bring people out of poverty. That will also give them the ability to use their God-given talents to rise rather than to simply be satisfied in a dependent position in society.”

He continued that message on Fox News’ “The Kelly File” Wednesday, describing the relationship of blacks and the Democratic Party.

“People who don’t truly respect you, who don’t really see you as an equal, but just take care of you in order that you take care of them,” he said.

Carson said his support is growing.

He revealed that one woman approached him in the airport and told him she loved him despite being a lifelong Democrat, and that many people came up to him while he walked the streets of Harlem and voiced their support.

“The stuff that I’m talking about has nothing to do with Republicans or Democrats,” Carson said. “It has to do with America and what kind of nation are we going to have and what are we going to pass on to our grandchildren.”

Watch the clip, via Fox News.

Watch the latest video at video.foxnews.com