Rep. Trey Gowdy, R-S.C., jabbed at MSNBC’s Ronan Farrow on Tuesday, referring to the cable host’s program as a “very obscure television show.”

The South Carolina lawmaker’s remarks came during a congressional hearing featuring testimony by Jonathan Gruber, an architect of President Obama's Affordable Care Act and MIT health economist who is in hot water over his recent controversial comments regarding the “lack of transparency” and the “stupidity of the American voter” that made its passage possible.

“I know initially that you said that you offered these comments at a conference. I think you meant ‘conferences.’ Plural,” Gowdy told Gruber, referring to the fact that the economist’s remarks were made during multiple events, not at one isolated incident.

"But you said [you spoke at one] conference when you went on a very obscure television show and initially apologized for what you said were inappropriate comments,” he said.

Stay abreast of the latest developments from nation's capital and beyond with curated News Alerts from the Washington Examiner news desk and delivered to your inbox. Sorry, there was a problem processing your email signup. Please try again later. Processing... Thank you for signing up for Washington Examiner News Alerts. You should receive your first alert soon!

American Commitment, a conservative activist group, on Nov. 7, 2014, uploaded footage of Gruber saying in 2013 that Obamacare was approved by Congress thanks to the “stupidity of American voters.” The backlash was immediate and fierce.

In response to criticism generated by his remarks, Gruber appeared on MSNBC’s “Ronan Farrow Daily” on Nov. 11, explaining in an interview with the show’s host that his “stupidity” comments were “off the cuff” and made in error.

However, in the days thereafter, reporters and bloggers uncovered additional footage of Gruber speaking at separate events, each video featuring the economist discussing various aspects involved in crafting Obamacare.

Gruber has not returned to Farrow’s program to explain his explanation.

Farrow’s show is consistently one of the least-watched programs on cable television.

Also from the Washington Examiner Limbaugh: CNN 'circled the wagons' for Clinton "I'm just pointing out that they are while they may want it to appear [like] something else."