Marc Millman The Fab Faux

It was during a performance of the recent Broadway musical “Let It Be” that it became clear what exactly is so extraordinary about the Fab Faux. “Let It Be” featured four admittedly talented musician-actors recreating the Beatles, but it was ultimately an attempt at a nostalgia trip – or, to be more charitable, it was primarily a theatrical experience. The Fab Faux, contrastingly, are not interested in nostalgia – they are a musical ensemble, and, unlike any other Beatles recreation that I have seen, they play the Beatles canon like it was, well, music. They don’t dress up in Beatles outfits or don fake mustaches and Sgt. Pepper suits – no more than Leonard Bernstein felt compelled to wear a powdered wig when he conducted Mozart. They don’t address the crowd in faux-Liverpuddlian accents, no more than Wynton Marsalis feels the need to go around saying “love you madly” whenever he plays the music of Duke Ellington with the Jazz at Lincoln Orchestra.

The rather humorously named Fab Faux, which actually consists of five musicians; founder and bassist Will Lee, drummer Rich Pagano, and Jimmy Vivino,

Frank Agnello, and Jack Petruzzelli on a battery of guitars and keyboards. The point is to get the music exactly, precisely right. Not just to play the Lennon-McCartney (and, in the case of the concert at The Beacon Theatre, Harrison) chord changes, but to play the exact voicings of those chords and the proper inversions. Although the Beacon Theatre concert will spotlight the contributions to the group of George Harrison (in honor of what would have been the guitarist’s 70th birthday), one of the band’s usual strategies is to recreate an entire Beatles album from start to finish, including that music from the second half of the 1960s which the Beatles themselves never even attempted to play live. (They’re also playing at the Chicago Theater in Chicago on Saturday, November 9, and at the State Theater in New Brunswick on Novemer 23.)

Another factor that also makes the Faux unique is the additional musicians beyond the basic two guitars, bass, and drums; much of the Beatles’ most memorable music involved instruments other than guitars, keyboards and drums (famously the string quartet behind Paul McCartney on “Yesterday”) and most Beatles tribute bands will simply take care of this with a synthesizer – that’s the way they did it on Broadway in “Let It Be.” The Fab Faux however makes a point of using an actual acoustic string section and real horns, not a digital simulation, sometimes there are as many as ten musicians on stage – there’s even a piccolo trumpet on “Penny Lane.” (To date, I’ve only heard a piccolo trumpet played twice in all my concert-going experience, “Penny Lane” by the Fab Faux and once as played by Jon Faddis in Leonard Bernstein’s “Glitter and Be Gay,” simulating a stratospheric soprano.)

The overall effect of this so-called “tribute band” is to underscore the uniqueness of the achievement of the original Fab Four: among other things, they were the first to combine every step in the music-making process into a single seamless result: composing melodies, writing lyrics, arrangements, vocal and instrumental performance, the recording process – the classical music scholar Edward Green has compared the totality of their output to that of Wagner’s gesamtkunstwerk (of course, today that would be gesamtkunst-twerk).

There’s a story out there, quite probably apocryphal, that concerns “Beatlemania,” the first major Beatles recreation show, which played Broadway from 1977-1979, when John Lennon was living in Manhattan. Supposedly Lennon himself was in Times Square when he happened to run smack into the actor who was playing him at the Palace, in full costume, enjoying a smoke in between acts. “It’s not easy even being a fake Beatle, is it?” Lennon asked “Lennon.” No matter, it’s worth the effort. This is the best the music has sounded in over 40 years. So, if you’re looking for a sentimental journey down memory lane, look elsewhere. As far as the Fab Faux are concerned, it’s all about the music, man.

The Fab Faux

The Beacon Theatre



New York, N.Y.



Saturday

[Correction: An earlier edition of this post said the Fab Faux were performing at Radio City. The group is playing The Beacon Theatre.]