Senate 'Cures' package adds White House, FDA-friendly proposals

With help from Mary Lee

SENATE ‘CURES’ PACKAGE GROWS WITH WHITE HOUSE-FRIENDLY PROPOSALS — The Senate HELP committee rolled out two new bills last week for its April 6 markup – the third and final markup for its companion legislation to the House-passed 21st Century Cures. The new bipartisan measures could sweeten the administration on the whole package.

Story Continued Below

One bill would give legs to President Barack Obama’s Precision Medicine Initiative, by codifying it into law. http://politico.pro/1UHoiLQ

Another aims to help FDA and NIH recruit and retain staff by quadrupling the number of people eligible for the Senior Biomedical Service from 500 to 2,000. Those employees, most now at NIH, can take home salaries well above the normal government pay scale. http://1.usa.gov/1Z5Eyqv

Despite the sweeteners, the final markup is likely to be tense as Democrats press to include mandatory NIH and FDA funding before the package hits the Senate floor. Republican Susan Collins is also expected to put forth her legislation with Sen. Claire McCaskill to address drug pricing. Other amendments could further complicate the picture.

Meanwhile, the House and Senate ‘Cures’ leadership met with Vice President Joe Biden late Wednesday. House architect Fred Upton is hoping the cancer moon shot will help propel his legacy legislation to the president’s desk and HELP Chairman Lamar Alexander has said that the biomedical innovation legislation is the best chance for funding Biden’s moon shot. But nothing came out of that meeting suggesting the two initiatives were joining forces yet.

It’s Monday, welcome back to Prescription PULSE. This week in 1999, Dr. Jack Kevorkian was convicted of second-degree murder for giving a lethal injection to a man who was terminally ill with Lou Gehrig’s Disease. He was sentenced to 10 to 25 years in prison. He was released in 2007 and died in 2011. Four states now have laws allowing physician-assisted suicide, though all have safeguards and a legal framework different than Kevorkian's actions.

DISPATCH FROM THE PART B WARS — Update: more than 300 groups are urging House and Senate leadership to press CMS to “permanently withdraw” the Innovation Center experiment to overhaul payments for Part B drugs. The letter last week came from many of the same groups that appealed to CMS before it formally proposed the rule. Now they’re trying their luck with lawmakers, where indications are they’ll find a more receptive audience.

… The American Society of Clinical Oncologists weighed in separately, calling the Part B proposal a “significant, independent threat” in comments to the House Energy and Commerce Committee mainly focused on MACRA. “This new demonstration not only continues to erode practice resources necessary for the care of patients with cancer, it imposes additional administrative burdens by making participation in this experiment mandatory,” ASCO President Julie Vose wrote.

… The Institute for Clinical and Economic Review published a white paper on different models for indications-based pricing,which CMS wants to test in Part B. The paper.

FDA PRIORITIES MISSING FROM DEVICE LOBBIES’ MDUFA PROPOSAL — New notes from industry and FDA private medical device user fee discussions show that AdvaMed, the Medical Device Manufacturers Association and the Medical Imaging and Technology Alliance want a deal that looks very similar to MDUFA III. The trade group proposals say that FDA can improve its device reviews without new revenue. But they suggest providing $4.5 million to develop a portal for electronically tracking device submissions and $6 million to continue an independent assessment of FDA’s device review process for four years. The groups also say they want to provide resources to support patient engagement activities and a quality management system at FDA, but the agency objected that the proposal left out high priorities for FDA including support for supervisory oversight and recruitment. The minutes: http://1.usa.gov/1pyYjuJ

FDA GUIDANCE WOULD ERASE SOME BIOLOGIC EXCLUSIVITY COME 2020 — Some medical products regulated by FDA as drugs will be considered biologic medicines come March 23, 2020 per the biologics law created under the Affordable Care Act. With that change FDA says that any unexpired period of exclusivity for a transitional product –those approved as drugs that will convert to biologics in 2020 –would cease to have any effect except for orphan drug exclusivity. These transitional products would not be eligible for the 12 years of marketing exclusivity normally given to new biologics. The exclusivity provisions are likely ripe for controversy, since FDA is interpreting the law so that these “transitional” products may get less market protection than traditional drugs or biologics, Hyman, Phelps & McNamara attorneys explain in a blog post. The draft guidance: http://1.usa.gov/1RTTGBU. The blog post: http://bit.ly/1pz36fQ

HHS LAYS OUT PAIN STRATEGY — A new federal strategy to address pain calls for better education of health care providers and improved access to pain management that doesn't rely solely on prescription medicines. HHS released the strategy Friday, following Tuesday's publication of final CDC guidelines to rein in primary care doctors' use of opioid medications to treat chronic pain. The strategy was largely drafted by the same interagency committee that tried to block the CDC guidelines in December. The document: http://1.usa.gov/1Fdzdag

PHARMA IN THE STATES: WISCONSIN BEEFS UP PDMP, OREGON PASSES BIOSIMILAR BILL AND MORE

— Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker signed a pair of laws last week that mandate that providers check the state prescription drug monitoring database before first prescribing an opioid and periodically after that. Just seven states now require mandatory PDMP checks, according to Shatterproof CEO Gary Mendell, who cheered the new Wisconsin laws. “I call on state legislatures across the country to follow Wisconsin’s lead,” he said.

—Oregon became the 16th state to pass a bill allowing the substitution of ‘interchangeable’ biosimilars for biologics at the pharmacy, the Generics and Biosimilars Initiative notes.

— The New York Senate and Assembly aren’t going along with Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s proposals to control drug costs, our POLITICO New York colleagues report.. Cuomo wants to require a minimum Medicaid rebate for a list of key drugs. Legislators in the Senate instead want to require prior authorization for any drug for which the wholesale cost doubles in one year. The Assembly wants to expand the preferred drug program so it negotiates on behalf of all Medicaid recipients, including managed care providers.

TEVA-ALLERGAN DEAL DELAYED, IMPACTING PFIZER-ALLERGAN INVERSION — Teva pushed back the timeline for when it expects to complete its acquisition of Allergan’s generic drug business (the old Actavis) because of how long it thinks FTC will take to clear the deal. Teva had hoped the deal could close in the first quarter but now predicts it could take until June. Financial analysts’ said the delay may indicate the divestitures FTC will require could be more significant than they had thought. But they don’t think the deal will fall through.

… The delay also may hold up the Pfizer merger with the rest of the Allergan business, which is contingent on Teva-Allergan first going through. Meanwhile, on Friday Bernie Sanders added to the pressure on the Treasury to block Pfizer’s merger and “similar tax scams.” Our Pro Tax colleague Katy O’Donnell has more.

FTC: PAY-FOR-DELAY DEALS MAY VIOLATE ANTITRUST LAWS EVEN IF COURT CASE CONTINUES — Pay-for-delay deals between brand and generic pharma companies should still be subject to antitrust scrutiny under the 2013 Supreme Court ruling in FTC v. Actavis even if the reverse payment wasn’t made in the context of a settlement, the FTC argues in an amicus brief submitted to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit late last week.

… The case involves a GlaxoSmithKline payment to Teva to keep a generic version of antidepressant Wellbutrin off the market while their patent litigation was pending. FTC said the court made several errors, including ruling that plaintiffs must show the payment resulted in delayed entry of the generic. Since the 2013 Supreme Court case, FTC has been pushing lower courts to take a wide view of the types of reverse payment deals that may violate antitrust laws. The full brief: http://1.usa.gov/22oRAVs

FDA, NIH CRAFT CLINICAL TRIAL TEMPLATE — The agencies issued a draft template for clinical trial protocols aimed at greater efficiency. It's designed for investigators writing phase II or phase III trials that require an application for an investigational new drug or investigational device exemption. Comments are due by April 17. http://1.usa.gov/1SZ8HHH

ICYMI: SIMON WILL LEAD CANCER MOON SHOT - Vice President Joe Biden appointed Greg Simon, a former pharma executive, Clinton administration official and Hill staffer as executive director of the cancer moon shot task force. A recent cancer patient, Simon was most recently CEO of Poliwogg, a financial services company focused on life science investment. He was VP for patient engagement at Pfizer from 2009 to 2012. More from Sarah: http://politico.pro/1Rr99c6

EVIDENCE MOUNTS FOR PHARMA SPENDING SLOWDOWN — Express Scripts gave its clients a reprieve on drug spending last year, holding growth to 5.2 percent, the company announced last week. That’s about the same as CVS Health’s pharmacy benefits manager reported recently. The PBMs saw less than half of the country’s 12-plus percent spike in 2014. The figures bolster industry claims that 2014 was an “anomaly,” in the words of PhRMA CEO Steve Ubl, who also cites government projections that spending will stabilize over the next few years. Drug spending is still expected to grow faster than overall health spending and it remains to be seen what the nationwide figures will be for last year. But the two giant PBMs are a strong indicator of a slowdown. Whether that will take any political pressure off the industry is another question. Hearings on drug prices continue, though focused almost exclusively on industry “bad actors,” and the topic remains hot on the 2016 campaign trail.

McCASKILL TO DRUG PRICE GOUGERS: “BETTER GRAB WHILE THE GRABBING’S GOOD” — The Senate Aging Committee hearing on drug price spikes Thursday produced a grilling for a new slate of Turing executives. There was lots of outrage but little news. “We’re not done,” ranking member Claire McCaskill said near the end of the hearing – her first since leaving the Hill last month for breast cancer treatment. “So better grab while the grabbing’s good, because something’s going to happen.”

… Nearly all of the discussion focused on the so-called “bad actors,” but Sen. Elizabeth Warren cited a string of headlines about price increases by prominent drug companies and pledged to address the broader problem. “It happens again and again,” she said. “The pharmaceutical market may be producing giant profits for drug companies but it is not working for the American people.”

… McCaskill and committee chair Susan Collins have introduced a bill meant to accelerate competition for off-patent drugs that are made by just one company, like Turing’s Daraprim. It’s likely to be considered at HELP’s final “Cures” markup.

PEOPLE ON THE MOVE: WITTY LEAVING GSK, SCHNEDAR LEAVES FDA

— GlaxoSmithKline CEO Sir Andrew Witty plans to retire early next year; a search for his replacement is underway.

— FDA said its Office of Compliance Director Cynthia Schnedar left the agency on Friday to pursue opportunities in the private sector. This follows a January announcement that Schnedar had to recuse herself from all substantive compliance enforcement and policy issues due to conflicts of interest because of her husband’s job.

— The American Clinical Laboratory Association announced that Quest Diagnostics CEO Stephen Rusckowski would serve as board chair for the third year in a row. See the rest of the board announcement here.

— AdvaMed named Cohera Medical CEO Patrick Daly as chairman of the board for the trade group’s Accel division, which serves smaller companies.

— ICER announced eight new members of its New England Comparative Effectiveness Public Advisory Council.

— Vernessa Pollard has joined McDermott Will & Emery as co-head of its FDA practice from Arnold and Palmer.

HELP ADVANCES OPIOIDS BILLS — HELP approved a package of mental health and opioid- related bills, including the TREAT Act, which would expand medication-assisted treatment for addiction. More from Pro’s Brianna Ehley here.

COLE WANTS TO BOOST NIH FUNDING ABOVE WHITE HOUSE REQUEST — Rep. Tom Cole last week pledged that the House Appropriations Committee will protect the $2 billion funding boost NIH got for 2016 "and perhaps do a little bit better than what the president proposed" for 2017. The Labor-HHS subcommittee chairman said that the White House proposal to cut NIH’s discretionary budget by $1 billion and offset with $1.8 billion in mandatory spending was “disappointing.” Speaking for a lot of Republicans (and most research advocates to boot!), he said the best way to grow the NIH budget is through the appropriations process.

FDA SIGNS OFF ON EMERGENCY ZIKA TEST — FDA issued an emergency use authorization Friday for a real-time diagnostic test for the Zika virus, CDC announced. The test can show whether an individual is infected with chikungunya, Zika or dengue, instead of requiring three separate tests.

ICYMI, DEMS WANT RECESS DELAY TO ADDRESS PUBLIC HEALTH CRISES — Democrats want House Speaker Paul Ryan to postpone the two week congressional recess that's set to start Wednesday until the chamber takes action to address the Zika virus, opioid addiction and the Flint water disaster. More here. Hillary Clinton also blasted Congress for not acting on Zika in a scathing Medium post here.

CATCHING OUR ATTENTION: PHARMA DOLLARS DRIVE PRESCRIPTIONS — Pharmaceutical company payments and perks for doctors do in fact mirror drug prescribing practices, a new ProPublica analysis finds. Doctors long denied it, but the research shows those who receive payments tend to prescribe a higher percentage of brand-name drugs compared to doctors who didn’t. ProPublica has been tracking company payments to doctors since 2010, and found that 75 percent of doctors across five medical specialties received at least one payment from a company in 2014. Doctors who prescribe brand-name drugs say they are acting in their patients' best interest.

** A message from The Pharmaceutical Care Management Association: PBMs are projected to save employers, unions, government programs, and consumers $654 billion - up to 30 percent - on drug benefit costs over the next decade. PBMs reduce drug costs by: · Offering Amazon-style home delivery of medications and creating select networks of more affordable pharmacies; · Encouraging the use of generics and more affordable brand medications; · Negotiating rebates from drug manufacturers and discounts from drugstores; · Managing high-cost specialty medications; and · Reducing waste and improving adherence. Learn more at: http://thatswhatpbmsdo.com **