Just when charities have started to recover from the worst recession in a generation, a new threat struck in 2013. The automatic budget cuts known as sequestration and a 16-day federal government shutdown offered fresh challenges from reduced grants, forcing many charities to lean on the private sector more than ever.

Many companies rose to the challenge. Here’s a sample of the ways Washington area businesses made their mark on the community this year; consider this a snapshot of the good deeds in our midst.

— Vanessa Small

Adventist HealthCare donated about $60 million worth of health care and community benefits this year. The Rockville organization offered free and low-cost health services to about 54,000 people, including wellness education, support groups for stroke survivors and screenings for heart disease, cancer and diabetes. Adventist partnered on its community outreach efforts with organizations such as the Mercy Health Clinic, Rockville Senior Center and the Jewish Community Center of Greater Washington. In April, Adventist employees, along with their family and friends, helped renovate the Silver Spring home of a 62-year-old man who has been diagnosed with Parkinson’s disease.

Advisory Board Co. saw 100 percent of its employees participate in community service in 2013. Employees conducted 32,000 hours of service, an average of more than 13 hours per staffer. The Washington firm executed more than 70 pro bono projects for its nonprofit partners. It also provided monetary contributions to 23 organizations through its Community Impact Grants program.

●National wireless provider AT&T donated more than $1 million to nonprofit organizations in the Washington region this year, focusing primarily on those that prepare students for college and careers after high school. Organizations that benefited from the program include Food and Friends ($90,000), the Washington Drama Society ($50,000), the MdBio Foundation ($20,000) and the Maryland Hall for the Creative Arts ($25,000). Additionally, the company contributed $40,000 to the National Book Festival and gave grants to the Wounded Warrior Project.

During what’s known as “Spirit of Caring Month” at Arlington’s AvalonBay Communities, employees across the country collaborate on volunteer projects that serve their local communities. In the Washington region, staffers worked to assist families who had sought services from the District Alliance for Safe Housing, a group that provides housing and services for survivors of domestic violence.



Alliant Techsystems’s chief executive serves on the USO-Metro Washington board of directors, and ATK sponsors a half-dozen events annually with the organization. This year, the Arlington company volunteered at a skeet and trap shooting event for members of the military and their families, as well as a tour of the Stephen F. Udvar-Hazy Air and Space Center in Chantilly and a chance to meet ATK’s astronauts.

In December, more than 50 employees from BAE Systems volunteered at the company’s Trees for Our Heroes event, which allows 150 military families to select a Christmas tree, make holiday crafts, and get photos taken with Santa and Mrs. Claus. In June, the company held a giving campaign that raised $50,000 for United Through Reading, an organization that promotes the read-aloud experience for separated military families.



Bank of America’s charitable foundation gave Capital Partners for Education and Urban Alliance Foundation each a $200,000 unrestricted grant. The bank also connected more than 80 local teens to summer employment through its 2013 Student Leaders program, which places community-minded high school students in paid eight-week internships at local nonprofits, and the 2013 Summer Youth Employment Initiative, which provides low-income teens an opportunity to gain valuable work experience through interning at local banking centers and nonprofits. The foundation gave more than $1.5 million in grants to more than 60 nonprofits in the greater Washington area as part of a national effort to enhance the economic vitality of local communities with a focus on housing, hunger and jobs.



Booz Allen Hamilton provided pro bono expert consulting for a literacy program, support for multiple sclerosis, guidance to an education effort and assistance to an environmental program. The activities were among eight projects, each valued at more than $150,000. The McLean company also planned and sponsored an event for more than 1,000 elementary and middle school students, parents, coaches and volunteers to learn about natural disaster preparedness and recovery in partnership with 15 area organizations, including the National Building Museum, the American Red Cross, and the Washington Humane Society. About 115 Booz Allen employees serve as mentors through the Wounded Warrior Mentor Program at Walter Reed National Military Medical Center and Fort Belvoir.

Cafe Deluxe and Tortilla Coast locations held a fundraiser where $1 of every margarita sold went to benefit Food and Friends, an organization that delivers meals to people living with HIV/AIDS, cancer and other life-challenging illnesses. The restaurant’s corporate parent, the Clover Restaurant Group, raised $500 for the organization.

Since its opening in March, Cappella Washington D.C. has donated rougly $20,000 worth of overnight stays at the luxury Georgetown hotel. Beneficiaries include the National Kidney Foundation, Starlight Children’s Foundation and Fashion for Paws.



Capital One gave $100,000 to the United Way of the National Capital Area and $250,000 to the Latin American Youth Center in emergency funds during the federal government shutdown. The McLean-based credit card and banking giant sponsored the opening of the new Junior Achievement Finance Park in Prince George’s County, with offers students real world experience with money management. The company also created the Book by Book initiative, a digital campaign to put beloved children’s books into the hands of young readers across the country. In June, Capital One committed nearly $500,000 to the local Easter Seals, a nonprofit staffing agency for veterans and their families. As part of Capital One’s $800,000 commitment to support the Women Veteran Entrepreneur Corps, a training and mentorship program, the company hosted a conference to help women veteran business owners create new jobs and fuel business growth.



CEB’s annual Global Service Day drew 2,500 volunteers who completed a combined 13,000 hours of community service. These staffers worked on 125 varied projects, from cleaning up the Anacostia River to building bicycles for children. In coordination with Taproot Foundation, the Rosslyn-based research and talent assessment company held its first ever “ScopeAthon,” in which 80 CEB employees met with 25 local nonprofits for a one-day pro bono session aimed at boosting organizational effectiveness.

CACI International this year participated in eCybermission, an online mentoring initiative meant to help students in grades six through nine work on science, technology, engineering and mathematics. The Arlington contractor’s employees also volunteered at events including bingo and trivia at a USO center at Fort Belvoir and with Wreaths Across America, which provides wreaths for veterans’ graves.



CGI maintained a partnership with Team Fisher House, the online, grass-roots fundraising program of Fisher House Foundation. The foundation provides housing for the families of military members who might be hospitalized or receiving other medical treatment. This year, CGI’s Fairfax-based operations contributed $75,000, in part through a sponsorship of Fisher House race jerseys that were worn for events such as the Marine Corps Marathon or Army Ten Miler. Staffers also volunteered for Fisher House at the Marine Corps Marathon.

Cooley’s D.C. lawyers logged 4,685 pro bono hours in 2013 on cases that dealt with immigration, asylum, intellectual property and consumer protection issues. The law firm also donated money to charities, including Whitman Walker Clinic, Gifts for the Homeless, Capital Area Immigrants’ Rights, Legal Counsel for the Elderly and Muslim Advocates.

Crowell & Moring’s Washington lawyers and staff contributed 27,000 hours in pro bono legal services to the homeless, children, immigrants, individuals seeking justice in the criminal system and victims of domestic violence. The law firm also participated in the Salvation Army’s “Angel Tree” holiday program that provides holiday gifts to children in need, and supported tutoring programs for children in D.C. public and charter schools.



Deloitte employees in the greater Washington area contributed more than 69,000 hours of volunteer time to the community and more than $1 million in pro bono services. The professional services firm also raised more than $1 million locally through its annual United Way Campaign, dedicating $100,000 to a new Deloitte-United Way Veterans Fund serving local veterans’ organizations. Deloitte was a lead convener of a regional pro bono summit in the greater Washington area, attended by more than 200 business, nonprofit and public sector leaders committed to advancing the cause of pro bono in the region.



Deltek this year hosted a breakfast to kick off Jeans Day, a Fairfax County effort to end homelessness. The Herndon company also collected more than 600 toys and nearly $3,000 for Toys for Tots at its annual holiday party and continued to host interns in support of the Year Up Foundation’s intern program, meant to give urban youths work experience. The company currently has three Year Up interns and has previously hired four employees who started as Year Up interns.

Drinker Biddle & Reath’s lawyers and legal professionals in the District devoted more than 4,500 pro bono hours in 2013 on matters including efforts to make prison phone calls more affordable, and compiling a report with the Equal Rights Center that showed Latinos seeking rental housing in Virginia were treated differently than white counterparts. In the aftermath of Hurricane Sandy, the firm raised more than $6,000 and collected gift cards, clothing and goods to Covenant House, a New Jersey-based organization that provides services to homeless youth. The firm also participated in the Salvation Army Angel Tree Program, buying gifts for 44 children, and donated winter clothing, bedding and funds to the Gifts for the Homeless campaign.



DynCorp International this year donated about $117,000 to the Tragedy Assistance Program for Survivors, which provides support for military and contractor families who have lost a relative. The Falls Church contractor also donated more than $110,000 to USO programs, including Operation Back to School, through which DynCorp purchased a calculator for every military child in the program. The company helped ship more than 40 boxes of winter clothing and supplies for residents of Afghanistan through the Afghan-American Women Association.



Emergent Biosolutions concentrates its philanthropic efforts on USO Metropolitan Washington, part of the biotechnology contractor’s strategy to support communities in which it also does business. The Rockville company gave $30,000 to help construct Fort Meade’s USO Center, a recreational facility for service members and their families. Employees at the company also stuffed backpacks with school supplies for USO’s Operation Back to School initiative and collected food donations in advance of the holiday season.



Entertainment Cruises, a Chicago company with operations in Washington, donated an Odyssey lunch cruise to wounded warriors from Walter Reed National Military Medical Center and the Wounded Warriors in Transition Unit at Fort Belvoir. Odyssey employees volunteered to work on the cruise and serve as bartenders, food runners, servers and cooks. The company established a Making Waves program to encourage employee contributions to the local community. Its November food drive collected more than 500 items, which were donated to the National Baptist Memorial Church Well Food Pantry. It held a Toys for Tots drive in December. The company also donated a $14,000 National Elite yacht dinner cruise to Life With Cancer’s Lobster Extravaganza as a live auction item.

More than 700 employees in Ernst & Young’s greater Washington offices skipped a day at the office to do community volunteer activities, donating more than 4,200 volunteer hours to 13 nonprofit organizations. They worked with students on financial literacy, coached entrepreneurs on their business plans, decorated hats for cancer patients and helped with chores on sustainable food farms. The professional services company also sponsored the learning facility Finance Park in Fairfax, donated more than $40,000 raised through a annual bowl-a-thon benefit and gave more than 1,000 hours visiting elementary and high schools to educate students on business, economics and how to succeed in a global economy.

Geppetto Catering did a 12-month volunteer program through its “25 Years of Giving” campaign. The team volunteered at DC Central Kitchen by performing kitchen duties. The catering company’s employees also ran in Columbia Lighthouse for the Blind’s annual Light The Way 5K and provided barbecue for 1,150 racers. Employees also mentored Eastern Senior High School student summer interns and provided financial donations and in-kind catering for the school’s honor roll assemblies. Overall, the Riverdale company gave more than $24,500 in catering gift certificates to support 49 local nonprofit organizations for their silent auction fundraisers and events.

Supermarket chain Giant Food of Landover is on track to donate $12 million this year, including nearly $2 million to Washington area schools and $1.6 million for pediatric cancer research. The company also provided millions of meals to local hunger relief organizations, such as the Capital Area Food Bank and Maryland Food Bank.



District-based HelloWallet has had a double bottom line business model since its inception in 2009 — meaning it seeks to both make money and help the community. In that vein, the firm has given one free subscription of its personal finance software to a family in need for every five that it sells. In April, the firm upped that effort by offering free subscriptions to all 200,000 members of Iraq Afghanistan Veterans of America.



Holland & Knight employees donated more than 65,000 hours of legal service to those in need and volunteered more than 1,800 days of community service through its 9/11 Day of Service initiative. More than 85 lawyers, professionals and staffers in the firm’s D.C. and Tysons Corner offices helped by volunteering for Rebuilding Together and raised more than $8,000 to be a house sponsor. It sponsored the holiday party for the Edward C. Mazique Parent Child Center, which provides child care and counseling services to underprivileged children and their families. Twelve employees participated in the Audi Best Buddies Challenge in D.C. and raised $18,000. The event was held in support of Best Buddies International, a nonprofit organization dedicated to enhancing the lives of people with intellectual disabilities. The firm also held a month-long typhoon relief drive across its offices in the United States and abroad and raised more than $90,000 for American Red Cross and Doctors Without Borders to assist with the relief efforts in the Philippines.



Washington area IBM employees contributed more than $1 million to local and national charities through the company’s annual employee charitable contributions campaign. IBM also provided big data analytics technology and know-how to the Center for Inspired Teaching, helping its professional development strategy. Technology and know-how was also provided by IBM to the Latin American Youth Center, enabling them to improve operations. Additionally, 30 IBM employees volunteered at Food and Friends for a Day of Caring and more than 50 employees volunteered with the Yellow Ribbon Fund, which supports Walter Reed Bethesda Naval Hospital and Fort Belvoir, to host two special programs for 300 injured service members, their families and caregivers.



Eight staff members at the D.C. digital marketing firm iStrategyLabs devoted 125 hours this year to pulling together Social Media Week, a series of speakers, workshops and parties aimed at educating people about technology and social media in Washington. An estimated 5,000 people and 300 companies took part in the festivities.



JBS International gave to more than 10 local charities, including collecting school supplies for children in August and food and gift cards at Thanksgiving. In December, the woman-owned Rockville technology services firm collected toys for My Sister’s Place and New Endeavors by Women, a transitional residential program for homeless women and their children. On Valentine’s Day, the company prepared 100 gift bags for women at N Street Village.



Employees of John Marshall Bank serve as volunteer marketing and finance instructors at Strayer University, where they teach seminars for local entrepreneurs and business owners. In addition, the Reston-based bank donated more than $70,000 this year and hosted its second annual motorcycle ride to benefit injured veterans. Proceeds from the ride — which attracted 70 participants, including bank president Bill Ridenour — were donated to the Wounded Warrior Foundation.



More than 210 employees of the Mid-Atlantic offices of Jones Lang LaSalle participated in a day of service on Dec. 5, wrapping gifts for underprivileged children and families; preparing and delivering food for homebound residents; and assembling weekend meals for students in free lunch programs. Among the charities the services firm partnered with are Food & Friends, For Love of Children, New Hope Housing and Operation Homefront.



Kaiser Permanente of the Mid-Atlantic States held productions at local schools and community organization to address many topics including HIV/AIDS awareness, bullying, nutrition and active living through its Educational Theater Program. The theater group has performed more than 430 shows and workshops for 39,657 students and 9,073 adults. Kaiser Permanente has invested nearly $1.25 million in producing these productions at no cost to the school or community organization. The health care provider awarded more than $3 million in grants, donations and sponsorships to 85 nonprofit organizations which support health and wellness and employees volunteered more than 4,000 hours with various service organizations.

K&L Gates’ lawyers and staff packed about 18,000 pounds of food and hygiene products at Capital Area Food Bank, and made more than 650 peanut butter and jelly sandwiches for Martha’s Table. The law firm also did pro bono work for the American Heart Association’s Lawyers Have Heart program, the Capital Area Food Bank’s Outlaw Hunger Campaign, Legal Counsel for the Elderly and the D.C. Bar Pro Bono Program, and made charitable donations to So Others Might Eat, Manna, the Legal Aid Society of D.C., the D.C. Bar Foundation and the D.C. Fraternal Order of Police.

KPMG created a “Reading Relay” across 90 U.S. offices, where volunteers read to children and gave students new books to take home with them. More than 130,000 new books were distributed across the country, and children in the Washington area received 9,400 books. A lead sponsor of the American Heart Association of the Greater Washington Region, KPMG co-chaired the annual Heart Ball, donated funds and helped lead efforts to raise more than $1.5 million in support of the AHA’s mission. In addition, KPMG employees participated in the AHA’s Heart Walk. More than 110 employees donated in excess of 1,300 hours as volunteer teachers for Junior Achievement’s JA-in-a-Day, a program which brings accounting professionals into the classroom to enhance the financial literacy of children in a fun and engaging way.



Leidos presented a check for $25,000 to Paralyzed Veterans of America at a Washington Nationals game in September. The Reston company has donated nearly $300,000 to the organization over the past four years. Leidos also donated $25,000 to the Women in Military Service for America Memorial Foundation for educational outreach.



LivingSocial donated technology, money and man hours this year to assist Musicians On Call, which brings live music to patients’ bedsides; Miriam’s Kitchen, which provides meals to the homeless; and typhoon relief in Southeast Asia. Lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender issues have become particularly important to the District-based deals firm. This year, 40 employees created a float to take part in the District’s Capital Pride Parade. LivingSocial’s attorneys also crafted an amicus curiae brief to the Supreme Court in support of striking down Proposition 8.

Lockheed Martin funded a mentoring program with Girls Inc. as well as Great Minds in STEM’s Viva Technology program. The Bethesda-based contractor also provided $4 million to UCLA’s Operation Mend, which paid for a surgical recovery suite and telehealth suite for military service members undergoing plastic and other reconstructive surgery.



Long & Foster committed to matching up to $25,000 in donations to the American Red Cross’s relief efforts in the Philippines after a deadly typhoon struck the island nation in November. Additionally, the real estate seller held its annual community service day in June in which thousands of staffers worked at parks, schools, shelters and day-care centers to help with spring cleaning and other improvements. At Long & Foster’s Chantilly headquarters, employees spent that day collecting and packing food items for the You Feed Others program, which provides food for disadvantaged children in Fairfax county.



ManTech International backed CharityWorks, which connects business leaders to charities in the D.C. area to provide administrative and technical support. Company employees donated hundreds of hours to the organization and its partners. The Fairfax contractor also provided students at the Ivymount School, a special education school, with work experience at its corporate office and donated to the CIA Officers Memorial Foundation.

Attorneys and staff members at McDermott Will & Emery helped prepare food at DC Central Kitchen, coached students at Stuart Hobson Middle School for a geography tournament and worked at the Washington Legal Clinic for the Homeless. Firm employees also donated new clothes and toys to local children through Families Forward, a nonprofit that helps with employment training for families that are transitioning from shelters into homes.



MedImmune celebrated its 25th anniversary as a company this year, and the milestone became a theme for its philanthropic endeavors. The life sciences firm donated $25,000 to health care and science education groups, including Macmillan Cancer Support in the United Kingdom, the United Nations Foundation, Resource Area for Teaching and Starlight Children’s Foundation MidAtlantic. The company also challenged its employees to volunteer a combined 2,500 hours this year — a goal they had surpassed by 1,600 hours as of mid-December.



Money One Federal Credit Union of Largo held a school supply drive and a Thanksgiving food drive at its branches. It donated more than $1,000 in coats to benefit the Boys and Girls Club of Greater Washington Community.



Since 2005, District developer Monument Realty has participated in the D.C. Housing Authority’s Gift of Love Tree program, in which partners of the agency provide gifts for children and families living in significant economic hardship who rely on affordable housing vouchers. Gifts regularly include winter coats, school uniforms and school supplies. Monument also participates in the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation “real estate games,” for which it founded and sponsors a bicycle race. And it holds a “Jeans Friday” every month, where the staff picks an employee’s favorite charity and donates to that cause. Everyone gets to wear jeans.



Monumental Sports & Entertainment Foundation donated $106,053.94 to Tragedy Assistance Program for Survivors. One hundred percent of the proceeds from 2,774 Courage Caps and 1,858 Courage T-shirts sold benefitted TAPS, a national nonprofit that provides care for the families of America’s fallen military heroes. It also gave a $50,000 grant and programming to Playworks Washington D.C., for the 2013-14 school year, and started a hockey program in five schools in the fall of 2013. For the holidays, Washington Capitals, Mystics and Wizards players and coaches and significant others assisted in a $20,000 shopping spree at Wal-mart for underserved families by shopping, wrapping and delivering gifts.





MRP Realty, a District real estate developer, supported a Toys for Tots drive and an array of local charities in 2013, including the Arlington Free Clinic, Fight for Children and the Boys & Girls Club of Greater Washington. MRP staff volunteered at Bread for the City, which provides services including food, clothing, medical care, legal and social services.



Encouraging students, particularly girls, to pursue careers in science, technology, engineering and math is a cause central to Sterling-based Neustar’s annual giving. The company partnered with District-based EverFi to deliver an online course in digital literacy to students in Virginia, Kentucky and California — states where Neustar has large operations — at a cost of $900,000. The firm also provided $40,000 in support to the Anita Borg Institute for Women and Technology.



To mark new branch openings, Navy Federal Credit Union donates $1,000 to a local Fisher House facility, which provides lodging for families of military personnel undergoing medical procedures. This year, the Vienna-based credit union opened new local branches in Fredericksburg and Germantown. Employees also raised more than $350,000 for United Way’s Live United campaign.



New Signature made in-kind donations of technology and interactive Web services to organizations including Year Up, Street Sense, Urban Alliance, CrisisLink and Network for Teaching Entrepreneurship. The value of those donations was equal to about 2.5 percent of the company’s revenue. In October, the Washington firm received the 2013 Street Sense Good Neighbor Award for the assistance they’ve provided to the biweekly street newspaper.



Nixon Peabody worked with Critical Exposure, an organization that gives children in underserved D.C. schools a chance to highlight issues through photography to create social change. The law firm was lead sponsor for the organization’s annual event that drew more than 300 people to the Edison Gallery and raised $38,000. The firm also fundraised for Rachael’s Women’s Center, First Book — a nonprofit that provide books to low-income children across the country — and worked with Enterprise Community Partners to clean and landscape a vacant property in Southeast D.C. that will be converted into low-income housing.



Northrop Grumman and its foundation focused on contributions to science, technology, engineering and math-focused organizations in 2013, including a $4.5 million, three-year grant to the CyberPatriot program. The Falls Church company also completed a $5 million donation to the USO Warrior and Family Center at Fort Belvoir and announced it would continue to sponsor the Military Bowl.



Patton Boggs in 2013 gave nearly 43,000 hours of pro bono services and contributed to more than 50 organizations, including the DC Jazz Festival, Don Bosco Cristo Rey Corporate Work Study Program and the Lawyer’s Committee for Civil Rights Under Law.



The Pentagon Federal Credit Union Foundation donated more than $100,000 for day care services at Walter Reed National Military Medical Center and Marine Corp Base Quantico. It also gave nearly $442,500 to its Military Heroes Fund, which helps wounded veterans to retrofit their homes and vehicles.



Prudential PenFed Realty gave nearly $30,000 to Sunshine Kids, a national charity that adds quality of life to children with cancer by providing them with group activities.



Raffa’s Companies for Causes, a program that encourages corporate philanthropy, hosted a group of students during the summer for an internship and professional development program. Raffa employees gave $25,000 to the AIDS Life Cycle Ride. Each month, employees of the Washington consultancy give donations to a charity through its Denim Day drive and the company gave $7,500 to the Leukemia Lymphoma Society.



Restaurant staff at Ris prepared meals for the Capital Area Food Bank and walked as a team to fight leukemia. They mentored more than 200 Girl Scouts on leadership, hosted underprivileged students for lunches with lessons on etiquette, and offered kitchen skills training for 15 high school students to help them secure jobs. Overall, the restaurant of 70 totaled 350 hours of community service and donated $25,700 worth of food, charity gift certificates and other contributions.



Science Applications International Corp. donated $250,000 to Operation Homefront, which provides financial and other types of support to members of the military, including those who have been wounded. The McLean contractor also supplied more than 6,000 backpacks for children of service members. Additionally, SAIC helped provide Washington Nationals tickets for military families who have lost a relative at war as well as wounded service members.

Sodexo of Gaithersburg and its charitable arm, the Sodexo Foundation, raised more than $2.3 million this year through employee payroll deductions and fundraisers, supplier partner campaigns and its annual Sodexo Foundation Dinner. The foundation funded backpack food programs and summer feeding programs that provided more than 400,000 meals to needy children in 2013. Sodexo Foundation is also working to mobilize youth in the fight against hunger. Its Stephen J. Brady Stop Hunger Scholarship, which rewards students who have made an impact in the fight against hunger, generated 5,300 applications in December.

The Sprinkles cupcake shop in Georgetown teamed with “Scandal” star Kerry Washington this fall to raise $10,000 for Americans for the Arts. All proceeds from the sale of red velvet cupcakes — which Washington served up to customers — went to the nonprofit organization. Throughout the year, the store donated $200,000 in cash (and cupcakes) to local organizations, such as D.C. Public Schools and the Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation. Leftover cupcakes are donated daily to Central Union Mission and Crowder Owens Food Bank.

SRA International sponsored the For Inspiration and Recognition of Science and Technology National Capital Region chapter, which promotes science and technology for young people. SRA’s employees served as competition judges, mentored robotics and Lego teams, and developed an interactive technology demonstration. SRA also donated $24,000 to Homes for Our Troops and organized employee volunteer work days for the organization.

Steptoe & Johnson’s Washington office provided 29,065 hours of pro bono representation, continued its monthly “Casual for a Cause” Fridays — where employees can wear jeans in exchange for a donation to a charity — and raised $20,000 for Gifts for the Homeless.

This year, Tasc employees, family members and friends logged 2,698 miles of walking or running to support the Walking with the Wounded Project, which helps retrain and reeducate wounded soldiers. Employees also raised $11,000 for Building Homes for Heroes, an organization that builds or modifies homes for wounded veterans. Tasc matched the donation to bring the total to $22,000.



Triple Canopy sponsored events at the Special Olympics of Virginia. The Herndon security contractor also sponsored six Armed Forces Foundation dinners at Walter Reed National Military Medical Center and sponsored 15 wishes in the Salvation Army’s Angel Tree Program.



Developer Urban Investment Partners is a benefactor of the Anne Frank House, a nonprofit founded by Adas Israel congregants in 1988 that provides housing support for local residents suffering from mental illness. Along with his family, Steven Schwat, who co-founded UIP, packed and delivered Thanksgiving meals to AFH clients.



Telecommunications behemoth Verizon has made domestic violence awareness and prevention a cornerstone of its charitable giving for the past 15 years. This year, the company will dole out an expected $6.5 million nationally to aide shelters and prevention organizations. That figure includes 25 grants totaling $332,500 to organization around the Washington region, including Mary’s Center, My Sister’s Place, Bowie State University Foundation and Shelter for Help in Emergency.



Vornado/Charles E Smith is a partner to Higher Achievement, a year-round learning program that helps at-risk District middle school students aim for college. Higher Achievement’s gala, led by company President Mitchell Schear, also a board member, raised $1.2 million. The commercial real estate company was the exclusive corporate volunteer for the Higher Achievement Olympics of the Mind, an academic competition. Vornado’s food drive donated more than 5,300 pounds of food to the Arlington Food Assistance Center and Capital Area Food Bank and raised more than $14,000 for the Capital Breast Cancer Center.

Staff from Washington Property Co., based in Bethesda, participated in Children’s National Medical Center’s “Race for Every Child,” an October run and walk along Pennsylvania Avenue.

WilmerHale staff and attorneys tutored 30 high school students from Maya Angelou Public Charter Schools, volunteered pro bono hours and made financial donations to Bread for the City, and participated in a 5k walk to benefit Whitman-Walker Health, a nonprofit organization that helps those affected by HIV/AIDS. Since 2011, the firm has raised more than $55,000 for the group. So far in 2013, D.C. area employees have logged 61,077 pro bono hours.

Vanessa Small, who covers nonprofits, compiled this report with contributions from Abha Bhattarai, Marjorie Censer, Sarah Halzack, Catherine Ho, Jonathan O’Connell and Steven Overly.