AUSTIN, Texas--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Fringe Benefit Group, an industry leader in the design, implementation and administration of benefits for hourly and part-time workers, today announced it has acquired The American Worker Plans, an Illinois-based Managing General Agent specializing in limited medical, voluntary and self-funded benefit options for employers with hourly and part-time workforces, from American Westbrook Insurance Services, LLC., a subsidiary of Hendricks Holding Company, Inc. Terms of the transaction, which includes all assets and trademark rights to The American Worker Plans, were not disclosed.

The American Worker Plans (TAWP) was founded in 1992 to provide affordable supplemental health and benefits programs to uninsured working Americans. Since then, the company has established a national reputation for providing employers with innovative products featuring highly effective promotional materials and enrollment tools. TAWP offers a variety of both employer and employee-paid benefits products underwritten by many of the country's leading insurers. As part of Fringe Benefit Group, TAWP’s existing products and customer programs will remain unchanged and there will be no disruption to TAWP clients and their valued employees, or their health insurance advisers or insurance broker representatives.

“The American Worker Plans has collaborated effectively with Fringe Benefit Group since 1997. I am extremely pleased that this relationship will now be able to provide us with a one-stop solution for benefit program marketing, service and support,” said George Duczak, president of TAWP. “This purchase creates the largest independent wholesaler of products for the hourly and part-time marketplace, enabling us to provide brokers and advisers with the best advice and products. Through consolidation of our marketing and administrative resources, we are confident that we are going to continue our leadership role in this market as part of Fringe Benefit Group.”

“We’ve known and worked alongside George and Jon Duczak and The American Worker Plans team for many years. Like us, they have been very successful working with brokers to support employers with part-time and hourly workers,” said Travis West, CEO of Fringe Benefit Group. “We believe the hourly and part-time worker marketplace will expand significantly in the coming years as a result of ACA and this acquisition will position us well to serve their needs.”

The Affordable Care Act (ACA) has greatly changed the benefits landscape. Companies with hourly and part-time employees face the constant challenge of attracting and retaining quality workers. Fringe Benefit Group’s Framework voluntary benefit offering is specifically designed for employers looking for a plan for part-time employees that is affordable, flexible, and easily administered. The Framework team works closely with brokers to customize plan design, pricing, communication, implementation, and enrollment to meet their customers’ individual needs. Framework provides employers with a best-in-class benefits package, communication and enrollment services, and unique billing and premium payment options. Framework benefits include MEC, fixed indemnity, inpatient and outpatient supplemental, dental, vision, critical illness, short-term disability, life insurance, and accident plans. Framework customers include many of the nation’s leading restaurant, retail, hospitality and staffing companies.

“This acquisition benefits our mutual clients, employees and their families because it’s a combination of two great companies who excel at servicing the part-time employee benefits arena,” said Jon Duczak, senior vice president of TAWP. “The strength of TAWP’s communication, benefit strategies and experience with the outstanding administrative services provided by Fringe Benefit Group will result in a superior experience for everyone we serve.”

About Fringe Benefit Group

Austin, Texas-based Fringe Benefit Group and its affiliate companies have helped employers design and administer fringe benefit programs since 1983. Through its nationwide network of independent brokers and agents, Fringe Benefit Group has established itself as the leader in government contractor health and welfare and retirement plans. Drawing on its expertise in the prevailing wage segment, the company has also emerged as a leader in group benefit plans designed specifically for hourly and part-time workers. For more information, visit www.fbg.com, www.thecontractorsplan.com or www.frameworkbenefits.com.