Tom Petty once opined that “the waiting is the hardest part.” That theory is born out every day in Division of Motor Vehicles offices, where seemingly interminable waits have become a cliche.

If nothing were being done to resolve the problem, there would be good reason to box the whole thing up and outsource it to private companies. That is what some lawmakers are suggesting with draft legislation to privatize the DMV, according to The Denver Post’s Joey Bunch.

And while it’s fine to consider the pros and cons of that idea, the state is well into a multi-million-dollar endeavor to revamp the entire DMV, spending nearly $100 million to upgrade a 20-year-old and outdated computer system.

The state has also set up “wait-less” kiosks in Front Range DMV offices, bolstered its online system and set goals to reduce the wait times to less than 15 minutes by 2018. And most of its offices are on track to hit that goal, according to recent reports.

The state’s DRIVES project was launched Aug. 17 and will take place over two 18-month phases. The first will involve replacing the Driver License System and should be completed by December 2017. The second phase, replacing the title and registration system, will be complete by 2019.

These efforts may not be perceptible to the person stuck in line waiting for a driver’s license. But imagine how long implementing an outsourcing system might take, not to mention its potential problems.

Additionally, there are questions about how privatization would work. What would start-up costs be? Would contracting services have better results? Would the government set caps to forbid overcharging?

With only two months into the present project, why throw in the towel?

Currently, DMV fees do not fully cover the costs of the division, which is supplemented by the state budget. If lawmakers approved outsourcing, a private company would have to charge enough to recoup its investment while making a profit.

The governor’s office said that currently the state regulates third party driving schools and third party testers for driver’s licenses. However, the DMV is still the agency that issues licenses.

The state has outsourced its vehicle emissions program for years, setting a $25 cap and limiting the contractor from making a profit greater than 10 percent of operating costs.

Yet, a 2010 audit said the state had not kept track of the contractor’s finances to determine if the $25 fee was appropriate.

If the state were to outsource DMV services, it would have to do a better job in terms of accountability and transparency.

Before jumping into the complicated outsourcing game, lawmakers should closely examine the moves the state is making toward reducing wait times that are intended to make the DMV experience more efficient and, yes, even customer friendly.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.