DMC: LIFE AS A FOR-PROFIT Did the DMC maintain charity care? Depends on the numbers

One worry some had when the Detroit Medical Center became a for-profit was that the health system would reduce the amount of uncompensated care it provides.



The numbers aren't clear if that has happened.



Numbers provided to Legacy DMC, the nonprofit organization formed to monitor the 2010 sales agreement with Nashville, Tenn.-based Vanguard Health Systems Inc., show that uncompensated care increased 14.7 percent from 2010-12.



That's less than the 18.5 percent increase shown by Henry Ford Health System, but more than St. John Providence Health System at 8.7 percent. Henry Ford and St. John are primary competitors to the DMC because of their flagship hospitals in Detroit.



Officials for Henry Ford and St. John declined to comment for this story other than to provide the uncompensated care data.



But according to Medicare cost reports for the DMC, uncompensated care was reduced by $6.5 million, or 8.2 percent, from 2010 to 2012.



Because of incomplete data, uncompensated care — which includes bad debt and charity care — for DMC Children's Hospital and DMC Rehabilitation Institute of Michigan were excluded.





Uncompensated care

The following is the amount of uncompensated care provided by the Detroit Medical Center and its primary competitors. There are two sets of figures for DMC: those provided by Medicare (left) and those provided by the health system.

The main difference between the Medicare-reported uncompensated care numbers and Vanguard's, said Phil Roe, DMC CFO under Vanguard, is that Medicare cost reports use a different method for estimating bad debt and charity care, based on a complicated cost-to-charge formula that is supposed to reflect a hospital's actual costs of service delivery rather than what it charges patients.



The figures the health system uses for other purposes are based on generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. Roe said a GAAP requirement was that insurance company payment denials, which were counted as bad debt when the DMC was a nonprofit, instead had to be counted as an insurance contractual adjustment.



"If we had stayed on DMC policy on how denials were counted, the bad-debt expense would have been even higher" after 2010, Roe said.



While Roe disputed the Medicare cost figures, he gave two additional reasons why uncompensated care accounting changed after Vanguard took over.



One is that bad debt related to the practices of physicians employed by the DMC was not included after 2010.



Another is that Vanguard DMC also did a better job at collecting unpaid bills from patients and health insurers. But, he said, as revenue and patient volumes increased, overall bad-debt totals also increased.





Related Links