While going 8-2 and enjoying a five-game winning streak in the first 10 games of December, the Avalanche was a balanced bunch. Scoring was spread from the first line to the fourth.

But at the same time, first-line center Nathan MacKinnon suffered through a goal-scoring drought that still exists, and he and his wingers were held without a goal the past three games.

Time for a change. The Nine Line — coined from the sweater numbers of Gabe Landeskog (92), MacKinnon (29) and Matt Duchene (9) — was not intact in Saturday’s practice and is not expected to surface in Sunday’s game against the Arizona Coyotes at the Pepsi Center.

MacKinnon and John Mitchell have traded spots, with Mitchell now between Landeskog and Duchene and MacKinnon with 30-somethings Alex Tanguay and Jarome Iginla. MacKinnon might get fewer even-strength minutes but will continue to play with Duchene and Landeskog on the power play.

“We were together for two months, and we’ve played really well,” MacKinnon said of the Nine Line. “It’s a long season, and we’re not even at the halfway point yet. There’s a lot of hockey left, and I’m sure those guys will be at my wings at some point. But right now, we all hope this works.”

MacKinnon, a natural goal-scorer, hasn’t scored in 13 consecutive games. Landeskog has just three goals in 12 games, and Duchene — who was the NHL’s top goal producer in November — has just five in his past 13.

“Chemistry comes and goes, and you gotta get a jolt every now and then, and I think that’s kind of what Patty’s trying to do,” Duchene said of coach Patrick Roy’s line changes. “If all of us get back to the foundations of our games within those lines, it will be a good thing.”

Roy is hoping the unchanged lines continued to produce. The newcomers line — center Carl Soderberg and wingers Blake Comeau and Andreas Martinsen — and the Cody McLeod-Mikhail Grigorenko-Jack Skille trio have been fantastic.

The Avs returned from a four-day Christmas break Saturday and practiced longer and harder than normal.

“That was a good one,” Duchene said. “The harder you push it the first day back, the better you feel. It should come back quick for us.”

ARIZONA AT COLORADO 6 p.m. Sunday, ALT2; 104.3 FM

Spotlight on Anthony Duclair:

A year ago, Duclair and teammate Max Domi — Arizona’s leading scorer — were playing for Canada at the World Junior Championship. They won the gold medal together and now are major pieces in Arizona’s bright future. Duclair, 20, has 10 goals, tied with Domi for second among the Coyotes, and has a plus-3 rating, tied for the team high. Duclair was drafted by the New York Rangers in 2013 but acquired by Arizona in the Keith Yandle trade in March.

NOTEBOOK

COYOTES: They hosted the Los Angeles Kings on Saturday, and Sunday’s game will be their only road contest in a nine-game stretch. They began 4-1 on the homestand, including a 3-2 victory against Toronto on Tuesday. … Arizona defeated Colorado 4-2 on Nov. 5 in the desert. Defenseman Nicklas Grossman scored two goals for the Coyotes; he has only three this season. … Arizona’s 34 points are just one fewer than the Avalanche, but the Coyotes are minus-14 in goals for, goals against. Colorado is plus-2. … Arizona is 7-10-1 on the road.

AVALANCHE: Defenseman Nate Guenin was diagnosed with a concussion after Monday’s game against Toronto but has passed tests and said he felt fine after Saturday’s practice. But he is not scheduled to play against the Coyotes, with former Arizona defenseman Brandon Gormley taking his place on the third pairing with Zach Redmond. … Semyon Varlamov will start in goal Sunday. Calvin Pickard is the scheduled starter Monday at San Jose. Pickard is 9-8 with a 2.75 goals-against average and .917 save percentage for San Antonio of the American Hockey League. Mike Chambers, The Denver Post