Harris said the probe should seek answers to several questions, including: "how federal dollars were spent on the exchange," "the procurement process, which may have included contractors with no expertise," whether federal funds can be recouped from the state "in light of their obvious lack of proper oversight" and "who specifically failed in their responsibilities to safeguard federal taxpayer money."

The exchange's now-fired contractor, Noridian Healthcare Solutions, had been paid nearly $65 million by Maryland, and had billed the state for $13 million more. Additional spending is projected to bring the exchange's total cost to a total of $261 million.



The bulk of Maryland's funds for its Obamacare exchange came from federal grants.



"By the end of this year, over $100 million [in] federal dollars will have been spent on a project that should have cost much less, and doesn't work," Harris wrote in his February letter, which was co-signed with Rep. Jack Kingston, R-Ga., chairman of the House's Appropriations Committee. "As a result of the fact that Maryland appears to be willing to waste tens of millions of dollars of more federal dollars ... we ask that the investigation start immediately."

(Read more: Oracle faces ouster from Oregon Obamacare website)



A spokeswoman for Maryland Health Connection, which is one of 14 state-run Obamacare exchanges, declined to comment on the probe. A spokeswoman for HHS' inspector general did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

The exchange, which sells private Obamacare insurance and enrolls low-income people in Medicaid, has performed abysmally since its Oct. 1 launch. As of March 1, the exchange had signed up just 38,000 in private plans, far short of original projections.

Its leadership now is contemplating junking its entire exchange model, and possibly relying on the federal government's Obamacare site after March.

On the heels of its launch, as the exchange tried to get its botched website working properly, the exchange's director, Rebecca Pearce, took a weeklong vacation in the Cayman Islands in late November. She resigned in December, after her ill-timed jaunt was disclosed.

Two weeks ago, the exchange fired Noridian Healthcare Solutions and replaced the company with Optum/QSSI as the main IT contractor on an interim basis.