The Frequent Flyers' aerial dancers will be in the air for the Boulder Philharmonic's entire performance of Aaron Copland's "Appalachian Spring." (Courtesy photo)

If you go What: The Boulder Philharmonic collaborates with the University of Colorado choirs, Boulder Ballet and Frequent Flyers Aerial Dance Company in a program of American music When: 7:30 p.m. Saturday, Nov. 2 Where: Macky Auditorium, University of Colorado campus Tickets: $13-$70 Info: 303-449-1343 (ext. 2) or boulderphil.org

The Boulder Philharmonic is no stranger to collaborations with choral and dance groups, but director Michael Butterman believes that Saturday's concert at Macky Auditorium, the second of the current season, will feature the most individual performers of any single event in his tenure.

The all-American program, which also ties into the "nature" theme of the 2013-14 season, is centered on two giants of American music who will always be linked by their professional and personal relationship, as well as their deaths within two months of each other in 1990: Aaron Copland and Leonard Bernstein.

A collaborative effort with the Boulder Ballet had been in the works during early planning for the season, in which a 100th-anniversary performance of Stravinsky's "Rite of Spring" with choreography was considered.

"That effort was tabled," Butterman said, "but we decided to include another great piece that was originally performed with dancers but does not typically include them anymore."

That led him to Copland's "Appalachian Spring." The concept grew to include not only the Boulder Ballet but also the Boulder-based Frequent Flyers Aerial Dance company. Neither Butterman nor Nancy Smith, founder and director of Frequent Flyers, wished to turn to the original Martha Graham choreography.

Smith said the Saturday performance will be a fresh take. The orchestra will be onstage, behind the Boulder Ballet dancers, rather than in the pit. The aerial dancers will be above ground for the entire 20-minute work.

"It's a simple concept: (The aerial dancers) are basically supernatural beings or gods, and the ballet dancers on the ground are humans," said Smith, who devised the choreography with the Boulder Ballet's Alex Davison.

The aerial dancers will be working with their typical apparatuses, fabric, hammocks and hoops.

The company is celebrating its 25th anniversary this year and is one of the pioneers of the art form. Smith said that while the Frequent Flyers have collaborated with other orchestras and classical groups, this will be the first-ever pairing with their "home" professional orchestra, something she and Butterman said was a long time coming.

Boulder Ballet dancers will represent humans on the ground during the Boulder Philharmonic's presentation of "Appalachian Spring" by Aaron Copland. (Courtesy photo)

"A lot will be going on," Smith said, "but we hope that it will wash over the audience and that it will be a complete visual and sensory integration with this great music as the backdrop."

Butterman leads into this visual extravaganza with a rich slate of music, including the suite from Copland's opera "The Tender Land." The last movement of the suite is an orchestral version of the familiar chorus titled "The Promise of Living."

Here, Butterman saw an opportunity to expand the collaboration by including singers. The choirs of the University of Colorado will join the Phil for the first time.

"Since Greg Gentry was named director of Choral Studies at CU, we have wanted to do something with them," Butterman said, "and the Copland connection provided a great entry."

In addition to the final movement of the Copland suite, the choirs will join the Phil in Bernstein's "Chichester Psalms" from 1965, a popular work with college and professional choirs.

Gentry said the Bernstein work, which is sung in Hebrew, is a great fit for his singers. The director, who previously worked with the Phoenix Symphony Chorus, prepared Bloch's "Sacred Service," another piece with a Hebrew text, for a performance with the Colorado Music Festival last summer. He had a professional relationship with outgoing CMF director Michael Christie when the latter was director of the Phoenix Symphony.

The University Singers, made up of primarily graduate students, and the larger undergraduate University Choir will participate, a total of about 80 singers.

"I very much believe in choral and orchestral collaborations as being one of the highest orders of our musical art forms," Gentry said. "For the joy of music making in the Boulder community, this is a wonderful offering."

While the "Chichester Psalms" are considered a sacred work, Butterman pointed out that some sections come from discarded portions of "West Side Story." It includes a major part for boy soprano, which will be sung by Quinn Evans of the Boulder Children's Chorale. A student at Manhattan Middle School, Evans, who was born on Sept. 11, 2001, recently gave a performance of "Pie Jesu" from the Faure Requiem in memory of those who died the day of his birth.

The concert opener, fitting the American and nature themes, is "Rusty Air in Carolina" by Mason Bates. The short 2006 work blends live music with electronic sounds.

"That's kind of his calling card," Butterman said of Bates. The electronic portion is triggered by laptop and closely integrated with the orchestra.

"It's complicated and requires a skilled operator," Butterman said. "It's a far cry from the pre-taped stuff of the past."

But it is accessible music, Butterman added, saying, "It expresses the heat and sultriness of a midsummer mid-Atlantic evening, with strains of folk music and bluegrass."

Appropriately, it was originally commissioned by the Winston-Salem Symphony of North Carolina.