LANSING, MI -- Most insurers providing individual health insurance for Michiganders on the federally-facilitated health care exchange expect to raise rates for 2016, according to data filed with the state's Department of Insurance and Financial Services.

Of the sixteen insurers offering plans on the federally facilitated marketplace in Michigan, 11 have asked to raise rates from their 2015 offerings. Three are asking to decrease rates, and two replaced all existing 2015 plans.

Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan and its HMO Blue Care Network of Michigan are the largest providers on the exchange, affecting 310,000 individuals. Together, they plan a rate increase of about 10 percent. The companies also asked for increases in 2015.

BCBSM Director of Individual Business Rick Notter said that "most of the increase is the result of medical trend or increased medical cost."

He said about 7 percent of the increase was driven by that cost.

The company asking for the biggest increase in rates is UnitedHealthcare Community Plan Inc. at 14.7 percent. The company with the biggest decrease is Meridian Health Plan of Michigan Inc. at -12.6 percent.

DIFS noted that the proposed rate changes don't reflect a comparison between providers, since each has a different starting point. In addition, individuals who receive tax credits through the exchange will experience different rate changes because of the tax credit calculation. The actual changes consumers experience could vary, because rates vary based on plan, geographic area and tobacco use.

The department is accepting public comment on the proposed rate increases through June 30. Those wishing to comment should submit an email to HealthRateComments@michigan.gov. DIFS will review the proposed changes. The rate changes, if approved, would go into effect Jan. 1, 2016.

Emily Lawler is a Capitol/Business reporter for MLive. You can reach her at elawler@mlive.com, subscribe to her on Facebook or follow her on Twitter: @emilyjanelawler.