(AP) — Illinois Gov. Bruce Rauner's administration is negotiating a two-month contract extension with the public relations firm that handles the state's promotion of health insurance coverage, an indication of the Republican governor's cautious co-existence with President Barack Obama's health care law.

A $25.6 million contract with St. Louis-based FleishmanHillard to promote Get Covered Illinois, the state's branded outreach campaign, expires Thursday.

Chief marketing officer Jose Munoz told The Associated Press the state hopes to extend the contract to June 30 to make sure the program is sustainable. He didn't specify how Illinois will handle the work after that.

Read more:

• Rauner names new director of Get Covered Illinois

• Illinois renews Get Covered PR contract after cost criticism

• Chicago political firm had key job in Get Covered Illinois

"We are looking forward to the next open enrollment period and continuing our educational efforts with Illinois residents," Munoz said in an email. Munoz and Get Covered Illinois Executive Director Karin Zosel, both state employees, declined the AP's request for an interview about the contract.

Under the health law's expansion of coverage, more than 625,000 Illinois residents have gained insurance through Medicaid and another 350,000 Illinoisans bought private insurance on the new subsidized marketplace.

Money to promote coverage comes from federal grants under the Affordable Care Act, but the work is supervised by the state of Illinois. Rauner recently appointed Zosel to oversee the work.

Rauner's position on the health care law has been reserved compared to other Republican governors who lash out against the law they deride as "Obamacare." During the campaign, he said he wouldn't have agreed to expand Medicaid because he believes there's too much waste and abuse. He also said he worried about how Illinois will cover added costs once enhanced federal contributions phase down.

Since taking office in January, Rauner has focused on finding savings in the health law by assuming certain people, such as home health care workers, now can get subsidized private health insurance through the federal HealthCare.gov insurance market.

FleishmanHillard won a $33 million contract in 2013 during the administration of former Gov. Pat Quinn, a Democrat. The first-year contract drew criticism for its hourly rates, which far exceeded contracts other states signed for similar work, when first reported by the AP. During the first months of the contract, more than 90 people, including executives from the firm and its subcontractors, billed at least $270 an hour.

This week, Munoz said FleishmanHillard's first year of work came in $4.3 million under budget, and work to promote the second insurance enrollment season may also come in under budget.

"The majority of our work over the next two months will be dedicated to consolidating the infrastructure we built to ensure we have a sustainable program," Munoz said.