27-year-old Andressa Urach, a Brazilian model competing to be Miss BumBum, was hospitalized after a botched plastic surgery procedure left her with an infection.

On November 21, Urach underwent a procedure during which doctors implanted hydrogel and PMMA into her thighs and butt in order to enhance their shape. This was one of 9 cosmetic procedures she had undertaken in the past 5 years — including a nose job, a bioplasty facial correction, a jaw reduction, boob job, liposuction and vaginal lip reduction. Shortly after her recent injection, however, she developed an infection and was sent to Conception Hospital in Porto Alegre, where doctors drained her thigh. Currently, Urach requires a breathing apparatus and is heavily sedated but seems to be doing well.

During an interview with Brazil’s R7 website, Urach noted that “the hydrogel was no absorbed by my body and started to harm me. Now I’ve discovered that the PMMA is sticking to my muscles and causing the tissue to rot. That’s why I am feeling such strong pains. I’m taking morphine every four hours and antibiotics to alleviate the suffering.”

Miss BumBum is an annual competition in Brazil that aims to find the woman with the “best butt.” There are currently 27 contestants for Miss BumBum 2014; Urach won second place in the competition in 2012. She had previously made a media splash after claiming she had had an affair with Cristiano Ronaldo, a famous Portuguese soccer player, though he had vehemently denied her claims and said they were “pure fiction and forgery” to seek “the limelight on my account.”

Urach had undergone 9 different plastic surgery operations in the past 5 years. Facebook

Meanwhile, Urach’s friends and family are hoping she will recover from her plastic surgery-induced illness: “I ask everyone to pray a lot, because I’m sure that my dear Jesus is wonderful and will cure it,” Marisete de Favari, Urach’s mother, said in a statement, according to Brazilian news agency Globo.com.

Jessica Lopes, another Miss BumBum contestant and one of Urach’s friends, told The Daily Mail that “everyone is in a state of shock. Andressa and I would go to the plastic surgeon as if we were going shopping. Sometimes we would agree to do some procedure together, we were not afraid. We were slaves to beauty.”