A heartbreaking, open letter, posted on Facebook, is going viral. It describes a young University of Michigan graduate’s experience that there is nothing “affordable” about the Affordable Care Act. She concludes that it has done little but rape her future.

Ashley Dionne, 26, posted her letter on conservative talk radio host Dennis Prager’s Facebook page, and it’s now being picked up by other media.

Although highly educated at a well-respected university, Dionne describes herself as a member of the “working poor.” She’s paid $8 an hour to work 32 hours a week at a gym. She was placed in that position by a failing economy, which Obamacare can only make worse.

Obamacare is forcing her out of a plan she favors and into one in which the premiums have more than quadrupled and with a massive deductible. Yet her own medical problems mean that going uninsured is not an option.

Here’s her letter:

My name is Ashley Dionne and I’m a 26-year-old recent graduate from Michigan. The phony Obamacare signup poster boy made me want to send a message about how Obamacare is really affecting people. I graduated from The University of Michigan in 2009. In my state, this used to mean something, but even with a bachelor’s I was told I was too educated and wouldn’t stay. I watched as kids with GEDs and high school diploma’s took the low-paying jobs for which I applied. I went back to school and got a second degree and finally found work at a gym. I work nights and only get 32 hours a week for eight dollars an hour. I’m unable to find a second job at this time. I have asthma, ulcers, and mild cerebral palsy. Obamacare takes my monthly rate from $75 a month for full coverage on my “Young Adult Plan,” to $319 a month. After $6,000 in deductibles, of course. Liberals claimed this law would help the poor. I am the poor, the working poor, and I can’t afford to support myself, let alone older generations and people not willing to work at all. This law has raped my future. It will keep me and kids my age from having a future at all. This is the real face of Obamacare and it isn’t pretty.

Liberals have yet to learn — there is no such thing as a free lunch.

[poll id=”123″]