UPDATE 10/28/15 @ 8:05 p.m.

GALLIA COUNTY, Ohio (WSAZ) -- Families in our region are on edge as Holzer Health System announced 100 jobs will be slashed.

MGN Photo: Jobs Report

It will affect people in southern Ohio and parts of West Virginia.

Holzer CEO Dr. Christopher Meyer said changing technology and growing costs are part of the reason. He explained that because more services are outpatient and technology has changed healthcare, fewer people are needed for inpatient care.

Meyer said they're eliminating 100 positions from vice presidents and directors to its employees and couriers because of the growing costs. He also says that includes a number of unfilled positions, but couldn't elaborate.

He also said employees who are qualified can transfer to other open positions. He also made it clear that doctors and nurses are not included in these cuts.

Meyer said these tough decisions have to be made in order to make sure they aren't forced to deal with an even more significant problem in the future.

"I fully understand that Holzer is to Gallia County, for example what the auto industry was to Detroit," Meyer said. "We're that type of employer. We take the steps we take, as painful and emotional as they are, for everybody involved, to right-size our workforce, to accommodate it to the book of business -- the volume of patients we currently see so that Holzer's here forever."

Meyer said employees affected will be notified through Friday. He adds they're giving employees let go a month's pay and help with job placement services.

Meyer added that he does not expect more cuts in the future, but he says the eliminated jobs will not return.

GALLIPOLIS, Ohio (WSAZ) -- Holzer Health System says it's cutting some 100 jobs at its locations in southern Ohio and western West Virginia.

According to a press release, the cuts are mostly non-direct patient care position.

Officials say the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act has caused dramatic change in healthcare service delivery models. The say inpatient volumes continue to shrink while outpatient volumes are rising.

Officials also say that reduced Medicare and Medicaid reimbursements further complicate the issue.

Holzer says approximately 65 percent of its patients are covered by government insurance.

The shift in service delivery and funding cuts are realities for hospitals across the United States. The situation is uniquely more challenging for health systems in rural communities.

The release also says that prior to this announcement, Holzer Health System was actively reducing operational expenditures, eliminating duplication of services resulting from a merger in 2012, divesting excess property holdings, and renegotiating supply contracts.

“Our entire staff works tirelessly to reduce operational costs and to streamline operations while continuing to provide excellent care to our patients,” said Holzer Health System CEO, Christopher T. Meyer, D.O. “While these efforts helped us to maintain our not-for-profit community hospital system, unfortunately, it has not been enough to address the sweeping changes in the healthcare environment. This national situation placed us in a regrettable position. We must now take additional action to ensure the long-term financial health and stability of Holzer so that we may continue providing the excellent health care our patients deserve for many years to come.”

Officials say the the delivery of high quality, patient-centered care remains its top priority. The organization will continue to meet or exceed national safety standards for staff-patient ratios as it manages this difficult transition.

Holzer began notifying employees of the cuts on Monday and will continue through Friday. Separation pay and outplacement services including job placement assistance and career support will be provided to employees affected.