— Republican Pennsylvania congressman Lou Barletta is hoping that the third time is the charm for a bill that cleared the U.S. House on Tuesday.

His legislation to ensure that volunteer firefighters are not counted as full-time employees under the Affordable Care Act's employer mandate had passed the House twice before Tuesday's 415-0 vote. Both last year and in January, the bill also had unanimous support.

But each time, the Senate used Barletta's bill for other purposes. In 2014, a provision was added to extend unemployment benefits, and the controversial addition sank the measure.

During last month's standoff over paying for the Department of Homeland Security, senators gutted his bill and inserted the funding details that allowed the agency to continue its operations without a shutdown.

The week after that February vote, Barletta reintroduced the bill, which he says would protect volunteer fire companies from becoming liable for health care costs under Obamacare requirements.

"Our volunteer firefighters have a hard enough time raising money needed for basic equipment," he said. "They cannot afford to pay for health insurance or pay a fine on top of it.

The Hazleton lawmaker, whose 11th District locally includes parts of Carbon County, first raised the issue in 2013 after hearing from a constituent that fire departments were worried about how their volunteers would be classified for health insurance purposes.

The Internal Revenue Service counts volunteer firefighters as employees for other tax purposes. But under the Obamacare statute, employers with 50 or more employees must provide health insurance or pay penalties.

Barletta and others — including Pennsylvania's two senators, Republican Pat Toomey and Democrat Bob Casey — did not believe that Congress intended to include volunteer firefighters under that coverage mandate. The cost of providing health insurance would be crippling to small fire companies and could cause some to close down, Barletta said.

About 96 percent of Pennsylvania's 2,300 fire companies are fully staffed by volunteers, according to a 2014 report to the state Legislature.

The U.S. Treasury Department announced last year that such volunteers would not be counted for Obamacare health insurance purposes. But Barletta has continued to press the legislation, arguing that volunteer fire companies need the certainty of having the law permanently clarified by Congress.

"I don't think we should leave something as important as public safety in the hands of unelected bureaucrats at the IRS," Barletta said.

In a rare show of bipartisanship, Democrats agreed. Rep. Loretta Sanchez, D-Calif., said Monday during a floor speech on the bill that she was "heartened" to see Republicans "acting on legislation to improve the Affordable Care Act, rather than to simply repeal it."

Barletta's bill heads back to the Senate to await consideration.

lolson@mcall.com

Twitter @LauraOlson

202-824-8216