Programs combating obesity expect to gain under Obamacare as covered patients lose

Weight-loss outpatient clinics emphasizing healthy diets and bariatric surgery hospital programs in Michigan stand to be big winners under the Affordable Care Act with improved insurance coverage for services and procedures.



With 31.1 percent of the state's population considered obese, Michigan has the 10th-highest percentage of obese people in the nation. Louisiana is first with 34.7 percent. At 31.4 percent, Indiana is the only Midwestern state higher than Michigan, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.



Michigan insurance experts project that up to 1 million people will either purchase private insurance under the Affordable Care Act's expanded benefits or gain Medicaid coverage through the state's Healthy Michigan program over the next several years.

Hospital programs

"Not only will Detroit Medical Center see an uptick in (obesity-related) services, but all hospitals" will generate more business, depending on what health insurance plans they purchase, said Don Gulish, program manager of service line development with Harper University Hospital, which is part of the eight-hospital DMC.



Other hospital-based systems in Southeast Michigan with weight loss, diet, nutrition counseling and bariatric programs include Beaumont Health System, Henry Ford Health System, St. Joseph Mercy Health System, St. John Providence Health System, Botsford Hospital and University of Michigan Health System.



Dearborn-based Oakwood Healthcare is expanding its bariatric surgery and weight loss program with physicians to provide more comprehensive options for patients, said Daniel Bacal, M.D., medical director of the Oakwood Bariatric Program.



Bacal said it is unclear how many newly insured patients will seek bariatric surgery or nutrition counseling services under health reform.



"Oakwood is ready to help these newly insured patients," said Bacal. "Some of these plans require a very high deductible, so it is unclear if that may ultimately discourage patients to seek medical or surgical treatment for weight loss."



Average costs for bariatric services, depending on the type of procedure, range from $18,000 to $30,000. Insurance coverage also depends on the amount of deductibles and coinsurance, or the percentage amount a patient pays against charges.



Gulish said the Harper Bariatric Medicine Institute, which conducted about 350 bariatric surgeries last year, projects a 5 percent to 10 percent increase this year from health reform, a recovering economy and a referral contract with Southfield-based Medical Weight Loss Clinic Inc.

Outpatient clinics

Last month, DMC and Medical Weight Loss Clinic signed an agreement to refer patients to each other. Patients who purchase services at Medical Weight Loss Clinic will be able to seek consultation with DMC's bariatric surgeons.



"This is the first health care system partnership in Medical Weight Loss Clinic's nearly 30-year history," said David Paull, the company's president.



Gulish said DMC also will use Medical Weight Loss Clinic services to fulfill insurance company requirements that patients seeking bariatric surgery prove medical necessity by first successfully completing a six-month to one-year weight-loss program.



"Patients who want surgery meet with a surgeon who explains (the weight-loss) process" and then take pre-surgery medical health tests, said Gulish. "They are referred to Medical Weight Loss Clinic and put on a diet. After they complete the prerequisites, they are sent back to us for cardiac clearances."



However, some patients will take off enough weight during the diet program that bariatric surgery is not required, Gulish said.



A weight-loss program normally includes people attending regular meetings, eating prescribed foods and taking nutritional supplements.



Medical Weight Loss Clinic opened its 34th center in Royal Oak earlier this year. The clinic offers patients customized programs based on individual needs and uses common food purchased from grocery stores or farmers markets, Paull said.



"We are projecting anywhere between $15 million to $16 million in revenue this year," Paull said. "We had a little dip last year after grossing $16 million in 2012."

Obesity screening

Under the Affordable Care Act's 10 essential benefits, insurance companies that sell ACA-compliant products on or off the healthcare.gov marketplace must cover obesity screening and nutritional counseling, said Bryan Cole, director of product development with Flint-based HealthPlus of Michigan.



Michigan requires additional benefits that include physician-supervised weight loss services, Cole said. Obese individuals with a body mass index of 35 or greater are at increased risk of diabetes, cardiovascular disease, hypertension and cancer, according to a January report by the Center for Healthcare Research & Transformation.