By Arin Mikailian, Glendale News-Press, Calif. McClatchy-Tribune Information Services

Sept. 25 --A Glendale Police sergeant arrested last month for allegedly soliciting a prostitute in Nevada is on paid leave of more than $10,000 a month until he reaches retirement, part of a settlement reached with the city in May regarding his discrimination lawsuit.

Sgt. Vahak Mardikian will receive $10,579 a month as part of the deal, said City Attorney Mike Garcia . He will be paid to not work through Dec. 29, 2015 and will be required to retire from the force after that date, according to settlement documents.

The city will also pay him $24,792 to be distributed evenly during a one year period that began on May 16 and the city's insurance company, AIG, will pay $250,000 to his attorneys, the settlement stated.

Mardikian turns 50 next year and will be eligible for retirement to be paid for by the California Public Employees' Retirement System .

He was one of five officers that filed a lawsuit in 2010 against the police department alleging discrimination, retaliation and harassment because they're Armenian.

In addition to Mardikian, Officers Robert Parseghian and Benny Simonzad dismissed their cases in exchange for $10,000 worth of attorneys' fees each. The two received no other compensation. The city prevailed in a case filed by Officer Tigran Topadzhikyan last November.

Officer John Balian's trial is scheduled for January 2015 .

Mardikian signed his settlement on May 9 and it went into effect the same day.

"There is always a risk of a bigger payout if a case proceeds to trial," Garcia said in an email. "In this case, there was also a risk of attorney's fees if Mardikian recovered any amount of money."

Mardikian was demoted in early 2012 following claims he was pressuring fellow officers to join the lawsuit. He successfully appealed the demotion and was reinstated as sergeant last year by the Civil Service Commission .

Garcia said Mardikian was also asking the commission to reinstate his special assignment pay he lost when he transferred out of the burglary unit in 2012, but that claim was dropped as part of the settlement.

Mardikian could not be reached for comment and Rosanna Vargas , an attorney with Shegerian & Associates , which represented him in the lawsuit, declined to comment on the deal.

A confidentiality agreement was also part of the settlement.

On Aug. 8 , Mardikian was arrested in Las Vegas after offering undercover Det. Justine Gatus $250 -- plus $25 in gas money -- for sex, Nevada court records show.

At about 2 a.m. , he got up from playing poker at the Flamingo, where he was vacationing with friends and started talking to Gatus, according to a police report of the incident.

She denied being a cop when asked and agreed on a price and service with Mardikian and planned to meet him in a parking lot, according to the report.

At that point, Mardikian was taken into custody by Las Vegas officers.

A court date on the misdemeanor charge is scheduled for Oct. 22 , according to the Clark County Court documents.

Garcia would not comment on whether Mardikian's arrest would have any effect on his settlement, saying it is a personnel matter.

Glendale Police Chief Rob Castro said once Mardikian's misdemeanor case in Nevada is over, there would be an internal police department investigation, but did not say what sanctions Mardikian might face, if any.

___

(c)2014 the Glendale News-Press (Glendale, Calif.)

Visit the Glendale News-Press (Glendale, Calif.) at www.glendalenewspress.com

Distributed by MCT Information Services

Wordcount: 575

[jetpack-related-posts]