No one likes being referred to as a fixture, but H. Wayne Wilson is as close to a fixture on Peoria public television as you can get. He's hosted the "At Issue" program on WTVP Channel 47 that delves into community affairs for more than 25 years. We recently had a chance for a brief review.



►Q: When did you first start doing interviews on Channel 47?



A: I performed volunteer duties at WTVP-TV from 1975 through 1988 while working at other media outlets. Celeste Kelley, who had been hosting a half-hour program at WTVP, left that position about the same time I left WHOI-TV in 1988. I approached WTVP with a proposal to do public affairs talk shows and documentaries on a freelance basis. After first offering me a full-time position, station management agreed to a contractual arrangement, and "At Issue" began on a September through May basis.



►Q: What are some of the biggest changes on the media front you've seen in that time?



A: While there have been many technological advancements in the quarter-century since then, the biggest change has been newsroom consolidation and the increase in the amount of news offered by commercial television stations without a corresponding increase in staff. In addition, many reporters are new to the Peoria market. All this has resulted in some news reports that lack perspective and very few in-depth investigative stories.



►Q: How do you go about selecting a panel for a TV discussion?



A: It varies. With state constitutional officers or community leaders, guest selection is self-evident. Controversial issues like gun control require individuals from opposite sides who are willing to appear together yet be civil. Since the program is informational in nature, I look for guests who can best address a subject without letting the studio setting affect their demeanor.



►Q: With your long history at the station, people may think you're a Channel 47 employee. What is your status?



A: My services at WTVP-TV are offered on a freelance basis through a handshake agreement with station president Chet Tomczyk. The arrangement with the station does not fill the work week, which allows me to produce videos and write for corporations and non-profit organizations.



►Q: What's coming up on "At Issue" this season?



A: So far in this 26th season of "At Issue," we went on the Honor Flight trip to Washington, D.C., aired programs regarding the nitrate levels in area waters and heard from former Secretary of Transportation Ray LaHood and Congressman Aaron Schock. In January, issues include the Affordable Care Act with two hospital presidents (Jan. 2), suicide prevention (Jan. 9), Gov. Pat Quinn (his schedule allowing, Jan. 16), the GOP gubernatorial primary debate (Jan. 23) and Congresswoman Cheri Bustos (Jan. 30). The program airs Thursday evenings at 8:30, repeats Sundays at 4:30 and is available on www.wtvp.org.



►Q: Ideally, what would you set up in the way of news coverage at Channel 47 — if you had free rein?



A: WTVP planned a week-in-review program to air on Fridays a few years ago, but it didn't make air for lack of underwriting in the weak economy. WTVP executive producer Bill Baker and I would have produced it, updating local reports aired earlier in the week on commercial station newscasts, giving more in-depth reporting to the most important story of the week and adding a short interview segment offering different perspectives on issues. The concept is still viable if funding becomes available.