Business: Global medical device manufacturer dedicated to transforming the treatment of some of the world’s most expensive epidemic diseases.

Based: 1 St. Jude Medical Drive, Little Canada

Founded: 1976

CEO and president: Daniel J. Starks

Employees: 16,000 worldwide; 3,000 in Minnesota

Economic impact: Opening a 145,000-square-foot distribution center in Roseville this year to provide space for future growth. Also invests in Minnesota-based companies to help expand its product portfolio and donates more than $1.3 million annually to Minnesota causes.

Website: www.sjm.com/corporate.aspx

Long known as an innovator in medical device technology, St. Jude Medical knows it needs to continue stepping up its game to compete in today’s highly regulated industry that serves an aging population.

“We believe that medical device companies cannot keep doing the same things and expect to keep up with the burdens facing health care today. We need to work more efficiently to improve patient care and be a resource for reducing the cost of health care,” says John Heinmiller, executive vice president of St. Jude Medical.

Heinmiller says St. Jude has invested more than 12 percent of revenue in medical research and development in “each of the last 10 years.”

One example of that innovating spirit is what the company calls a game-changing pacemaker. It’s 10 percent of the size of a conventional pacemaker and the world’s first that doesn’t require invasive surgery. The device is commercially available in Europe, and the first implants for a trial designed to evaluate it for U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval occurred in February.

The company expects market-share gains for its pacemaker and defibrillator unit to help sales grow for the first time in two years. But CEO Dan Starks tempers the company’s overall outlook in light of uncertainties around the effects of the federal Affordable Care Act, foreign currency exchange rates and a sluggish global economic picture that has led to fewer doctor visits and patient surgeries.

“We are focused on delivering a balanced portfolio of sustaining and pioneering technologies that will provide the company with both near- and long-term revenue growth,” Heinmiller says. “Our goal is to develop medical devices that help improve patient outcomes and reduce the cost of health care for patients around the world.”