Fifty years ago this month, President Lyndon Johnson flew to Independence, Missouri to sign legislation creating Medicare and Medicaid in the presence of Harry Truman, who had championed universal health insurance. Reformers of this period viewed Medicare as the favored child – a universal entitlement built on a social insurance model run by the federal government. In contrast, Medicaid was a federal grant program to the states that targeted the poor and had all the trappings of "welfare medicine." Many believed that, as is common with programs for the poor, it would never generate the political support needed to thrive and escape erosion.

Contrary to these expectations, however, Medicaid expenditures and enrollees have steadily grown over the last five decades, and the government health care program has become a core pillar of the American health insurance system. The program presently insures over 71 million Americans – significantly more than Medicare. The Congressional Budget Office initially estimated that a Medicaid expansion under Obamacare would cover about half of the 30 million people who would gain insurance.

An array of factors help account for Medicaid rising. One is Medicaid's open-ended funding formula, in which the federal government matches at least half of what a state chooses to spend on the program. This means that elected officials at each level of government can take political credit for expanding Medicaid while paying only part of the tab. Another factor is the panoply of Medicaid service providers and other advocates (e.g., hospitals, nursing homes, managed care organizations and disability rights groups) who defend and promote the program.

A steady improvement in Medicaid's public image has also helped. Welfare recipients make up a shrinking share of the program's enrollees. Instead, Medicaid has emerged as an initiative for working people and as a safety net for middle-class individuals who need long-term care for themselves or loved ones. In this regard, Medicaid subsidizes some two-thirds of those in nursing homes. It also provides critical assistance to younger people with disabilities – children with severe intellectual impairments or cerebral palsy and adults left disabled after spinal cord or traumatic brain injuries.



[READ: Give All Women Abortion Coverage]

For their part, the nation's governors have, with occasional lapses, served as an intergovernmental lobby promoting Medicaid in Congress. For instance, the National Governors Association played a pivotal role in fending off efforts of the Reagan administration to retrench Medicaid in the early 1980s. During this period, southern governors teamed with former California Rep. Henry Waxman, a Democrat, to pass federal legislation significantly expanding Medicaid eligibility. The growing willingness of federal policymakers to grant states waivers has also fueled Medicaid growth. With greater freedom to innovate, many states (including Massachusetts under former Republican Gov. Mitt Romney) dramatically expanded eligibility for the program.

These and other catalytic factors have stoked the growth of Medicaid well into the 2000s. But they may not do so in the future. The last three decades have witnessed growing partisan polarization in the United States with the movement of the Republican Party to the ideological right. The reluctance of 21 Republican-dominated states to participate in Obamacare's Medicaid expansion bears witness to this trend. So too does the resolve of congressional Republicans to resist tax increases that could shore up entitlement programs like Medicaid.



[READ: Study Finds Doctors Order Fewer Preventive Services For Medicaid Patients]

This brings us to the importance of 2016. If next year's election leads to Republican control of Congress and the White House, the threat of Medicaid retrenchment looms large. Since 1965, Medicaid has spent only four years under unified Republican government – 2003 to 2007. During that time, the second Bush administration tried to convert Medicaid to a capped block grant but failed when it could not rally the support of most Republican governors. More recently, however, House Republicans have for five consecutive years (2011 to 2015) passed budget resolutions to repeal Obamacare and convert Medicaid to a block grant with massively reduced funding. A Republican-led senate followed suit this year. The Romney-Ryan ticket ran on this anti-Medicaid platform in the 2012 presidential election.