Click to email this to a friend (Opens in new window)

Less than eight months after its statewide launch, the Washington Health Benefit Exchange today announced that more than 100 Washington businesses from across the State have now enrolled through Washington Healthplanfinder Business.

Starting this November under the Affordable Care Act, Washington Healthplanfinder Business will expand its coverage to businesses of up to 50 employees to larger businesses of up to 100 employees.

“Business owners are looking for the best way to get quality, affordable health insurance for themselves, their families and their employees,” said Catherine Bailey, director of Washington Healthplanfinder Business. “Washington Healthplanfinder Business provides employers the opportunity for Washington business owners to compare plans, decide their contribution level and manage payment all in one place—and it’s the only place where small businesses can access tax credits to help cover the cost of health insurance.”

Over the past year, Washington Healthplanfinder Business representatives have met with brokers and business owners across the State, building innovative partnerships with business groups, trade associations and other community organizations.

That outreach continues on Thursday in South Lake Union when Washington Healthplanfinder Business hosts a networking happy hour at startup incubator WeWork. Business owners and entrepreneurs will be able to meet with Washington Healthplanfinder Business staff as well as with brokers to learn more about their health insurance options.

“Seattle is a national leader in small business and start-up job growth,” said Bailey. “We’re excited that two statewide health insurance carriers—Moda and UnitedHealth—have expressed interest in offering health plans on Washington Healthplanfinder Business beginning this fall. In addition, Kaiser Permanente has applied to offer health plans on Washington Healthplanfinder Business in Clark and Cowlitz counties.”

The Washington Healthplanfinder Business networking happy hour takes place on Thursday, June 4 from 4:30 to 6:00 p.m. at WeWork, 500 Yale Ave. N, Seattle, WA (First Floor Lounge).