By Allen Perkins, M.D.

My patient, William, was referred to see a specialist here in Mobile. His e-mail report back to me was, "Nice guy. I like him a lot. He's thorough, asks good questions. Thinks everything will be fine. Just in case there's an abnormality, he recommends I get a CT scan, with and without contrast."

The specialist's nurse helpfully set up an appointment at a hospital in town. In the pre-Obamacare days, the story would end with my patient getting his test with little or no out-of-pocket expense, my colleague would get his result, and the hospital would get about $3000, no questions asked.

This is how it works after Obamacare, as told by my patient: "I show up at 7 a.m. bright and cheerful, and the admitting nurses look a little suspicious, and they say, well, you owe us $750. And I say, wow. Only when I get there for my appointment do I discover that the charge for this CT scan is over $3,000. The $750 I owe is of course the result of the insurance company's formula to pay down my deductible." (My patient had previously had a low deductible plan subsidized by his employer. Having been recently downsized, he had switched to a high deductible bronze plan sold to him by Blue Cross.)

So now my patient has skin in the game. Here's what happened next, "I say no thank you, and the nurses say they don't blame me (but they clearly blame me for having a high deductible plan, and the insurance companies for not paying more.) I call the specialists office, and they say I can get the CT scan whenever I can afford it, so I head home and start researching CT prices. As you are probably aware, they are all over the place. There are sources that list the average cost of the exact same CT scan in this region as $1,100. Another site lists it as much less. And comparison shopping for real prices in other markets show many hospitals would charge less than $1,000 for this service."

There is a Healthcare Blue Book (https://www.healthcarebluebook.com/) that compares rates for certain tests, but the information is not available for most of Alabama.

William actually gave Mobile hospitals a call and after a bit of confusion got some quotes, ranging from a high of $3,976 at Mobile Infirmary, a little less at Springhill Medical Center, and a low of $1,468 At USA Medical Center. Unfortunately, the specialist's nurse was unsure how to get the study results From USAMC to the office so suggested it might be worth William's $750 to stick with one of the others (although they did suggest they might be able to get it on a disc.)

A call to Blue Cross by William to determine what they thought his costs should be, given that he now had the total price each hospital would charge, was equally unrewarding. Their representative explained that he'd have to commit to a procedure, get pre-certified at each of the hospitals, and then the hospital would tell him what his cost would be, based on the amount of deductible that would be charged for each separate item they billed for. She suggested that if he had a platinum plan (an extra $3,500 a year), it would limit the co-pay, and none of this would matter.

Skin in the game. I spend a lot of time writing about the Affordable Care Act and the protections it affords for Alabama's poorest citizens. We tend to forget that the ACA is not just about Medicaid. It has changed the health care market for us all. Had William lived in another state, his insurance company might have said "You can get a perfectly good CT in your region for about $1500. Get it done at the cheap place and there is no cost to you. We will pay that much no matter what. If it is worth $2,000 to you to save your doctor the trouble of requesting the results, feel free."

These changes are coming to Alabama. Currently the Health Care Blue Book doesn't have good pricing for the Alabama market. I anticipate that will change.

(Dr. Perkins is Professor and Chair of Family Medicine at the University of South Alabama College of Medicine in Mobile. The opinions he expresses are his own.)