Topics: Bacterium, cdC, Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Flu, Scientific American, Life News

This article was originally published by Scientific American

In March researchers at the U.S. Department of Agriculture received a shipment of what they thought was a relatively harmless strain of animal flu from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. It was, in fact, highly pathogenic H5N1 flu virus. Months later the researchers only began to suspect something was amiss when their experiments yielded results that they didn’t expect and couldn’t explain. The CDC, it turns out, had sent the deadly samples inadvertently.

The flu virus shipment was the third recent mistake by a government lab in handling dangerous pathogens. Last month a CDC lab prepared anthrax samples but failed to inactivate the bacterium. And 10 days ago six vials of smallpox, arguably the most dangerous known virus, were discovered in a box in an unsecured storage room at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) campus in Bethesda, Md.

The incidents are a “wake-up call” that raise “serious and troubling questions” and underscore potentially pervasive problems with oversight, reporting and adherence to safety protocols, said CDC Director Tom Frieden at a press conference. “Frankly, I’m angry about it,” he said. “These incidents should never have happened.”

The latest incident came to light as part of a dispatch from federal officials investigating the problems that led to some 75 federal employees’ potential exposure to live anthrax last month. The CDC announced today it is issuing an immediate halt on the transfer of all biological materials into or out of its high-level biosafety facilities pending a review by an advisory committee. The action will not extend to other agencies’ high-level labs.

The H5N1 flu incident, which the CDC discovered in the course of its post-anthrax investigation, entailed a relatively safe avian influenza being unintentionally contaminated at a CDC lab with a highly pathogenic H5N1 strain of influenza. On March 13 the CDC shipped that hazardous material to a facility operated by the Agriculture Department (USDA). Although the USDA lab in Atlanta was a high-level biosafety level 3 facility that required workers to shower in and out and wear respiratory protection, the lab was not supposed to have received that sample and did not have adequate clearance to handle that level of hazardous material. No workers are believed to have been exposed to the substance.

Frieden claimed that he did not hear about the incident until two days ago—an “unacceptable delay,” he says.

The recent anthrax debacle occurred June 5 when workers were preparing liveBacillus anthracis at a lab that did not follow mandated protocols to nactivate the bacterium. Because the anthrax was not properly killed, workers who received materials from that laboratory may have been unintentionally exposed to the deadly pathogen. No employees have become ill with anthrax symptoms. The CDC today said that it is possible that staff members were exposed to anthrax but “extremely unlikely.” “This is not the first time an event of this nature has occurred at CDC nor the first time it occurred from the [laboratory where the anthrax incident occurred],” the CDC noted in a new report, released today. The Centers are aware of four other such incidents in the past decade at the laboratory. The facility is now closed, the report notes.