Gillespie prevails on the first ballot at a party convention in Roanoke, Va. Gillespie, GOP win in Virginia

ROANOKE, Va. — Ed Gillespie won the Virginia Republican Senate nomination at a party convention here Saturday afternoon and will face Democratic Sen. Mark Warner in the fall.

Gillespie, a former Republican National Committee chairman and lobbyist, won on the first ballot over three conservative opponents.

Story Continued Below

The coronation, while expected, is another win for the Republican establishment.

He enters the general election as the decided underdog, but GOP operatives see him as a credible candidate who could capitalize in this purple state if there is a strong wave against Democrats in the midterm elections.

“When we win here in November, it won’t just mean that Mark Warner will become the former senator from Virginia,” Gillespie told delegates. “Harry Reid will become the former Senate Majority Leader.”

( Also on POLITICO: Gillespie: GOP must be inclusive)

Gillespie was a top adviser to George W. Bush and Mitt Romney, both of whom have drawn criticism from some corners of the tea party movement.

His main challenger, insurance agent Shak Hill, drew a mix of cheers and boos when he attacked Gillespie for pushing the TARP bailout in the closing days of the Bush administration.

“I have the moral authority to challenge Mark Warner,” Hill said. “When you lobby for big bank bailouts, there is no separation between you and Mark Warner.”

Hill supporters handed out literature that showed pictures of Gillespie laughing alongside fellow strategist Karl Rove under the heading: “Ed Gillespie: A Washington Insider with a Virginia Address.” The back of the leaflet attacked Gillespie for being soft on Obamacare, for helping sell the TARP bailout and for supporting comprehensive immigration reform.

Two less-organized Gillespie alternatives also got 15 minutes to make their case to delegates but received few votes: Tony DeTora, a policy adviser to California Rep. Dana Rohrabacher taking a leave of absence from the Capitol, and Chuck Moss, an engineer from Prince William County.

The vote counts were announced by the chairmen of each of the state’s 11 House districts. When it became clear Gillespie had the majority of delegates and could avoid a second round, Hill took the stage to concede and ask the convention to nominate Gillespie by acclimation.

Gillespie then took the stage to ask those who did not support him in the convention to join him for the fall.

( Also on POLITICO: Rand Paul's summer plans revealed)

“We have to send a message loud and clearly: the days of the Democratic rule are over,” he said. “We have come into this hall through many different doors, but we will leave as one.”

The convention offered a marked contrast to last year’s state convention, which dragged on late into the night and nominated firebrand preacher E.W. Jackson for lieutenant governor over several more electable candidates.

Jackson, who got trounced last November, introduced Hill as a principled conservative who won’t go along with party leaders.

Gillespie was introduced by Mark Obenshain, the Republican nominee for attorney general last year, who lost only after a recount. “Ed’s been in the trenches for decades fighting for our shared Virginia values,” Obenshain said. “In addition, Ed Gillespie knows how to win.”