Ten Republican Presidential candidates appeared in the primetime debate on August 6: Senator Marco Rubio from Florida, Senator Ted Cruz from Texas, Former Governor Jeb Bush from Florida, Senator Rand Paul from Kentucky, Governor Chris Christie from New Jersey, Governor Scott Walker from Wisconsin, Governor John Kasich from Ohio, Businessman Donald Trump, Physician Ben Carson, and Former Governor Mike Huckabee from Arkansas.

Did they collectively endorse a system of single-payer health care that will cover all Americans and be paid for by a progressive tax on all forms of income? No. Did they stand up and pledge to defend women’s reproductive rights? No. Did they say anything at all surprising? No. And even though you knew it; you watched anyway.

With so many debaters and so many topics to cover, health care got relatively little attention. It seems clear that all the candidates oppose women’s reproductive rights, that they are against funding for Planned Parenthood, and that they want the Affordable Care Act repealed and replaced. So, what did they say on the subject of public health? The full transcript is here. I’ve summarized a few of their answers.

On Medicaid:

With the exception of Governor Kasich, who was asked about his support for extending Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, there was little discussion of this effort to extend health care coverage. Governor Kasich provided a spirited defense of Medicaid expansion, first by noting that President Reagan expanded Medicaid, and then by pointing out that it saves money by giving the mentally ill treatment rather than sending them to prison. He reported that it is keeping the working poor healthy and out of emergency rooms so they can go to their jobs. And, finally, he said it is saving the state money.

On the Affordable Care Act:

“Repeal and replace” is the favorite sound bite when the Affordable Care Act is mentioned. Trump, called it “a disaster,” and wants it repealed and replaced with “a private system without artificial lines around every state.” Governor Bush wants to “get rid of Obamacare and replace it with something that doesn’t suppress wages and kill jobs.” Governor Walker and Senator Rubio also favor repealing and in Rubio’s case, replacing, the Affordable Care Act.

On Reproductive Rights:

Women’s reproductive rights brought a resounding chorus of “no” from the candidates who addressed this topic. Governor Walker affirmed his statement that he wanted to make abortion illegal even in cases of rape, incest, or to save the life of the mother, although he signed legislation in Wisconsin that does have an exception for the mother’s life. In reply to one question on the topic, Walker said, “I’ve said many a time that that unborn child can be protected and there are many other alternatives that can also protect the life of that mother.” Governor Huckabee affirmed his support for a constitutional amendment banning abortion and stated he wants to go further, “I think the next president ought to invoke the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments to the constitution now that we clearly know that that baby inside the mother’s womb is a person at the moment of conception.” Challenged about his support for rape and incest as exceptions permitting abortion, Senator Rubio replied, “I have never said that,” adding “What I have advocated is that we pass a law in this country that says all human life at every stage of its development is worthy of protection.” Trump reported evolving from his previous pro-choice position to being “pro-life” saying “I hate the concept of abortion,” and later, “I am very, very proud to say that I am pro-life.”

On Planned Parenthood:

Governor Walker reported, “I defunded Planned Parenthood more than four years ago, long before those videos came out.” In his closing remarks, Senator Cruz promised to “instruct the Department of Justice to open an investigation into these videos and to prosecute Planned Parenthood for any criminal violations.”

What do they plan to do about health insurance?

I went to the candidates’ websites to find out how they planned to replace the Affordable Care Act. The statements are there in some cases, but none of the websites provide details about the funding of replacement plans or make clear just who or what will be covered under the plans. Many candidates offer no information about their health care plans. They have time to figure it out. The Republican National Convention is 11 months away (July 18-21, 2016 back in Cleveland). Perhaps we’ll learn some details after the nominee is selected. The Democratic National Convention will be here in Philadelphia a few weeks later (July 25-28, 2016) We’ll look to see what the Democratic Party candidates have to say after their debate.

Excited about the coming election? Here’s a countdown clock for you.

Read more about The Public's Health.