Pin Getty Getty Images

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

The Republicans keep giving Sarah Palin the microphone. And when she has it, it's impossible not to pay attention. Palin delivered the closing speech of CPAC Saturday, employing her signature witticisms, and a parody of Dr. Seuss to criticize the Obama administration, promote her own specific brand of conservatism, and rabble-rouse the arena full of her adoring fans. Here are some gems:

1. Young people are screwed.

"I love coming back here because there are always so many young people, or, as you're known by the folks across the river, 'ObamaCare suckas.'"

Most Popular

2. Adopting a tactic Texas Senator Ted Cruz employed when filibustering in Congress, Sarah Palin rewrites some Dr. Seuss.

"I have five kids so reading Green Eggs and Ham over all those years, to each one, you know, you totally have it memorized by, especially by the time Trig was born, so I had to spice it up a bit, and little Trig, lucky little fella, his bedtime story, now it goes something like this:

I do not like this Uncle Sam

I do not like his health care scam

I do not like these dirty crooks or

How they lie and cook the books.

I do not like when Congress steals

I do not like their crony deals

I do not like this spying man

I do not like 'Oh yes we can'

I do not like this spending spree,

We're smart, we know there's nothing free

I do not like reporter's smug replies

When I complain about their lies

I do not like this kind of hope, and

We won't take it nope, nope, nope"

3. "Real America" is now "Amazing America," which also happens to be the name of Palin's new reality show.

"I feel good about America because Conservatives haven't forgotten the American beyond the ruling classes, wealthy D.C. suburbs. I'm talking about the places where most of the people who do the working and the serving and the building and the taxpaying live. That's where you'll find amazing America."

4. She has pity — condescending pity — for Secretary of State John Kerry.

"Speaking of those who just carry the water, man, I feel sorry for some of those Cabinet members, frankly — take Secretary of State John Kerry. You say 'take him, take him?' No really, I feel sorry because it's just draining on him. He does not look happy. He has sent a message that this president is dazed and confused. Poor guy, you can just see it on him. Bless his heart, but no need to ask him any more why the long face. Now we know."

5. Cheers for nuclear war!

"Mr. President, the only thing that stops a bad guy with a nuke is a good guy with a nuke… He promised to heal the planet and stop the raise of the oceans, but the planet's not listening to Dr. Obama."

6. When intolerance bugs you, keep quiet…

"Another reason to feel good about our future and our movement, because we are pushing back against what some would call the 'perpetual panties-in-a-wad' people. You know them, these people are quick with quote about the latest victimized identity group. They are professionals at taking offense. It's what they do, and their media minions are even quicker, seeking them out and publicizing their manufactured outrage. The play is always the same, someone on the right says something that isn't politically correct, or it can be distorted not to sound politically correct, and it's 'perpetually wadded-up people' that they get to work and they claim to want tolerance, open debate and their goal really is the complete opposite. Their goal is to shut up anyone who doesn't toe their line. What ever happened — you see or hear something, that kind of bugged you — buck up or stay in the truck? That's how we grew up."

7. …But when conservatives are called out, scream intolerance!

"Remember when their skirts got all tangled-up over their heads when, recently, our buddy from Duck Dynasty, Phil — remember this? Here's Phil, he's talking about faith with a reporter from GQ, first mistake, but in between saying he loves humanity, he loves sinners, and leave it to God to judge. Well, he quoted the Bible and he got colorful with expressing his opinion, so what did that brilliant TV network do? They fired him. They canned the devout Christian for expressing his devout Christian views on a television show about his devout Christian family. Yeah, there's nothing wrong, nothing out of line on cable TV, it's those executives who get to school America on standards."

8. How dare Democrats talk to women about birth control.

"You know, these are the same 'fainting couch liberals,' whining that we disrespect women. Bull. Hey, Democrats, it is your leaders who are demeaning to women. Liberals seem to think that the women of America are just cheap dates, you know, feed 'em a few lines about that free birth control, throw in a few scary quotes on the War on Women, then they will be yours. Don't bother their pretty little heads with tax policy or debilitating debt or energy independence. Imagine if they treated the men like that?" … Hey, you can join us, be legit, because, come on libs, can you really sing, 'I am woman hear me….' No, cause donkeys just bray, only Mamma Grizzlies say 'hear me roar.'"

9. Girl power means an anti-choice agenda.

"This sisterhood so believes in respect, the powerful and purposeful potential of every woman so much so that we're the party with the plank that protects even our littlest sisters in the womb."

RELATED:

Sarah Palin Says "Told-Ya-So," Mocks Obama for "Mom Jeans"

Follow Heather on Twitter.

Photo credit: Getty Images