Last week in Qatar, first lady Michelle Obama Michelle ObamaClinton rules out Sanders while playing 'who'd you rather' to chose running mate First Nigerian girl taken by Boko Haram rescued WATCH: Obama accidentally steps on First Lady's dress at state dinner MORE called attention to the 60 million girls not getting an education. Now, think about how global tragedies are often depicted in the faces of children and young people in despair. Whether images from Africa, Asia, Latin America, the Middle East or even the United States, young people in trouble are shown: lack of access to education for youth; a child in a father's arms, both fleeing to Europe; starving children in sub-Saharan Africa; unemployed youth in Tunisia; missing girls in Nigeria; women and child refugees; sexual trafficking of girls; the Ebola virus. These problems are real, along with many other terrible consequences of poverty, extremism and the marginalization of vulnerable populations.

ADVERTISEMENT

But there is another side of the coin. Young people can also be a source of positive change, hope and peace. If we are looking to fix a broken world, we need to stop seeing young people as problems or potential problems, and start focusing on them as agents for solutions. In many parts of the world, young people are lifting people out of strife. Their efforts need to be better recognized and reinforced through networking and scaling them up.

These young people, who are a driving force for change, are often invisible heroes. They are creative, inspired, energetic and enthusiastic. But without resources and training, their efforts cannot be multiplied. Rather than bemoan the absence of a countervailing force to fight back against extremism, let's create it.

Across the Middle East and Africa, communities are experiencing a "youth bulge," with young people far outnumbering older adults, often in circumstances of high unemployment and other social, economic and political stresses. Researchers and scholars have documented the resulting potential for crises stemming from widespread discontent, including conflicts spiraling into violence and the draw of violent extremism.

So who are the young people making a difference?

Shuby Nantege, who runs Go Girl Africa, is working hard on teen pregnancy. "I have a vision," she says — to get girls off the streets, to show pregnant women how to deliver a healthy child, to bring entrepreneurship to poor neighborhoods, to teach young leaders how to resolve their own issues. Shuby works in Bwaise, a slum in Kampala, Uganda's capital. She is getting her story out, letting the world know that African girls are helping other African girls climb out of desperate circumstances.

Far from Bwaise, "Ahmed" is running a national Muslim leadership institute in the Middle East to teach pluralism to young people who, absent training in peace, are likely to fall into the hands of extremists. "If we don't guide them, someone will misguide them," he explains. Ahmed is using social media and curriculum guides to deliver peaceful educational content in parts of the world where recruitment leads young people to veer off the path of nonviolence. He is part of a generation of change agents using digital spaces to create peaceful places.

In Morocco, a Generation Change fellow, Mouad Azouggar, teaches a life skills course at a youth community center to help young people deal with family and other personal conflicts more constructively.

How can the international community support sustainable training-of-trainers models that help to really scale up the training of young peacebuilders?

Resources : Youth leaders in such difficult environments also often face self-doubt and exhaustion. Managing a civil society organization demands a near-constant pace of writing applications for grants and monitoring quantity of participants, in addition to trying to ensure quality of the programs. Monitoring and evaluating programs are important and necessary, but it can be incredibly difficult to prove the impact of a program in the short term. We can provide financial support, training, a network community and access to technology to empower these emerging leaders.

: Youth leaders in such difficult environments also often face self-doubt and exhaustion. Managing a civil society organization demands a near-constant pace of writing applications for grants and monitoring quantity of participants, in addition to trying to ensure quality of the programs. Monitoring and evaluating programs are important and necessary, but it can be incredibly difficult to prove the impact of a program in the short term. We can provide financial support, training, a network community and access to technology to empower these emerging leaders. Leadership development skills : Practical skills in communication, leadership presence and storytelling help leaders articulate their mission and vision more effectively and create healthier and more stable organizations.

: Practical skills in communication, leadership presence and storytelling help leaders articulate their mission and vision more effectively and create healthier and more stable organizations. Conflict transformation skills: The core skills of active listening, relationship building, negotiation, mediation and dialogue help young peacebuilders work cooperatively to find mutually agreeable solutions to conflicts.

A youth bulge in the world is not a problem — it's a youth surge and a potential solution, if we can see the possibilities of training and developing a cadre of young leaders able to prepare this generation to face problems, design solutions and enhance productivity and prosperity. Empowering youth is the critical mission of our time. It is why we need this global effort called "Generation Change" to grow and expand.

Omar is associate vice president of the United States Institute of Peace's (USIP) Middle East and Africa Program. Omar also serves on the board of IREX. For more information about USIP's Generation Change Program — dedicated to empowering and building the capacity of civically engaged youth as they emerge as leaders in their communities — contact Alison Milofsky, director of curriculum and training design, at amilofsky@usip.org.