President Barack Obama’s job approval rating among Granite Staters has improved slightly over the past two months, with views of his performance widely split along party lines, a new poll shows.

In the latest WMUR Granite State Poll, released Thursday evening, there is also a slight uptick in how Granite Staters view the president personally, although that, too, is divided according to partisan loyalties.

The poll by the University of New Hampshire Survey Center, conducted April 7-17, found that 50 percent of Granite Staters approve of how the president is handling his job, while 46 percent disapprove and 4 percent are neutral.

That’s a modest improvement since the last WMUR Granite State Poll in February, which showed that 45 percent approved of his job performance and 48 percent disapproved.

Showing a bump in overall popularity, 49 percent now view Obama favorably and 44 percent unfavorably, with 7 percent neutral on the question. In February, 46 percent viewed the president favorably and 47 percent viewed him unfavorably.

The president gets a positive grade from New Hampshire for his handling of the economy, but his handling of foreign affairs remains unacceptable to the majority of residents. The view of the Affordable Care Act has improved slightly since the last WMUR poll in February.

The poll also shows that Granite Staters remain seriously concerned about the overall direction of the country, with 56 percent saying it is on the wrong track and 38 percent saying it is moving in the right direction.

The survey center polled 621 New Hampshire adults, including 553 likely general election voters. The margins of error are plus or minus 3.9 percent for the larger sample of all adults and 4.2 percent among the smaller sample of likely voters.

View the full poll results here.

The survey center said it expects Granite Staters’ views of Obama’s job performance and personal popularity to be a factor in the 2016 presidential election, with Democratic candidates praising him and Republican candidates sharply criticizing him. His standing may also be a factor in the state elections, especially for the U.S. Senate and the U.S. House.

As past polls have indicated, opinions on Obama’s job performance continue to be split along party lines, with 87 percent of Democrats approving and 10 percent disapproving, but only 9 percent of Republicans approving and 90 percent disapproving. Independents are also unhappy with Obama’s job performance, with 35 percent approving and 55 percent disapproving.

The results are similar for his overall popularity, with 87 percent of Democrats, 34 percent of independents and only 9 percent of Republicans viewing him favorably.

On the president’s handling of the economy, opinion remains split, as it was in February. Currently, 49 percent of Granite Staters approve, 48 percent disapprove and 3 percent are neutral.

He remains underwater on his handling of foreign affairs, with 43 percent saying they approve and 52 percent disapproving, while 5 percent are neutral.

Opinion has improved slightly on Obama’s signature legislation, the Affordable Care Act. In February, 40 percent of Granite State adults favored it while 47 percent were opposed, but in the new poll, there is an even split, with 42 percent favoring it and 42 percent opposed.

According to the poll, 64 percent of Granite Staters said recent terrorist attacks have not changed their plans to travel abroad, although 34 percent said the attacks have made them less likely to travel.