The response to Oscar's simple plans has been dramatic.



Schlosser said that in the first weeks of open enrollment for 2015 Obamacare plans in New York, which began Nov. 15, "two-thirds of the enrollments we've had have been in simple plans."

"I think they like the simplicity," he said of the consumers opting for the plans. "It's really straightforward. You have a real clear idea of what you owe, when . . . you know that if you do have hospital care, you know exactly what we're going to pay."

"You don't have these weird things where you pay up to your deductible, and then you have all this assortment of co-insurance or co-payments that will take you up to the out-of pocket maximum," he said. Co-insurance, in particular, is a notoriously difficult concept for customers to grasp. In that form of cost-sharing, a customer pays a percentage of the "allowed amount" of health services, and pays the co-insurance on top of any deductible they owe.

Oscar also took several steps to drive people to the simple plans, which are not sold in the company's market in New Jersey because that state has a $2,500 maximum for deductibles.

Read MoreShe ran 'Obamacare' but hates the name



First, Oscar's website steers potential customers to the simple plans, showing them those plans' prices and features after they answer several questions about themselves— ZIP code, how many people would be covered by the plan, ages, and household income. A customer has to click on a pull-down menu to look at other plans.

Secondly, Oscar sweetened the deal for customers who choose simple plans by covering, at no cost to the customer, two visits to their primary care physicians, as well as generic drug prescriptions. Oscar's so-called "standard plans" do not include those features.

Another big selling point is that the premiums are lower than the other plans Oscar offers. For example, a 35-year-old living in Manhattan would pay $395 per month for a simple silver plan with a $4,500 deductible, compared to $435 per month for a "standard" silver plan with a $2,000 deductible and a $5,500 maximum out-of-pocket limit.

Those premiums are the full retail price. Federal subsidies to offset the cost of premiums, and in some cases the cost of out-of-pocket expenses, are available to individuals and families who fall below certain income thresholds.