The polls are all over the place in North Carolina’s U.S. Senate race. The latest NYT/CBS/YouGov poll has pro-life Thom Tillis, Republican Speaker of the North Carolina House, up two points over incumbent pro-abortion incumbent Democratic Sen. Kay Hagan. However the current Real Clear Politics average has Tillis up by just 0.8% over Hagan.

Clearly the outcome will likely be very, very close. As always, educating the public is Job #1.

Sen. Kay Hagan has stood in lockstep with President Obama in advancing his pro-abortion agenda. She voted to enact the pro-abortion, pro-rationing Obamacare law. She voted to spend federal funds on health plans that pay for abortion on demand (12/08/09, Roll Call No. 369). She opposes the bill that would protect unborn children from abortion at 20 weeks, when they are capable of experiencing pain. President Obama issued a veto threat when such a bill passed the U.S. House of Representatives.

In Hagan’s 6 years in the Senate, she voted against pro-life interests 100% of the time on votes scored by National Right to Life. That is out of touch with North Carolina.

By contrast, Thom Tillis is pro-life and opposes abortion on demand. In the state legislature, Tillis provided key leadership in enacting a record number of pro-life laws.

“Thom Tillis has demonstrated his effectiveness in the fight to protect innocent human life in North Carolina with his leadership in the North Carolina House,” said Barbara Holt, president of North Carolina Right to Life. “His excellent style and knowledge will serve him well in advocating for the unborn babies and their mothers in the U.S. Senate.”

On the ground in the Tar Heel State, I have heard time and time again about the frustration North Carolinians have with President Obama’s leadership (or lack thereof). The Huffington Post’s current average disapproval of Obama’s job performance stands at 51.7%. The latest polling from the Democratic Public Policy Polling shows 54% disapprove.

Not surprisingly, in the candidates’ first debate last week, Kay Hagan was desperate to distance herself from President Obama. She also carefully avoided mentioning the word “abortion.” Yet, she cannot hide from her close ties with the President or her extreme record on abortion.

If you live in North Carolina, it’s up to you to educate your pro-life friends and family about what’s at stake in the Senate election. Whether pro-abortion Senator Harry Reid (D-Nv.) continues as U.S. Senate majority leader may all depend on what happens in North Carolina.

Click here to sign up for daily pro-life news alerts from LifeNews.com

As I travel around North Carolina and meet with voters at county fairs and other events, it’s clear there are two opportunities for the pro-life movement. There is a swath of voters that is energized, informed and motivated to get to the polls and oust Kay Hagan.

And then there is a group that is pro-life but previously unaware of Hagan’s radical position on abortion. We especially need to reach out to the latter group. You can help in that effort!

Please download this piece comparing the candidates on pro-life issues and share with your pro-life friends and family.

If you’d like to volunteer to assist in National Right to Life’s efforts on the ground over the next two months, please email me at Andrew@nrlc.org.