Boos from many fans in the Pepsi Center sellout crowd.

And what at least came off as denial from Avalanche coach Patrick Roy.

Those were two of the major reactions in the wake of Colorado’s stunning 4-3 loss to the previously winless Columbus Blue Jackets on Saturday night. Colorado came back to take a 3-2 lead after two periods, then collapsed in the third.

In Roy’s case, it probably was an attempt to avoid the perception of panic, rather than a case of truly believing his postgame statement that the loss to an 0-8 team neither embarrassed nor angered him.

Roy has been publicly angry and critical of his players after previous losses in what has become a 2-4-1 start, but that didn’t happen Saturday night, when he essentially said that kind of play and effort would win on many nights.

Among the problems, though, was that kind of play and effort wasn’t good enough to beat the worst team in the league. The Blue Jackets came in with an 0-8 record, and with new coach John Tortorella in his second game behind the bench and still learning to match names with faces after taking over for the fired Todd Richards earlier in the week.

After a day off, the Avalanche will practice Monday before heading out on a three-game road trip to Florida on Tuesday, Tampa Bay on Thursday and Carolina on Friday.

“It’s just a matter right now to manage our game a little bit better,” Roy said after the game. “And I think that could make the big difference between losing and winning. Because we’re doing a lot of good things out there.”

He repeated, “We need to just learn to manage our game a little bit better, and I think we’re going to be just fine.”

The Avalanche was 0-1-1 in the homestand, also losing to struggling Carolina 1-0 in overtime Wednesday.

Avalanche captain Gabe Landeskog chose his words carefully.

“For us, it’s a matter of analyzing the game and looking at the video and seeing what we would do better,” Landeskog said. “At times, we definitely put pressure on the goalie (Sergei Bobrovsky) and made it hard on him. I do think that we somehow made it a little too difficult in the neutral zone, and our backcheck has to be better.”

He added: “A couple of games ago, we weren’t playing well enough defensively. We made sure we corrected that, and I think we had a solid defensive game against Carolina, and now it seems like we’re making it a little bit too hard on ourselves getting through the neutral zone. For us, like I said, it’s a matter of just kind of ignoring the past and obviously correcting what we can do to make us better. …

“It’s disappointing to lose two at home, no doubt about that, but there’s no time for us to feel sorry for ourselves. It’s late October, and we have to make sure that when March comes, we have to make sure that these points matter and we pick up as many points as we can. We have to start doing that right now.”

Nathan MacKinnon, making the adjustment to playing center — his natural position — in his third NHL season, had a power-play goal at 17:12 of the second period that gave the Avalanche the 3-2 lead. He was critical of himself for his lapse on the Blue Jackets’ fourth and tiebreaking goal, scored by Brandon Dubinsky at 6:43 of the third period, when Columbus defenseman David Savard was in the rush going the other way.

“It’s getting pretty frustrating, what we’re doing in our third periods,” MacKinnon said. “I don’t even know where it starts. It’s just overall defensive awareness. I thought it was a 3-on-2, getting back, and it was a 3-on-3, and I have to know that my D-man’s behind me. … I got a little too excited getting back. It’s just little things like that. We need to be better. I need to be better.

“If I’m going to be a first-line center, I definitely need to be better defensively, especially in the third period. We definitely need to close out games. Against Carolina, our offense wasn’t there. Tonight it was. Tonight it was a little bit opposite. We gave up (36) shots tonight, so it’s definitely tough.”

Going into Sunday’s games, the Avalanche already was five points out of what would be the final wild-card playoff spot in the imbalanced Western Conference. Chicago was in that spot, and in fifth in the Central Division, with 10 points. Pacific Division leader San Jose also had 10, but each division is guaranteed three spots in the playoff field.

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or @TFrei