Topics: blockbuster, BuzzFeed, Netflix, Nostalgia, Pajiba, Media News, Entertainment News, News

This piece originally appeared on Pajiba

Blockbuster Video is closing for good. You probably heard. After years of stumbling in a culture that increasingly expressed a preference for streaming and on-demand content, then being bought out by Dish a few years ago after declaring bankruptcy, the chain of video rental stores is shuttering its remaining 300 stores and all of its distribution centers. The news was only moments old when people, quite a few of them critics, began offering paeans to the store and reflecting on what many, many outlets called the “end of an era”. The Dissolve published two pieces in two days about the demise of video stores in general and why brick-and-mortar rental shops are still valuable parts of film culture whose demise should be met with sadness and regret. Pieces like that are an important part of the conversation, but in those and others like them, people have also been quick to stress that Blockbuster had just as many cons as pros: it was a corporate, plastic environment that stressed new releases and mainstream titles while downplaying older, foreign, or more obscure releases. In other words, it aimed for the biggest possible chunk of the market, and it made quite a bit of money doing so.

Yet Blockbuster had been dying for years. Between 2008 and the company’s Chapter 11 filing in 2010, they closed about 1,000 locations, and they kept rolling back locations in an effort to shore up earnings. They died by a thousand cuts: Netflix, founded in 1997, went public in 2002, and Blockbuster tried to play catch-up with its own DVD-by-mail program. Redbox was founded in 2002 and now has more than 42,000 kiosks nationwide, and Blockbuster experimented with those, too, until they were folded into Redbox’s army. Netflix expanded its streaming selection, while Blockbuster tried to catch up (Blockbuster on Demand remains operational, at least for now). Blockbuster was also fighting to grow and survive in a field built on quick, drastic changes. The VHS boom was already slowing by the early 1990s, which meant the store had to start pivoting to DVDs, a market which started its own slowdown a decade later. Between the big swings and the increasing quantity and quality of streaming content, it was going to be an uphill fight at best for Blockbuster to stay in the game. That they managed to hang in for close to 30 years is impressive.

So why the tone of mourning? Why the nostalgia for a crusty chain store that’s been relegated to fodder for cheap nostalgia hits on BuzzFeed? Why act as if something is changing?

Because we mourn ideas as much as things, and because we like pretending to have options more than actually exercising them. I haven’t been to Blockbuster in years. I would be very surprised if you’ve been to one recently, either, unless it was to pillage the clearance rack of a store going out of business. That’s why it’s closing: nobody went. It’s one thing to look back fondly on earlier methods of rental and consumption, but it’s a little disingenuous to act as if some part of us has died. Nothing’s ending, or at any rate, it’s not ending now. It ended a while ago. Blockbuster was huge for a while because videocassette rental was, for years, the only way to see movies at home. But they long since stopped being the only game in town, or even the biggest game in town. We have all moved on to new methods of search and discovery and consumption, whether it’s Netflix (discs or streaming), Amazon Prime, Vudu, cable on-demand offerings, or even borrowing discs from the local library. Blockbuster wasn’t a part of our lives at all. The news of its shuttering struck a chord with so many not because it meant the company was dead, but because it was such a surprise to find out that it was still alive.