Black Shoe Hospitality, a group of Milwaukee area restaurants are a 2015 Top Workplace. The restaurants include Maxie’s, W. Fairview Ave., Blue's Egg, on N. 76th St. and Story Hill BKC on W. Bluemound Rd. Video by Mike De Sisti

By of the

When John Buchel first took bartending shifts right out of college in the middle of the recession, he would become frustrated looking at other graduates getting jobs across the country.

The redeeming factor of his job: He was making a living and even getting health benefits.

Despite being an independent restaurant company, his employer, Black Shoe Hospitality, offers its workers benefits including health insurance, free meals, a bonus program for management and bonuses for cooks based on volume of work.

"Even through some dark times, I would think, 'I might not be crazy about what I'm doing right now, but I'm playing for a great team,'" said Buchel, who has since worked his way up to become the company's outreach coordinator.

Black Shoe manages three restaurants on the west side of Milwaukee: Maxie's, Blue's Egg and Story Hill BKC.

In its first year on the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel's list of the region's Top Workplaces, the company vaulted all the way to the No. 1 spot among midsize employers.

While more restaurants are beginning to offer benefits to their staffs with the enactment of the Affordable Care Act, Black Shoe was ahead of the game, and co-owner Dan Sidner said that has contributed to his company's high staff retention rate relative to state and national industry averages.

"It's expensive," Sidner said. "It's a big investment on our part, but especially when you have somebody who's a mature professional, we don't want to see them leaving over something like health insurance."

Several of the staff members have been working for the company since Maxie's first opened in 2007. At Story Hill BKC, which opened last year, more than three-fourths of the staff are still on the payroll. That's something Joe Muench, also a co-owner, said is part of the company's model for success.

"You talk about having that combination of a professional environment and an approachable, casual restaurant," Muench said. "We attract a lot of professional wisdom, people who have been doing this their whole life, not just to get through college."

Rachel Crouch, a sous chef at the company, illustrates that model. She worked her way up through the kitchen ranks starting at Maxie's and moved over to Story Hill when it opened.

"They go out of their way to help with their families," Crouch said. "I think it's because it's not a corporation that you get that consideration for your personal life."

Overall, Black Shoe Hospitality employs about 150 people. Sidner described the operation of the restaurants as built on the motto of "happy people making people happy."

"There are a lot of unhappy people out there, and we try to make sure they don't work for us," Sidner said.

That means getting employed at Black Shoe requires intense interviews, with hiring decisions made not just on experience but also on personality.

"Internally, we try to take the same approach to hospitality with the staff," Muench said. "We call them our 'internal guests.' We take care of our staff the way they want to be treated."