Former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee is setting up a constitutional showdown if he wins the presidency.

In a Saturday interview with The Atlanta Journal-Constitution and Channel 2 Action News after he spoke at the RedState Gathering in Atlanta, Huckabee said the answer to the “judicial tyranny” of the U.S. Supreme Court is reasserting the power of the executive against it.

“The main thing the president can do is when he takes the oath to uphold the Constitution, he would actually do it. And what that means is you invoke the Fifth and 14th Amendment. The Fifth Amendment says you have due process that’s entitled to you before you’re deprived of life and liberty.

“The 14th Amendment says that everything to an individual is subject to equal protection under the law. We have not provided either of those constitutional rights to unborn children. The only way that we cannot do it is if we do not consider them persons. So do we consider unborn children to be persons or blobs of unanimated, or maybe animated, protoplasm.

“And that’s really the determining factor, because once we determine that they are persons — and as president I believe they are — then we have a constitutional obligation to protect them.”

+ HYOSUB SHIN / AJC Former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee speaks during the RedState Gathering at Intercontinental Buckhead Hotel on Saturday, August 8, 2015. HYOSUB SHIN / AJC ×

That would be one heck of an executive order.

Huckabee chuckled when asked whether he will be the last one fighting the culture wars. “It’s not so much fighting the culture war,” he said. “It’s fighting for the principles upon which our nation was built.”

In his speech to hundreds of conservative activists at the InterContinental Buckhead, Huckabee talked about the “slaughter of unborn children,” but he also kept things light with his folksy humor.

Related Latest RedState Gathering news

Huckabee won applause for backing the Fair Tax — a national sales tax to replace the income tax — and talking of his battles with “the Clinton machine” in Arkansas.

Check out the rest of our recent RedState stories:

Donald Trump barred from RedState

Marco Rubio talks Planned Parenthood and a possible government shutdown

Bobby Jindal takes on Jeb Bush, but not Donald Trump

Rick Perry says he’s ready this time

What Chris Christie said about Planned Parenthood

At RedState: Chris Christie greeted with a slam from a Georgia gun group

How the Georgia convention eclipses Iowa (for at least a weekend)

Why Gov. Nathan Deal is skipping the event

Your guide to who’s coming to the RedState convention.

The talk jock behind the Atlanta convention.

More AJC coverage of the RedState Gathering.