The growing influence of pharmaceutical companies has caused increasing concern among Americans. From their role in the development to the Affordable Care Act to most recently having a cozy relationship with the nominee to head the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, the industry’s role in our national health policy has even received increased scrutiny by lawmakers. Some of them have decided to confront them directly.

When Sen. Ed Markey (D-MA) announced his hold on President Obama’s nominee for FDA Chairman, his focus was on the FDA’s lack of action on the growing opioid addiction. He criticized the agency’s ignoring advisory input into new opioid painkillers, as well as approving another against the advice of experts. This was in addition to the shock experienced after the FDA approved the use of OxyContin for children with severe and chronic pain. The FDA based its decision on research done by the maker of the drug.

Millions of Americans suffer from chronic pain and they are the ones most in need for stronger, longer acting medications. The Affordable Care Act included a provisions to advance research, care and education on pain management. To facilitate this initiative, the law provided for the creation of the Interagency Pain Research Coordinating Committee (IPRCC). The committee consists of 19 members, representing seven federal agencies, six from the scientific and medical communities, and six from the public and stakeholders. The Department of Health Human Services (HHS) is responsible for overseeing the committee

Recently, the CDC released guidelines on prescribing opioids for chronic pain. The statistics show that health providers wrote 259 million opioid prescriptions in 2012 – enough for every American adult to have a bottle of pills, even as the amount of reported chronic pain has not increased among patients. The new guidelines recommend more training for health providers on the appropriate uses for opioids, as well as exploring all non-opioid options prior to taking that path. The goal was to significantly reduce the amount of prescriptions and related overdoses.

Almost immediately members of the IPRCC blasted the guidelines. Members called them ”ridiculous” and “shortsighted,” even questioning if the advisors the CDC consulted were biased against using drug therapy. This criticism was particularly ironic considering who these committee members represented.

The creation of the IPRCC was lobbied for by the pharmaceutical industry, specifically those involved in manufacturing pain medications. The desire was to “expand partnerships between public entities and private entities to expand collaborative, cross-cutting research.” At the inaugural meeting of the committee in March 2012, the FDA reported that they were “supporting workshops on the efficacy of opiates for non-cancer chronic pain.” A curious initiative considering the United States was in the midst of an opioid addiction epidemic.

The most abused form was OxyContin, a morphine-like drug that was much stronger than anything on the market when approved in 1995. Prior to that, opioids were primarily used for the pain management of cancer sufferers and end-of-life care. Through direct marketing campaigns by OxyContin maker Purdue Pharma, doctors were increasingly prescribing the drug for pain beyond the norm, such as toothaches and joint pain. It was discovered that crushing the pills created a fast acting, heroin like high. Soon, the local heroin dealer became the oxy dealer, who was often supplied by a network of unscrupulous for-profit “pain medical centers” that would write legal prescriptions for complaints of pain without an exam.

By the time IPRCC held its first meeting in 2012, deaths by opioid overdose were averaging 11,000 annually. At that meeting were several representatives from the scientific community and the public, including a lawyer who sat on the board of the American Pain Foundation. Mary Vargas said the foundation was made up of doctors, researchers and patients, among others, that felt the healthcare and research community had a responsibility to help people with their pain. Two months later, the American Pain Foundation shut down amid a Congressional investigation into narcotics manufacturers.

Also attending the meeting, though never formally introduced or ever speaking on record, was Cameron Seward. He was the “government affairs assistant” for Purdue Pharma, the maker of OxyContin. A few months prior, a Pro Publica investigation discovered that APF received 90 percent of its funding from pharmaceutical companies. The bulk of that funding came from Purdue Pharma. After AFP closed its doors, Seward joined the conservative think-tank The Heritage Foundation, where he remains today.

Earlier this week, Sen. Ron Wyden (D-OR) sent a letter to the Health and Human Services director to inquire about the selection process for members. He was prompted by an investigation published by the Associated Press last month which showed nearly one-third of the committee members at the December 2015 meeting had ties to the pharmaceutical industry. Those five members had all received funding, either directly or through their institutions from multiple drug companies, with the most vocal opponents having direct ties to Purdue Pharma.

One IPRCC member, Myra Christopher, was responsible for crafting the panel’s response to the CDC guidelines. She noted they had “sufficient concerns about the work that’s been done and the negative impact it will have on our charge and mission” and asked for a dely. Christopher is the chair of the Center for Practical Bioethics, a non-profit funded by several drug companies. Her position is completely funded with a $1.5 million grant from Purdue Pharma. She was also present at the April 2015 meeting which coincided with the FDA’s approval of OxyContin.

Sen. Wyden noted these connections in his letter to HHS, saying there was nothing in the law that required pharmaceutical companies, or their agents, to be represented. He asked for details on how they were vetted, if at all, as well as what guidelines they use for selection. He praised the CDC’s guidelines and promised that he would ensure that opioid manufacturers would not influence them. In the meantime, the CDC has said they will lengthen the time for public input into the proposal.