Topics: Birth Control, Contraception, Editor's Picks, emergency contraception, Plan B, Life News

In spring 2005, at the not-so-tender age of 26, I was on the receiving end of my first (and only) condom malfunction. The incident sent me into a frenzied state of paranoia that had me up all night and found me and my partner bleary-eyed early the next morning at the university emergency clinic in my town, in desperate need of some emergency contraception. This was during the days of the Bush administration, before Plan B — more popularly known back then as the “morning after pill” — was available over the counter. To get it required a prescription and to get a prescription usually required a medical appointment and examination.

In order for me to get Plan B, I had to have a pelvic exam and then sit there while a well-meaning but patronizing nurse subjected me to a speech on how to properly use a condom, complete with a step-by-step demonstration involving a plastic speculum. I was well into my 20s and had used condoms countless times without any problem (as I told the nurse before she launched on her lecture). But sometimes condoms break, which is when Plan B comes in handy. That is, if you can actually get your hands on it.

Even though it was first approved for prescription use in the United States in 1999, Plan B did not become available over the counter until 2006 for women 18 and older. The age requirement was then dropped to 17 in 2009. Age restrictions were finally dropped altogether this past July as mandated by a U.S. District Court Judge — despite much resistance and an appeal by the Obama administration’s Department of Justice. However, as part of a compromise reached by the court and the DOJ, this ruling only applied to Plan B One Step. Generic brands — which are often cheaper–would still only be for sale at pharmacies without a prescription for those over 17 and with a government-issued ID.

But even before age restrictions for Plan B One Step were dropped, research has indicated that pharmacists were misinforming teenagers about the rules regarding its access. At least, those are the findings of a study published in December in the Journal of Adolescent Health.

In the study, researchers called pharmacies in several different cities around the country posing as teenage girls seeking emergency contraception. Approximately 20 percent of the pharmacy staff they contacted wrongfully informed the callers that because they were teenagers they could not legally have access to emergency contraception at all. Of the remaining 80 percent of respondents, only about half of them got the exact age requirements for Plan B correct.

Even more interesting were some of the other things pharmacy staff told the callers. Many cited ethical reasons or personal religious beliefs for not offering the medication. Other pharmacists inaccurately told the callers that a parent or guardian would have to come with them to pick up the medication (even if they had a prescription) or that an older friend or boyfriend above the age restriction could not buy Plan B over the counter for them. In fact, some callers were even told Plan B wasn’t sold to men, which also isn’t true.

Though this study was conducted before age restrictions for over-the-counter Plan B One Step were dropped, its implications are still current.

“Our society is pretty uncomfortable about sex and very little healthy sexual decision making is portrayed in the media, so there seems to be a lot of judgment in these situations along with all these rules and restrictions,” said Dr. Tracey Wilkinson, a pediatrician at the Children’s Hospital of Los Angeles and lead author of the study.