I read Courtney Jung’s book on breast-feeding activism while nursing my second child. Or, to be accurate, while pumping in The Washington Post’s lactation room — a closet-like space that requires maneuvering around an office chair to get to the sink (to clean pump parts), the microwave (to sterilize equipment) and the mini fridge (to store milk). Jung, a political scientist by training, offers enough skepticism about the benefits of nursing and pumping to make a mom wonder: Why in the world am I doing this?

Much of “Lactivism” builds on Hanna Rosin’s 2009 Atlantic article “The Case Against Breast-Feeding ,” which included the memorable line: “It’s only free if a woman’s time is worth nothing.” And no doubt Jung’s book will revive debate about whether the health benefits are overstated. But she reviews the research from a perspective I can appreciate. “Six women have to spend six months exclusively breastfeeding to prevent one ear infection?” she writes. “Conservatively speaking, that’s about 5,400 hours of breastfeeding to prevent one ear infection; 15,600 hours of breastfeeding to prevent a case of pneumonia.”

I had a similar reaction when the journal JAMA Pediatrics published a 2013 Harvard Medical School study suggesting that breast-feeding can boost IQ by four points. A measly four points? When the tests have a five-point margin of error? The study found that each month in a year of breast-feeding was associated with an additional 0.35 verbal IQ points and 0.29 nonverbal points. With some back-of-the-burp-cloth math, assuming 150 hours of breastfeeding per month, I figured each hour translated to 0.0023 verbal points and 0.0019 nonverbal points. Not too inspiring.

Like Rosin, Jung isn’t against breast-feeding. But she doesn’t like that “selective reading of medical literature” has turned a lifestyle choice into a public health issue. She argues that “breastfeeding advocacy too often crosses the line into lactivism,” limiting women’s choices and punishing mothers and babies who don’t conform to the prevailing moral standard.

She makes some good points, including that it’s unfair to penalize women who don’t have the flexibility in their lives — maternity leave, pumping breaks, etc. — to make breast-feeding a realistic option. But she overstates her case when she writes, “Not one of the public breastfeeding initiatives launched since 1995 seems directed toward supporting women’s own preferences and choices.”

“LACTIVISM: How Feminists and Fundamentalists, Hippies and Yuppies, and Physicians and Politicians Made Breastfeeding Big Business and Bad Policy” By Courtney Jung, 258 pp. $26.99 (Basic/Basic)

Jung lays out an intriguing analysis of how different groups have interpreted the “breast is best” slogan to reflect their own agendas. Feminists tend to see breast-feeding as empowering. Conservative Christians see it as an affirmation of traditional gender roles, as well as evidence of intelligent design. Hipsters see it as an extension of the local food movement, while attachment-parenting adherents see it as essential to the mother-infant bond. (Jung identifies herself as a follower of “half-baked attached parenting,” though “semi-attached parenting” would be a less clunky term.) With a bit of a leap, she concludes: “No wonder, then, that contemporary politicians have also embraced breastfeeding in large numbers. As a consensus issue, it has the potential to win them support from all sectors.”

In medical research, telling women what to feed their babies is taboo — it would be unethical to conduct a randomized trial with one group assigned to breast-feeding and another to formula. Yet in public policy, there’s little hesi­ta­tion about pushing breast milk over formula. Are we comfortable with the incentives and disincentives governments have set up in the name of public health, with public money? It’s worth a reappraisal. But most public policy on baby feeding isn’t as coercive or as punitive as Jung makes it out to be.

One of her targets is Latch On NYC, a breast-feeding initiative by New York City’s health department. She repeats criticisms that made the rounds when the campaign was announced in May 2012: that it required hospitals to keep formula “under lock and key” and prohibited access “unless it was medically indicated.” The city dismissed both claims before the program launched: “Mothers can and always will be able to simply ask for formula and receive it free of charge in the hospital — no medical necessity required, no written consent required.”

Jung raises the specter of big government by putting Latch On NYC in the context of then-Mayor Michael Bloomberg’s moves to ban smoking, trans fats and supersize sodas. She doesn’t mention that it’s in line with the international Baby-Friendly Hospital Initiative, which includes hundreds of U.S. hospitals and birthing centers. I delivered twice at Baby-Friendly Georgetown, and I felt far more pressure from the people who want you to sign up for a baby photo shoot (not part of Baby-Friendly) than I did from the lactation consultants who are on call if you need them.

Jung argues that those lactation consultants limit women’s choices. Many readers will agree that women who need or want formula should be able to get it, without grief. New mothers shouldn’t have to fend off maternity ward lactivists like my colleague Emily Wax-Thibodeaux did — even after explaining that she couldn’t produce milk because she’d had cancer and a double mastectomy. “It may come out anyway, or through your armpits,” one ill-informed lactation consultant pushed back.

But for women who can and may want to breast-feed, a nudge in the hospital can actually preserve choice. Nursing can be surprisingly hard. Many new mothers find the first few days and weeks exhausting, painful and frustrating. If they start their babies on formula in the midst of that frustration, before they’ve had a real chance to weigh their options, they risk losing their milk supply and may find themselves unable to nurse, even if they want to.

Another program Jung criticizes is the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants and Children (WIC), which she situates in the U.S. government’s “long history of using coercive tactics to get poor women to conform to its mandates.” To make the case that the government is “effectively punishing poor mothers who didn’t breastfeed, and their babies too,” she describes how WIC offers different food packages to breast-feeding women and those using formula. “WIC is clear that the reason it offers breastfeeding mothers more, and better, food is to provide ‘incentives for mothers to breastfeed without [formula],’ ” she writes.

That clause is in WIC’s food package guidance issued in 2009, and, yes, the program is transparent about encouraging breast-feeding. But the first half of the sentence says packages for breast-feeding mothers and their infants are designed in part “to supplement their special nutritional needs.” Breast-fed babies, for instance, tend to have low levels of iron, so when they start eating solid foods they have more need for meat than babies getting iron in their fortified formula. And nursing mothers tend to need 300 to 500 calories above their normal daily diet. Jung implies that WIC is denying essential nutrients to formula-fed babies and their mothers, but that’s just not true.

And if we’re going to debate the ethics of WIC distorting women’s preferences, we should also talk about how it’s the main purchaser of formula in the United States — responsible for 57 to 68 percent of all formula sold. WIC participants can get formula for free, which makes them more likely to go the formula route than mothers who don’t participate in, but are eligible for, the program. And as much as WIC administrators try to make the breast-feeding package appealing, surveys find that because formula is normally so expensive, participants see the package for formula-fed infants and their mothers as the better deal.

Jung doesn’t write about formula manufacturers’ interest in WIC. She has a lot to say, though, about how the Affordable Care Act, which mandated insurance coverage of pumps, has “been a boon to the corporate fortunes of companies that make breast pumps.” Her account of the big bad breast pump industry is unconvincing. Even she admits that she “didn’t find any evidence of such a lobby.” And, as Ester Bloom notes in the Atlantic, suggesting that the breast-pump and nursing-accessories industries have anything near the resources of formula manufacturers is like comparing PBS and Comcast.

Jung echoes the New Yorker’s Jill Lepore in her criticism that pumping policies take the pressure off employers to provide more generous maternity leave. Sure. But should we also give up on child-care reimbursement, or subsidized day care for babies, because it enables women to return to work and enriches the day-care industrial complex?

If her interest is in preserving women’s choices, that should include the choice to pump during the workday. I may not love the lactation room at my office. But I’m glad to have it.

Twitter: @marisabellack