150 cameras cost department about $57,000

Nine Boulder police officers are already wearing the newly acquired body cameras, and all 150 cameras ordered by the department should be in use by the end of the year. (Boulder Police Department / Courtesy photo)

Boulder Police Department has received its full order of body cameras and hopes to have officers outfitted with them by the end of the year.

Boulder police received approval from the City Council to place an order for 150 body cameras at a cost of about $57,000, and the department placed its order with L3 Mobile Vision — a New Jersey-based vendor of law enforcement recording equipment — for the cameras in December.

Due to high demand for the cameras as more police departments across the country are using them in the wake of several high profile police incidents, there was a delay in Boulder police getting their order. But Deputy Chief Carey Weinheimer said the department now has all of the cameras.

Weinheimer said the department hopes to have officers outfitted with them by the end of the year.

"We're anxious to get them out, but we want to do it in a measured, thoughtful approach," Weinheimer said, adding that other departments have sometimes taken a full year to begin implementing the cameras. "We feel like given the delays we had just getting them, the end of the year is pretty timely."

Advertisement

The department already has nine officers using the cameras in the field to test them out before the entire department starts to use them.

"They are using them on a day-to-day basis, and they are giving us feedback on how they're using them," Weinheimer said. "Pretty soon here we hope to start rolling them out to other work units."

Weinheimer also said the department is still trying to install and set up download and charging stations for the cameras.

The department has already begun drafting a 20-to-30 minute presentation that the officers will get during their briefings to orient them on how to use the cameras.

"They are pretty simple," Weinheimer said. "There are some nuances about how to categorize videos and things like that."

Boulder will be the only police department in Boulder County to begin widespread use of body cameras when they do roll them out, but other law enforcement agencies around the county are looking into the technology.

Mitchell Byars: 303-473-1329, byarsm@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/mitchellbyars