Johnnie: A number of my neighbors in north Longmont have noticed an unusual browning of the south side of juniper and arborvitae plants coming out of this past winter.

My only theory from the meteorological side of things is that we had some record breaking warm weather in late January and early February (75 degrees on Jan. 26 and 74 degrees on Feb. 7), followed by an arctic cold spell three weeks later where temperatures dropped to 4 below zero on the morning of Feb. 27. Readings also dropped to just above zero on the morning of Mar. 5, following a snowstorm.

Juniper trees in Longmont, such as this one on the north side of town, have turned brown this year. (Courtesy photo)

Perhaps the late January warm sun on the south side of these plants got some juices flowing early and then the arctic cold a few weeks later killed the leaves? I don't know; you would have to check with a local horticulturist. And the greater question — will these plants recover to their usual evergreen state? — Juniper Guy

Juniper Guy: You are right about the weather playing a role. However it wasn't the January-to-February-to-March temperature change that got to the juniper trees, it was the October-to-November temperature change.

Carol O'Meara, a horticulture expert with the CSU Extension office in Longmont, led me to the answer, which the extension office provided in its Winter 2015 newsletter.

I'll do my best to summarize.

As temperatures drop during the fall, plants prepare themselves for winter by storing sugars and amino acids and going dormant.

However, last October's warm temperatures (81 degrees on Oct. 24) were followed by a rapid drop in temperatures in November. The newsletter notes that on Nov. 10, the high was 58 degrees. That night, the low was 16 degrees.

"When our freeze hit, many plants such as elms, callery pears, and oaks had not completed the hardening off process," the newsletter notes. "Many conifers and deciduous trees and shrubs showed freeze damage immediately with straw-colored needles or flash-frozen leaves. Buds and shoots suffered freeze injury that in some cases resulted in death of buds or the entire plant, however, long-term impact on these buds won't be seen until spring."

That injury is what you are seeing now. Will they turn green again?

"The freeze burned needles will not green up, but new needles will mask the damaged ones," the newsletter says.

For those with deciduous that were damaged, "trees may need judicious pruning to remove the dead twigs and branches."

Send questions to johnnie@times-call.com