When the Human Rights Campaign and the Equality Federation Institute graded equal rights in four Colorado cities, the state scored the equivalent of a C-Plus, according to the organization’s annual Municipal Equality Index released Tuesday.

The index measures inclusion of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people. The study examined 291 U.S. cities. On a scale of 100, Denver scored an impressive 99. Boulder got a B-plus, 87 points. Aurora scored 66, and Colorado Springs managed just 60 points, giving the state an average of 78 points, one point below the national average.

The cities were graded on recognition of same-sex relationships, employment and contracting policies, inclusiveness of city services, law enforcement and “municipal leadership on matters of equality,” according the report’s authors.

While Denver did extremely well, 25 cities aced it with 100 points for “excellent policies ranging from non-discrimination laws, equal employee benefits and cutting-edge city services,” including Minneapolis, Atlanta, St. Louis and Missoula, Mont.

Four cities scored zeros, two of them in Mississippi, Starkville and Southhaven, joined by Kansas City, Kan., and Port St. Lucie, Fla. The groups that published the report hope it spurs those with low scores to do better.

“Here in Colorado, state and city leaders are taking critical steps to protect LGBT Coloradans and their families,” said Jon Monteith, spokesman for One Colorado, the state’s leading LGBT advocacy organization. “We’re seeing this progress in communities across the country, as this year’s MEI demonstrates, but we also know our work continues to fulfill our vision of a fair and just Colorado where all are truly equal.”

Chad Griffin, president of the Human Rights Campaign, called the rating system, in its second year, “groundbreaking,” as it examined “basic fairness” in municipalities large and small across the country.

“Equality isn’t just for the coasts anymore,” he said.

The full report is available on the Human Rights Campaign’s website.

Colorado crossed a threshold on May 1, when civil unions became state law, passed by the legislature earlier this year. Mayor Michael Hancock delivered a powerful address before a celebratory dinner. City Councilwoman Robin Kniech, the city’s first openly gay city council member, elected in 2011. Afterward, Hancock presided over civil-union ceremonies from midnight until almost daylight. Colorado House Speaker Mark Ferrandino and his partner, Greg Wertsch, were among the couples. They later held a private ceremony on the west balcony of the state Capitol, officiated by state Supreme Court Justice Monica Márquez, the first openly gay person on that body.

Denver’s former mayor, John Hickenlooper, politically drove the issue of civil unions to his desk for a signature into law.

Also this year, One Colorado ensured that the state’s health insurance exchange and private insurers recognized the issues and needs of LGBT patients.

In September, Denver hosted two national meetings of LGBT-oriented organizations. For the first time, the GLMA — which has dropped the more formal Gay and Lesbian Medical Association — convened in Colorado to discuss advances in healthcare for LGBT people. That discussion included work being done to reduce HIV infections in the city by 50 percent over the last seven to eight years. That work is being led by Dr. Mark Thrun, the director of both the HIV/STD Prevention and Control program and the Denver Prevention Training Center for the city health department.

American Veterans for Equal Rights held its national convention in Denver for the third time to discuss LGBT rights and issues in the military.

On the other hand, in 2006 Colorado voters approved a constitutional amendment that effectively banned same-sex marriage.