Water aerobics for seniors. (Photo: Richard Hamm, 2011 AP photo)

Here we go again. Insurance companies and members of Congress are trying to scare seniors with dire warnings that new spending cuts will hurt the popular Medicare Advantage program, forcing beneficiaries to pay more for less. The final numbers are due from the Obama administration on April 7.

Our advice: Take the warnings with a big grain of salt. Many of these same folks said many of these same, scary things back when health reform was being debated in 2009, insisting that cuts to Medicare Advantage in Obamacare would devastate the program.

Instead, enrollment has grown steadily, satisfaction rates are high, and while some insurers have raised premiums, on average, premiums are lower than they were in 2011.

OPPOSING VIEW: Don't harm seniors

Let's examine what's really going on here.

Medicare Advantage, also known as "private Medicare," traces its roots back to the 1970s, when politicians insisted private companies could deliver Medicare benefits better and more cheaply than traditional "government" Medicare. That wasn't a bad idea. Competition could help, and maybe private companies really could do it for less.

But that's not the way it worked out. By the time Obamacare was being debated in 2009, Medicare Advantage was more expensive, not less. It was getting a fat 14% federal subsidy over traditional Medicare, and insurers used some of the extra cash to gold-plate their plans, delivering goodies unavailable in traditional Medicare, such as free gym memberships, prescription glasses and hearing aids.

Taxpayers and traditional Medicare beneficiaries paid extra to support those freebies. Not surprisingly, Medicare Advantage has grown from just a tiny fraction of beneficiaries to nearly 16 million, or almost one-third of all seniors on Medicare.

The Affordable Care Act rightly included provisions to gradually cut the subsidy for Medicare Advantage to bring it closer to the traditional program. The subsidy was down to 6% over traditional Medicare last year, and it's expected to be 3% to 4% above the government version this year. By 2015 or 2016, the private and public versions are supposed to be funded equally.

Well-run Medicare Advantage companies can do just fine on the same money the government gets to run traditional Medicare — just as early proponents insisted. Competition is working well enough to keep average premiums for Medicare Advantage at their lowest level in four years, according to an analysis by the Kaiser Family Foundation. While some plans are raising their prices sharply, most seniors can find competing plans that keep premiums the same or less.

Forcing Medicare Advantage plans to live with little or no subsidy over government Medicare is entirely fair, but you wouldn't know it from the howling by Congress, where 273 members of the House and Senate from both parties have signed letters demanding that upcoming cuts for 2015 be suspended.

We'd guess that if you asked any of these politicians whether they support wasteful spending that gives one class of Medicare patients more benefits than another, they'd say no. But in the middle of an election year, on a popular program for seniors that's especially easy to demagogue, that's exactly what they're doing.

USA TODAY's editorial opinions are decided by its Editorial Board, separate from the news staff. Most editorials are coupled with an opposing view — a unique USA TODAY feature.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1fvE5JC