TRENTON — Mercer County hospitals spent about $68.7 million in documented charity care to treat working poor and uninsured patients last year, an increase of $10.5 million from 2011, according to a report from the state’s Department of Health.

The report describes an apparent leveling-off of expenses around the state, but with sharp dips and increases in certain areas.

After a high of $1.027 billion in charity care spending in 2010, hospitals throughout the state spent about $998 million in 2012, up a modest $2.5 million from 2011, according to the report. Last year, New Jersey’s 72 hospitals shared $675 million in charity care reimbursement from the state and federal government to help offset those costs, equalling about $2 for every $3 spent.

Charity care costs fluctuated for Capital Health, which maintains two hospitals in Mercer, one in Trenton and one in Hopewell Township, as well as a satellite emergency room in Trenton.

Capital Health Regional Medical Center, on Brunswick Avenue in Trenton, saw about $31.2 million in charity care costs in 2012, up from $24.5 million the year before.

However, charity care for its sister operation, Capital Health Medical Center of Hopewell, was $6.9 million in 2012, down from $11.4 million a year earlier. The hospital was formerly in Trenton on Bellevue Avenue and a hospital spokeswoman attributed the decline to the move.

Hospital officials announced this month that they will close the satellite emergency department they have maintained at the former Bellevue site. Average daily visits dropped from 61 in November 2011 to 32 in March, and some days the department sees as few as 12 patients. The majority of those patients do not require emergency care and would be better served in a primary-care setting, hospital officials said in a news release.

Across the state, urban hospitals reported spending an average of $23.3 million on charity care, more than twice as much as the $9.9 million average spent by suburban hospitals.

Capital Health spokeswoman Steffanie Archbald said in an email that the Brunswick Avenue hospital has been supporting a high amount of uncompensated care as a result of violence within the city and the high number of patients qualifying for charity care, and it continues to see an increase above 2012 levels in 2013.

“The cost incurred for treating patients without insurance is an immediate cost, with funding lagging two years, and the charity care funding that we do receive is substantially less than the cost of providing the care,” Archbald said. “The Hopewell campus continues to provide $7 million a year in documented charity care.”

The largest percentage increase in documented charity care in Mercer County was at Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital-Hamilton, where the amount increased $5.6 million, from $2.7 million to $8.3 million, or 208 percent, from 2011 to 2012.

Skip Cimino, president and CEO of RWJ Hamilton, said in an email that the hospital has a long history of serving the working class in the county, and over the last few years, that segment of the population has particularly felt the effects of the economic downturn and job losses.

“As a result, RWJ Hamilton has seen a rise in uninsured patients who, a year or two years ago, were easily in a different situation,” Cimino said. “Our job remains to take care of people in need, no matter how well they are insured.”

New Jersey residents who earn below 301 percent of the federal poverty level (no more than $34,470 for one person) and who do not qualify for Medicaid or any other insurance are eligible to receive free or reduced-rate charity care services. New Jersey hospitals are required by law to provide all necessary care regardless of a patient’s ability to pay.

Suzanne Ianni, president and CEO of the Hospital Alliance of New Jersey, representing 16 urban hospitals, said she expects to see rates decline as the Affordable Care Act allows people with slightly higher incomes to obtain coverage through Medicaid next year.

“However, certain hospitals may have seen decreases as a result of their population health initiatives,” Ianni said. “Hospitals are not only investing in staff to help patients enroll in Medicaid but also in ‘feet on the street’ to help low-income patients better manage their chronic diseases, such as diabetes or asthma where unmanaged patients frequently rely on the ER. That type of management could lead to a decrease in a hospital’s documented charity care.”

St. Francis Medical Center in Trenton reported an increase of $1.5 million in documented charity care in 2012, and the University Medical Center of Princeton at Plainsboro reported an increase of $1.2 million, according to the report.

Some of the increase for St. Francis is because of Capital Health’s decision to move one of its hospitals to Hopewell, which shifted more of the urban care burden.

“We’ve seen a somewhat steady increase over the last few years in charity care. The change in the Capital Mercer campus impacted that a little bit,” said Mark Kelly, St. Francis’ chief financial officer. “We also opened a walk-in clinic in 2012 to provide a better setting for care. We’re hoping with expanded Medicaid, we’ll see more of the population become insured.”

Charity care costs at St. Francis steadily increased from $11.2 million in 2007 to a peak of $19.6 million in 2010. Charity care costs were $11 million in 2011 and $12.9 million in 2012.

Officials at University Medical Center of Princeton at Plainsboro said in an email yesterday they were unable to comment on the report at this time.

The Star-Ledger contributed to this report.

Contact Nicole Mulvaney at nmulvaney@njtimes.com.

On mobile or desktop:

• Like Times of Trenton on Facebook

• Follow @TimesofTrenton on Twitter