WASHINGTON, D.C. -- It didn't take long for special-interest groups to seek out U.S. Rep. John Katko after he took office on Jan. 6.

Two days later, the National Air Traffic Controllers Association in Washington, D.C., contributed $5,000 to Katko through its political action committee, or PAC.



By April 1, Katko's haul totaled $177,672 from PACs, most located outside of the 24th Congressional District in Central New York.

The PAC money accounted for 62 percent of the $286,601 Katko's campaign raised during his first three months as a member of Congress, according to a syracuse.com analysis of reports filed with the Federal Election Commission.

Katko, R-Camillus, raised more PAC money in the quarter than all but two of New York's 27 House members and all 12 members from New Jersey, according to the FEC records.

Who is contributing money, how much? We have created a database so you can see who is giving money to the Katko campaign, how much and where the money is coming from.

Craig Holman, who advocates for campaign finance reform for the group Public Citizen in Washington, said it's clear the PACs want to influence Katko's vote on two key committee posts.

"He is on two committees that have a lot of financial interests at stake," Holman said. "The corporations want to influence him and, in a sense, get in his pocket. He's now playing the insider game."

During his successful 2014 campaign, Katko criticized former Rep. Dan Maffei, D-Syracuse, for taking most of his campaign cash from donors outside of Central New York. Katko portrayed Maffei as a Washington insider who had lost touch with voters in Onondaga, Cayuga, Oswego and Wayne counties.

"I am honored and thankful for the support of thousands of local individuals and proud that 82 percent of my donations come from families I hope to serve in Congress, not from outside special interests," Katko said in October.

He added, "Dan Maffei can never change Washington because he is Washington."

By the end of the 2014 campaign, Maffei had received 54 percent ($1,430,676) of his total campaign donations from PACs, while Katko took only 18 percent ($179,675) of his contributions from PACs.

Katko: Money doesn't influence votes

Now Katko is reaping the same benefits of incumbency that he once criticized, taking advantage of a campaign finance system where wealthy special-interest groups line up to donate millions of dollars to influence members of Congress.

Katko makes no apologies for accepting the money, and emphasizes that two-thirds of his donors (not total cash contributions) are people who either live or work in the 24th District.

He said the percentage of campaign cash coming from local donors is now smaller because PACs tend to write bigger checks. PACs can give individual candidates up to $5,000 per election under federal campaign law, but individuals are limited to $2,700 per election.

Katko insists the money will have no influence on his decision-making as a congressman, and that he will always do what is best for people who live in the 24th Congressional District. The district covers Onondaga, Cayuga and Wayne counties and the western half of Oswego County.

"I am beholden to the people of NY-24, and I'll continue to fight for my constituents every day in Congress," Katko said when asked about the PAC money.

Regulating donors

Among the 97 individual PAC donations listed on Katko's disclosure report for the period from Jan. 1 through March 31 are contributions from industries that Katko helps regulate as a member of the House Transportation Committee and Homeland Security Committee.

The House Transportation Committee has oversight of the Federal Aviation Administration, which regulates the aviation industry. Katko also has oversight of the Transportation Security Administration as chairman of a House Homeland Security subcommittee.

Among those who have a stake in the committees' work is the National Air Traffic Controllers Association PAC, which gave Katko $5,000 in January. It's the same group that donated $7,500 to Maffei when he opposed Katko in the 2014 election.

Katko also accepted a $1,000 contribution from the Airline Pilots Association PAC and $1,000 from the PAC representing JetBlue Airways crew members.

Katko, an opponent of the Affordable Care Act and its tax on medical devices, received $5,000 from the American Association of Orthopaedic Surgeons PAC; $1,000 from the Medical Device Manufacturers Association PAC; $1,000 from the MVP Healthcare Inc. PAC and $1,000 from the Express Scripts Inc. political fund.

Welch Allyn Inc. Federal PAC, which represents medical device-maker Welch Allyn of Skaneateles Falls, contributed $1,000.

PACs give to other freshmen

Katko isn't the only new member of Congress benefitting from an outpouring of support from special interest groups.

In Upstate New York, freshman Rep. Elise Stefanik, R-Willsboro, took in $151,000 from PACs during her first quarter in Congress, almost half of the money she raised during the quarter. Freshman Rep. Lee Zeldin, R-Long Island, accepted PAC donations that accounted for 46 percent ($208,570) of the money he raised.

But Holman, of Public Citizen, said he was surprised to see Katko relied on PACs for such a large percentage (62 percent) of the cash he received.

"It helps him because he won't have to work so hard at fundraising anymore, because these companies are going to throw money at his feet," Holman said.

He said Katko's committee assignments were part of a strategic move by House Republican leaders to boost fundraising for a vulnerable freshman.

"He is playing the inside game, and any opponent will attack him for it," Holman said. "Sixty-two percent is lot of money to come in from PACs."

Despite the flow of cash from Washington, Katko said he won't forget who he's serving back home. He points to the total number of small contributions he received in the quarter as evidence of his local support.

Of Katko's 429 total donors in the quarter, 287 were residents of the 24th District. He took in $11,280 in small donations under $200 that do not have to be itemized for the FEC. His campaign said those donations included many loyal small donors, including one man who contributes $10 per week.

Contact Mark Weiner anytime: Email | Twitter | Facebook | 571-970-3751