After any game, you’re likely to find second-year Nuggets center Joffrey Lauvergne on the locker room floor contorting his body to stretch out his ailing back.

It’s just one of the things Lauvergne has to do to keep playing.

Lately, December Joffrey has started to look a whole lot like September Joffrey. Or early November Joffrey.

Those were the times when he was playing his best. Those were the times when he not only won the job as Denver’s starting center in the absence of projected starter Jusuf Nurkic, he was running away with it.

Lauvergne is getting back to that now.

“He’s definitely rounding back into form,” said Nuggets coach Michael Malone. “I wasn’t surprised that it took a little time to get back to that, when you miss that many games — and the kind of injury he had, the back, he couldn’t do anything. When you have a bad back, it really inhibits the movements you’re able to do.”

His back injury cost the 6-foot-11, 220-pound Lauvergne nearly a month of time. He has played in nine games since returning, gradually getting better each game. And in the last week, Lauvergne has started to bump his performance to a higher level.

In his last three games, Lauvergne has two double-doubles and is averaging 12.3 points and 10.3 rebounds while shooting 57 percent from the field, including 50 percent from the 3-point line.

After initially coming off the bench while Malone worked him back into the rotation, Lauvergne has returned to the starting lineup and is averaging 21.3 minutes per game. He scored 12 points and grabbed a career-high 13 rebounds Friday night in the Nuggets’ 97-88 loss to the Utah Jazz in Salt Lake City.

Lauvergne has given Malone another legitimate big man to turn to in the post. The former second-round draft pick has regained most of his touch around the rim, and he has been more than capable of scoring from the block when the Nuggets need a high-percentage shot.

Lauvergne, 24, started this season with three consecutive games in double-figure scoring, including 11 points and seven rebounds in 18 minutes against the Thunder on Nov. 1 at Oklahoma City. He was on his way to having a big night when his back wouldn’t allow him to play the majority of the second half.

From that point, there was plenty of downtime to rest his back until he returned Nov. 28. An anti-inflammatory injection helped get him back on the court.

Now, his effectiveness will keep him in the rotation.

“I think he’s getting his confidence and his rhythm back, which is great to see,” Malone said. “We need him. He had a great preseason and a great training camp. We’re seeing that Joffrey Lauvergne again.”