By Izzy Lyman | Watchdog Arena

Michigan’s middle class is shrinking, according to a map produced by the Pew Charitable Trusts, a non-profit organization dedicated to “invigorating civic life.”

In 2000, the percentage of Michigan households that were categorized as “middle class” was 50.6 percent. By 2013, that number had plunged to 46.3 percent. In 2000, Michigan’s median income, adjusted for inflation, was $61,551. By 2013 the number plummeted to $48,273.

The middle class, according to Pew, is defined as those Americans earning between “67 percent and 200 percent” of a state’s median income.

Congressman Tim Walberg, R-MI-7, puts part of the blame for the declining fortunes of his constituents on the spiraling growth of the federal government during the Obama administration’s tenure.

“President Obama sent Congress a $4 trillion big government wish list. His budget had all the hallmarks of an unserious proposal; namely, a $2.1 trillion tax increase and a $2.4 trillion spending increase. We should be helping middle class families increase their take-home pay, not asking them and their children to shoulder a bigger tax and debt burden,” stated Walberg in a Hillsdale Daily News op-ed.

Walberg also singles out the Affordable Care Act for downsizing full-time employment from 40 hours per week to 30 hours.

The state of Michigan, however, isn’t exactly a bastion of economic freedom. Despite the current Republican Gov. Rick Snyder signing right-to-work measures and reforming personal property taxes, Michigan, unlike Florida and Texas, still has a state income tax.

Michigan could also stand to be more accommodating of Main Street entrepreneurs. Thumbtack.com’s 2013 Small Business Friendliness Survey gave the Great Lakes State a cumulative grade of D due, in part, to its onerous regulations and tax code.

Manufacturing jobs, once the backbone of the Rust Belt, are also waning. Michigan Capitol Confidential, a free-market blog, reported last year, “The auto industry accounted for one of every 13.5 jobs in Michigan in 2000, but just one in 24.5 jobs in 2014.”

The Pew map also notes increases in the cost of housing. In 2000, 24 percent of households in Michigan spent at least 30 percent of their income on housing, but by 2013 that number had climbed to 31 percent of households. The Tax Foundation, an independent policy research outfit, has listed Michigan among the “worst states” for property taxes (matched to the value of the home).

If the current leadership in Lansing hope to retain control of Michigan’s political reins, numbers like these will have to improve.

This article was written by a contributor of Watchdog Arena, Franklin Center’s network of writers, bloggers, and citizen journalists.