Big Pharmacy Deal: Walgreens Boots Alliance Is Buying Rite Aid PART 1 OF 7

The Rite Aid–Walgreens Merger: Walgreens Moves to Rival CVS

Merger arbitrage

To perform merger arbitrage, an investor generally buys the stock of the company being acquired, short-sells the relevant ratio of the acquirer’s stock, if applicable, and waits for the deal to close. When the merger is complete, the investor exchanges the stock of the company being acquired for the amount agreed upon in the deal.

Another big deal in the healthcare space

On Tuesday, October 27, Walgreens Boots Alliance (WBA) agreed to buy Rite Aid Corp. (RAD) for $9.00 in cash per share of Rite Aid in yet another big deal in the healthcare space. Obamacare has driven more integration in the space as companies look to cut costs and increase their negotiating power with the drug companies. This deal gets WBA into the management of prescription drug benefits, an area where rival CVS Pharmacy (CVS) also operates.

Basics of the arbitrage spread

The Rite Aid–Walgreens merger is subject to customary closing conditions and regulatory approvals. According to the press release, the deal is expected to close in the second half of 2016. If you assume a closing date of December 31, 2016, then the spread is trading at an annualized rate of 12.1%. This is a somewhat wide spread and reflects the antitrust risk in the deal. The merger is a combination of the first and third players in an industry that is already very concentrated. This deal is pretty much a guaranteed second request, and the antitrust regulators may determine that the deal is not fixable.

Other merger arbitrage resources

Other important merger spreads include merger between Cigna Corporation (CI) and Anthem (ANTM), which is set to close at the end of 2016. For a primer on risk arbitrage investing, read “Merger Arbitrage Must-Knows: A Key Guide for Investors.”

Investors who are interested in trading in the healthcare sector can look at the S&P SPDR Healthcare ETF (XLV)