Andy Naylor reviews Judge Dredd #18…

“Judge Death and the 12 other Dark Judges have targeted Mega-City and found the entire population guilty of the most serious crime… living! While the Dark Judges prepare their “Affordable Death Care Act,” a desperate Justice Department, facing mass-murder of unreal proportions, draws up an apocalyptic plan that will change the city forever. And the only person standing between the city and certain death—Judge Dredd—is a billion miles away on the Titan penal colony. But he turns out to have allies in the strangest of places.”

After the poor showing from the Mega-City Two story line, it was a great relief to read an enthralling and dark Dredd comic that contained something resembling a plot. Previously, Dredd had been exiled to Titan as a convict while back in Mega-City One is assaulted by the returning Judge Death and his posse of Dark Judges.

The plot is tense, concise and proceeds with purpose. The reader is drawn in to the tension and predicament, if this were a movie then you’d be at the edge of your seat, digging your nails into the arms and holding your breath. Compared to the Judge Dredd #17 this story is very much devoid of the Dark Judges. The last issue threatened to overwhelm the reader with a vast array of Dark Judges, this issue concentrates on what it should, Judge Dredd. We are with him for the entire time, witnessing his determination to return to Mega-City One and save the citizens he swore to protect, despite the fact it would be safer to stay at the Penal Colony on Titan.

The art throughout is fantastic, just what Dredd should be – dark, atmospheric and bland colours which highlight the bolder ones when required. The panels flow easily and at no point are you confused about where to go next on the page. My only complaint with the presentation is the clashing font and box colour when the robot guards are talking. Light grey with white text is NOT easy to read!

This particular story arc of Judge Dredd just gets better and better. I can’t wait for the next issue, I just wish each issue was slightly longer.

Andy Naylor – Follow me on Twitter.