Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Judge Olu Stevens supporters met outside the Commonwealth Attorney's office Monday to demand a meeting with prosecutor Tom Wine. The supporters want the motion against Stevens rescinded, cleared from record and an investigation on jury selections. Alton Strupp, The C-J

Buy Photo Jefferson Circuit Judge Olu Stevens, shown in court, was accused of discussing the pending case on Facebook. (Photo: The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

Jefferson Circuit Judge Olu Stevens is anticipated to resume hearing cases Monday on the heels of mediation with Jefferson County Commonwealth's Attorney Tom Wine.

The two met for "several hours" Friday on the orders of Kentucky Chief Justice John D. Minton Jr.

Wine has now dropped his motion to disqualify Stevens from all pending and future criminal cases, according to a mediation agreement signed by the two men, as well as four Minton-appointed mediators.

"The parties now have a better understanding that their words and actions can, to others, give the perception of a bias or prejudice that the individual may not intend to convey," reads the one-page agreement, obtained by The Courier-Journal on Saturday.

Wine filed the motion Nov. 18, referencing a series of posts the judge made on his personal Facebook page in which he called Wine a racist who wants all-white juries. He argued the posts showed Stevens couldn't be fair and unbiased to him and his prosecutors.

While not ordered off the bench, Stevens had elected to roll hearings in all cases that came before him to later dates while Minton considered the motion. The mediation agreement clears the way for Stevens to resume his normal daily docket.

Stevens didn't intend to personally criticize Wine in his Facebook posts and he recognizes Wine doesn't want all white juries, according to the agreement. Rather he was voicing his "passionate concerns for the underlying issues and a desire to address the injustices created by racial disparity in the juries of Jefferson County."

The agreement also notes both men said neither is a racist.

The Facebook posts stem from a November 2014 case in which he granted a defense motion to dismiss a jury panel in a case with an African-American defendant. Of 41 potential jurors, 40 were white.

Wine asked the Kentucky Supreme Court in January to clarify legal questions, including if Stevens had the authority to dismiss the jury based on its racial composition. The court has agreed to look at the case.

In posts last month, Stevens maintained he had the right to intervene to make sure a jury is representative of the community. In Facebook posts, he wrote the November 2014 jury panel was "not properly constituted" as it "represented a substantial departure from the racial make-up of the average jury panel."

The circuit court judge also criticized Wine for seeking clarification on the law with the state Supreme Court, writing online that Wine was advocating for all-white juries, is against diverse juries and will "live in infamy."

Wine's disqualification motion arose from those comments, not the legal questions concerning juries that are currently pending before the state Supreme Court.

Addressing the Facebook posts, Wine and Stevens agreed Friday that "issues concerning the parties" should no longer be addressed on social media, citing professional and judicial codes of conduct.

Wine and Stevens are both members of the Jefferson County Racial Fairness Commission, which in past studies has identified systemic bias and racial disparities in bail, jury selection and sentencing.

Both agreed that despite some past progress there "is much work to do on these issues."

On Wednesday, Minton ordered mediation, putting Wine's motion on hold in an attempt to avoid potential "systemic disruption."

There was no set process for the mediation or mediator selection, said Leigh Anne Hiatt, a spokeswoman for the state Administrative Office of the Courts.

Raoul Cunningham, president of the Louisville NAACP and member of the Racial Fairness Commission, served as a mediator.

Also mediating were retired Justice Martin Johnstone, a current appointee to the Executive Branch Ethics Commission; retired Judge Steve Mershon who now specializes in mediations; and J. Michael Brown, secretary of the Kentucky Justice and Public Safety Cabinet.

Judge disqualification motions directed to the state's chief justice aren't common in Kentucky. Of the 176 such motions filed between 2009-2014 statewide, only 11 were granted, according to data from Hiatt's office.

Minton's use of mediation is not unprecedented, Hiatt noted, citing its use in a 2010 Harlan County case.

In a statement through an office spokesman, Wine said he was glad to have had the chance to participate in mediation and that he "looks forward to all parties complying with the obligations" in the agreement.

The agreement did not address what if anything is to be done with Stevens' Facebook posts with which Wine took issue. As of Saturday afternoon many remained on his personal page.

Looking ahead, the Commonwealth's Attorney's Office is expected to file this month its first brief in the pending state Supreme Court case.

Reporter Matthew Glowicki can be reached at 502-582-4989 or mglowicki@courier-journal.com.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1XQZRKf