The incidence and treatment costs of skin cancer are both on the rise in the U.S., according to a new study. Joe Raedle/Getty Images

The costs associated with skin cancer increased five times faster than treatments for any other cancer between 2002 and 2011, according to a study released Monday. The findings suggest that Americans are not diligent about protecting their skin from harmful rays, and that health care costs continue to rise.

[READ What's Behind the Slowdown in Health Care Costs]

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention study, published online in the American Journal of Preventive Medicine, found the average annual cost for skin cancer treatment increased 126 percent.

For all other types of cancers during the same time period, the average yearly cost for treatment increased by 25 percent, or five times slower than the cost of skin cancer.

From 2002 to 2006 the treatment costs for skin cancer increased $3.6 billion, and from 2007 to 2011 the costs increased to $8.1 billion. Health officials have known that the number of skin cancer cases has been increasing, but according to the report little was known before this study about the costs of skin cancer treatment.

The report studied skin cancer data on adults between 2002 and 2011 using the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey, which polls families, individual adults, medical providers and employers. The researchers created two five-year periods of data from 2002 to 2006 and from 2007 to 2011.

The most significant cost increase occurred in treatment for people with melanoma, the deadliest type of skin cancer. The study found that the cost of treatment jumped 106 percent, rising from $2,320 annually to $4,789 annually.

The data show that the cost increase is both due to a higher cost of treatment per person and a higher number of people affected.

The average annual number of adults treated for skin cancer increased from 3.4 million in during the first period to 4.9 million during the second period; and the cost to treat an individual patient on average rose from $1,044 annually during the first period to $1,643 annually during the second period.



[READ World Health Organization: Tuberculosis Still Taking a Toll]

The percent of patients treated for skin cancer in hospitals grew from 8 percent to 32 percent – a fourfold increase. Costs for inpatient treatment are generally higher than those for outpatient treatment, and could also have played a role in higher overall costs. The data show that outpatient costs shrunk from nearly $20 million to $11 million by 2011.

From 2007 to 2011, private health insurance paid for 43 percent of all skin cancer treatment, while Medicare – the government's health insurance program for seniors, paid for 41 percent of care. Among other types of cancers, private health insurance paid for 45 percent of treatment and Medicare paid for 36 percent.



Annual estimated treatment costs for skin cancer and other cancer sites in the United States. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the American Journal of Preventive Medicine

Skin cancer is the most commonly diagnosed cancer in the U.S. The two most common types are basal cell cancer and squamous cell cancer, which are named after the layers of skin that they appear in. They usually form on the head, face, neck, hands and arms.

“This … underscores the importance of skin cancer prevention efforts,” said Gery Guy, the report’s lead author and who works at the CDC’s Division of Cancer Prevention and Control, in a statement.

Most cases of melanoma are caused by exposure to damaging ultraviolet light, which can occur when people do not their skin when they are outside, or when they use a tanning salon.

The Food and Drug Administration in July issued a warning about tanning beds, recommending that children under 18 not use them. The Affordable Care Act tacks a 10-percent tax excise on tanning salons – a move that is expected to generate $2.7 billion during the course of a decade.



[READ CDC Report Examines Obesity and Antidepressants]

The District of Columbia and 41 states regulate tanning for minors in some way, according to the National Conference of State Legislatures. California, Delaware, Hawaii, Illinois, Louisiana, Minnesota, Nevada, Oregon, Texas, Vermont and Washington state go so far as to ban the use of ultraviolet tanning devices by anyone under age 18.

The findings highlight the importance of skin cancer prevention efforts, which could result in future savings in health care. They also could save lives – about 9,000 people die from melanoma in the U.S. every year, according to the report.

The U.S. Surgeon General in July called skin cancer a public health crisis.

Though anyone can get skin cancer, it tends to be genetic and occur in people over 50. It also tends to be more common among people who spend a lot of time in the sun or get sunburned, as well as people with fair skin tones and light eyes. Skin cancer is largely preventable by staying out of the sun or covering skin when exposed. Many Americans tan intentionally for cosmetic reasons, and by doing so increase their risk. One third of Americans have been sunburned this year, according to the Surgeon General.

Changes in a person’s skin tone, moles, bumps, rings, or scars that appear not to heal can be indications of skin cancer, and samples in the form of a skin biopsy need to be tested by a doctor to be certain.

Treatments for skin cancer include surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, photodynamic therapy – a laser light that kills cancer cells – and biologic therapy – which helps the body boost its ability to fight cancer.