Topics: Affordable Care Act, ed fitzgerald, Editor's Picks, Election 2014, John Kasich, Mitch McConnell, Obamacare, Paul LePage, Tea Party, The New York Times, The Right, Elections News, Media News, News, Politics News

At this point in an election year, when advertisements from candidates and super PACs begin to march across the line between “constant” and “oppressive”; when the attacks levied by the respective campaigns begin to get faster, looser and more frequent; and when most voters are just beginning to pay attention, the political media tends to go into high theater criticism mode.

Every decision the candidates make, whether conscious or merely perceived, is analyzed by members of the media not from the viewpoint of the journalists themselves, but rather from what they imagine is the perspective of an average voter — or an undecided voter, or a female voter, or a Latino voter, and so on. At a certain point, it can feel more like a scathing pantomime of democracy than the contemporary manifestation of the real thing.

So when I saw President Obama being criticized by some pundits recently for saying his policies were on the ballot this November even if he was not — and consequently thwarting red state Democrats’ attempts to distance themselves from him — I was at first inclined to dismiss it as more savviness for its own sake. If there was something interesting about the moment at all, I thought, it was that the usually on-message Obama made such a petty and silly mistake. Now I’m having second thoughts.

The primary reason why is a recent succession of more substantial rhetorical faux pas from three Republican candidates — Sen. Mitch McConnell, Gov. John Kasich and Gov. Paul LePage — which have me reconsidering whether the president’s comment was truly a mistake. Whether he meant to or not, by placing himself back on center stage, Obama challenged the savvy position, which holds that Dems are wise to avoid defending his achievements (Obamacare chief among them) and to focus instead on slamming congressional Republicans. After what I’ve heard from McConnell, Kasich and LePage? I’m not so sure.

Since Salon’s already covered the feeble attempts by McConnell and Kasich to argue the popular parts of Obamacare don’t count, I’ll focus on LePage’s comments, which came Tuesday night during the Maine gubernatorial race’s final televised debate. Asked to defend his decision to reject Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion, which denied some 70,000 Maine residents access to affordable healthcare, the famously intemperate and radical Tea Party governor tried to sound as if those tens of thousands lacking coverage was not his fault. “[T]here are people under the federal poverty level,” LePage granted. “They need to be able to go to the exchanges …Take those that do not qualify and then find a way to get them insurance.”

When pressed by a moderator to acknowledge that a reason many people weren’t covered was because he had rejected the element of Obamacare designed to help them, LePage responded with pure nonsense. “That’s ACA,” he said, referring to the Affordable Care Act, Obamacare’s official name. “I didn’t put that in.” Reminded that the unaffordable deductibles keeping many Mainers without insurance long predated Obamacare (and were in fact part of the reason for its passage in the first place), LePage wouldn’t budge. “Yeah, well, that’s ACA,” he said. “That’s what I’m saying. The ACA has changed the entire system.”