Sen. Linda Evans Parlette announced her retirement from the Washington State Legislature this year. The Senator leaves a distinguished 20-year career which includes five consecutive terms as the Caucus Chair.

In this interview, Sen. Parlette reveals the importance of this year’s leadership changes to the Senate Majority Coalition Caucus (MCC). She also shares which health care topics she hopes that the MCC “will stay on top of” following her departure.

JJ Lee: You are a pharmacist and great advocate for mental/behavioral health issues. Upon your departure, what health care “torches” do you hope to see leaders within your Caucus pick up and run forward with in future years?

Sen. Linda Evans Parlette: one of the principles our Senate Majority Coalition Caucus (MCC) formed around is the protection of our most vulnerable. I expect next year’s leaders will continue to build on the results we have seen in the past few years. I also have focused on insurance issues – because the Affordable Care Act will go through changes in the future, and if premiums and deductibles continue to rise, affecting access to care, Americans will question if the Affordable Care Act is really affordable and working. Someone in the MCC will have to keep up on those issues, as there seems to be unrest in the health-insurance world. The same is true regarding the Joint Select Committee on Health Care Oversight. I am a “charter member” of this committee, and if you look at the agencies our panel oversees and the headlines they have made, there is no question that the MCC will want to stay on top of this also. I would love to see another pharmacist become a legislator and wish that my stepping away from Olympia would not cost the MCC and the Legislature the first-hand experience I have been happy to share. At the same time, I like to think that over 20 years I’ve raised the profile of the pharmacy profession in the Legislature to the point that pharmacy will, somehow, continue to have a voice in discussions about access to medication or patient care or many other pressing health-care issues before the Legislature.

JL: You mentioned to KPQ that you are in charge of “what is called the ‘reorg’” within the Republican Caucus. What leadership changes may be most significant to the Caucus this year?

LEP: Being in charge of the “reorg,” which is short for “reorganization,” is one of the many duties that goes with my serving as Caucus Chair. Every two years approximately half of the 49 Senate seats are on the November ballot. After the election our Caucus reorganizes to elect the new leadership team and conduct any other pre-session Caucus business. It is a very important gathering because the leadership team sets the agenda for each of the next two years, and our Majority Coalition Caucus leads the Senate. In that sense the “reorg” ends up having an influence on at least the next two legislative sessions. This year’s reorganization is more significant because the Caucus Chair position, the second-highest post on the leadership team, will be wide open for the first time in 10 years. I had announced early this year that I would not seek reelection as Caucus Chair after five consecutive terms – a record for Republicans in the Senate – so others would have more time to consider a run for the job. As Caucus Chair I have been involved in all sorts of high-level discussions and decisions, working with other leaders of the other caucuses and the governor’s office, so its importance goes beyond what the title might suggest. Whomever succeeds me will step into a very different situation than I did. When I ran for Caucus Chair the first time, Senate Republicans held only 17 of the 49 Senate seats. We picked up seats at each election, until the 2012 election got us to 23 seats. Then two Democrats joined with us to form the Majority Coalition Caucus, and I went from Minority Caucus Chair to Majority Caucus Chair overnight. In 2014 the MCC’s mix changed to 25 Republicans and 1 Democrat, and many think our Caucus will grow again later this year. We have really gone from “famine to feast” during my time as Caucus Chair, and anyone who runs for a seat on the leadership team this year does so knowing the MCC has firmly established itself as the leader of the Senate. This next biennium will be challenging – they all are, for one reason or another – but I am confident the new team will be up to the task.

JL: I have been looking through our archives and reliving your participation at the State of Reform conferences, most recently in January at SeaTac. Do you have a favorite State of Reform moment that you could share?