President Barack Obama’s administration is reviewing a plan to allow military enlistment by thousands of illegal aliens according to Jessica L. Wright, the Defense Department’s acting undersecretary for personnel and readiness.

Wright described the illegal aliens, who as children were brought to the US illegally as “some of the best and brightest in America that we could capitalize on.”

Wright said the decision would come by summer’s end and involved the Department of Homeland Security, the Department of Justice and the White House.

Were Obama and Wright to proceed with their plan it would appear to be a direct violation of the plain language of the Immigration and Naturalization Act (INA) and 10 U.S.C. § 504(b)(1).

What’s more under current law and regulations all U.S. military officers be must be U.S. citizens. Non-U.S. citizens legally residing in the United States may join the military as enlisted service members only, and do not have access to Officer or Warrant Officer ranking positions.

Some military specialties are also limited to citizens only. For example, federal law prohibits granting security clearance to non-citizens, which excludes non-citizens from military assignments that require such security clearance.

As Senator Jeff Sessions noted in a recent interview with Breitbart’s Matthew Boyle, “Such a policy would be another unacceptable action that sends a message that this nation is not willing to take the most basic actions to end the immigration lawlessness. The first step is to stop rewarding it, as with a career in the United States military—which is not a job Americans won't do. It is a high calling and a noble career. I am not aware of any evidence indicating that there is a lack of qualified applicants to meet the needs of the armed services.”

And Senator Sessions is right. As our friends at NumbersUSA documented, by 2017, the Army needs to downsize from its recent peak of 570,000 active duty troops from 2006-08 to 450,000 troops.

The Associated Press reported that most of the reductions will come from voluntary retirements, resignations, and decreased enlistments, but 3,000 officers will be forced out over the next few years to meet the lower personnel requirement.

We’ve documented regularly and in great detail the litany of lawbreaking by President Barack Obama, Attorney General Eric Holder, HHS Secretary Kathleen Sibelius, BLM Director Neil Kornz and other members of the Obama administration.

From refusing to deport criminal aliens, to refusing to enforce politically inconvenient provisions of Obamacare, to the refusal to prosecute the new Black Panthers for voter intimidation the law is a malleable thing in the hands of Obama and his political henchmen in government.

Were Obama’s plan to allow illegal aliens the privilege of serving in the armed forces of the United States to go forward how long would it take for the first lawsuit to be filed claiming discrimination and demanding illegal alien access to officer training or a security clearance?

Obama’s plan to allow illegal aliens to enlist in the armed forces of the United States in exchange for citizenship is of a piece with the rest of his politically motivated lawbreaking, but for the first time Obama's lawbreaking has real national security implications.