The Duke of Denver hates being a runner-up or an also-ran in anything.

He doesn’t even want to draw the Community Chest card in Monopoly that proclaims: “You’ve won second prize in a beauty contest. Collect $10.”

In 2010, he finished runner-up in the celebrity-athletes golf tournament at Lake Tahoe and was irked again.

WOODY’S MAILBAG: Pose a question for Woody to answer on The Sports Show

He has been runner-up for the Heisman Trophy, the California high school player of the year, the NFL MVP, the league’s executive of the year, the all-NFL team (three times), the starting quarterback at the Pro Bowl (four times), the AFC West title (three times) and in the Super Bowl as a player or the team’s executive vice president of football operations (four times).

Jack Nicklaus finished second in 19 majors.

But he won 18.

John doesn’t accept losing, either. That’s the fact, Jack. John was an NFL MVP, a Super Bowl MVP, the No. 1 pick in the NFL draft, a first-team college All-American, a Parade magazine high school All-American, a Pro Bowl player (nine times), 1990s first-team all-NFL quarterback, a division champion (seven times), a unanimous first-ballot Hall of Famer and a world champion (twice).

If Elway isn’t the executive of this year, Congress should order an investigation.

But he doesn’t care a whit. Elway has only one goal — the world championship.

John is the sole NFL executive VP-general manager in the Super Bowl era to win a division title in each of his first four years. In Elway’s regime since 2011, the Broncos have compiled a 45-17 regular-season record (19-4 in the AFC West) and an overall mark of 48-20 (70.6 percent).

In the draft, Elway, picking at 31, chose Bradley Roby, the last of five cornerbacks taken in the first round. Roby has produced the best season of the bunch. Twelve other rookies are on the Broncos’ roster, injured-reserve list and practice squad.

Of the 22 starters for the Cincinnati game Monday night, 19 have been brought to Denver by Elway and his staff. Eight are Pro Bowl contenders.

THE SPORTS SHOW: Watch Woody and Les on Monday-Friday, 1-3 p.m.

Everyone was aware of the signings splash of the Big Three free agents (DeMarcus Ware, Aqib Talib and T.J. Ward), and The Steal Deal of Emmanuel Sanders, but the rescues of center Will Montgomery and defensive lineman Marvin Austin Jr. off the scrap heap also were inspired.

The Elway Entourage also was responsible for college free agents Chris Harris, C.J. Anderson and This Brandon Marshall. Oh, Elway got Pot Roast and Peyton too. And the Elway stamp came down hard on the coaches and players last month as the Broncos were blown out in New England and almost shut out at St. Louis.

There would be no more runner-up, second-class attitude.

It was either the El-Way or the highway. He ordered:

• No more mess on the offensive line, particularly at right tackle. The Broncos would insert Montgomery at center and move Manny Ramirez to right guard and Louis Vasquez, an all-pro at any position, to tackle.

• No more games of 57, 49 and 54 passes, and no more rushing days of 36, 43 and 28 yards. The Broncos would place significant emphasis on the run, as they did in the two seasons the team won the Super Bowl.

• No more passive defense with fewer turnovers than the opposition. The Broncos would blitz and attack.

• No more lousy special-teams play. The Broncos would change kickers and return men.

• No more games of stupid double-digit penalties. The Broncos would play smart.

In the past four games the Broncos have rushed for more than 200 yards twice, more than 110 in the other two. They had 822 yards passing, 659 rushing. At 55.6 to 44.4, the percentage is much closer to the 60-40 sought.

The Broncos committed only nine, five, five and seven penalties and coerced one, three, three and two turnovers during that span.

The Broncos are blitzing, not Blitzen.

The Broncos’ offensive line has been stabilized and solidified, and no longer is “horrible.”

The Broncos’ new two-kicker system has been copacetic, Omar Bolden is outstanding on kickoff returns, and the Broncos aren’t fumbling punts.

The Broncos have won four straight games.

As a softspoken Peyton Manning said last Sunday in San Diego, the Broncos are guaranteed a place in the playoffs and have a shot. Terrance Knighton was more outspoken, telling The Denver Post’s Mark Kiszla the Broncos will “hoist” the Super Bowl trophy.

John Elway wants champs, not runner-up chumps.

Woody Paige: woody@woodypaige.com or twitter.com/woodypaige