Photo

DETROIT — The trial of a suburban homeowner accused of the shotgun shooting of a young black woman last fall opened on Wednesday with jarring images projected on a large screen before jurors. Renisha McBride, 19, grinning for the camera. And then, Ms. McBride, bloodied and lifeless on a porch.

The shooting ignited racial tensions here because the homeowner, Theodore P. Wafer, is white. But prosecutors did not make race an issue. They began their case by recounting the events that led to the death of Ms. McBride after she appeared at Mr. Wafer’s front door in Dearborn Heights in the middle of a November night. Ms. McBride, who had been in a car accident, was unarmed when she approached the stranger’s house, prosecutors say, but Mr. Wafer opened his front door and fired a shotgun at her head through a locked outer screen door.

“The defendant in this case had other options,” Danielle Hagaman-Clark, an assistant Wayne County prosecutor, told the jury in an opening statement, laying out the second-degree murder, manslaughter and weapons charges Mr. Wafer faces. “He could have called 911, but he didn’t. His actions that night were unnecessary, unjustified and unreasonable.”

The defense said that Mr. Wafer, 55, had been acting in self-defense, believing that someone — perhaps multiple people — was breaking into the small house where he lived alone. “Boom! Boom! Boom!” Cheryl Carpenter, Mr. Wafer’s lawyer, bellowed at the top of her voice, portraying the pounding at his doors that she said Mr. Wafer was woken by before 5 a.m. on Nov. 2, 2013. The banging went on, from side door to front door, Ms. Carpenter said, as Mr. Wafer fumbled around, in terror, in the dark — unable to find his cellphone and only eventually getting his shotgun.

“How would you feel if this is what you saw and went through at 4:30 in the morning one night?” Ms. Carpenter asked the jurors in her opening statement. “If somebody is coming after you in your house, you have special protection.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Ms. Carpenter suggested that, in the darkness and rush of events, Mr. Wafer did not immediately know Ms. McBride’s race or sex. But the case has stirred longstanding friction here and elsewhere, with some people likening it to racially charged shootings such as Trayvon Martin’s in Florida.

Racial tension can simmer just below the surface here, particularly in moments when life in Detroit, which is more than 80 percent black, intersects with life in neighboring suburbs like Dearborn Heights, which is more than 80 percent white. Some civil rights leaders here have suggested that Ms. McBride, who may have been seeking help after her car accident, was probably presumed to be threatening because she was black and that Mr. Wafer may be more likely to walk free because he is white.

In Michigan, a self-defense law allows deadly force only if a person “honestly and reasonably believes” that it is necessary to prevent an imminent death or great bodily harm. Under Michigan’s so-called castle doctrine, there is no legal requirement for a person to retreat if inside his or her home.

For months, much had been unknown about the events that unfolded in the hours before Ms. McBride’s death, and prosecutors indicated on Wednesday that the authorities may never know exactly where Ms. McBride was and what she was doing immediately before her death.

In the early morning hours, Ms. McBride — who had been drinking vodka and smoking marijuana with a friend, her friend testified on Wednesday — was in a car accident on a street within Detroit’s city limits. She hit a parked car, and an autopsy later showed she had a blood alcohol level of more than twice the legal limit. Neighbors along the street testified that they had offered assistance to the young woman, who appeared to be injured and seemed disoriented, but that Ms. McBride had refused help and wandered away.

Several hours later, and six blocks from the crash site, Ms. McBride appeared on Mr. Wafer’s front porch. Her family has suggested that she may have come to the door seeking help. But Mr. Wafer’s lawyers said she pounded repeatedly on the doors, broke part of a screen and a peephole, and may have left a muddy footprint on Mr. Wafer’s air-conditioning unit. That might have given Ms. McBride a view inside a room where Mr. Wafer had been sleeping, the lawyers said.

“Get your mind set in Ted’s mind,” Ms. Carpenter told jurors, saying Mr. Wafer had no landline telephone and grew so frightened that “his heart is coming out of his chest.” “He’s still hoping, ‘Go away, go away, go away, leave me alone,’ ” she said.

But Ms. Hagaman-Clark, the prosecutor, said Mr. Wafer would have had to take the time to load his Mossberg 12-gauge shotgun, take a safety device off and pull a trigger that requires significant force. “This isn’t some sort of hair-trigger device,” she said.