WASHINGTON — For months, Congress has been trying to avoid the legislative equivalent of a slow-motion car wreck.

The federal Highway Trust Fund, which helps pay for transit projects nationwide, is expected to run out of money in August — a scenario that would undercut road builders in states such as Colorado and lead to nationwide job losses and construction delays.

“I hope that Congress will avert this crisis before it is too late,” Transportation Secretary Anthony Foxx wrote in a recent letter to state transportation leaders. A separate report issued by the White House estimated that nearly 10,000 Colorado jobs would be at risk if nothing was done; state transportation officials also have raised the possibility of potential delays to Interstate 25 work.

Yet in spite of these and other warnings, lawmakers so far have failed to agree on how they should refill the highway piggy bank.

The latest expectation, at least among Beltway insiders, is that Congress will pass a short-term fix that pumps a few more billion dollars into the Highway Trust Fund before legislators depart for their annual August recess.

Nevertheless, the last-minute negotiations have raised the stress level of state transportation officials — who have watched other big deals fall apart — and cast doubt on the ability of Washington policymakers to eventually develop a long-term fix.

“A short-term solution is better than no solution,” said Tony Milo, executive director of the Colorado Contractors Association.

Still, he said the whole process was “frustrating” and urged lawmakers to find a new method of financing the Highway Trust Fund, which has been hemorrhaging money for years. Last year, the account took in about $37 billion but distributed about $50 billion — a $13 billion deficit.

“Congress absolutely needs to get serious about a long-term, fully funded transportation bill,” Milo said.

The U.S. House took the first step toward a stopgap fix last week when it passed a $10.8 billion funding bill to bail out the Highway Trust Fund for another 10 months.

But the Senate has yet to pass its own version — an uncertainty that has prompted officials at the Colorado Department of Transportation to think about a Plan B.

The state agency gets about 40 percent of its $1.3 billion budget from the Highway Trust Fund, and any long-term disruption could cripple its ability to pay for future projects.

Amy Ford, an agency spokeswoman, said the state could endure a few months without federal funding before it would be forced to delay one or more upcoming projects.

While no decision has been made on which projects would be affected, she noted that future plans call for adding an express lane in each direction on Interstate 25 near Northglenn from 120th Avenue north to around Colorado 7. The agency also is looking at upgrading I-25 interchanges at both Fillmore Street in Colorado Springs and Arapahoe Road in Arapahoe County, she said.

But if Congress doesn’t act by the end of the year, “we might put them on hold until things are better resolved,” Ford added.

That type of lengthy impasse is unlikely, although Ford and other transportation officials warned that even the temporary fix now under consideration in Congress — the latest of many — only puts a patch on a much deeper problem.

The primary method of funding the Highway Trust Fund, a gas tax of 18.4 cents per gallon, hasn’t been adjusted since 1993.

In the 21 years since then, inflation has eroded its buying power while the improved fuel efficiency of cars has chipped away at the rate of money going into the fund. A similar problem is affecting Colorado’s own 22-cent gas tax, which hasn’t been increased since 1991.

In both cases — but especially at the federal level — lawmakers are reluctant to raise the rate because political opponents could use the move as campaign fodder.

But something must be done, said transit experts, or Congress will be faced with the stark choice of continually rescuing the Highway Trust Fund or allowing the nation’s roads and bridges to slowly deteriorate.

According to the White House, 17 percent of the nearly 90,000 miles of public roads in Colorado are in poor condition.

If Congress doesn’t raise the gas tax, lawmakers have other options — from fees on imported oil to a new tax structure that would bill drivers for mileage, and not gallons consumed.

Any proposal, however, must survive a congressional vote, a dicey proposition even when Republicans and Democrats are working together, which has not been the case very often this session.

“It’s an extremely heavy lift in the current fiscal and political climate,” said Joung Lee, of the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.

Indeed, even the fix that passed the U.S. House last week by a 367-55 vote found an opponent in the Colorado delegation: U.S. Rep. Doug Lamborn, R-Colorado Springs.

“This short-term, status-quo bill relies on budget gimmicks and fee increases a decade in the future and does nothing to address the structural problems plaguing our broken Highway Trust Fund,” he said in a statement.

Mark K. Matthews: 202-662-8907, mmatthews @denverpost.com or twitter.com/mkmatthews

Numbers

10,000

Estimated jobs at risk in Colorado if nothing is done about the Highway Trust Fund’s money issues

$37 billion

Money received by the Highway Trust Fund in 2013

$50 billion

Money spent out of the account

17 percent

Portion of Colorado’s nearly 90,000 miles of public roads in poor condition