Rings around Morris Dam in the Angeles National Forest show the declining water level from past years in the on Friday, Feb. 7, 2014. Southern California is in the third year of drought. File/Watchara Phomicinda/Staff Photographer

California’s prolonged drought left an indelible mark on state water policy and homeowners alike in 2014.

For the first time in the raucous history of water in California, regulation of groundwater basins was approved, the state Water Resources Control Board gave local cities the power to hand out $500 fines to over users, and thousands of planet-conscious homeowners transformed their green lawns into desert landscapes.

In short, even if winter rains continue at what has been an above-normal clip and the story for 2015 is a busted drought, the behavioral and regulatory changes from the four-year drought may be permanent.

The passage of the Sustainable Ground Water Basin Management Act by the Legislature means 80 percent of the ground-water basins will eventually be subject to some kind of regulation. Only 23 out of 515 basins are currently adjudicated — mostly in urban regions — meaning they are subject to pumping limits by a court or court-mandated overseer. The 80 percent unmanaged basins are mostly in farm-rich San Joaquin Valley, where water regulators say a Wild West mentality is fading away.

“That kind of management is unsustainable,” said Kenneth Manning, a veteran water manager who once managed the massive Chino Basin and is now executive director of the San Gabriel Basin Water Quality Authority. The new law is a sea change in state water policy, he said.

Likewise, 2014 saw the state water board demand water conservation plans from 400 water agencies. In addition, it required water use reporting for the first time and enabled everyone to compare residential water in gallons per person per day (R-GPCD) starting in September. What some call your water number — a new tool developed this past year — varied greatly from city to city.

While Los Angeles came in at 93 and San Francisco at 45, residents of Quartz Hill, a community in the high-desert near Lancaster, used 308 and residents in Granite Bay and Folsom in Sacramento County in August reached 529 and dropped to 384 in September.

Felicia Marcus, chair of the state board, suggested that if low rainfall continues into 2015, the state could require each agency to enact water-budget allocations and/or tiered pricing. Some cities, such as Irvine and Santa Monica, assign homes a water number. Households exceeding allotments face stiff penalties.

A UC Riverside professor of environmental economics said water fines don’t always work.

“Most research finds wealthier households are less responsive to the price (of water),” said Kurt Schwabe. “They see it as a small expense relative to their overall income.”

Advertisement

Southern California residents worried about the drought or simply tired of paying high water bills responded in 2014 by claiming 20 million square feet of turf removal rebates, enough to strip 345 football fields, according to the Southern California Water Committee.

Changes in suburban front lawns are slow but increasing, as cities and water agencies pay $2 to $4 per square foot to replace grass with a combination of drought-tolerant plants, rocks and decomposed granite.

Manning compared turf removal in Southern California to watching your children grow up. It’s not noticeable you look over time.

“You are seeing people making front and backyards more California friendly. In 50 years we will look more like Phoenix or Las Vegas,” Manning said.