30-unit apartment complex on target to open in May

Interviews start on Monday for potential residents of Artspace. The 30-unit complex is projected to be finished by May 2015. ( Jessica Benes / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Applications Loveland Housing Authority: Submit an application for residence at Artspace Loveland here: lovelandhousing.org/about-us/applicants/applications/. Artspace Loveland: Find out more about the Artspace Loveland campus at www.artspace.org/our-places/artspace-loveland-arts-campus.

Almost a year ago several colorfully painted shovels broke ground on the Artspace complex at 130 W. Third St.

In a "culmination of dreams," as Priscilla FitzMaurice — one of the first board members of Novo Restoration — said that day, construction crews got to work building a 30-unit apartment complex that will cater to the arts and allow low-income artistic families to live and work together in community.

In preparation for building completion in May, coordinators with the Loveland Housing Authority and with Artspace have been screening applications since December for potential residents of Artspace.

Interviews start on Monday.

Angie Banza, lead housing coordinator with the Loveland Housing Authority, is the first step in the process. She makes sure applicants are low income-qualified.

"I look at their income from Social Security, employment, self-employment, etc," she said. "I look at their assets if they have any. Through all of that I see if they qualify."

Each person is a little different as single people make less than families with several adults.

Advertisement

She puts each applicant through the same screening process and applicants who do qualify advance to the next step: an interview.

Applicants who prove themselves to be active artists living or working in Loveland are given first consideration.

Artists living outside Loveland come next, followed by non-artists living in Loveland, then non-artists living outside Loveland.

Banza said there is no deadline to accept applications. Anyone can fill out the application at any time and will be put on a waiting list. Roughly 100 people have applied so far and there are 30 units to fill.

Banza said she has seen all kinds of artists apply: writers, graphic designers, web designers, musicians, illustrators, cooks, jewelry makers and more.

Leah Saari, Loveland Artspace project manager, said artists will be asked a handful of questions in the interview and some might even be required to demonstrate their craft.

"Something that demonstrates what they do and that they are committed to it," she said.

Construction should be complete in early May.

"It has slowed a little bit due to weather delays but overall things are tracking the way we planned," Saari said.

The roof of the building, drywall, plumbing, electrical and much of the infrastructure has "been roughed in."

"I would say they're 65 percent done. They're at the point now where they can start putting drywall on. The rooms are starting to look like rooms," she said.

On the Feed and Grain side of things, Saari said stabilization work is being done now on the building, infrastructure that deals with the brick and roof, but doesn't make a huge visual difference yet.

A state historical fund grant of $200,000 was added to around $300,000 raised through private philanthropic gifts for the restoration effort. Artspace is continuing to raise money to complete the restoration work.

The Loveland Housing Authority is also still accepting donations on the apartment complex side, as well.

Project funding sources include the Colorado Housing and Finance Authority, Loveland Housing Authority, the Erion Foundation, the Loveland Community Fund of the Community Foundation of Northern Colorado and the Bruce and Muriel Hach Family Fund.

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/jessicabenes.