Gregory Rocco, of Brooklyn, New York, looked at an iPhone 5C on display at the Fifth Avenue Apple store on Friday in New York. Andrew Burton/Getty Images …

One of the first customers to purchase the Apple iPhone 5S celebrated after exiting an Apple Retail Store in New York. Adrees Latif/Reuters …

A cashier counted U.S. dollars next to five new Apple iPhone 5S phones in New York. Adrees Latif/Reuters …

Apple sales associates talked with customers waiting in line for new iPhones during the opening day of new iPhone sales at an Apple store in Richmond, Va. Steve Helber/Associated Press …

The gathering outside the Apple store on New York's Fifth Avenue. World-wide, opening-weekend sales of the new iPhones were expected to hit six million. ('SYM,' by the way, is 'sell your Mac.') Timothy Clary/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images …

Yahor Papkouski, who had come all the way from Belarus with friends and spent the night outside the Berlin Apple Store, wore his sleeping bag as he bought two Apple iPhone 5S smartphones. Sean Gallup/Getty Images …

New Apple iPhone 5C smartphones awaited customers at the Berlin Apple Store. Sean Gallup/Getty Images …

Far from Asia, Norman Kicks was first in line at the Covent Garden Apple store in London, set for a three-day wait. National News/Zuma Press …

Others left the tent behind, but brought chairs, tables, and drinks while they waited outside another London Apple store. Michael Melia/Uppa/Zuma Press …

Lines to get Apple's latest iPhones began forming days before their public release, such as here outside a store in Tokyo's Ginza shopping district. Toru Yamanaka/Agence France-Press/Getty Images …

These are the first iPhone models being launched at the same time in mainland China as elsewhere, though they're still cheaper in Hong Kong, where a long line formed outside this Apple store. Laurent Fievet/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images …

Across Asia, fans showed their devotion by dressing up in Apple apparel, or in the case of one man in Ginza, as an iMac G3, supplemented with a helmet and neck brace. Toru Hanai/Reuters …

You might be a mighty power ranger, complete with Apple logos, but you still have to wait in line with the rest of the Tokyo iPhone buyers. Yogei Osada/Aflo/Zuma Press …

But eventually a superhero gets his phone. Batman chose to get his 5S in gold, a new color for the iPhone. Yoshikazu Tsuno/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images …

Japanese operators KDDI, SoftBank and DoCoMo are offering the 16-gigabyte iPhone 5S for free on certain two-year contracts, forehead clamp not included. Yohei Osada/Aflo/Zuma Press …