Longmont's Liberty statue is in Roosevelt Park, on the northwest corner of Coffman Street and Longs Peak Avene. (Carol Beam / Courtesy photo)

In February 1949, amid fears of the impending Cold War, the Boy Scouts of America kicked off a two-year campaign called "Strengthen the Arm of Liberty."

After the scouts held a torch-lighting ceremony beneath the Statue of Liberty in New York Harbor, Jack Whitaker (a Boy Scout commissioner in Kansas City, Mo.) came up with the idea of casting 200 copper replicas of the statue and placing them in communities around the country.

As Whitaker said in Boy Scout literature at the time, "Americans, more than ever before, need to be reminded that freedom, like life itself, is preserved only through vigilance and care."

In addition to becoming a worthwhile project, the Sisters of Liberty, as the replicas were called, honored the scouting organization during its 40th anniversary in 1950.

That same year, two of the statues reached Boulder County when local scout troops erected replicas at the Boy Scout's Camp Tahosa, near Ward, and in Longmont's Roosevelt Park, on the northwest corner of Longs Peak Avenue and Coffman Street.

Each of the 8-feet, 4-inch-tall statues includes more than 40 sheets of copper (about the thickness of a nickel) that cover a wooden frame. The statues were manufactured in Chicago at an individual cost of $350. They were paid for by the Boy Scouts and donated to local communities.

Bases varied and were the responsibility of local troops. Longmont's statue was donated to the city by the Longs Peak Boy Scout Council and was placed on a sandstone pedestal. Camp Tahosa's was mounted on a large rock outcrop overlooking Tumblesom Lake.

By 1951, replica statues were in place in 39 states, plus Guam, Puerto Rico, the Canal Zone and the Philippines. According to Cheyenne Boy Scout Troop 101 that keeps track of them all, Colorado has 17 Sisters of Liberty statues, including one in the town square in Kremmling, in City Park in Fort Collins and on the Logan County Courthouse lawn in Sterling.

Throughout the years, many of these symbols of American freedom and opportunity were neglected or simply forgotten. Before the mid-1970s, Longmont's Liberty statue was missing six of the seven spikes in her crown.

Then, in 1976, during Colorado's centennial year, the Longmont Noon Optimist Club arranged for the Longmont statue to be temporarily moved to a local foundry, where the spikes were restored and the statue polished.

The original Statue of Liberty (named Liberty Enlightening the World) was designed by Frédéric Auguste Bartholdi and was a gift to America from France in 1886. Since then, hundreds of replicas, in addition to those by the Boy Scouts, have been erected in countries in Europe, North and South America, Asia and Australia.

Setting the scouts' project of 65 years ago apart from other replicas are plaques inscribed: "With the faith and courage of their forefathers who made possible the freedom of these United States, the Boy Scouts of America dedicate this copy of the Statue of Liberty as a pledge of everlasting fidelity and loyalty."

Both Longmont's and Camp Tahosa's replicas still are standing.

Look for them, and others, in your travels.