Feds report dip in Obamacare numbers

Posted: 2 pm ET

Nearly 1 in 4 Americans who purchased a health plan this year through the Obama health care law's insurance exchanges dropped or lost their health coverage, according to federal health enrollment numbers released this week.

The report shows that the number of exchange-based health plan enrollees with coverage in effect dipped from roughly 12.7 million to 9.9 million between the close of the 2nd Obamacare open enrollment period in February and the end of June.

Nothing to see here?

But experts say that isn't necessarily bad news for Obamacare. Plan attrition is normal throughout any coverage year. In fact, the data suggest that Team Obamacare remains on target to reach its year-end enrollment goals this year.

It has been at times a rocky ride for President Barack Obama's signature health care reform since the launch of the online exchanges in October 2013. By the end of that computer-plagued initial open enrollment, 7 million Americans had signed up for a metallic-coded health plan (bronze, silver, gold or platinum), most with the help of an income-based tax subsidy.

Enrollment typically fluctuates on health plans for a variety of reasons: People move, marry, divorce, give birth, retire, change jobs and sometimes run into all sorts of financial hardships that make it difficult to make payments or, worst case, make them eligible for Medicaid. And, federal officials say the exchange plans of 423,000 of this year's 12.7 million enrollees were voided because they had not provided proof that their citizenship or immigration status made them eligible to sign up for exchange coverage.

Higher numbers may be hard to attain

That said, the latest Obamacare enrollment dip suggests challenges remain if the program is to reach its goal of 21 million enrollees next year -- more than double its current enrollment -- as forecast by congressional budget analysts. The Congressional Budget Office expects exchange enrollment to surge in 2016 when the Obamacare tax penalty takes another jump.

Experts like Elizabeth Carpenter, vice president of the consulting firm Avalere Health, wonder if Obamacare may settle into more modest gains, having already welcomed those Americans who were easiest to reach. The low-hanging fruit, as it were.

"The question is, given where we are today, should we expect a slower ramp-up?" she asked The Washington Post.

What do you think? Will Obamacare more than double its current paid enrollment of 9.9 million next year?

Your credit score could affect how much you pay for health insurance. Check out your credit score for free at myBankrate.

Follow me on Twitter.

Subscribe to Bankrate newsletters today!