In the wake of current Missouri Gov. Jay Nixon’s term ending, the race to claim his position is in full swing. This time around, most of the candidates running are Republicans with plans of increasing employment and ensuring the security of the Second Amendment.

Republican candidate John Brunner is a marine turned business man. Brunner’s reform of his family’s manufacturing business led to the company later becoming the largest personal care private label company in the U.S. Brunner said he plans on using his military and business background to help create more jobs in Missouri.

Despite his extensive experience in business, Brunner is no stranger to politics. He ran for U.S. Senate in 2012 and said he has consistently been dedicating his time to conservative causes over the years. He said three of the main focuses of his platform are to stop overspending, stop corruption in state government, and improve both grade school and college-level education.

Brunner isn’t the only candidate with a political background. Running as the only Democratic candidate, Chris Koster has two terms as Missouri attorney general under his belt. Koster is an alum of the MU School of Law and has used his degree to be an active public servant since 1991. Some of Koster’s biggest accomplishments include revamping Missouri’s domestic violence laws and decreasing the amount of patient fraud and abuse by Medicaid.

Eric Greitens is a former Navy SEAL whose mission statement is to “turn Missouri around.” Greitens is a Republican whose platform focuses on issues such as cutting government spending, protecting religious liberties and improving life for war veterans. According to his website, the anti-abortion candidate is also a strong supporter of the Second Amendment and is a “life member of the NRA.”

Although Republican candidate Catherine Hanaway comes from “small town America,” she has had no problem making her mark on the state of Missouri. She was the first female Speaker of the Missouri State House of Representatives and served from 2002 to 2004. During her two years as Speaker, she stopped public funding of abortions, established the Missouri AMBER Alert system and halted tax increases. According to her website, Hanaway thinks she should be governor because she will pass “common sense reforms” and bring quality jobs to the state of Missouri.

Hanaway isn’t the only candidate who wants to pass common sense reforms. Republican Peter Kinder served for 12 years on the Missouri Senate and has received an A+ rating from the NRA. He is also a major advocate for the repeal of the Affordable Care Act and led Missouri’s only lawsuit against the act. If elected, some of Kinder’s plans include enhancing Missouri’s economic standing, creating comprehensive educational reform and increasing access to health care.

The final candidate running for governor, Independent Lester Turilli, Jr. describes himself as having conservative views with a liberal love for people. According to his website, his campaign is anchored in faith, hope and love for the people of Missouri, and he prays daily for the “revival of the state” with a prayer team. Turilli’s platform is focused on many issues that include bringing more business to the state, eliminating abortion and advancing education.

Primaries will be held on Aug. 2, according to the Boone County Clerk election calendar. The last day to register to vote for the election is July 6.

Edited by Hailey Stolze | hstolze@themaneater.com