For centuries, hunting has been an integral part of Colorado’s outdoor heritage. However, despite its rich and longstanding tradition, hunting remains a polarizing topic in today’s ever-changing social and political climates.

Although recent surveys indicate that the vast majority of Americans approve of hunting (upwards of 77 percent), the recent controversy surrounding Africa’s Cecil the lion has led to misconceptions about big-game hunting in North America.

With Colorado’s hunting seasons now underway, it seems appropriate to address some of the misinformation and to acknowledge a few of the reasons hunting is critical to wildlife conservation and how it greatly benefits our state.

1. Recreational hunting supports all of Colorado’s wildlife species: It may seem contradictory, but hunters are the primary reason Colorado is home to such an abundant and diverse wildlife population. Because Colorado Parks and Wildlife does not receive general tax dollars to fund its wildlife management programs, these projects are paid for almost exclusively by sportsmen. The revenue generated from the sale of hunting licenses supports all of the state’s wildlife management efforts, including threatened and endangered species programs, wildlife reintroductions and habitat conservation. Hunters are truly an economic force for conservation who support all wildlife with open wallets. Like the popular TV commercials suggest, “hug a hunter” if you enjoy Colorado’s enormous abundance of wildlife.

2. Hunting supports local and state economies: In addition to funding wildlife management programs, hunting (combined with fishing) provides an even bigger economic juggernaut to Colorado’s economy. According to a 2014 economic study conducted by Southwick Associates, hunting and fishing contribute $2.8 billion of annual economic activity to the state. Hunting and fishing also support more than 21,000 full-time jobs and are the only recreational activities that benefit every county in the state. For many of Colorado’s rural communities, business generated during hunting season is the lifeblood of their economy.

3. Hunting manages wildlife populations: Recreational hunting is the state-mandated method for managing Colorado’s big-game populations. Colorado law states: “The state shall utilize hunting, trapping and fishing as the primary methods of effecting necessary wildlife harvests.” In simple terms, hunters manage elk, deer, moose, sheep, goat, bear and mountain lion populations to ensure that animals do not expand beyond the carrying capacity of the habitat.

Without hunting, animals become overpopulated and are more susceptible to starvation, chronic wasting disease and other health threats. As an added benefit, hunters keep Colorado’s wildlife populations in check without placing additional burdens on taxpayers to fund expensive (and often ineffective) chemical or surgical methods of fertility control.

4. Hunting is ethical and humane: Nature can be harsh and unforgiving for wildlife. In the wild, animals face starvation, succumb to disease and perish in periods of extreme weather. Most of these fates are not particularly kind. And if you’ve ever watched a nature documentary and seen an elk or deer brought down by a pack of wolves you know that animal suffered terribly before it became food for the pack. In contrast, the majority of animals that are dispatched by hunters are done so quickly and humanely. Whether an animal is taken by a rifle, bow or muzzleloader, a hunter’s well-placed shot is far more humane than most of nature’s perils.

5. Hunting provides organic, locally grown meat: The locavore and organic food movements are more popular than ever. As a result, more people are taking to Colorado’s fields and forests to put meat on their tables. Hunting provides an alternative to the grocery store that lets people provide truly free-range and organic meat for their families, instead of buying livestock raised in commercial feedlots. The health benefits of game meat are also undeniable. In comparison to lean cuts of pork and beef, game meat has about one-third fewer calories and far less saturated fat. Game animals are also free of hormones, steroids and other chemicals that are often used to promote growth in animals raised on large-scale commercial farms.

6. Hunting helps manage human/wildlife conflicts: Colorado’s population is growing rapidly. In most areas of the state, people and wildlife share the same habitat. Therefore, managing human/wildlife conflicts has become an even greater challenge for state wildlife agencies. Conflicts tend to be more prevalent in areas where hunting is not permitted. Animals that are not hunted become habituated to humans, resulting in an increase in unwanted and potentially dangerous encounters. Although most people enjoy viewing wildlife (it’s one of the great things about living in Colorado), it’s important that wild animals maintain an innate fear of humans and stay clear of urban environments. Elk, deer, bears and mountain lions that visit suburban backyards can pose a serious risk to pets and public safety. Hunting keeps the “wild” in wildlife and helps maintain a healthy boundary between wildlife and people.

7. All game animals harvested by hunters are consumed.

Hunting is often misrepresented solely as a quest for a trophy. Contrary to this misconception, there is no trophy hunting in Colorado. Under Colorado law, every game species that is harvested by a hunter must also be processed and consumed. The wanton waste of game meat results in stiff penalties and fines.

Whether someone chooses to harvest a cow elk, a large-antlered bull elk or purchases a license to hunt a bighorn sheep, moose or a mountain lion, the end result is the same. All edible portions of the animal are eaten or are donated to a local food bank. Although pursuing an elk or deer with exceptionally large antlers may be part of what motivates some hunters (similar to anglers who like catching big fish), it’s an insignificant part of a much broader and meaningful experience. Moreover, Colorado hunting licenses are only allocated for game species that can support hunting.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.