Capital improvement bond issue

What it asks: "Shall Boulder Valley School District RE-2 debt be increased $576,520,000 with a repayment cost of up to $1,351,017,635, and shall district taxes be increased up to $56,097,800 annually to pay such debt, all for the purposes described in the district's educational facilities master plan approved by the board of education and monitored by a citizens' bond oversight committee, including but not limited to the following:

— Investing in all district schools, sites and facilities by repairing, replacing, and/or upgrading infrastructure, building systems and finishes for the purposes of improving the learning and work environment for students and staff, increasing functionality and efficiency of district-wide support facilities, extending the life of buildings; improving energy efficiency and creating safer environments;

— Addressing the educational deficiencies in district schools by modernizing, expanding and constructing learning spaces such as but not limited to classrooms, performance spaces, fitness facilities, special education dedicated spaces and spaces that support innovative educational delivery;

— Expanding full-day kindergarten opportunities and preschool programs by renovating, enlarging and constructing early childhood education spaces;

— Constructing and equipping a school campus to serve grades Pre-K through 8 in Erie, Colorado, to accommodate enrollment growth and investing in the replacement of select schools that have exceeded their service lives;

Advertisement

And, to the extent funds are available, for other capital expenditures related to constructing, repairing and equipping district buildings, and shall the mill levy be increased in any year without limitation as to rate and amount sufficient to pay the principal of, premium, if any, and interest on such debt or any refunding debt (or to create a reserve for such payment); such debt to be evidenced by the issuance of general obligation bonds to be sold in one series or more, for a price above or below the principal amount of such series, on terms and conditions and with such maturities as permitted by law, including provisions for redemption of the bonds prior to maturity with or without payment of a premium of not to exceed one percent; and shall the district be authorized to issue debt to refund the debt authorized in this question, provided that after the issuance of such refunding debt the total outstanding principal amount of all debt issued pursuant to this question does not exceed the maximum principal amount set forth above; and provided further that all debt issued by the district pursuant to this question is issued on terms that do not exceed the repayment costs authorized in this question; and shall such tax revenues and the earnings from the investment of such bond proceeds and tax revenues be collected, retained and spent as a voter approved revenue change and an exception to the limits which would otherwise apply under Article X, Section 20 of the Colorado Constitution or any other law?"

What it means: The Boulder Valley School District is asking for a $576.5 million bond issue to pay for building a new school in Erie, rebuilding three existing elementary schools, adding a centralized kitchen, repairing and renovating schools, and other capital projects. If approved, it would be the largest K-12 capital construction bond issue in Boulder Valley's and Colorado's history. The district would raise the $576.5 million by selling bonds, with landowners paying back the debt over 30 years through property taxes. District officials project the total repayment cost of the bonds, once interest is added in, to be $1,351,017,635. It's estimated that the tax increase would cost homeowners an estimated $47 more a year per $100,000 of home value, or $188 a year for a $400,000 home.

What supporters say: By addressing years of deferred maintenance through renovations and repairs, 3A will provide a significant positive impact. It's up to local communities to ensure that students, teachers and educational staff are provided with safe and effective learning environments. Fifty percent of the bond money will be used to address critical deferred maintenance on all 55 school buildings in the district, of which 72 percent are more than 30 years old. Funds will also be directed toward the rebuilding of three schools, building a new school in Erie and creating space to ensure there's enough space for all-day kindergarten and preschool programs for all children in Boulder Valley. An oversight committee will ensure that the money is spent as outlined in a facility master plan.

What opponents say: The school district shouldn't have allowed schools to fall into disrepair and won't maintain improvements if the measure passes. Some of the projects are excessive or aren't true needs, such as a central district kitchen. The school district is asking for too much money and should find money in its budget for maintenance. The district already has too much debt and shouldn't ask for more. Property owners, especially those on fixed incomes, can't afford higher taxes. There's no guarantee that a future school board won't make changes to the projects.