By Anne Dachel Read Anne's commentary and view the links after the jump. The Dachel Media Update is sponsored by Aperture International.

Variety covered her on Sept 30 in Sinclair Chooses Sharyl Attkisson to Charge Into Sunday-News Arena.

. . .Attkisson at times has been a controversial figure in the TV-news business. In her 2014 book, “Stonewalled,” she suggested she could not get stories about a slow pace of early enrollment under Obamacare or about the 2012 attack on a U.S. compound in Benghazi on the air at CBS News. She has in the past also alleged the federal government hacked into her personal computer with spyware. A lawsuit regarding those allegations is still in process, she said. And while Sinclair in the past has been associated with programming that has a conservative political bent, Attkisson maintained none of these elements would affect her reporting or the way she presents her stories.

“The way I view most of what I do is these are not political stories. They are oversight stories, inappropriate secrecy. These things persist from administration to administration,” she said, adding: “I’ve always been someone who is fairly critical of government secrecy and improper government oversight, before the lawsuit. That’s always a theme that won’t change.”

Her view of TV news is that many outlets could be doing stories of greater depth, but the corporations that own them remain leery of such stuff, and the “pushback campaigns” they generate. Big media companies can often have alliances with political parties or politicians, not to mention advertisers, all of which puts duress on the news divisions they own. “In the good old days, which weren’t that long ago, the news networks were OK with that sort of pushback and created an infrastructure that expected it and sometimes it meant you were doing a good job,” she said. “But it’s only fairly recently that they got squeamish.”

Sharyl's a distinguished journalist who was not willing to compromise her principles to remain in the national news. The autism community trusts her because of her coverage of vaccine safety and the link between vaccines and the autism epidemic when no one else the mainstream press was willing to do so. She has investigated many government controversies and continues to do so.

Full Measure is a frightening prospect to many who don't want to see honest coverage of controversial topics.

Hannah Groch-Begley at Media Matters referred to five-time Emmy Award winning Sharyl Attkisson as a "discredited former CBS reporter" and says her work was "shoddy and inaccurate."

Sharyl Attkisson Got A Show After Years Of Pushing Misinformation And Conspiracies

Discredited former CBS reporter Sharyl Attkisson will host a weekly news show on Sunday mornings starting October 4 on Sinclair Broadcast Group stations, which include ABC, CBS, NBC, and Fox affiliates. Attkisson has a lengthy record of shoddy, inaccurate reporting, and she has pushed a bizarre conspiracy theory that the government hacked her home electronics.

In case anyone need a refresher course on what Sharyl has done in the past 11 years, see these stories.

Vaccines Don't Cause Autism, and Guns Don't Kill People

Q&A with Sharyl Attkisson (C-Span)

Dachel Media Review: Sharyl Attkisson Resigns from CBS,

Sharyl Attkisson - Stonewalled



Aperture International provides visionary products that translate scientific breakthroughs into outstanding health benefits for our clients worldwide. Based on 24 years of research and clinical experience, the Aperture line of supplements was formulated for individuals who require the highest level of quality and purity. Visit us at Aperture International.



Anne Dachel is Media Editor for Age of Autism and author of The Big Autism Cover-Up: How and Why the Media Is Lying to the American Public, which is on sale now from Skyhorse Publishing.