Pool closes early on Oct. 31

Waldo visited the Sterling Recreation Center Trick or Treat Street last Halloween. Children age 12 and under are invited to this year's "Freaky Farms" from 5 to 8 p.m. Oct. 31 and get free treats from the Rec Center's lifeguards. ( Journal-Advocate file photo )

Ghosts in the barnyard and monsters in the corn — Sounds like the perfect setting for Sterling Recreation Center's annual "Trick or Treat Street."

From 5 to 8 p.m. on Halloween, the Rec Center's lifeguards will be passing out treats to "all zombies, Harry Potters, princesses" and every other costumed character to come through the "Freaky Farms" themed event, an announcement from the Department of Parks, Library and Recreation says.

The trick-or-treating area includes part of the indoor pool deck area, so the pool will close at 7:30 a.m. on Thursday, Oct. 31. The rest of the building will close at 4 p.m. in preparation for the event.

The alternative to door-to-door trick-or-treating is intended for children ages 12 and under. Admission is free.

The event is sponsored by the city of Sterling with the support of more than 80 local businesses. Treats have been donated this year by A & A Rental, ACE Hardware/Mr. D's, Aero Applicators, AFLAC-Bob Mollendor/Daryl McCormick, American 1st Aid & Safety, Appelhans Self Storage, B & J Plumbing, Beardsley Welding, Bedford Furniture & Upholstery, Better Electric, Bohler Well, Canary/Luft Machine LLC, CGI Fence Installation, Chaney-Reager Funeral Home, Charlie's Diesel Service, Children's Corner, Choice Real Estate, Coldwell Banker — Wendy Jerman, Concrete Specialties & Utilities, Creative Eye Works, DC Dozer Service, Dr.

Advertisement

Robert Patten DDS, E&B Maxi Storage, Equitable Savings & Loan, Furniture Mart, Griffith Auto Electric, Herzog Automotive, High Plains Diesel, Hilltop Garage, JG Designs, JayDee's Photography, Journal-Advocate, K & K Oildfield Services, Korf Continental, Kutchar & Assoc., Lambrecht PC, Lauer, Szabo & Assoc., Lock & Sons Plumbing & Heating LLC, Lock Works, Logan County Lumber, Marsaus, Master Storage, McDonald & Assoc. Physical Therapy & Sports Medicine Center, McEndaffer Cattle Co., McMurrin Electric, Mead Lumber, Mike's Meat Market, Mike's Portable Storage, Mini Storage, Mitchek Feed and Grain, MV Equipment Inc., Nails by Sue, New Age Electronics, Northeastern Junior College, Nichols Tillage Tools, Pizza Hut, Personal Graphics, Polenz Electric, Reata Travel Shop/Quizno's, Rapunzels, S & S Repair, Schmale Realty, Sears Roebuck & Co., Smart Parts, South Platte Sentinel, Stanly Motors, Sterling Auto Sales, Sterling Component Systems, Sterling Digital Service, Sterling Federal Credit Union, Sterling Monument Co., Sterling Styles & Tropical Tans, Sterling Trophy Shop, Taco John's, Tennant Funeral Home & Crematory, The Tan Zone, Total Axcess, Tri County Insurance, Trinidad Benham, Wal-Mart, Warehouse Sales, Wax Room & Yetter Well Service.