After postponing all action regarding the funding for the North and East Lubbock Community Development Corp. at the last City Council meeting — mainly because council members wanted more time and discussion — the issue will again be brought to the table Thursday.

There will be a work session at 1 p.m., where the council members will hear from NELCDC staff and board members about their budget, management and organization.

A few of the concerns stated by the City Council are that the corporation, whose operating funds right now are from the city’s grants, is supposed to be self-sustaining and that not enough focus has been directed toward the infrastructure needs in that area.

The latter is the concern of Mayor Glen Robertson, who presented a resolution at the last council meeting for the city to no longer fund the NELCDC, but to instead take the money from oil revenue, which would otherwise be included in the city’s general fund, and use it to pave any unpaved streets in North and East Lubbock.

This resolution was suspended indefinitely.

The resolution up for consideration at the council meeting Thursday is recommended by Councilman Victor Hernandez. If passed, it would put 75 percent of the funding from revenues generated from mineral interests to the NELCDC, with 25 percent allocated to Central Business District Tax Increment Financing for downtown redevelopment.

The resolution also asks the corporation to submit performance measures to the city that outline goals and proposed and actual projects. Hernandez told A-J Media the resolution should address most of the problems with the organization, which he said have already been much improved from last year.

“The whole purpose is to act with clarity to the relationship between the city of Lubbock and NELCDC,” he said.

The NELCDC is akin to groups like the Lubbock Economic Development Corp., the downtown TIF and the North Overton TIF, Hernandez said, which are diverting funds for specific purposes that could be diverged elsewhere. He said if someone questions one, they should question them all.

Hernandez’s resolution was also on the agenda at the last meeting, but it was also suspended.

Monique Coleman, executive director of the corporation, was unavailable for comment Wednesday. She has been the executive director of the corporation since mid-July, and previously told A-J Media the corporation is largely responsible for a 20,000-square-foot retail center named Parkway Place, phase 1 of the subdivision of homes called King’s Dominion across the street from Estacado High School, and probably more importantly, the occupancy of those 27 homes.

The concerns about the city’s continued funding were brought up during the council meeting Oct. 23, which featured a resolution to authorize a grant for about $342,000, following the approval of the organization’s budget for fiscal year 2014-15.

Market Lubbock

The council will also likely pass an amendment to the Grant Management Agreement with Market Lubbock Inc. Robertson said it was already approved during budget operations, but the council needs to amend the agreement.

The original grant agreement dating back to 1996 set a base grant for Market Lubbock at 3 cents of the property tax rate. The council has since decreased it a few times, and a resolution brought to the council would again decrease the grant amount to 2.315 cents of the city’s property tax rate for fiscal year 2014-15. The city also receives some of that money for economic development, but most is for Market Lubbock.

Cheryl Brock, executive director of budget, said that although the base grant amount is decreased, the amount given to Market Lubbock and the Lubbock Economic Development Alliance, which are separate entities but are operated by the same board of directors, is relatively unchanged.

LEDA is funded by money from sales taxes. Brock said LEDA’s estimated revenue in fiscal year 2014-15 is $5.5 million, up from $5.3 million in 2013-14. The estimate for Market Lubbock in fiscal year 2014-15 is almost $3 million, down from the previous $3.4 million.

Health plans

The council will also consider a resolution to make changes to the Master Welfare Benefit Plan to make it compliant with the Affordable Care Act.

The city’s benefit plan could be amended to include the removal of pre-existing conditions, lifetime maximums on health benefits and to ensure coverage of dependents through the age of 26.

Council members will also vote on a resolution for the city to purchase specific stop loss insurance coverage from Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas for the city’s health program.

matt.dotray@lubbockonline.com

• 766-8744

Follow Matt on Twitter

@MDotrayAJ