Earnest: Obama LeBron's 'big fan'

President Barack Obama is a “big fan” of LeBron James and considers him to be “a fine young man,” White House press secretary Josh Earnest said Friday.

“I didn’t speak to him personally about it,” Earnest said when asked at Friday’s press briefing what Obama thought about the NBA superstar’s decision to rejoin the Cleveland Cavaliers. “I know that the president is a big fan of Lebron’s.”

Story Continued Below

James on Friday announced he will return to play for the Cleveland Cavaliers, a decision he announced in a Sports Illustrated article published Friday. James, a native of Akron, Ohio, won two NBA championships with the Miami Heat, the team he joined after spending the first seven years of his career with the Cavs.

Earnest praised James’s “tremendous skill and athleticism on the court,” and said the president is also a fan of his off the court. “[T]he president enjoys watching him play,” Earnest continued. “The president also has had an opportunity to meet him personally a few times, and the president does consider him to be a fine young man who carries himself with the kind of professionalism that is really pretty impressive to see.”

Obama, a major NBA fan, has met James multiple times, including during the Heat’s two visits to the White House after winning back-to-back NBA championships. When the NBA star was last a free agent in 2010, Obama made an appeal for him to join the president’s beloved Chicago Bulls. “He doesn’t want to tamper,” longtime Obama adviser David Axelrod said at the time, “but as a Chicago fan, the president thinks LeBron would look great in a Bulls uniform.”

James has also pitched in politically for the president. The day before the 2012 presidential election, James tweeted his support for Obama’s reelection, writing: “The President got more work to do, make sure you get out and vote tomorrow.” Earlier this year, James starred in an administration advertisement to encourage Americans to enroll in the Affordable Care Act.

On Friday, Earnest offered some of his own thoughts, praising James’s decision to return home to Ohio. “The fact that he’s made this decision I think is a testament to the kinds of values that he has incorporated into his life and that he says he’s interested in instilling in his children,” Earnest said. “So, I think it’s a pretty powerful statement about the value of a place that you consider home.”

Authors: