Advertisement

The prestigious destination in the U.S. for the "increase and diffusion of knowledge," better known as The Smithsonian Institute, has announced a ban on the popular “selfie sticks” from visitor usage.

Established in 1846, The Smithsonian Institute includes 19 museums and galleries located across the country in places such as Ariz., Md., Va., NYC, and Panama. With 168 other museums serving as Smithsonian affiliates, the Institution unveiled a stern message to their 30 million annual visitors.

"For the safety of our visitors and collections the Smithsonian prohibits the use of tripods or monopods in our museums and gardens. Effective today, March 3, monopod selfie sticks are included in this policy," the bastion of knowledge and history remarked in a statement on its website. To serve as a preventive measure to ensure the safety of priceless artifacts and other museum attendees, The Smithsonian has instituted this prohibition in order to stave off accidents during crowded conditions. "Leave the selfie sticks in your bags," the house of history adds.

Following the Cooper-Hewitt Smithsonian Design Museum banning selfie sticks back in December 2014, the policy came about after Andrew Carnegie’s mansion was renovated and restored in a three-year effort. Afterward, the Metropolitan Museum of Art also decided in February of this year to ban selfie sticks.

Over the past few months, the selfie stick, which is offered by many companies (including ProMaster), has risen in popularity. With more and more would-be photographers aiming to show off their latest and greatest to the social media community, the selfie stick has even found its way into the highest ranks of our American government. President Barack Obama, in a promotional video for ObamaCare, was seen showing off his goofier side inside the White House. The video went viral instantly.

Meanwhile, some sites like the New York Museum of Sex and the Museum of Modern Art have never permitted visitors to photograph its works of arts with any camera-extension devices. However, even with The Smithsonian's ban in motion, the selfie stick can still be unsheathed at the Smithsonian National Zoological Park.

Photo: Ton Schulten | Flickr

© 2016 Tech Times, All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.