Sen. Kelly Ayotte, R-N.H., is holding to the political center, a position becoming increasingly tenuous in today’s Washington. (AP Photo/Carolyn Kaster)

HANOVER, N.H. – Independence is a valuable trait in this “Live Free or Die” state.

And it’s how the Granite State’s junior senator, Republican Kelly Ayotte, plans to sell herself in next year’s reelection race, one of the most competitive Senate contests on the ballot in 2016.

She is one of five Republican senators up for reelection next year in states that have historically tipped blue in presidential elections. Ayotte’s race is critical for Republicans fighting to hold on to their already slim Senate majority. But even if she does make it back to Washington, the Republican could find herself an odd woman out in a chamber where conservatives frequently speak the loudest.

As her party lurches rightward in the halls of the Capitol, Ayotte is positioning herself as a Party of One. She has deliberately broken with Senate Republicans – most notably, by publicly calling out Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas) for insisting on defunding Planned Parenthood in the budget bill and by announcing her support for President Obama’s clean power plan.

“I’ve tried to focus on issues where we can find common ground,” Ayotte said. “I believe we’re going to need some bridge builders who can actually be consistent with their principles but bridge divides.”

[Sign up for The Daily 202, The Washington Post’s new political tipsheet]

While the first-term senator’s not-so-subtle declaration of independence is a gamble, she may find that occupying the middle means nobody is happy on either the right or the left.

Polls show the senator running neck-and-neck with sitting New Hampshire Gov. Maggie Hassan, a recruiting coup for Democrats who recently declared she would challenge Ayotte. And recently, a group of conservative state legislators began a search for a Republican willing to mount a primary challenge to Ayotte.

“I understand the frustration of my constituents, particularly those on my side of the aisle,” Ayotte said in a recent interview here, referring to conservative criticism that Washington Republicans have failed to roll back many of President Obama’s policies on Obamacare and immigration.

“Republicans won and they had a very good 2014 election, they took the Senate. [Voters] feel like why then can’t we do all of these things. I understand the frustration, but that’s why I think it’s important to sit [voters] down and walk them through, ‘Here are some things we did do.’”

Ayotte is known around Washington as a disciplined, careful politician who made a name for herself early in her Senate career as a defense hawk. She quickly rose to chair the military readiness subcommittee on the Senate Armed Services Committee.

Her voting record in recent years has drifted further towards the center, much to the frustration of influential conservative outside groups. Heritage Action gives Ayotte a 29 percent rating for 2015, down from a term average of 63 percent. The Club for Growth ranked her the 8th most conservative senator in 2011 and the 32nd in 2014.

That drift toward increasing independence makes Ayotte one of the most coveted votes on legislation as the band dwindles of so-called GOP Senate moderates. The small group now includes GOP Sens. Mark Kirk (Ill.), Pat Toomey (Pa.) and Rob Portman (Ohio), who are also up for reelection next year.

But breaking from her Washington colleagues isn’t guaranteed to help Ayotte — a former prosecutor and state attorney general, who was elected with more than 60 percent of the vote in 2010 –with Democrats and independents.

New Hampshire is highly competitive, with The Cook Political Report recently dubbing the Senate race a tossup. President Obama won the state with about 52 percent of the vote in 2012, the same year that Hassan secured her seat with about 55 percent. Both chambers of the state’s legislature are controlled by Republicans, who have gone toe-to-toe with Hassan this year over the state budget

Liberal groups like Planned Parenthood and the Senate Majority PAC are already on the air with ads attacking Ayotte’s record on women’s health and her ties to big business. The New Hampshire Democratic Party set up a project devoted to debunking every moderate claim Ayotte has made about her record. The goal is to call out the senator as an ideological carpetbagger.

“In Washington, Kelly Ayotte has always put her special interest backers first,” said Hassan campaign communications director Aaron Jacobs in a statement. “Ayotte has voted repeatedly to make college more expensive, defund Planned Parenthood, turn Medicare into a voucher system, and opposed efforts to protect Social Security — and voters will see right through her transparent political efforts to hide her true record.”

Ayotte’s race is ground zero for the fight over abortion rights, and the debate over Washington Republicans’ push to defund Planned Parenthood in the wake of undercover videos in which conservatives believe the group’s employees are seen selling fetal tissue. It’s an issue that is likely to repeat itself in the contests of other Republican senators running in blue states. Ayotte is anti-abortion rights, but supports exceptions for rape and incest and for the life and health of the mother.

Abortion nearly divides New Hampshire voters. A recent poll from Suffolk University found that 49 percent of Republicans in New Hampshire call themselves pro-choice while 41 percent call themselves pro-life.

Ayotte has a history of supporting individual health initiatives, like legislation to expand breast cancer awareness and screenings and combat eating disorders. But she also voted for a stand-alone bill to defund Planned Parenthood and favored a ban on abortions after 20-weeks.

Yet Ayotte was unafraid to call out Cruz in a tweet storm unleashed during the budget fight, arguing there was no point in attaching the Planned Parenthood language to must-pass government funding legislation. She supported the budget bill without the defund language.

Despite the fact we don't have the votes to redirect Planned Parenthood funding, some are still pushing to tie this to govt funding bill — Kelly Ayotte (@KellyAyotte) September 22, 2015

In a letter to Cruz, Ayotte asked: “During the last government shutdown, I repeatedly asked you what your strategy for success was when we did not have the votes to achieve the goal of defunding Obamacare, but I did not receive an answer.”

Ayotte’s opposition to some of her colleagues hasn’t stopped Democrats from attacking her on women’s issues.

“If Senator Ayotte got her way, women would not have access to breast cancer screenings at Planned Parenthood-the largest provider of reproductive and sexual health care in New Hampshire,” said Jennifer Frizzell, vice president of policy at Planned Parenthood New Hampshire Action Fund. “She cannot hide this decade long record of working against women’s health by trying to pinkwash it in an election year.”

Ayotte has also split with Washington Republicans on environmental issues.

She recently backed Obama’s clean power plan — which would require electric companies to cut carbon emissions — and is among just five Republicans who supported an amendment to the Keystone XL pipeline bill stipulating that “human activity significantly contributes to climate change.” But she backed a bill to approve the controversial pipeline long before Obama rejected the plan. Ayotte also recently joined GOP Sens. Kirk, Lamar Alexander (R-Tenn.) and Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.) to launch a GOP environmental working group.

But days afterwards, she supported a failed effort to force the Environmental Protection Agency to roll back and modify clean water regulations.. And the League of Conservation voters gave her a lifetime score of just 23 percent.

Ayotte is aggressively courting environmentalists in New Hampshire, joining a conservation group on an October hike.

With green-minded constituents in tow, she trekked across a stretch of the Appalachian Trail just outside the idyllic campus of Dartmouth College, crunching over leaves and muddy streams led by members of the Appalachian Trail Conservancy.

Earlier this year, the group honored the Republican with its annual award because she supports renewing the Land and Water Conservation Fund, which uses oil and gas royalties to support conservation. The program expired in September and Ayotte has been leading the charge to permanently reinstate it.

“I’m not going to have the same view as some of my colleagues,” Ayotte said along the 90-minute walk in the woods. “I went to the Senate to solve problems for the country and New Hampshire. When you have something like the land and water conservation fund that you know has bipartisan support…yet you’re fighting to get that vote to get it done, it’s frustrating but it’s important.”

The fighting and contradictions may be tough to explain on the campaign trail but Ayotte’s independence has gained her considerable respect among the small cadre of more moderate Republicans still in the Senate.

“Kelly has an independent streak,” said Alexander in a recent interview. “The Senate badly needs members from both parties who have respect and want to get things done.”

But back in New Hampshire, the Republican Party is struggling with the same hard-line revolt that has been roiling the Washington power structure. Last week, a group of conservative activists and state lawmakers met to begin drafting a GOP candidate to challenge Ayotte.

The group, led by the politically divisive former New Hampshire House speaker, is angry with Ayotte’s willingness to compromise and the state’s plan to expand Medicaid to help bolster Obamacare enrollments.

“All Kelly Ayotte has to do is comply with the platform of the party at the state and the federal level,” said Aaron Day, chairman of the conservative PAC Stark 360.

But Ayotte is confident the center will hold. She argued that it is unrealistic to think Republicans will win a filibuster-proof Senate majority, meaning compromise is necessary.

“I, too, hope for a Republican president. That would make it a lot easier getting things done that are consistent with my principles,” she said. “Either way, we’re still not going to have all of the cards and we’re still going to have to work to get people on board.”