H.H.C. president Ram Raju. | Rob Bennett/Mayoral Photography Office Council 'alarmed' by H.H.C.'s $1.5 B. deficit

The city's public hospital system is facing growing deficits that are expected to reach $1.5 billion before the end of the decade.

City Council members expressed concern over the growing gaps between revenue and expenses during an executive budget hearing on Wednesday and, at the same time, urged the Health and Hospitals Corporation to take over health services at Rikers Island, which would almost certainly add to the corporation's fiscal woes.

Story Continued Below

Corizon Health Inc., whose contract to provide health services expires at the end of the year, has been criticized for allegedly providing substandard service to dozens of patients.

“We are imploring you to create a new system,” Councilman Paul Vçllone said. “We're not given a lot of opportunities. We don't have a lot of choices. There aren't a lot of vendors.”

Dr. Ram Raju, president and C.E.O. of H.H.C., said he was discussing possible solutions with the de Blasio administration but he did not know whether H.H.C. was capable of taking on the project.

The problem H.H.C. faces, one that would not be helped by serving a prison population, is that a large share of H.H.C's patients cannot afford to pay the full cost of their care either because they are uninsured, underinsured or have Medicaid, which typically reimburses hospitals less than the cost of service.

The corporation is also facing $3 billion in lost revenue between 2017 and 2024 because of federal cuts to the Disproportionate Share Hospital program. And H.H.C. was specifically excluded from the state's Vital Access Provider program, which provides money to safety net hospitals around the state.

“This is embarrassing,” said Councilman Corey Johnson, chair of the health committee. “That the state is behaving this way toward the best public hospital system in the United States, shortchanging us as a city, shortchanging the people who need H.H.C.”

“I don't know,” Raju said, lowering his head. “I don't think they like me very much.”

Raju's problems are further compounded by the fact that the City Council, the mayor and unions oppose most cost cutting measures. Closing hospitals is a non-starter. Raju had to repeatedly reassure the council Wednesday that he was not contemplating consolidating services or laying off employees.

And Johnson, as well as others, vehemently opposed a move to privatize dialysis services at four public hospitals.

(The state's Public Health and Health Planning Council has removed Big Apple Dialysis' application from Thursday's agenda.)

Raju's plan to cut the deficit, which he first outlined last month, involves growing H.H.C.'s market share.

Today, H.H.C. serves one out of every six New Yorkers. By the end of the decade, Raju wants H.H.C. to serve one out of every four New Yorkers.

MetroPlus, the corporation's insurance company which offers Medicaid plans, and private insurance options on the state's exchange, serves 473,000 customers. Raju wants that to grow to more than one million by 2020.

His theory is the increase in patient revenue will be enough to offset the expected decrease in state and federal reimbursements.

It's a lofty goal, leaving at least one council member incredulous.

“How is that realistic,” Johnson asked.

Raju said the Affordable Care Act and the state's decision to implement the Basic Health Plan allow far more patients to access insurance than ever before. That will offer the opportunity to increase enrollment in MetroPlus.

The challenge for Raju is convincing these newly insured patients that H.H.C. should be their first choice for care even as they now have greater access to health systems throughout the city, which are also looking to increase their patient revenue and are no less serious about increasing their marketshare.

That's why Raju wants to improve inpatient satisfaction scores to 80 percent and outpatient satisfaction scores to 93 percent.

“The linchpin of HHC’s 2020 Vision is to make the patient experience the best that it can be,” Raju said. “We must recognize that the value of an excellent patient experience is a critical part of the formula for us to compete in a dynamic marketplace.”

Raju also pointed to some savings, saying the corporation found $75 million through supply chain efficiencies.

Raju's confidence notwithstanding, the growing deficit left the council uneasy.

“I am still nervous and alarmed and worried about the precarious situation H.H.C. finds itself in,” Johnson said.

Authors: