Topics: Andres Escobar, Colombia, FIFA, GlobalPost, James Rodriguez, Lionel Messi, Thomas Muller, Video, World Cup, Entertainment News

This article originally appeared on GlobalPost

BOGOTA, Colombia — It’s been so long since Colombia last played in the World Cup that today’s national soccer team players barely remember those dispiriting matches.

The team’s marquee member, midfielder James Rodriguez, was only 8 when his country’s side, known as “Los Cafeteros” (the Coffee Men), was quickly eliminated from the tournament in France in 1998.

That’s why the entire nation is reveling in its winning streak at the World Cup in Brazil. The team handily won its first four games and has, for the first time ever, advanced to the quarterfinals with a showdown with Brazil in Fortaleza on Friday.

In addition, Rodriguez, now 22, has emerged as the breakout talent of the tournament. He has notched five goals — more than Argentina’s Lionel Messi, Brazil’s Neymar and Germany’s Thomas Muller — and is credited with one of the World Cup’s most spectacular strikes in Saturday’s game against Uruguay.

His back to the net, Rodriguez caught a pass with his chest at the top of the penalty area, then shocked the goalkeeper by twisting around and blasting a left-footed shot that banged off the crossbar and in. Uruguay was already reeling from the suspension of star striker Luis Suarez for biting an opposing player and Rodriguez’s no-look stunner seemed to break the team’s spirit.

“We are making history,” Rodriguez told reporters after the game.

Back in Colombia, his goal set off celebrations. When the ball went in “a chill went through my entire body,” said law student Alvaro Barrero, one of thousands of fans who watched Los Cafeteros’ 2-0 victory over Uruguay on a giant outdoor screen set up in a Bogota park.

Rodriguez and his teammates have also found glory on the sidelines in Brazil. After each goal, the team performs choreographed dances to celebrate. Their best moves have been compiled and set to music on YouTube.

This outpouring of joy contrasts with Colombian soccer’s painful past.

In the 1980s and ’90s, drug kingpins financed several of the country’s professional teams as a way to launder money — and scratch their soccer itch. They provided a huge monetary boost for some teams, like America de Cali, allowing them to sign top talent from around Latin America. America de Cali, it turns out, was underwritten by Miguel and Gilberto Rodriguez Orejuela, the leaders of the now-defunct Cali cartel.

“When I was coaching America de Cali, the team had a president. But everyone in the country, everyone in Cali, everyone on the team knew that the guy who ran things was Miguel Rodriguez,” said Francisco Maturana, who went on to coach Colombia’s national team in the 1990s, in a documentary film about cocaine traffickers and Colombian soccer.

This criminal influence perverted the game. Cartels and gambling syndicates often leaned on players and referees to throw matches. Colombia’s 1989 professional soccer season was canceled following the murder of a referee, while a soccer association president was imprisoned for drug-related crimes.

Then there was the Coffee Men’s infamous performance at the 1994 World Cup in the United States. The star-studded team, which included Carlos “El Pibe” Valderrama, Freddy Rincon and Faustino “El Tino” Asprilla, was coming off a 5-0 victory over Argentina in a qualifying play and seemed like a powerhouse. Brazilian legend Pele picked the Colombians to take home the trophy.