CLEVELAND, Ohio -- Eleven years ago, Myles Stevens' jaw began to swell. It seemed as if it doubled in size from one day to the next. As someone who had never seen a doctor regularly and had no health insurance, Stevens didn't know what to do.

Then he remembered hearing about the Free Medical Clinic of Greater Cleveland. He stopped at the agency's Euclid Avenue facility and learned his jaw problem was caused by untreated diabetes and hypertension. He eventually got those ailments under control and with more help from the agency, Stevens is now a calmer, happier person.

While doctors treated Stevens for his physical maladies, they also referred him to the nonprofit's behavioral health department.

Once Stevens began talking to a therapist, he began to realize how anger issues took a toll on his life.

"It took years to unravel everything, but we definitely got to the bottom of what my problem was," said Stevens, now 55. "One of the things I told them was my reason for being there is if love comes to me ever again, I want to be prepared. From that point on, we've been working on getting me together. I am much calmer, I am much happier. I deal with my issues. I face anything I have."

The Free Clinic, which began 45 years ago as a volunteer operation to help those with substance abuse problems, has seen Stevens through everything from anger management issues to diabetes, to now helping him with dialysis.

"I've had the best care that I can get," he said. "They look after you and see to all the needs you might have."

The same can be said of Northeast Ohio Neighborhood Health Services (NEON), which now has seven locations on Cleveland's East Side and in

East Cleveland. The facilities offer comprehensive health care to those in need -- regardless of ability to pay. Both NEON and the Free Clinic are health and human services nonprofits selected by area residents to benefit in the 2014-2015 Good News Giving campaign.

The charitable effort, now in its second year, is sponsored by Northeast Ohio Media Group, which represents The Plain Dealer, cleveland.com and the Sun News.

The 20 agencies that got the most votes from readers are featured in stories over the next several weeks and will receive an equal share of contributions from donors.

Contributions can be made to Good News Giving on the website, Cleveland.com/goodnewsgiving, or by using the coupon in The Plain Dealer.

Neighborhood Health Services is in its 47th year as a federally funded community health care center, and now has a wellness center at Shaw High School, and one of only three mobile dental units in Ohio.

Dental services is what brought Ron Lawton to NEON about a decade ago when his gums were bothering him. He was told he needed surgery, but there was a catch.

"I'd love to do this, but I can't," his dentist said, delaying the surgery. "Your blood pressure is through the roof!"

Lawton, now 77, was retired and didn't have an income, yet NEON took care of him. Through medication and attention to diet and fitness, Lawton now has a blood pressure that he calls "boring."

"My blood pressure is so boring it's unbelievable," Lawton said. "[My doctor] calls me her most boring patient ... We have a pact: She takes care of me, and I follow her rules. I never in my life had a family doctor, but we're still together."

Preventative services is the focus of both NEON and the Free Clinic, as they seek to treat patients holistically. Neighborhood Health Services offers everything from podiatry to gynecology. The Free Clinic is adding pediatrics to its services.

The Affordable Care Act has been transformative for the Free Clinic in the past two years as it now accepts patients with insurance, and helps others apply for Medicaid or other insurance for which they might qualify. NEON also employs application counselors to aid in insurance questions.

"We know that often patients won't seek the care they need because they're afraid of the cost," said NEON's chief operating officer, Karen Butler. "If they don't have coverage or they're not insured, they'll forgo many of the preventive tests that catch illnesses before they become so catastrophic that they end up in the emergency room."

The Free Clinic, which operates on about a $5 million budget annually, serves clients with a variety of needs. It offers one of the few syringe exchange programs in the state -- where anyone can swap a used needle for a clean needle in hopes of preventing the spread of disease among intravenous drug users. It participates in Project DAWN (Deaths Avoided With Naloxone), where anyone who knows an opiate addict can receive a naloxone kit that can help prevent overdose if administered in time. And it runs the Student-Run Free Clinic every other Saturday with students from Case Western Reserve University.

Most of all, the Free Clinic -- and NEON, too -- still adheres to the plan posted on the original door to the first building it was housed in:

"Hours: 5:30 p.m. until we reach our limit."