Topics: 2016 election, columnists, Editor's Picks, elections, Hillary Clinton, Media Criticism, New York Times, presidency, pundits, Ross Douthat, White House, Politics News

Ross Douthat’s latest column in the New York Times about the post-Obama Democratic Party without Hillary Clinton running for president has started a live one, a real hot debate on the political Internet! Specifically: Is the party screwed in 2016 if Hillary Clinton doesn’t run? And does that mean that the party is facing some sort of existential collapse? Are Democrats the Real Troubled Party, as opposed to the commonly held belief that Republicans are in worse shape?

As in much of his work, Douthat makes isolated strong points in support of a thesis that doesn’t hold up.

For example, there is a belief among certain hubristic Democrats that they’ll never have to worry about another presidential election again. “Democratic partisans assume that 2016 will inevitably be better for their party than the looming midterms,” Douthat writes, “and many analysts assume that the Republican Party is a long, long way from mounting a substantive challenge to liberalism. My friends on the left have an extensive list of things that the right simply ‘must’ do before the G.O.P. can be relevant at the presidential level again.” Douthat would do well not to dismiss as tedious liberal lecturing the serious, open-ended demographic disadvantages that the Republican Party faces in presidential elections. (They’re real.)

But Douthat is still correct to note that just because the Republican Party is facing a long-term abyss and can’t seem to do anything about it right now, that doesn’t mean that the Democratic Party, by contrast, is popular. “Political skill builds majorities, but popular policy successes cement them,” he writes, “and that is what has consistently eluded Obama.” The jury is still out on, say, Obamacare, and much of Obama’s legacy. But in general, he’s right: The public hasn’t been particularly impressed with the current Democratic presidency and his poll numbers are reflecting that. And just being better at building national coalitions than Republicans doesn’t alone guarantee some kind of national, enduring approval — or what’s that awful word, “mandate”? — for the Democratic Party.

So what’s the answer for the post-Obama Democratic Party? Hillary Clinton, of course! Douthat explains why she’s such a formidable presidential candidate for the party:

I really have no idea what proposals Clinton will run on, what arguments she’ll make. But as with Franz Josef, it’s not her policies that make her formidable; it’s the multitudes that “Hillary” the brand and icon now contains. Academic liberalism and waitress-mom populism and Davos/Wall Street/Bloomberg centrism. Female empowerment and stand-by-your-man martyrdom. The old Clintonian bond with minority voters and her own 2008 primary-trail identification with Scots-Irish whites. And then the great trifecta: continuity with the Obama present, a restoration of the more prosperous Clintonian past and (as the first … female … president) a new “yes we can” progressive future.

“But without her,” Douthat concludes, “the deluge.” As in, without Hillary Clinton, the Democratic Party is a nothingburger that has zilch to offer and isn’t a very strong national force — and one susceptible to break down along fault lines: “the liberal coalition’s extraordinary diversity also offers many potential lines of fracture.”

This is where things fall apart. Actually, they fell apart way earlier in the piece, when Douthat introduced this thesis:

And her desire converges almost perfectly with the interests of her party, even if not every liberal quite realizes it yet. That’s because Clinton’s iconic status is, increasingly, the only clear advantage the Democratic Party has. If her position is weakened, diminished or challenged, the entire coalition risks collapse.