Cigna Corp. on Friday boosted its outlook for the year as earnings easily beat Wall Street expectations in the first quarter of the year, helped by more favorable medical costs in the health-care provider's government and commercial employer businesses.

For full-year 2016, the company now expects earnings of $8.95 to $9.35, up from its previous forecast for earnings of $8.85 to $9.25 a share.

The Bloomfield, Conn., insurer said it had 15.1 million total medical customers at the end of the most recent quarter, compared with 14.7 million a year earlier and 15 million in the previous quarter.

In Cigna's global health-care business, premiums and fees revenue grew 4.9% to $7.06 billion, driven by customer growth, particularly in the Medicare Advantage business, specialty contributions, and rate actions in the commercial employer group business, partially offset by expected reductions in Medicare Part D and individual customers.

Over all for the March quarter, Cigna reported earnings of $519 million, or $2 a share, down from $533 million, or $2.04 a share, a year earlier. Income in the 2015 quarter included a charge of $40 million, or 14 cents a share, for transaction costs related to Cigna's proposed merger with Anthem.

Excluding certain items, earnings from operations rose to an adjusted $2.32 a share from $1.96 a share.

Revenue rose 4.4% to $9.88 billion.

Analysts polled by Thomson Reuters had projected earnings of $2.15 a share on $10 billion in revenue.

Cigna said its medical-loss ratio, or the share of premiums paid out for members' health expenses, was 86.2% for its government-based business, which the company attributed to strong performance in the Medicare Advantage business and improved medical costs in the Medicare Part D business. The medical-loss ratio for commercial members was 75.8%, reflecting continued strong performance of the commercial employer business.

Shares of Cigna, inactive premarket, have added 1.4% over the past three months, easing the year's decline to 7.8%.

In July, Anthem agreed to buy Cigna for $48 billion, capping months of merger frenzy among top U.S. health insurers. The deal combines the second- and fifth-largest health insurers by revenue and would create a company with a huge footprint in commercial insurance, the type of coverage provided to employers and consumers.

The biggest companies are seeking more cost efficiency and scale as the health-care landscape changes because of the Affordable Care Act and other factors.

Last week, Aetna reported its enrollment in Affordable Care Act plans grew more than the company expected in the first quarter, but the insurer said it is still on track to roughly break even on the business this year, adding to the mixed signals from the industry about the direction of the health-law exchanges.

Write to Anne Steele at Anne.Steele@wsj.com

More from MarketWatch