CBP spokesman Ruben Jauregui discusses CBP inspection procedures for commercial vehicles at the Bridge of the Americas. (Alberto Tomas Halpern)

Border Patrol spokesman Ramiro Cordero speaks to journalists at the border fence near Sunland Park, New Mexico. (Alberto Tomas Halpern/Newspaper Tree)

Chief CBP public affairs officer Ruben Jauregui leads journalists on a tour of the Bridge of the Americas on September 28. (Alberto Tomas Halpern/Newspaper Tree)

With the U.S. now in its third week of a federal government shutdown, Customs and Border Protection (CBP) officers at El Paso’s international bridges are working without pay.

CBP is one of the federal government’s largest law enforcement agencies and is responsible for securing the country from terrorists at land, sea and air ports of entry. CBP officers also facilitate the flow of legitimate trade and travel into the U.S.

Only essential federal employees, including military personnel, federal law enforcement officers, and airport traffic controllers, continue to work through the shutdown. Nonessential federal employees are on temporary unpaid leave, or furlough.

According to CBP’s website, employees will be paid for time worked up to September 30. Some CBP employees who work during the shutdown will be paid retroactively once the impasse ends, while others will be paid retroactively only if approved by Congress.

Newspaper Tree attempted to contact CBP to learn more about the shutdown’s impact on international commerce and national security at El Paso’s ports of entry, however, most of CBP’s public information officers have been placed on leave.

Public information officers are the communications coordinators for governmental organizations. They act as messengers and the public face of an organization. Their jobs are to provide essential information to the public and press.

CBP officers at the Paso del Norte bridge in El Paso directed Newspaper Tree to Doug Mosier, a CBP spokesman. Mosier’s voicemail plays the following message: “Due to the lapse of appropriations and emergency furlough, I’m out of the office.”

Bill Brooks, a CBP and Border Patrol spokesman with the Border Patrol’s Big Bend Sector in Marfa, is also on furlough and could not be reached.

Ruben Jauregui, CBP’s chief public affairs officer in El Paso, said he couldn’t comment on the shutdown.

“We can’t answer any questions to that,” he said. Jauregui said the Department of Homeland Security headquarters in Washington, DC had directed CBP staff to route all media calls to Washington.

Jauregui provided the phone number for the U.S. Office of Personnel Management in Washington, DC. He said that office could answer questions about the shutdown’s impact on CBP.

“That’s what this number was set up specifically for,” Jauregui said.

That number also answers with a recorded message, saying that the communications office is open but with reduced staff. No one could be reached and their message box was full.

Ramiro Cordero, a spokesman for the El Paso Border Patrol Sector, said he couldn’t answer any questions regarding furloughed Border Patrol officers either.

Asked if anyone could speak to the shutdown’s impact on CBP and Border Patrol officers, Cordero said, “Try and call (the Border Patrol) headquarters in DC.”

No one answered at the DC press office and Cordero later told Newspaper Tree, “Well, you’re not going to get answers from anybody. You can try, and maybe someone will want to talk, but our orders are to protect our borders and not to answer questions from anyone from public affairs.”

Congressman Beto O’Rourke, who has criticized the government shutdown, said there are very tough consequences to a government shutdown, including the flow of information from government agencies coming to a standstill.

“I think everyone who has dedicated their career to public service is being hurt by it,” O’Rourke said.

The congressman said he has been in contact with CBP officers in El Paso and the situation is difficult.

“It hasn’t been good for anyone who works for the federal government,” O’Rourke said. “CBP officers are working without pay,” he said.

O’Rourke said many CBP officers are concerned over whether or not they can provide for their families during the shutdown. “Especially the more recently hired officers, who are in many cases living paycheck to paycheck,” O’Rourke said.

However, O’Rourke said he didn’t think the shutdown would affect the job performance of CBP officers.

“It certainly makes a demanding job that much harder. I’d say these are trained professionals who I think take their jobs very seriously,” O’Rourke said.

O’Rourke added that he was hopeful the shutdown would be resolved this week. “We’re seeing those signs.”

According to the Washington Post, Senate leaders from both parties are getting closer to a deal to end the shutdown. If that happens, legislation would move to the House, where a rift exists between conservative and moderate Republicans.

“You have two very divergent views on how to finance the government and whether or not you should tie other policy concerns to that, like the Affordable Care Act,” said O’Rourke.

The Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, was signed into law in 2010, with many of its provisions taking effect from 2010 to 2015. The legislation has become a primary issue in whether Congress will provide funding for the federal government.

O’Rourke said House Speaker John Boehner’s biggest challenge in leading the Republican Party through the government shutdown is bridging the gap between moderates and conservatives.

“The real fight in the House is between House Republicans and House Republicans,” O’Rourke said. “That’s where the real drama is, in the House Republican Conference.”