American DanceWheels Foundation, a nonprofit organization that uses ballroom and Latin dance to overcome social barriers between people with, without disabilities, performed at the Pan American Games

American DanceWheels Foundation (ADF), a nonprofit organization that uses ballroom and Latin dance to overcome the social barriers between people with and without disabilities, performs at Nathan Phillips Square. (Photo: ~Courtesy of 2B Entertainment) Story Highlights Aubree Marchione wants to change the perception about people with disabilities through dance

The dancers performed a tantalizing Tango along side Pitbull, Kanye West and Serena Ryder

Aubree Marchione was hired as one of the choreographers for the Pan American Games

American DanceWheels Foundation (ADF), a nonprofit organization that uses ballroom and Latin dance to overcome the social barriers between people with and without disabilities, recently performed at the third-largest sporting event in the world, the Pan American Games.

For more than 10 years, South Amboy resident and ADF Artistic Director Aubree Marchione has been working with the organization to change the public's perception about people with disabilities through dance. ADF's mission made a great stride as their formation team was highlighted at Nathan Phillips Square in the heart of Toronto, and at the Rogers Center for the internationally televised Pan Am Games Closing Ceremonies. The opportunity for dancers in wheelchairs to perform center stage among their peers was the ultimate demonstration of equality and inclusion.

"Our performance at the Closing Ceremonies marked the 25th anniversary of the Americans with Disabilities Act. This opportunity was a chance to show what incredible things can be done when all communities unite," said ADF dancer Ania Flatau.

The opportunity to dance at the Pan Am Games came about when Marchione was hired as one of the choreographers of the event.

"Most of the dancers in my group did not know one another, but by the end of the performance, we felt like a family. What we experienced together was really wonderful, and I am lucky to have had such an enthusiastic team," she said.

The South Amboy YMCA and Arthur Murray Manhattan on Fifth Avenue provided rehearsal space for the troupe a week prior to traveling to Toronto. On July 20, ADF was welcomed by the U.S. Consulate in Toronto during a reception at the renowned Cambria Gallery.

"We are so grateful for the support we received from the U.S. Consulate, the Fordney Foundation, Cobbs Creek Healthcare and Ballroom Dress Rental. We are very fortunate to have people who believe in our mission and share our mindset," said ADF Executive Director Melinda Kremer.

ADF first took the stage at Nathan Phillips Square, and was named one of the top 3 performances during PANAMANIA, the 35-day arts festival that accompanies the Games.

American DanceWheels Foundation (ADF), a nonprofit organization that uses ballroom and Latin dance to overcome the social barriers between people with and without disabilities, performs at the Pan Am Games Closing Ceremonies. (Photo: ~Courtesy of 2B Entertainment)

"One of the most memorable moments for me about performing at Nathan Philips Square was the reaction from the children. Children are often very curious about disability but are prevented from asking questions. After our performances, several excited children came over to meet us. What was inspiring was that instead of learning to be scared of those with disabilities, they saw how we are similar and what we are capable of," said ADF dancer Derrick Williamson.

During the Closing Ceremonies on July 26, the dancers performed a tantalizing Tango alongside Pitbull, Kanye West and Serena Ryder for an audience of more than 45,000. Their dance was very well received, and American DanceWheels, along with Marchione, look forward to sharing more performances with audiences everywhere.

Follow American DanceWheels at www.facebook.com/americandancewheels, or visit www.americandancewheels.org.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1T6oGFd