Legislators debating Medicaid expansion have generous insurance of their own

The plan costs them a fraction of what most employers demand their employees kick in and less than individual policies available through the Affordable Care Act marketplace cost people with incomes in the $30,000- to $40,000-a-year range.

In all the angry debate over extending health care coverage to Virginians living below the poverty line, there's been one taxpayer-funded insurance program Virginia legislators have been loathe to discuss: the low-premium, high-benefit state plan that three-quarters of them use.

Though most lawmakers won't say if they take advantage of the coverage — which is available to them despite their part-time status — the state Department of Human Resources Management reports that 104 out of 139 do (one seat is vacant). The state covers more than 200 dependents, too.

Many of the 71 House of Delegates members who get state coverage voted this week against a Senate Finance Committee proposal to reclaim Obamacare tax dollars that Virginians started paying this year in order to buy insurance coverage for the roughly 190,000 uninsured Virginians living below the poverty line. It's a scaled-back version of the Medicaid expansion House Republicans have adamantly opposed, which aimed to cover more than 380,000 people with incomes ranging up to 138 percent of the poverty line.

"It's unfortunate that people would put themselves in that position," said Del. Matthew James, D-Portsmouth, who supports the Senate proposal and who is covered by the state plan. "We've got people who aren't getting preventive health care, and needing the E.R. because they have no coverage."

Del. Brenda Pogge, R-Norge, who covers her family through the state plan and who opposes Medicaid expansion and the Senate proposal, says the issue of legislators' coverage isn't relevant to the issue of Medicaid expansion.

The Republican majority in the House of Delegates is calling for a two-year audit of the state's Medicaid program to determine if reforms already enacted are saving money and to see what further reforms might be necessary. They argue that the federal government won't continue to pay the majority of the cost of Medicaid expansion as the Affordable Care Act requires, and that the expense will then be shifted to the state.

Matthew Moran, a spokesman for the House Republican Caucus, said raising the issue "is just demagoguing at the expense of good, dedicated public servants," including the full-time state government employees who get the same coverage.

Moran said legislators' coverage doesn't keep them from knowing the anxieties of neighbors and constituents who don't have insurance.

"They work in their communities, they go to church in those communities, their kids go to school there, they know these people," he said.

Still, said Del. Monty Mason, D-Williamsburg, "It does give the appearance of a glass house."

Mason favors expanding Medicaid.

"It's a big issue for our area. We have lots of seasonal and part-time workers — they keep our tourism business going but they often can't get coverage," Mason said. He decided to come under his wife's state insurance coverage a year before running for office, adding that its coverage was more affordable than the highest quality benefits his employer offered.

Del. Scott Surovell, D-Mount Vernon, was blunter.

"It's hypocrisy," he said, of Medicaid expansion opponents who SSSShave state health care coverage. He and his family aren't covered by the state plan, and he thinks Virginia needs to expand Medicaid to cover people below the poverty line, which Obamacare has promised to pay for.