If you could change or eliminate something about the healthcare system, what would it be? I am often disappointed to see America's more than 93,000 PAs omitted from healthcare discussions, says Lawrence (Larry) Herman, RPA-C, MPA. That's just one of his answers to 10 questions the MedPage Today staff is asking clinicians, researchers, and leaders in their fields to get their personal views on their chosen profession.

Herman is the president of the American Academy of Physician Assistants (AAPA) and chair of the Department of Physician Assistant Studies at the New York Institute of Technology in Old Westbury, N.Y. He has practiced primarily in emergency medicine and family practice in underserved communities.

1. What's the biggest barrier to practicing medicine today?

Practicing medicine should be about spending time with patients in an effort to keep them healthy, out of the hospital and not doing unnecessary procedures whenever possible. The current reimbursement system incentivizes us to see as many patients and do as many procedures as we can.

2. What is your most vivid memory involving a patient who could not afford to pay for healthcare (or meds or tests, etc.) and how did you respond?

I had a young child I treated in the ER for an asthma attack whose parents had no insurance and little money. I had enough asthma medications to give them, but the child was so young he really needed a spacer for the inhaler medication to be effective. I felt stymied, because there was no way the parents could afford that. So I went to the vending machine in the waiting room and bought the child a Coke, which came in a plastic bottle. Using a scalpel, I cut a hole in the bottom of the empty soda bottle that just fit his inhaler and he took a puff of albuterol through the spout. Voila! He had his spacer and he did just fine.

3. What do you most often wish you could say to patients, but don't?

"I can't care about your health more than you care about your health."

I use a great deal of motivational interviewing, which I believe gets patients to change behaviors, and some days it keeps me from banging my head against the wall because I can't say what I want. I can partner with patients and empower them to accomplish as much as they are willing to do, and motivational interviewing lets us make small victories together.

4. If you could change or eliminate something about the healthcare system, what would it be?

I am often disappointed to see America's more than 93,000 PAs omitted from healthcare discussions. PAs practice medicine in every specialty across all medical and surgical settings, and we've been doing so for nearly 50 years. PAs were named as one of three primary care providers in the Affordable Care Act alongside physicians and nurse practitioners. The contributions PAs make to the healthcare team are invaluable and cannot be overlooked. We can't meet America's healthcare needs unless every member of the team is authorized to provide care to the fullest extent of their license.

5. What is the most important piece of advice for students or PAs just starting out?

If you are smart enough to go into medicine, you're smart enough to do almost anything. So find your passion, and stick with it.

6. What is your "elevator" pitch to persuade someone to pursue a career in medicine?

You want to get up every morning and really love to go into work. If that work is practicing medicine, then -- as the Chinese proverb says -- you never work another day in your life.

7. What is the most rewarding aspect of being a PA?

I'm fortunate to both practice and teach, and each has its own rewards.

Last week, I had a former student, now a department chair, tell me that one of the things that I said on her first day seeing patients with me still echoed in her head: "You are PAs. You have an incredibly broad medical education ... so, before we run to the computer to order tests, let's cheat, let's examine the patient."

She turned to me, smiled and admitted that she says the same phrase to her students today.

8. What is the most memorable research published since you became a PA and why?

I believe that the work Francis Collins, MD, and his colleagues at the National Institutes of Health have accomplished through The Human Genome Project has already started to change the way we practice, and those changes will only accelerate dramatically over the next 3 to 5 years.

9. Do you have a favorite hospital-based TV show?

I miss "ER." In general, I think that virtually every other TV show that is set in a hospital is so unrealistic I find them painful to watch.

10. What is your advice to other PAs on how to avoid burnout?

First, do what you love. And most PAs -- more than 85% -- love or like their jobs, which is much higher than physicians. But, if you find yourself getting burned out or you simply don't like your job, it's simple: switch jobs! The average PA switches specialties two to three times during his/her career. PAs are trained as generalists and we're in high demand. That's not going to change anytime soon.