Yes, it’s that time of year again when Liberty Never Sleeps makes its annual predictions for doom and gloom in 2015.

As we reviewed on our New Year’s Eve show, these are our top 10 predictions for 2015. Judging from our past record, it’s a pretty good bet that 8 or 9 of these predictions at least will certainly come true.

Liberty Never Sleeps radio show and website claims no psychic ability or mystical powers of the occult — just a thorough understanding of history and the illusion that somehow big government solves problems.

Here they are, in no particular order:

The liberal media will become bolder in 2015 with outright lies being published about American early leadership and rising stars in the GOP questioning loyalty and other matters. The DNC will rally with scandals and at least one high-profile — possible POTUS candidate — will have a major scandal. For the third year in a row, we will have a major terrorist attack on U.S. soil. Worse, it will be shown that a failure in intelligence will be the culprit, possibly leading back to a Dreamer or other immigrant to the country as a result of this President’s policies. There will be a groundswell of outrage and calls for impeachment, but the do-nothing Congress will let it slide. A dark horse will emerge in the GOP on the national front who picks up the banner of conservatism without putting on the tinfoil hat element of the party. There will be a major push in his state to scandalize or otherwise discredit him, and the GOP elders will lead the charge. ISIS will grow strong and seize at least one or more major cities in the Middle East, sue for peace and want a seat in the United Nations. Obama will appease and suggest they get it. The reduction in oil and gas prices will cause the economy to grow for the first time since the recession. Things will be rosier and the economy will be in recovery. The GOP will be stymied by it and the DNC will use it as a method to springboard to the White House. Republicans will take the blame, too, as taxes rise since they propose new revenues to pay off the debt. ObamaCare will be revamped in small measures to protect corporations, but do little to ease the plight of the middle class. Corporations will grow stronger and the rally will continue until 2016, at least. Economic instability in Micronesia. Taxes will increase across the board and the DBC will make sure the moderate GOP takes the blame as the new Congress will compromise in order to bolster the burgeoning debt that will spiral out of control. The GOP falls into the trap and writes up various bills to propose new taxes. Smaller insurance companies will continue to be gobbled up by the larger carriers and ObamaCare will become entrenched. Premiums skyrocket due to lack of competition. A new face will rise in the DNC and Hillary will probably bow out of the POTUS race. This new person will be backed by Obama. America will expand its “peacekeeping” role in the U.N. and complete its withdrawal from the world. Expect Japan and Taiwan to take the brunt of it.

Bonus Prediction

Expect a major natural disaster like an earthquake or flood in Mexico or Central America to hit with Obama claiming we need to take in millions of refugees without proper screening and paperwork. Also, he will pave the way for more refugees from ISIS.

That’s it.

Hope you have good 2015, but always plan for the worst. The Liberty Never Sleeps show will.

Thomas Purcell is nationally syndicated columnist, author of the book “Shotgun Republic” and is host of the Liberty Never Sleeps podcast. More of his work can be found at LibertyNeverSleeps.com.