Even though the state was home to a late-term abortionist who killed babies in live-birth abortions and ran what could be described as the most shocking abortion clinic in history, Pennsylvania voters are sending a pro-abortion governor to Harrisburg.

Pro-life Pennsylvania Governor Tom Corbett, who was frequently cited as one of the most vulnerable incumbent governors in the 2014 election cycle, lost his bid for re-election.

Due to his strong pro-life leadership, the National Right to Life Committee and the Pennsylvania Pro-Life Federation endorsed Governor Tom Corbett for reelection. By contrast, Tom Wolf was backed by NARAL, a radical pro-abortion group that opposes any and all limits on abortion.

Wolf’s campaign website states, “Tom Wolf is proud to stand with women in Pennsylvania who are fighting backwards legislation signed into law by Governor Corbett that restricts a woman’s right to make her own personal health care decisions.”

Governor Corbett has been a breath of fresh air for Pennsylvania since taking office in 2011. After years of pro-abortion administrations that turned a blind eye to the abuses of the abortion industry, including the horrors of Kermit Gosnell’s abortion center in Philadelphia, Corbett took action to protect women and their unborn children.

Following the direct recommendations of the Grand Jury report in the Gosnell case, Corbett signed a law ensuring abortion centers meet basic health standards.

Elections have consequences. And in Pennsylvania, gubernatorial elections have especially made the difference for women and unborn babies. The Gosnell Grand Jury report notes that under pro-life Governor Bob Casey, abortion centers were inspected. In the report, DOH official Janice Staloski states DOH’s policy under of his successor, pro-abortion Governor Tom Ridge, was “motivated by a desire not to be ‘putting up a barrier to women’ seeking abortions.” This mentality persisted in the administration of pro-abortion Ed Rendell. Gosnell, who was convicted last year of three counts of first-degree murder, did not have his Women’s Medical Society abortion clinic inspected for 17 years.

Does Tom Wolf want Pennsylvania to return to the days when the likes of Kermit Gosnell had virtually no oversight? Wolf’s website claims he “stands with Pennsylvania women.” How do women benefit from substandard, unsanitary facilities run by profiteers, like Gosnell, with a history of botched abortions and a willingness to kill unborn babies past the legal limit and even after birth? Women deserve better than that. And so do their unborn babies.

Corbett has worked to empower Pennsylvania mothers-in-need through the life-affirming Real Alternatives program, a state program that helps fund pregnancy resource centers.

Just this summer, Corbett also signed “Chloe’s Law,” a measure designed to ensure parents receive accurate, evidence-based information about Down syndrome when receiving a prenatal diagnosis and are aware of the resources available to them and their child. [“Chloe’s Law” will provide expectant mothers with information about Down syndrome].

Some studies have shown as high as 90% of babies given prenatal diagnoses of Down syndrome are aborted. Hopefully, laws like this one will give hope to parents facing unexpected circumstances in pregnancy and diminish some of the societal preference toward abortion of children with special needs.

Governor Corbett also signed House Bill 818, which barred coverage of elective abortion in health plans sold in the Pennsylvania exchange created under Obamacare. Dozens of states have also passed similar measures and limits on taxpayer funding of abortion continue to enjoy broad public support.

Click here to sign up for daily pro-life news alerts from LifeNews.com

Pennsylvania is a pro-life state. However, it is a state where Democratic voter registration exceeds Republican registration by a 50-37 percent margin.