Britons no longer find therapy taboo. We now spend more than £385m a year on mental health – with the demand for therapy tripling in the last 10 years.

And the benefits aren’t just for patients: working in the industry can be highly rewarding too. “I can’t think of a more fulfilling career, one that is designed solely to decrease suffering. There’s nothing I’d rather do with my life,” says Dr John Duffy, clinical psychologist and author.

“It’s an honour to do this work,” agrees Ryan Howes, therapist and author of Psychology Today’s In Therapy blog. “I essentially earn my living watching stories of strength and perseverance unfold before me. And I get to help people along the way.”

So, how are roles in mental health diversifying with the UK’s growing need for counselling? The types of roles in the industry are wide-ranging. You can work as a psychologist, psychiatrist, counsellor or specialist nurse, among others.

So, if you’re looking for a fulfilling career in mental health, join us on Thursday 13 August from 1-3pm BST for a live chat with the experts. We’ll be discussing:

The skills and qualifications you need to work in various mental health roles

The type of job that would suit your skillset

How to get a job in mental health

Advice on CV and job applications

The Q&A will take place in the comments section below this article. Taking part is easier than ever: create a free Guardian account, or log in using your Twitter or Facebook profiles to comment. Alternatively, you can tweet us @GuardianCareers or email your questions to charlotte.seager@theguardian.com, who can post them for you.

Comments are currently open and we welcome advance questions, however the webchat won’t be taking place until Thursday 13 August from 1pm-3pm BST.

Panel

Dr John Duffy is a clinical psychologist and consultant with 20 years experience in private practice. He is also a best-selling parenting author, speaker, blogger, and national media presence. He is the regular parenting and relationship expert for Steve Harvey on NBC.

Dr Lucy Johnstone is a consultant clinical psychologist who has worked in adult mental health for many years. She is the former head of the Bristol Clinical Psychology Doctorate training course, and a speaker, author and writer on a range of mental health topics.

Professor Andrew Samuels is a psychotherapist and professor of jungian studies at the University of Essex. He was the chair of the UK Council for Psychotherapy and one of the two co-founders of Psychotherapists and Counsellors for Social Responsibility. His many books have been translated into 19 languages.

Dr Ryan Howes is a clinical psychologist with a private practice in Pasadena, California. He is the founder of National Psychotherapy Day, blogs for Psychology Today, and writes an interview column for Psychotherapy Networker magazine.

Dr Kevin Morgan is lecturer of psychology for the University of Westminster. For the last nine years, he has been conducting research into psychosis at the Institute of Psychiatry. Prior to this, he held lecturing posts at the Open University and Birkbeck College, University of London.

Dr Tim Smith is a clinical psychologist and HCPC-registered practitioner psychologist. He works in the NHS with adults with severe and enduring mental health problems and their families. He has also worked in the fields of learning disability and addiction.

Jim Chapman is acting head of the department of mental health and learning disabilities at Birmingham City University. He has a background in acute and community mental health nursing; and is involved with the teaching of clinical nursing skills to all fields of nursing.

Professor Catriona Morrison is a trustee of the British Psychological Society, chair of BPS Education and Public Engagement Board, and professor of Psychology at Heriot-Watt University.

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs or sign up to Guardian Careers for the latest job vacancies and career advice