Katie Till competes during the Class 4A state cross country race on Saturday at Norris Penrose Event Center in Colorado Springs. ( Brandon Hopper / Daily Record )

Aubrey Till runs as blood drips from her knees during the Class 4A state cross country race on Saturday at Norris Penrose Event Center in Colorado Springs. (Brandon Hopper / Daily Record)

Colorado Springs — Aubrey Till didn't bother looking at the clock or the results after the race. She knew what had just happened.

She didn't find out her exact place until about four hours after she finished.

"It was just not a good day today," said the Cañon City Tigers junior who finished 52nd after placing fourth and eighth in her first two years at state cross country. "It happens to everyone and I am just glad I had the opporutnity to run."

At about the 400-meter mark, Till made it through the creek at Norris Penrose Event Center in Colorado Springs. At that point she was in the top 10, but on the way up the hill she was tripped from behind by a competitor.

"I was down for a little bit then when I went to get back up I got tripped again," Till said. "That just kind of broke me.

"Running is a mental sport. After I fell it just kinda got to me and got in my head a little bit. I was having a really hard time coming back from tripping."

Her time of 21:14 was about 3 minutes behind champion Elise Cranny's 18:07.

Freshman Katie Till, Aubrey's sister, finished in 101st place with a 22:15. She was followed by teammates Ellie Enderle (112), Riley Valentine (144), Drew Moore (178), Journey Short (180) and Cassy Giammo (182).

In the boys race, Tigers senior Alex Knoedler turned in a solid performance and finished 55th with a 17:57. He was the only boy to represent the Tigers this season, and it was his second year in a row competing at state, though first time qualifying as an individual.

Katie Till was in a bit of shock after the race.

"I hadn't been in this big of a race in my life," she said. "... I was hoping top 30 or top 20, but I got a look at reality. I saw a lot of people — it was just a lot. It's a mental thing and I don't have it yet."