Baldwin's bunk

Richmond Hill: Voicer Grace Araujo should save the sympathy she offers Alec Baldwin for someone who truly deserves it.

My nephew lives in Baldwin’s Greenwich Village building, and whenever I see the media-hungry misfit walking his dog nearby or in the building’s lobby, there’s always a sullen, scowling expression affixed to his face. Clearly, that is his prerogative.

But the false promises he made as he wined, dined and bedded Genevieve Sabourin while simultaneously romancing his now-wife, Hilaria, were the reason for his tearful courtroom display of forced emotion. Add to that his impulse-control issues, repeated use of anti-gay epithets and overt rudeness and hostility toward the media (and everyone else within eye range), and it’s hard to imagine his young, new bride will prove willing to subjugate herself and her child to a lifetime of conflict, confrontation and public exposure on his behalf.

Save your tears, Ms. Araujo! Adele DeLeva

Old news

Staten Island: Why is Alec Baldwin front-page news? He’s a bully who should move to a remote farm in North Dakota. Who cares about this guy? Donna Perrone

One of us

New Rochelle, N.Y.: Leave Alec Baldwin alone! The beauty of living in NYC and walking among the people anonymously is for all of us. He has a wife and infant daughter to protect — I don’t blame him one bit. Denise Ciotti

Problem solved

Brooklyn: Class sizes are increasing and test scores are falling. What to do? School choice, including private schools, that’s what. No child left behind. No child left out. All parents served, and failing schools a thing of the past. Dolores Jurkowski

Do the math

Howard Beach: Simple logic tells us an instructor gives more individual attention to each student when there are fewer of them. But smaller classes are expensive, so systems save money by having more students in each class — at the expense of individual attention for each child. Properly measuring class size takes more than dividing the total number of students in the school by the total number of classroom teachers on the faculty, since many teachers are diverted to administrative tasks. So if you look at actual classrooms, the number of students will be much higher than the fake “average.” Dave Shlakman

Single standard

Brooklyn: Linda Stasi’s premise (“Vile vigilantes,” Nov. 20) applies to the NYPD, too. Let’s recall those “tough guys’ ” courageous response to Eleanor Bumpers and Kimani Gray. You’ve got to love the way she arbitrarily applies her theory. Jamie Connor

Not waiting for January

Staten Island: Commissioner Ray Kelly is on his way out, Mayor de Blasio is on his way in, the stop-question-frisk policy is handcuffed and roaming gangs in Brooklyn are assaulting innocent people without fear of being apprehended. Let’s welcome back the crack-infested 1980s. Robert McKenna

Color-blind?

Yonkers: The mainstream media are just beginning to cover this knockout game garbage. But if you could switch the color of the participants, this would be front-page news and the main story on TV, along with protests led by our local charlatans. Michael Guerin

False account

Manhattan: Richard Cohen’s assertion that “Kennedy got us into Vietnam” is contrary to documented fact (“50 years later, why JFK still resonates,” Op-Ed, Nov. 19). We were spending $1 million a day, supporting the French when they were defeated in 1954. We sent “advisers” and then combat troops to protect them long before JFK reached the White House. Kennedy learned the ground war in Southeast Asia was unwinnable and wanted to bring the troops home, though it would have cost him his second term. I believe this attitude cost him his life. Too many people were getting rich from the war. Allen Singer

A veteran’s prerogative

Naples, Fla.: If you see a civilian saluting at a football or basketball game, you’ll be looking at an American veteran. A grateful Congress has honored all veterans with the special privilege of rendering the military salute at flag ceremonies — as you do with your hand over your heart. Active-duty and reserve veterans gave service to our nation and endured, to varying degrees, the privations of military life, for which they and their families are justifiably proud. There is no question that the public loves and respects its veterans, and the sight of veterans saluting is a patriotic enrichment of our traditional flag ceremonies. From now on, vets, show us who you are; give the flag a salute. R.E. Griffith

You gotta believe

Brooklyn: I find it interesting that the first three names on the Forbes list of the nation’s leading philanthropists are atheists or agnostics (Bill Gates, Warren Buffett and George Soros). Mayor Bloomberg, ranked No. 7, is known to be very secular in outlook as well. Yet we are constantly told that religious people are more charitable than nonbelievers. This does not seem to be the case. Martin Brahms

Atheistic reverence

Brooklyn: If Jesus actually existed and came back now to preach what he did in the Bible, he would be trashed and ridiculed by Republicans as a Socialist. A person does not even need to believe in a god to believe in his teachings. You just need to be a decent person with a moral compass that says it is wrong to take away from those less fortunate so the rich can get richer. Felyce Marchica

Saving and taking lives

Manhattan: I was sorry to hear about the hunting accident that took the life of firefighter Charles Bruce (“Long Island firefighter killed when mistaken for deer by friend in hunting tragedy,” NYDailyNews.com, Nov. 18), but puzzled by the disconnect that can lead men willing to saves the lives of pets, as well as people on a daily basis, to go on an annual outing of premeditated murder. I hope and pray this tragedy leads to a change in habit: Perhaps a weapons-free hike? Bowling? How about a trip to a different museum every year? Mickey Kramer

Obamacare for the win

Murrells Inlet, S.C.: Obamacare is not a failure! It was never about care; it was about control. The government now owns all our health care. Richard Steinis

Mixed emotions

Oceanside, L.I.: To Voicer Ken McGuire, who chastises Liz Cheney for opposing same-sex marriage while loving and supporting her gay married sister: It seems to me one is an overall philosophy, and the other is a very personal emotion — and both can co-exist within one intelligent human being. Steve Feuer

Fixated

Brooklyn: Why does the Daily News continue to show pictures of a sweet-faced 12-year-old Trayvon Martin instead of the person he was at the time of the incident? Diane Hunt

Innocence assaulted

Garrison, N.Y.: I was shocked and appalled to read that a first-grader was punched and then stabbed at school within a few months (“Girl jabbed with pencil point at troubled Harlem elementary school,” NYDailyNews.com, Nov. 15). As a 14-year-old high school student, I have seen a few verbal fights and even punches thrown, but never in elementary school, let alone first grade. Marge Feinberg, the Department of Education spokesperson, claims that no bullying incidents have been reported, but clearly bullying is occurring in the schools. Teachers failed to notify parents, so most likely they also failed to notify the Education Department and perhaps even the principal. The article also mentions a student being forced to perform sexual acts on other students and a girl being sexually assaulted by the ringleader of that same group of students. I was aghast to read that — children of such young ages shouldn’t even know what these things are! No wonder this school has been included on the state’s list of “persistently dangerous” schools since 2011. Natalie Cipriano