HOLLYWOOD, Fla.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Health Benefits Center, a full-service national insurance brokerage firm and call center based in Hollywood, Fla., and one of the fastest-growing in the nation, has announced the opening of its office in Boca Raton.

“We are open for business in Boca Raton and on the lookout for even more great agents. In just three years, we have grown to nearly 250 health and life insurance agents, contractors and support staff, and we need this facility to accommodate our growth,” said CEO Steve Dorfman. “Word is spreading that this is a great place to work and grow professionally. Our momentum for expansion has never been stronger and we are on track to establish a great statewide presence this year.”

HBC has leased 8,000 square feet at 4800 T-Rex Avenue, Suite 120, on the former IBM campus of IBM west of I-95 and south of Yamato Road as part of a major expansion in Florida and abroad. The office is designed to permit as many as 75,000 additional health care insurance customers.

HBC is also preparing to open a Miami office with the same capacity in the Doral-Miami International Airport area by midsummer, while making preparations to move its current headquarters, now at 200 South Park Road, south of Hollywood Boulevard west of I-95, to a larger, 18,000-square foot main office at Oakwood Plaza north of Sheridan Street east of I-95.

HBC is also preparing to open substantial offices this fall in Orlando and in the Tampa Bay area.

“We are here for the long haul. We have big plans and a simple mission: to make insurance decisions as simple, painless and informed as possible, whether in health, life, or disability,” Dorfman said. “HBC is always seeking a better way to find the right health insurance package for underserved people in all 50 states.”

To support its rapid growth, HBC recently opened a second customer support center in the Dominican Republic with a capacity for 150 employees, working in tandem with its existing center in Panama City, Panama.

“These support centers are essential to our model to become the most efficient, responsive insurance brokerage in the nation,” Dorfman said. “Insurance demands are changing fast. The Affordable Care Act is not the only game in town. Every day, 10,000 Baby Boomers turn 65, for instance, and we are there to help them find the right Medicare supplemental coverage. This market is huge. Our powerful and redundant customer service system will expand our capacity and go a long way to create an almost unlimited number of happy customers.”

Health Benefits Center is on the web at www.hbcinsure.com, with a toll-free number at 1-800-492-1834.