Buffs coach feels she has good reason to be excited for 2015-16

Despite a 15-26 mark in conference play over the last two seasons, Colorado women's basketball coach Linda Lappe is optimistic about the future of the Buffs. ( Jeremy Papasso / Staff Photographer )

Only 15 months ago, the Colorado women's basketball team was ranked No. 11 in the nation a month into the 2013-14 season, coming off an NCAA tournament appearance the previous year.

In the months since reaching that lofty perch, the Buffs have been inconsistent, turnover prone and failed to qualify for the postseason at all this season. If coach Linda Lappe ever has been concerned about the changed trajectory of her program in that time, she has never said so publicly.

In a recent postseason interview, Lappe said she has never looked forward to a season like she is already looking forward to next season. But she also is not blind to the reality that her program has been a disappointment through two straight conference seasons now.

The Buffs have gone 15-26 in Pac-12 play since the start of conference action a year ago, rarely beating teams in the upper-echelon of the conference.

"You look at all the little things that go into it, the confidence in knowing that you've put in the work, ability to withstand a long season, ability to come to practice and be consistent every single day," Lappe said. "When we had that team two years ago that was top 15 in the country, the difference was we were consistent. Every day we came to practice, it was competitive. You had Chucky Jeffery that lit a fire and, if somebody didn't compete, you were going to get run over. We probably had five bad practices that entire year.

Advertisement

"It really is about all the little things. Did I think we had a team this year that was top 10 in the country? No. But do I think that moving forward we learned a lot, and if we had come together a little bit earlier, if we play harder for longer stretches of time, if we come to practice prepared and we compete, I think the thing that we learned was mental toughness and competitiveness. We're not there yet, but I feel like we grew in those two areas significantly."

So why is Lappe so excited about next year?

There are three good reasons. She has a senior-to-be in forward Jamee Swan, who has the ability and potential to be one of the best players in the Pac-12 next season, if she focuses and works hard in the offseason.

Lappe has young players who were some of her most competitive this season, and they gained valuable experience. Freshmen Zoe Correal, Alina Hartmann and Brecca Thomas should be part of the core rotation, if not starters next season.

And finally, Lappe will have some depth at point guard, with incoming freshman Kennedy Leonard ranked as one of the nation's 50 best players by at least one recruiting service, and combo guard Alexis Robinson also considered a four-star recruit.

Lappe had to navigate this season with Lexy Kresl handling the point guard duties, even though she is more of a shooting guard or small forward, while Thomas grew into more playing time at the position.

"I feel really good actually," Lappe said. "So Brecca getting some experience this past year was really key for us moving forward. Kennedy Leonard is a point guard coming in. She's the 40th best player in the country. So she and Brecca will go at each other and that will be a really fun battle every day in practice and that is the competitiveness that we're looking for. "

Lappe said it is her responsibility to establish the culture in her program that fosters and breeds that competitiveness. She didn't shy away from that, but she also said there is only so much a coaching staff can do. She believes it takes a player or two or even more with the mentality and approach Jeffery used to bring for a team to really take off.

CU fans won't know until some point next season, if one of the current or incoming players establishes a higher level of expectations and accountability in the locker room. Lappe says she is eager to start winning more and taking steps forward toward building a winner again.

"I didn't come here just to help us be in the top half of the Pac-12," Lappe said. "I came here to help us get to the Final Four. So to do that, you look at the teams that went to the Sweet 16, they're the most mentally tough teams."

Kyle Ringo: ringok@dailycamera.com, on Twitter: @kyleringo