WASHINGTON, D.C. -- A federal judge has disagreed with Ohio Attorney General Mike DeWine that an Obamacare-related fee charged to most employers, including the state, is an unconstitutional tax.

The fee is paid by all employers who provide group health insurance in the workplace. It came to $63 per covered person in 2014 and $44 for each person in 2015. The money is used primarily to fund a temporary financial pool that protects insurance companies issuing individual policies in the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, marketplace. Insurers can tap into the reinsurance fund when they have to pay out particularly high medical claims.

This is one of several fees or taxes that Democrats in Congress built into the new health insurance system in an effort to start the new market -- targeted to individuals and families that lacked workplace coverage -- on sound financial footing. The reinsurance fee was designed to get the system started and to phase out after 2016.

But state employers, cities and public universities had to pay the fee too if they insured their employees under group plans.

DeWine, filing the lawsuit last January in U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Ohio, called it "an unprecedented attempt to destroy the balance of authority between the federal government and the states." A Republican and former U.S. senator, he was joined by the Ohio Department of Administrative Services, the Ohio Turnpike Commission, Warren County, the University of Akron, Bowling Green State University, Shawnee State University and Youngstown State University.

The fee amounted to $5.389 million for state in 2014. State universities paid hundreds of thousands of dollars each.

"The $5.3 million Ohio is being taxed is money that could be used for education, public safety, and roads and bridges," DeWine said last January. "The states are not the federal government's tax collectors, and the Obama administration should refund these illegal taxes immediately."

In issuing the opinion, released Tuesday, U.S. District Judge Algenon L. Marbley suggested that DeWine's intent was more than protecting Ohio fiscally. Marbley was appointed to the bench in 1997 by President Bill Clinton.

The state of Ohio "is no stranger to Affordable Care Act challenges," the opinion said. "To the contrary, the State's Attorney General proudly trumpets that his first act in office was joining a twenty-five state lawsuit challenging the Act in its entirety." That effort, challenging the federal government's right to charge a penalty for people who refuse to get insurance, largely failed when it reached the U.S. Supreme Court.

But DeWine wasn't done. "In 2014, Ohio redoubled its efforts against the Affordable Care Act by leading nineteen states in filing a friend-of-the-court brief in support of a challenge to the contraception-coverage mandate," Marbley noted in this week's opinion. In that challenge, known as the Hobby Lobby case because of the name of the chain of stores that did not wish to provide contraception coverage to workers, DeWine and the other litigants "notched a partial victory."

There was still another multi-state case with DeWine's involvement, this one concerning faith-based objections to birth control from nonprofit religious colleges and hospitals. The Supreme Court could resolve the case this year.

But meantime, DeWine last year pressed on with his own, Ohio-based lawsuit over the reinsurance program.

But the federal judge was unpersuaded.

"As with much of the State's previous challenge" in the case challenging the penalties for refusing to buy insurance, "this shot misses the mark," Marbley wrote.

"Put simply, Congress intended for all group health plans, including those operated by state or local governments, to pay into the Transitional Reinsurance Program. The text, structure, and purpose of the Affordable Care Act (and related statutes) confirm as much.

"Moreover, Congress and the Department of Health and Human Services did not violate the Constitution when they subjected health plans offered by state and local government employers to the same requirements as those offered by private-sector employers."

DeWine's reasoning notwithstanding, the attorney general failed to state a legitimate claim of law, the judge wrote. He dismissed the lawsuit.

The state will appeal, said DeWine spokesman Dan Tierney.

He said that regardless of whether this case concerned the Affordable Care Act or some other dispute over the balance of authority between the federal government and states, the legal issue is legitimate. DeWine is similarly challenging the federal government in court over rules protecting streams and wetlands, contending that states have the right as trustees to control their natural resources. The issue here, as in the environmental case, is whether the Obama administration has overreached its authority, DeWine's office said.

"Our office respectfully disagrees with the opinion and expects to appeal," Tierney said.

The Transitional Reinsurance Program is different from another temporary program that also was designed to protect insurers from losses in the new market. The other program, called a risk corridor, set up a method by which the insurers in the new market would share a certain level of financial risk among themselves. Those making profits pay a small share into a program that can be tapped by those losing money. Their losses could be the result of too many medical claims from the people they insure, or by not charging high enough premiums, or by both.

But the risk corridor program is under fire, too. It initially took in too little money to pay the insurers who had losses. Congress, led by Republican critics of Obamacare, recently barred President Barack Obama's administration from tapping taxpayer funds to make up the difference.

Had DeWine prevailed in his lawsuit over the Transitional Reinsurance Program, it could have added financial pressure to Obamacare's underpinning. No Republicans voted for the new insurance law when it passed in 2010 -- when Congress was under Democratic control. Now that Republicans control Congress, lawmakers are chipping away at elements of the 2010 act.

They recently suspended collection of another tax, this one on the sale of medical devices, that is used to underwrite tax credits for families that otherwise might not be able to afford health coverage, or at least the level of health coverage mandated by Obama's signature law.

But the White House maintains that none of these efforts is fatal. For now, at least, DeWine's loss means the reinsurance program -- and the money Ohio has paid in -- can go where Congress and Obama intended.