WASHINGTON -- The first two years of Obamacare enrollment brought health coverage to millions of people, overcoming political obstruction and a disastrous initial rollout of the sign-up system in the process. But the road could be even rougher ahead, Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell said Tuesday.

By the end of this year, President Barack Obama's administration expects that a little more than 9 million people will be enrolled into health insurance policies obtained via the exchange marketplaces created by the Affordable Care Act. But the administration estimates another 10.5 million uninsured people are eligible -- and they're the most elusive customers in the market.

"As we reduce the rate of the uninsured, there are fewer potential marketplace customers out there," Burwell said during a speech at Howard University Hospital in Washington. "Overall, the open enrollment is going to be tougher than last year."

Nearly half of the remaining uninsured are between the ages of 18 and 34, the most coveted demographic for health insurers because of their relatively low medical costs -- but among the most difficult to enroll for the same reason, because the value of health coverage may be less apparent to consumers who need little medical care.While 4 in 10 of the people who could sign up for health insurance exchange plans now earn low enough incomes to qualify for generous subsidies that significantly bring down the cost, awareness of these tax credits is low among the uninsured. Enrolling these people can also be a challenge even if they know about financial assistance, because they may find even small premiums unaffordable. The price of health insurance also remains out of reach for some whose incomes make them eligible for only modest tax credits or none at all.

Burwell highlighted Obamacare's progress to date, citing a new departmental report finding that 15.3 million previously uninsured adults gained coverage between October 2013 -- when the first enrollment period began -- and this month, either from the exchanges or from Medicaid in states that expanded eligibility for that program under the Affordable Care Act. A separate provision allowing young adults to remain covered by their parents' insurance until age 26 accounted for an additional 2.3 million people who have health coverage they wouldn't have absent Obamacare, HHS reported. That puts the total at 17.6 million, up from 16 million as of March, according to the department's analysis.

These findings are consistent with numerous other studies and surveys. The U.S. Census Bureau announced last week that 9 million people had gained coverage through the end of 2014, and Gallup polls have shown steep declines in the uninsured rate through the first half of 2015.