Cree

Consumers who would like to start saving energy by switching to LED lightbulbs have long been put off by their price tags. But new moves by some major suppliers mean competition is starting to reduce that cost barrier.

Cree on Wednesday is putting a $19.97 price tag on a new bulb sold through Home Depot. It’s got the equivalent light output of a 100-watt incandescent bulb, a desirable brightness level for many home applications that has, until now, carried a high premium.

The Durham, N.C., company was one of the first makers of light-emitting diode chips, only entering the market for consumer LED bulbs a year ago. Cree is also reducing prices on the other bulbs it sells through Home Depot by up to 23%.

One of Cree’s 60-watt equivalent bulbs, for example, will fall to $9.97 from $12.97, the company said.

“We are making an affordability statement,” said Mike Watson, Cree’s vice president of product strategy.

And competition means more savings all around. One of Cree’s biggest rivals, Philips, on Monday announced a 60-watt equivalent bulb at $9.97.

The consumer electronics giant, which offers a 100-watt equivalent bulb for $24.97, stresses that most of its bulbs are certified under a U.S. government program called Energy Star that can qualify them for utility rebates. (Cree says its 75-watt and 100-watt bulbs are still under Energy Star evaluation).

Most LED bulbs from Philips are round with a distinctive flattened head, but the new “SlimStyle” bulb announced Monday has a more two-dimensional design, a bit like a loop. Cree’s bulbs look more like incandescent bulbs, distinguished mainly by a white circular heat sink.

Other companies are planning to keep battling in the low-priced LED bulb sector. One is Switch, a startup in San Jose, Calif. The company says some of its 40-watt and 60-watt equivalent bulbs now retail for $11.99, and expects to offer 75-watt and 100-watt bulbs in the budget price class later this year.

Philip Smallwood, research director for the LEDs and Lighting Group at the market research firm Strategies Unlimited, estimates that worldwide revenues for LED bulbs in incandescent-replacement class known as A19 were only $1 billion in 2013. Aided by price declines, however, he sees the market growing to $5.2 billion by 2018.

“The only thing that is stopping consumers in the residential sector is price,” says Philip Smallwood, an analyst at the market research firm Strategies Unlimited. “With Cree cutting down these prices so much, and others coming down, it really is the driving factor for adoption.”