CLEVELAND, Ohio -- Gov. John Kasich has the right message.

He may be the wrong messenger.

Of all the Republicans angling to be president, no one's pitch is better suited to win the presidency than Kasich's. So well might his message resonate with independent voters that it could have the potential to not only beat Hillary Clinton -- but maybe to beat her badly.

Consider Kasich's political assets:

He's not named Bush. He's from a big state and has a wealth of government experience. He's been fortunate to be governor at a time that the state enjoyed significant job growth -- growth that enabled him to cut taxes. He's not overly partisan. And his record as governor includes significant evidence he cares more about the needy than his potential Republican rivals.

Nevertheless, far too many rank-and-file Republicans seem to think it's more important to send a message than elect a president. That's why most Republicans on the far right -- not a small group -- won't find Kasich sufficiently conservative.

However, that's not the only problem with a Kasich candidacy. Just as worrisome is his peculiar personality.

Speaking at a breakfast meeting in New Hampshire on March 24, Kasich said, "You know why I'm unorthodox ... ? Because I'm normal."

Normal, he is not. Kasich's a lousy listener, has an astonishingly short attention span, often comes off as narcissistic, and is wired so tightly one never quite knows what's about to tumble out of his mouth.

When he's on -- which is often -- Kasich is as good or better at communicating with voters than any of the other Republican wannabes. But candidates who mount serious presidential campaigns attract media scrutiny a thousand times more intense than anything Kasich has experienced as a governor or congressman.

That's worth worrying about if you're a candidate whose history includes publicly referring to a policeman as an "idiot" or suggesting that anyone who's spent time in Iowa would never want to return.

Kasich's record as governor includes much to brag about. He has a good story to tell. But it's not as great as Kasich wants us to believe. And if he continues to needlessly embellish that story, the national news media and his Republican opponents will feast on those exaggerations, leaving voters with the impression he's less than truthful.

Exhibit A on the exaggeration list has been talk by the governor and his lackeys about job growth -- the "Ohio miracle" nonsense Kasich touted as he prepared for a presentation at the 2013 World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland.

In touting the administration's job-creation record, the Kasich-controlled Ohio Republican Party has long engaged in the intellectually dishonest habit of using raw numbers that compare Ohio to places like Wyoming, Rhode Island and Delaware, instead of using percentage changes that adjust for a state's size.

If he runs for president, the national media won't let Kasich or his campaign get away with that deception.

Here's Ohio's real job-growth ranking among the 50 states during Kasich's first term, as compiled by the W.P Carey School of Business at Arizona State University:

2011: 13th

2012: 21st

2013: 44th

2014: 29th

Kasich will almost certainly leave Ohio better off than he found it. But Ohio's poverty rate continues to rise, the middle class continues to shrink, and average median income is nowhere near what it was in 2000.

Next stop on the campaign trail for Kasich might be a return visit to New Hampshire. Kasich also campaigned there in 1999, during his brief and unsuccessful bid for the 2000 Republican presidential nomination.

In that first run for president, a cornerstone of Kasich's campaign was a promise to end "corporate welfare." At some point, he may have to explain his change in position, given that his secretive JobsOhio has relied heavily on the type of government subsidies, or "corporate welfare," he once characterized as evil.

Meanwhile, the wait continues. Raising money and and organizing a national campaign are monumental challenges.

Time is of the essence, but those challenges remain on hold until Kasich resolves the most important question of them all.

"Is this what the Lord really wants me to do with my life?"

Brent Larkin was The Plain Dealer's editorial director from 1991 until his retirement in 2009.

To reach Brent Larkin: (216) 999-4252