An AED technician inspecting a forcep. AED’s excellence in repair service and cost savings will help the Premier members achieve their goals per the Affordable Care Act with quality service at a great value.

Advanced Endoscopy Devices has been awarded a Premier contract for surgical instrument and scope repair. The three year contract is effective February 1, 2016 through January 31, 2019. Contract PP-MM-388 will give Premier members the option to utilize AED to repair any endoscope and surgical instrument, onsite or offsite.

AED’s Service and Repair Program restores the excellence of any instrument and scope, saving hospitals time and money from purchasing new surgical products.

With a 99 percent success rate, AED’s service program repairs instruments most companies say are non-repairable, no matter the manufacturer. The program includes a free diagnostic evaluation, thorough inspection of all instruments, cleaning, repair, sharpening, parts replacement, re-insulation, and a final quality control inspection. Services range from custom manufacturing instruments, customizing existing instruments, and also remanufacturing obsolete instruments.

AED also offers the Encore™ Preventative Maintenance Program, a program hospitals can enroll in where AED maintains your tray of endoscopic instruments on a routine schedule at a fixed nominal cost.

Members who wish to take advantage of AED’s Service and Repair Program can visit http://www.aed.md or call 818-227-2720.

“We are very excited to have received the Premier GPO contract for service and repair,” said John Dawoodjee, president of AED. “Our repair services will be available directly to all 3,600 hospitals in the Premier alliance. With the award of this GPO agreement, AED’s excellence in repair service and cost savings will help the Premier members achieve their goals per the Affordable Care Act with quality service at a great value.”

About AED

AED has been at the forefront of MIS surgery since 1985. As one of the largest USA-based OEM sources for endoscopy products and repairs, surgeons have probably used an AED instrument at one time or another. Our experience has enabled us to refine and develop the highest quality AED-brand Rigid Endoscopes and Instruments for Laparoscopy, Arthroscopy, Urology, Hysteroscopy, and ENT. AED provides hospitals and surgery centers with the same high quality instruments and scopes they are used to using but at significant cost savings.

Visit http://www.aed.md for more information about AED’s complete line of endoscopes and instruments for all medical specialties.