This year, viewers can donate and sign up to receive a special shout-out from their favorite celebrity.

This year, viewers can donate and sign up to receive a special shout-out from their favorite celebrity. Stand Up To Cancer

Stand Up To Cancer (SU2C), an initiative that works to fund “dream team” cancer researchers, is set to host a star-studded telethon Friday, Sept. 5. Thanks to the support of major cable networks, such as ABC and Showtime, the event will air on more than 12 networks.

The telethon kicks off at 8 p.m. and will feature performances from The Who, Jennifer Hudson, Lupe Fiasco & Common, Ariana Grande, and Dave Matthews. Additional celebrities set to appear are Gwyneth Paltrow, Reese Witherspoon, Will Ferrell, the leading men of ABC’S Modern Family, Jon Hamm, and Jennifer Aniston.

Instead of the traditional phone bank staffed by the celebrities, tomorrow’s broadcast swaps in a digital lounge where stars can personally get in touch with those who donated via phone, Twitter, Facebook, and other social media. Visit werecallingyou.org to see exactly how you can receive one of these shoutouts.

“Since we started [SU2C] in 2008, social media has exploded, creating a whole new way to connect,” Katie Couric, anchorwoman and SU2C co-founder, said in a press release. “So in an unprecedented way, we’ll have plenty of stars reaching out to donors via social media, thanking them through Facebook messages, digital shout outs, Instagrams and tweets. In other words, this year, we are so 2014!”

One hundred percent of donations received by SU2C will go directly to their collaborative cancer research programs. Since they were founded, the website reported “over 140 clinical trials have been launched by SU2C scientists, in which more than 4,000 cancer patients have been enrolled.”

All of this is an effort to change the current odds of the one in two men, and one in three women, who will be diagnosed with cancer in their lifetime. It’s why the telethon’s tagline is, “When we all come together, cancer doesn’t stand a chance.”