Paul DeMain for 29th Senate District

Paul DeMain

EDITOR: "Wisconsin works best when Wisconsin works together!" is the vision of Paul DeMain, the Democratic candidate for the 29th Senate District, which covers all or part of Sawyer, Rusk, Taylor and Marathon counties.

We have seen that those who play by the rules and work hard have lost their voice, trampled by the wealthy who want to control the state. Paul vows to work hard every day to be our voice in Madison.

Paul was raised in Wausau and lives in Sawyer County. With Scottish, German, Irish, Ojibwe and Oneida ancestors, he is a product of America's melting pot and the vision it holds.

Paul served as adviser on Indian Affairs policy during Gov. Tony Earl's administration, developing policy with legislators for Indian and non-Indian communities, and he served as a liaison to the 11 federally recognized tribes. His resume includes a wide variety of public service experience.

Paul's work in communications led to his decision to begin Indian Country Communications in 1987. ICC is one of the largest employers on the Lac Courte Oreilles Reservation in Sawyer County.

Paul understands the needs of Wisconsin's small business entrepreneurs who work to turn good ideas into local jobs.

Paul will work with businesses and farmers to support policies that bring people back to rural areas and rebuild thriving communities; 18 percent of family farms have disappeared in 10 years.

Paul's vision for the people of the 29th Senate District is focused on the "Es": economy, education (supporting strong public schools that are the heart and soul of the community), environment — and on health.

Paul DeMain's spirituality imbues him with a love for Mother Earth and her inhabitants. Paul's wisdom is needed in Madison as our Senator from the 29th District, knowing "Wisconsin works best when Wisconsin works together."

Joyce Luedke,

Rothschild

Read or Share this story: http://www.wausaudailyherald.com/story/opinion/2014/07/07/paul-demain-state-senate-wisconsin/12298999/