By Carl M. Cannon - May 18, 2014

Alex Baldwin has been in the news again, this time for berating NYPD officers instead of the paparazzi, Republicans, Rachel Maddow—or others on his lengthy hit list.

It can be hard to defend the cantankerous “30 Rock” star, especially when he’s doing things like berating his then-11-year-old daughter for missing a phone date with her dad, getting tossed off an American Airlines flight for tormenting flight attendants, or calling a British tabloid reporter “a toxic little queen.” As for punching photographers who stalk him and his family, well, that must be frustrating—so let’s withhold judgment for the moment.

But as for his run-in with the bicycle police, it’s easy to defend Baldwin, regarding both his alleged traffic transgression and the larger issues he raised about living in New York. To recap: The 56-year-old actor was stopped for riding his bike the wrong way on Fifth Avenue, a one-way street. He was given a second citation, disorderly conduct, for the strenuous way he objected to the first. This entailed handcuffs and a ride to the station house.

It seems that Baldwin’s objections to the bike citation stem from a legitimate public policy concern. Is the NYPD enforcing traffic laws against bicyclists because it cares about safety or, as Baldwin suggested, to feed the city’s rapacious appetite for taxes and new revenue? The New York Post, no friend of the man it calls The Bloviator, found merit in his argument. “We never thought we’d say so,” the tabloid wrote the following day, “but Alec Baldwin has a point.”

And as one might expect, Baldwin phrased that point more colorfully than that. “New York City,” he tweeted, “is a mismanaged carnival of stupidity that is desperate for revenue and anxious to criminalize behavior once thought benign.”

One could read the last part of that quote in two ways. First, that biking has previously been thought harmless. Second, that forcefully expressing one’s opinion—even to peace officers—is any New Yorker’s God-given right. Perhaps Baldwin took this concept too far, but “f-bombs” freely escape this man’s lips when he’s agitated. Moreover, he was reported to have used the line cops like least: “Don’t you know who I am?”

Recent DYKWIA offenders include Joe Biden’s niece, Oscar-winning actress Reese Witherspoon, and former NBA hotshot Allen Iverson. All of these cases have interesting variables, but the same constant. The variables are the precise circumstances of each arrest and the exact language employed. The constant is the notion that fame or notoriety should shield a celebrity—or, worse, the relative of a celebrity—from the consequences of their actions.

“I shouldn’t be handcuffed,” Caroline Biden said after being arrested for a row with a roommate over unpaid rent. “You don’t know who you’re doing this to.”

“You are going to be on national news!” Witherspoon hollered at a Georgia state trooper handcuffing her husband for driving under the influence. “Do you know my name?”

When his car was pulled over for changing lanes improperly and he was found to be driving with expired tags, Iverson not only invoked “Do you know who I am?” but taunted the officer. “Take the vehicle, I have 10 more,” he said. “I make more money than you will in 10 years.”

This isn’t what Baldwin was doing. He was riding his bike without any identifying information on him, and only got into the don’t-they-recognize-me thing while trying to establish his identity so he could accept a citation and be on his way. No such luck.

Perhaps this is the last straw. In a February piece for New York magazine, the Amityville, N.Y., native said NYC has changed since he moved there in 1979, and not for the better. “It was a place [where] they gave you your anonymity, and not just if you were famous,” Baldwin said. “Now we don’t leave each other alone. Now we live in a digital arena, like some Roman Coliseum, with our thumbs up or thumbs down.”

He added that he’d “probably” leave New York for California. “I just can’t live in New York anymore,” he said. “Everything I hated about L.A. I’m beginning to crave. L.A. is a place where you live behind a gate, you get in a car, your interaction with the public is minimal. I used to hate that. But New York has changed.”

This new Alec Baldwin, with his live-and-let live sensibilities, disdain for government shakedowns, and desire for privacy—this libertarian-leaning Alec Baldwin—is an intriguing character. Moreover, if he actually does relocate, he’d be going to a state where many actors have successfully sought political office. George Murphy, Ronald Reagan, Sony Bono, Ronald Reagan, Arnold Schwarzenegger, and Clint Eastwood—Republicans all—were performing artists before they were politicians. Although he’s a Democrat, Baldwin would fit right in.

Moreover, he’s needed in California. Here, state and local governments are even more overextended than in New York—and more creative at bleeding the citizenry dry. If a cop in the Golden State sees you make a “California stop,” i.e. rolling through a stop sign, the typical ticket is $238—eight times what is was in 1992 when Baldwin, as the malevolent “Blake,” was getting them to sign on the line which is dotted in “Glengarry Glen Ross.” And God forbid an otherwise law-abiding Californian runs a red light: The fine is $490, plus another $59 for traffic school.

Now there’s a regressive tax for you, one that hits the poor and working class particularly hard. Wouldn’t it be fun to see Baldwin fight one of those tickets in front of someone such as Oakland traffic commissioner Taylor Culver, who’s been known to bellow to defendants who ask for a reduction in their fine, “Nobody here is special or better than anybody. There’s nobody here special but me.”

So, yes, Californians could definitely use Alec Baldwin. But much as I’d love him to move to my native state, I feel obliged—in case he sees this column—to issue him, well, a warning ticket. In that New York magazine interview, Baldwin singled out TMZ founder Harvey Levin for special disdain. “Harvey Levin exists in his own universe,” he said. “He’s this kind of cretinous barnacle on the press.”

But Levin is a Los Angeles native who operates extensively in Southern California. He’s not a guy dissuaded by gated communities. (Just ask Donald Sterling, who delivered his whacky ruminations on race relations in his own home.) Also, there are more paparazzi in L.A. than New York, and punching them in the face isn’t legal in California, either.

So, Alec: Montana, maybe?