Latin America could be the unofficial sponsor of International Happiness Day, with all ten of the top-ranked countries for highest amount of positivity coming from Latin America.

Paraguay has the highest score on the Positive Experience Index from Gallup, followed by Colombia, Ecuador, Guatemala, Honduras, Panama, Venezuela, Costa Rica, El Salvador and Nicaragua.

About 143 countries were polled, with about 1,000 people from each country responding.

Most of the world is in a good mood, with 70% of respondents across the globe saying that they smile and laugh a lot, have positive experiences, get treated respectfully and feel well-rested, according to Gallup.

Happiness is a major topic today, as the world celebrates the third annual International Happiness Day.

All 193 members of the United Nations have made a pledge to make global happiness a larger priority, which is how International Happiness Day began. The nonprofit Action for Happiness coordinates the international event.

International Happiness Day was first celebrated on March 20, 2013 with the theme “happy heroes.” Last year’s theme was “reclaim happiness.”

Celebrating International Happiness Day is easy. Simply reach out, in-person or online.

There are events taking place across the world, like positive message flash-mobs, groups of people coming together with handmade signs expressing positivity and encouraging people to make a connection with one another.

To find a positive message flash mob, check out the International Happiness Day Facebook page.

People can also reach out to one another online using #InternationalDayOfHappiness to share and connect with people from around the world.

Other ways to get involved include volunteering, hosting a potluck or simply sitting down for a meal with friends and family.

Get Free Updates! Stay in the loop with a weekly newsletter, with all our news from the previous week. We will never give away, trade or sell your email address. You can unsubscribe at any time.

Please follow and like us:

Please Leave A Comment

comments