Not all N.N.T.s are as high as aspirin’s for heart attacks, but many are higher than you might think. A website developed by David Newman, a director of clinical research at Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai hospital, and Dr. Graham Walker, an assistant clinical professor at the University of California, San Francisco, has become a clearinghouse of N.N.T. data, amassed from clinical trials. Among them, for example, are those for the effects of the Mediterranean diet.

When 30 Heart Attack Survivors Switch to a Mediterranean Diet for Four Years: 1 Death is Prevented After a first heart attack, one recommended treatment is a diet full of olive oil, vegetables and lean protein. But even after four years, most people switching diets won't see this benefit. 1 death is not prevented 1 death is prevented

The Mediterranean diet, which is heavy in vegetables, fruits, nuts and olive oil; moderate in fish and poultry; and light in dairy, meat and sweets; has long been advocated as a means to avoid heart disease. In people who have never had a heart attack, but who are at risk, the N.N.T. is 61 to avoid a heart attack, stroke or death. And that is for people who adhere to the diet for about five years. For those at higher risk, who have already had a heart attack, to avoid one additional death, the N.N.T. is about 30. That’s the number of people who would have to adhere to the diet for four years so that one extra person survived. About 1.4 people out of 30 such people will die no matter what they eat; 27.6 will not die no matter what they eat. Only one will benefit from sticking to the diet.

Photo

But it’s not easy for everyone to stick to such a diet for that many years. Some — for example, those who enjoy steak and ice cream — will feel that it diminishes their quality of life. When you hear that the diet prevents heart attacks, then it might sound worth it. But does it still sound worth it when you consider that 29 out of 30 people who stick to the diet for several years see no benefit at all? Will you stick to it for years and be the lucky one for whom that matters?

When 8 People Suffering From an Asthma Attack Are Treated With Steroids: 1 Hospital Admission is Prevented 3 are admitted to the hospital 1 avoids hospital admission

As treatments go, an N.N.T. of 30 is pretty good. Very few are as low as 10, though some are. For instance, the use of steroids in people having asthma attacks to prevent admission to the hospital has an N.N.T. of eight. This is so obvious, and so powerful a treatment, that there are no commercials and no op-eds preaching steroid use for asthma. (Maybe there should be. It’s likely that this therapy is being underutilized, perhaps because cost-sharing discourages some people with asthma from seeking care when they might need it.) Steroids work very well for asthma attacks — better than many treatments for other conditions. But still, seven of eight people suffering an asthma attack see no benefit at all from steroids with respect to preventing hospitalization.

Even more concerning, N.N.T.s as calculated from clinical trial data are probably lower than those based on real-world medical care. In clinical trials, treatments are applied to a select population for whom they’re intended. In medical practice, it’s very common for treatments to be applied to a much broader population, including many people for whom they’re less likely to be effective, which increases the N.N.T. This is, perhaps, because doctors would rather offer an explicit treatment — perhaps to harness a placebo effect — even when it’s not likely to be of additional benefit.

In fact, as recently reported in The Times, a new study showed that many people who are prescribed aspirin for the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease don’t meet the criteria described above for its use. Because of this use in a population beyond that targeted in clinical trials, the N.N.T. in practice is most likely higher than the 2,000 suggested by those trials. (It’s worth noting that our best estimates of N.N.T.s can rise or fall as more data are collected and as treatments or how or to whom they’re delivered change.)

When 15 People Take Antibiotics for a Sinus Infection: 1 Will Improve 2 people's symptoms are not resolved 1 person's symptoms are resolved

Antibiotics are a classic example of overuse. For instance, the N.N.T. for antibiotics to treat radiologically diagnosed acute sinusitis is 15, meaning that 14 out of 15 who take them derive no benefit. But physicians often write prescriptions for antibiotics in situations when the diagnosis of sinusitis is far less assured. This leads to antibiotics being overprescribed and overused, raising their N.N.T. in practice.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The use of stents to open up clogged arteries in patients who are not actively suffering a heart attack is another treatment that is employed too often. (Stents are considered appropriate in patients who are having a heart attack.) Many more patients believe they extend life than their N.N.T. suggests. The N.N.T is effectively infinite, relative to treatment with medications, for people not suffering a heart attack.

Until health care technology improves, there’s not a lot we can do about N.N.T.s that are larger than we might hope. It’s just a fact of current medical technology that not everyone benefits from treatment, even when well targeted. President Obama’s push for “precision medicine” is an attempt to change this, by using genomics to focus treatments on people who would most benefit from them. That will take time.

In the meantime, we would all be better served by a more informed understanding of exactly how much, or how little, benefit is reasonably to be expected by taking a drug, changing our lifestyle or undergoing a procedure. Especially since the chance of benefit, as expressed by N.N.T., might not be worth the risk of harm, as expressed by N.N.H. We’ll discuss that more next week.

The Upshot In a weekly e-mail newsletter, get the best of The Upshot's analysis about politics, policy and everyday life.