Friday's CNN Newsroom showed a classic liberal media double standard as a GOP guest was hit from the left substantially more on the gun issue as compared to a later Democratic guest who was just barely hit from the right. In the aftermath of Connecticut Democratic Senator Chris Murphy's recent incendiary claim that congressional members -- referring mostly to Republicans -- who have opposed enacting more gun laws have "complicity" and are "sending a message of quiet endorsement of these murders," CNN host Poppy Harlow hit former Virginia Republican Governor Jim Gilmore almost entirely from the left.

But, then, when Senator Murphy himself was interviewed by phone a bit later, half her questions also inserted a liberal take on the issue, as the CNN substitute anchor did not press him on whether his over the top comments went too far, even when she quoted his words back to him as part of one of her questions. The other two questions to Murphy only mildly pushed back to challenge his call for more gun laws.

In the segment with Gilmore -- out of six questions and follow-up statements made by Harlow - five came from the liberal point of view of those who advocate more gun laws, or were in defense of those who are taking such positions. In three cases, the CNN host quoted statements from gun control advocates -- including Senator Murphy, liberal New York Times columnist Nicolas Kristof, and Andy Parker, father of shooting victim Alison Parker -- and asked for Gilmore's response. The one non-liberal question to the Republican guest came from the neutral point of view of asking Gilmore what he believes is the answer to gun violence.

Harlow also jumped in to challenge the former Virginia governor's suggestion that gun control advocates like Andy Parker are pushing for measures that would weaken the Second Amendment:

FORMER GOVERNOR JIM GILMORE (R-VA): This fellow, this criminal went through a background check. So nibbling away at the Second Amendment rights of all Americans is not the solution to this problem at all. We have to stand for the rights of the Constitution. You can't- POPPY HARLOW: Well, he didn't say, he didn't say take away their Second Amendment right. That's not what he said. GILMORE: No, he didn't. He talked about nibbling away, inch by inch, and I'm sorry for his loss. But we can't allow the criminal activity of a person like Flanagan to be leveraged into the diminution of our rights under the Constitution and under the Second Amendment. ...

By contrast, out of the four questions posed to Murphy, only two were mildly challenging toward his liberal perspective, with the other two hinting toward the liberal point of view favoring more gun laws.

Harlow actually read Murphy's incendiary quote back to him, but, rather than questioning whether the remark had gone too far over the line, she simply asked for clarification about whom he was referring to, therefore giving him an unchallenged forum to repeat the assertion. Harlow:

You said, Senator, in an interview with the Huffington Post this morning: "Congress's silence in the face of this rash of mass shooting has become complicity. We are essentially sending a message of quiet endorsements to these murders." Who are you talking about in Congress?

Senator Murphy responded:

I'm talking about the entirety of Congress, especially those that have stood in the way of common sense gun measures like expanded background checks or reforms of our mental health system. The fact is, is that when, you know, our leadership in Congress stands up and says we can't do anything, they are absolutely wrong.

The Connecticut Democrat added:

And I believe that we have become complicit in these murders because people listen to the highest levels of government, and when we say nothing about it, we don't even attempt to change the laws to try to stop this mass slaughter, then people get some signal that it's okay to settle their grievances or deal with their illness through gun violence. I just don't accept that we can do nothing. And I'm speaking directly to the Republican leadership of the House and the Senate. They should be bringing anti-gun violence bills to the floor that can get consensus votes this fall or the Congress is complicit in these murders.

At one point, Senator Murphy oddly complained that Governor Gilmore's emphasis on improving mental health treatment was "feeding the stigma" against those with mental disorders, even though Senator Murphy himself has a recent history of emphasizing mental health issues as part of the debate over preventing gun violence, and had even brought up a desire for "reforms of our mental health system" earlier in the very same segment.

The two questions in which Harlow pushed back a little at Murphy were when she quoted Gilmore's emphasis of mental health improvements, and the fact that the Roanoke, Virginia, shooter does not seem to have a previous history that could reasonably have prevented him from purchasing a gun.

Below are transcripts of relevant portions of the Friday, August 28, CNN Newsroom from the 10:00 a.m. hour: