New Health Center Partnerships Help Expand Service Offerings to Families in Western Wayne County

Wayne County Executive Warren C. Evans joined today by partners from Beaumont Health, University of Detroit Mercy School of Dentistry and the Department of Health, Veterans and Community Wellness (HVCW) officially opened the new Wayne Health Center during a ribbon cutting ceremony.

Wayne County used a $700,000 grant from the United States Department of Health & Human Services to transform the 25,000 Sq foot space into a full service federally qualified health center with eight remodeled exam rooms. The expansion from two to four evaluation rooms for recipients of Women, Infants and Children (WIC) services will allow for increased access to care. The facility’s dental suite will receive an increase in dentistry stations from three to five later this spring.

The Wayne Health Center located at 33030 Van Born Rd. serves residents in the cities of Wayne, Westland, Romulus and Inkster where there is only one primary care doctor for every 4,100 residents. The new health center will deliver an expanded level of services that include: Immunizations, Behavioral Health, Nutrition Counseling, Pediatrics, OBGYN and WIC.

During his State of the County Address County Executive Evans said providing residents with access to quality health care is “a top priority for my administration.” At Tuesday’s ribbon cutting the County Executive reinforced that message, said the health center will lower barriers to health care in Western Wayne County and discussed the impact the new partnerships with Beaumont Health and the University of Detroit Mercy School of Dentistry will have on the community.

“Our residents will greatly benefit from these new partnerships,” said County Executive Evans. “Now it’s more convenient for residents to receive the health services they need and deserve. For example, when you visit this center, physicians and health care professionals from the Family Medicine program of Beaumont Hospital-Wayne are working side by side with Wayne County’s public health nurses.”

“Beaumont Health is committed to delivering high quality, affordable care to the families and communities we serve,” said Ashok Jain, M.D., senior vice president and chief medical officer, Beaumont Hospital, Wayne. “Partnering with the County on this new health center will help ensure our neighbors in the Wayne community have yet another resource to receive access to health care.”

County Executive Evans also said a full range of dental services are soon to be offered because of the partnership with the University of Detroit Mercy School of Dentistry. The dental school will provide dentists and dental students that can provide services at a low cost, and the school will benefit from the volume and opportunity to expand their teaching program.

“The University of Detroit Mercy School of Dentistry is excited to partner with Wayne County and Beaumont Health to provide dental services and be a part of a comprehensive healthcare solution for citizens of Western Wayne County,” said Dr. Mert Aksu, Dean of the U of D Mercy School of Dentistry.

Dr. Mouhanad Hammami, Director of the Wayne County Department of Health Veterans and Community Wellness said, “The Wayne Health Center is providing affordable access to healthcare for some of our most vulnerable citizens. In addition to having access to health care, we also teach the preventable methods of health care and provide patients with information on our other department services.”

The Wayne Health Center accepts most insurance. Those who are uninsured are offered service based on their income. If insurance is needed, the Department of Health, Veterans and Community Wellness has outreach specialists who can help residents with their Affordable Care Act application, Medicaid and your Health and Human Service paperwork.

Hours of operation are Monday – Tuesday-Thursday and Friday from 8am to 4:30 p.m. Wednesday hours are from 11a.m. to 7:30 p.m. For further information or to make appointments call The Wayne Health Center at (734) 727-7101.

Eastern Wayne County residents can continue to receive affordable health care at our Hamtramck Health Center located at 9021 Joseph Campau in Hamtramck. Hours of operation are Monday-Tuesday-Thursday-Friday and Saturday from 8 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Wednesday hours are from 11 a.m. to 7:30 p.m. For more information or an appointment please call (313) 871-1926.

For additional information on any of the Wayne County Health, Veterans and Community Wellness Department programs, visit www.waynecounty.com.