The scene where a man was allegedly stabbed to death. Photo: Tom Huntley.

A YOUNG father of two was allegedly stabbed to death by his mother’s long-term partner after a domestic dispute at the family home in Greenacres on Sunday.

Emergency services were called to the home after reports of a “disturbance” between two men about 1.30am.

Police discovered a man with a stab wound to the left side of his chest in the driveway of his Karoomba Ave home.

Paramedics treated the man but he died at the scene.

He has since been identified as 26-year-old Andrew Tilbrook.

Holden Hill police charged a 52-year-old man who lives at the house with murder.

He will appear in Adelaide Magistrates Court today.

The victim’s sister, Chantel Tilbrook, told The Advertiser she was in shock over the incident.

She said the family had spent the day at the beach near Port Adelaide before an argument broke out at their home between Mr Tilbrook and his mother’s partner of 15 years.

She said the dispute started over a joke that was taken “way too seriously”.

Andrew Tilbrook was allegedly stabbed to death by his mother’s partner.

Soon after the fight, she said she saw her brother badly injured in the driveway.

“I went into shock; there was blood everywhere,” she said.

“A few seconds later I was on the phone to the ambulance and was asked to feel a pulse.”

She said she thought she could feel a heart beat but when paramedics arrived they pronounced him dead.

“I don’t know how we’re going to explain this to his two little boys,” she said.

Mr Tilbrook has sons aged 1 and 3.

Detective Senior Sergeant Stuart MacIntyre, of Holden Hill CIB, said it was believed an argument started inside the house before spilling into the street.

“No other persons are suspected of being involved in the commission of this offence,” he said.

RSPCA inspectors arrived at the crime scene later in the morning and took some animals into care.

They included a puppy which was injured but not as a result of the incident.

Neighbour Cheryl Wegener said she had spoken with the victim’s mother who was “distressed” and had spent the morning speaking with officers at Holden Hill Police Station.

“I’m horrified,” she said.

“I’m here to support (the victim’s sister) and her mother.”

Another neighbour, Matt Webber, said he was shocked a man had been stabbed to death on his street.

“It’s pretty scary — you don’t expect to wake up to it,” he said.