International Frozen Yogurt Association (IFYA) Announces Comprehensive Business Compliance Solutions for Frozen Yogurt Shops





International Frozen Yogurt Association (IFYA) has teamed with Payality, a highly trusted and affordable business compliance solution provider, to bring special savings to frozen yogurt shops. The new comprehensive compliance solutions include payroll administration, risk management, HR compliance, financial reporting and more.

(RestaurantNews.com) The International Frozen Yogurt Association (IFYA) has partnered with Payality, a highly trusted and affordable business compliance solution provider, to help frozen yogurt shops comply with the myriad of regulatory burdens, including Human Resources, payroll, and financial accounting requirements. IFYA premium members who sign up with Payality will receive special discounted compliance solutions tailored to the individual needs of each Yogurt Shop owner.

IFYA President, Susan Linton, said, “These new compliance solutions packages designed by Payality for our association offer a wide range of compliance services to frozen yogurt stores of all sizes. With Payality, frozen yogurt shop owners can focus more time on operations rather than on keeping up with labor laws and business compliance issues. Payality’s services are particularly helpful for smaller and independent shops that don’t have their own HR/compliance department. We chose to partner with Payality based on its reputation, experience and the comprehensive compliance solutions. Payality is already known for its affordability and thanks to this partnership, IFYA premium members will receive additional savings on the most comprehensive, highest quality compliance solutions available. The savings are substantial.”



Payality President, Chet Reilly, said, “Government regulations and business compliance related issues distract business owners from running their business profitably. Payality is pleased to work with members of the IFYA to provide affordable solutions that are meant to keep the government away, give employees reasons to stay, and owners more time and money to play.”

Payality provides complete compliance solutions, including Payroll, Human Resources, Affordable Care Act, Worker’s Compensation Payment Administration, Retirement, Bookkeeping, and more. Payality’s comprehensive compliance solutions reduce their client’s costs, increase efficiency and streamline operations across the client’s business. Payality also integrates with leading workers comp carriers, including IFYA endorsed Select Marketing Insurance of California, to offer pay-as-you-go premium payments that feature no upfront deposit, premiums paid each pay period based on actual payroll, and the elimination of audit hassles.



IFYA premium members can choose from 3 different compliance packages, all discounted more than 20% for IFYA members. The small, medium and large compliance packages come with different features and can be further customized with additional services (aka toppings).

Small:

Payroll administration

Risk management

HR compliance

Medium:

Payroll administration

Risk management

HR compliance

Basic financial reporting

Large:

Payroll administration

Risk management

HR compliance

Deluxe financial reporting

Add On Toppings:

HealthCare Exchange administration

Time and attendance

Overnight delivery

W-2’s

Note, this offer is only available in the United States.



Visit http://www.payality.com/ifya for additional offer details.



About the International Frozen Yogurt Association

The International Frozen Yogurt Association (IFYA) serves as an unbiased source of support and information for current and prospective frozen yogurt store operators. The Association works to set and promote standards to elevate the quality of frozen yogurt stores and recognizes those that meet the Swirl of Honor™ standards of the industry. IFYA represents frozen yogurt shops, suppliers and consumers across the world. Their audience is diverse in background yet united by a common love of frozen yogurt. Visit the IFYA website, http://www.internationalfrozenyogurt.com for additional information.

About Payality

Payality is different. Payality provides total compliance solutions that help business owners minimize risk and have more time to focus on growing and managing their business, including Payroll, Human Resources, Affordable Care Act, Worker’s Compensation Payment Administration, Retirement, Bookkeeping, and more. Payality’s comprehensive compliance solutions reduce your costs, increase efficiency and streamline operations across your business. See how Payality performs and you’ll never look back. Visit http://www.payality.com/ifya for additional information.