U.S. Congressman Doug Lamborn visits with local residents at the Fremont County Republican Headquarters in February. (Carie Canterbury / Daily Record)

With less than six weeks to go before the June 28 primary elections, Congressman Doug Lamborn says he's seeking re-election because the job's not yet finished.

The incumbent will face Calandra Vargas in the Republican primary, while Donald Martinez and Misty Plowright will compete for the Democratic nomination. The general election will take place Nov. 8.

"Under Barack Obama, we've had too many good initiatives blocked that I and my fellow conservatives have wanted to pass, and we've had too many bad policies put into place, and I am angry and frustrated," Lamborn told the Daily Record during a recent phone interview. "With a new administration in January, especially if it's a Republican, we have the potential to really do some good for this country and get away from these bad policies that Barack Obama has been behind."

The Affordable Care Act, not securing the country's border and the Iran nuclear deal top the list of changes Lamborn would like to see take place with a new president in the White House, and with him continuing to represent Colorado's Fifth Congressional District.

In recent months, Lamborn has worked to try to stop the Guantanamo detainees from being sent to the U.S., specifically Fremont County.

"I called on Governor Hickenlooper to do the same thing that Nikki Haley did, the governor of South Carolina," he said. "In other words, come to Congress and testify, and tell the American people about why it's a bad idea to bring those people to U.S. soil — she did it and it would bring a real message if he were to do it."

Because of his work with the House Armed Services Committee, Lamborn said he has a vital platform from which to speak out on GITMO and other national security issues.

"This election is critical for our part of the state; if we were to send a freshman to Congress, that person would not be on Armed Services," he said. "We would lose a vital voice for national security and for all the impact that has on the Fifth District of Colorado."

In recent years, Lamborn is pleased with his accomplishments including holding the line on trying to stop Obamacare, working to obtain funding for some critical military missions and protected missions that could have gone outside the Pikes Peak Region, and working to bring a national veterans cemetery to the area.

"My first day in office, I told them to draft a bill to create a national veterans cemetery in Southern Colorado," Lamborn said. "They worked on it overnight, and I filed it my second day in office. That is now becoming a reality."

The Pikes Peak National Cemetery will be in Southern El Paso County, accessible to Fremont County residents, Lamborn said.

"I am really proud of that," he said.

Lamborn also has worked on the Joint Interagency Combined Space Operations Center, or JICSpOC, housed at Schriever Air Force Base in Colorado Springs. The project, still fairly new, allows the Pentagon and the intelligence community to work together to protect satellites.

"I've kept my promises, but I am frustrated and angry at Barack Obama's liberal policies and I've fought them every step of the way," he said. "I look forward to a new administration, hopefully a Republican administration where we can actually make forward progress."

Carie Canterbury: 719-276-7643, canterburyc@canoncitydailyrecord.com