Democratic presidential candidate Sen. Bernie Sanders of Vermont speaks during a news conference at The Hope Project to discuss the “Employ Young Americans Now Act” in Washington June 4, 2015. Reuters

KEENE, N.H. – Two thoughts spring to mind after a day spent watching Sen. Bernie Sanders on the campaign trail. (Read that story here.)

First: It isn’t so clear he really believes he can be president.

And second: He’ll be a formidable presence on the Democratic debate stage nonetheless.

A standing-room-only crowd of 800 sat in metal folding chairs and lined the walls of a local rec center Saturday to hear Mr. Sanders’s dire take on American economic and political life. The country is veering from democracy toward oligarchy, he said. People are working harder than ever for a diminishing share of the country’s wealth. Plutocrats abetted by conservative Supreme Court justices are flooding campaigns with money that can’t be traced to the source.

Missing from the speech were some of the softening notes that most conventional candidates see as obligatory. There weren’t all that many riffs about American exceptionalism. If anything, Mr. Sanders seemed more enamored with the Scandanavian model of social Democratic governance, with its generous health-care and educational subsidies.

Mr. Sanders’s supporters are loving it.

Annie Millar Desmond, a New Hampshire resident who came to hear Mr. Sanders, went with her husband afterward to a local coffee shop and raved about what she had heard.

“I’ve admired him since I was in high school,” Ms. Desmond, 37 years old, said. “He always seemed like the impossible: a politician who doesn’t seem like a politician.”

Deep into Mr. Sanders’s hour-long speech was a line that offered a glimpse into what his presidential campaign might really be about.

“What I’m trying to do in this campaign is raise issues that very few people talk about and are not going to see on TV or in the newspapers,” he said.

So, is he trying to become president, or raise important issues?

Odds don’t favor Mr. Sanders. Hillary Clinton is running nearly 50 points ahead of him in the polls. In 2008, then-Sen. Barack Obama took on Mrs. Clinton and had no qualms about attacking her credentials and record. Mr. Sanders is far more circumspect. He didn’t mention Mrs. Clinton once in his speech or in the question-and-answer session that followed. Only when a reporter asked about him later about Mrs. Clinton’s policies on trade did he offer a gentle rebuke, saying she should make her feelings known.

One reason? Mr. Sanders might have no wish to see her weakened in the event she squares off against the Republicans in the general election.

But Mr. Sanders could do some damage to her campaign, nonetheless.

Mr. Sanders is a compelling speaker. He lays out clear positions, delivering them with conviction and energy. Mrs. Clinton is a cautious campaigner who has yet to unspool many of her policy positions. Should she waffle when it comes to controversial issues like free trade, she could look calculating and tepid in comparison to Mr. Sanders. Is that enough to deprive her of the Democratic nomination? Doubtful. But a strong debate performance by Mr. Sanders would only feed the Bernie Boomlet that has been playing out in Iowa and New Hampshire in recent weeks.

David Axelrod, a lead strategist in Mr. Obama’s winning presidential campaigns, said he doesn’t believe Mr. Sanders will win the party nomination. But, he added: “He plainly is not in the practice of curbing his enthusiasms.”

Voters, Mr. Axelrod said, “appreciate someone who has a point of view and goes out and fights for it.”

RELATED:

Meet the Candidate: Bernie Sanders

Clinton to Address Social, Economic Policy in Speeches