BIRMINGHAM, Alabama -- Cut costs and improve quality.

Those are the challenges of Obamacare to the nation's medical providers.

The state's largest hospital at the University of Alabama at Birmingham, like many hospitals, has been working on these challenges since before the Affordable Care Act was signed into law March 23, 2010.

UAB Medicine long ago formed a task force and in the past six months has hired six primary care doctors in anticipation of increased demand of medical services due to reforms designed to get more people health insurance.

"What we realized early on with health care reform was there was a lot of theory and philosophy and concept that made a lot of sense -- but there wasn't a whole lot of meat," said UAB strategic planner David Randall. "So quite frankly, we are still learning as we go along."





Randall jokes that they had someone in the office read all 906 pages (bill only) of the sweeping, phased-in law -- just so they could say someone in the office did.

But that reading turned into a spreadsheet and timeline crucial to the hospital's planning for Obamacare's myriad optional and mandatory provisions.

Due to health reform, the nation's third largest public hospital has:

Hired the six primary care physicians. "It's very difficult to recruit primary care because they are in such demand," he said. "In fact one of the issues health care reform didn't address was supply. Most of what you see in there drums up demand."

Made a plan to look at expanding services throughout the community through other primary care sites and the creation of urgent care networks.

Launched a communication plan to inform and direct patients to appropriate information about how they may benefit from health care reform. "We are not in the business to help sign up individuals, it's not our role," Randall said. "But we want to make sure patients know where to go for information and how to access that information."

Entered a pilot program made available through the reform to eliminate the fee-for-service payment model for treatment of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD).

To make and develop these decisions, Randall said the hospital broke down the Affordable Care Act's effects into three key components:

Coverage Reform.

On Oct. 1, people can begin enrolling in what the government is calling the Health Insurance Marketplace, also known as the health care exchanges. It is too early to know how many people without insurance will become insured through these exchanges where subsidies will be offered on a sliding scale to people with incomes from 100 percent to 400 percent of the federal poverty level. Some experts predict a slow response at first, increasing as more people begin to understand what it means. Coverage would begin Jan. 1. But if you don't sign up right away, you can still enroll until March 31.

For UAB, the coverage reform component propelled the hospital to hire the primary care doctors and create the communication system to inform patients.

"We anticipate with the advent of additional coverage, increased demand," Randall said. "So we are focusing primarily on primary care and ambulatory services -- to open up those doors wider -- as well as looking at prevention and wellness programs. We want to provide an outlet for that demand."

Delivery System Reform.

Reform is pushing providers to get patients into systems that deliver care more efficiently. As an option, reform allows for the creation of something called Accountable Care Organizations which allows groups of physicians or hospitals to partner to manage a population of patients, being accountable for the quality as well as the costs of those patients. UAB has decided not to form a an ACO, which must be done under specific government guidelines. No ACO's have been formed in Alabama.

But Randall said UAB is adopting key concepts of ACO's through what it is calling Integrated Practice Units.

"IPUs were part of our original plan," Randall said. "This is where we've pulled together different physicians from different disciplines and other providers together to help manage a disease. The Breast Health Center is a good example."

The idea is to better coordinate care by providing a one-stop-shopping concept, creating smoother "hand-offs" between the various caregivers -- specialists, radiologists, pharmacists, and lab techs.

Payment Reform.

The key examples of payment reform are "Value Based Purchasing" and "Bundled Payments."

Value Based Purchasing ties the government's health care payments to hospitals -- through programs such as Medicare -- to quality and patient satisfaction measures. In other words, hospitals are rewarded for meeting high quality standards. Or, the flip view: They are penalized for failing to meet them.

For example, instead of a hospital getting the usual $100 for a medical service, the government gives $98 and requires the hospital to "earn those $2 back on quality and patient satisfaction measures -- and maybe even give you $3 back," Randall said.

The other type of payment reform, Bundled Payments eliminates the fee-for-service concept of payment.

"This is basically saying we are going to bundle and pay one amount for the physician, the hospital and all other services for patient care over a certain period of time," Randall said. "Because right now what happens if you come to the hospital there's a payment to the hospital, there's a payment to the physicians, there might be a payment to the anesthesiologist, there's a payment to the radiologist, there's might be payment for physical therapy -- so there's multiple payments associated with my care treatment. They're saying we're going to take all of our payments together, and we're going to pay you this one amount and you manage with that one amount."

The idea is to encourage coordination, eliminate inefficiencies and hopefully improve care.

Toward this end, UAB Hospital is participating with the federal government on a bundled payment pilot program for COPD, Randall said.

For example, CMS might figure that the average cost of a particular disease treatment is $5,000 and it will offer the hospital $4,500. From a business standpoint, "why would we do that?" Randall said.

"Because it is critically important to know how best to manage that coordination of care," he said. "We've got to make sure that we have improved communication looking across -- not just within the four walls of the hospital -- but with our various public partners, when you think about home health, when you think about rehab. That's all part of the continuum."