Still an undecided voter?

Here’s a rundown of where the federal parties stand on issues that may — or may not — be important to you:

Your big concern is marijuana — either legalizing it or enforcing a prohibition of the drug.

— Conservative: Against legalizing or decriminalizing marijuana possession. Would leave the status quo in place when it comes to medical marijuana. The Conservatives would also expand the National Anti-Drug Strategy.

— Liberal: Will legalize, regulate, and restrict access to marijuana.

— NDP: NDP leader Tom Mulcair has promised his party would move towards legalization.

You want to buy your first house and it’s too expensive.

— Conservative: Will increase the amount of money first-time home buyers can take out of savings tax-free from $25,000 to $35,000. Will establish a permanent Home Renovation Tax Credit for renovation expenses between $1,000 and $5,000.

— Liberal: Will “modernize” the Home Buyers’ Plan so Canadians impacted by “sudden and significant life changes” can buy a house without tax penalty. Will review “escalating home prices in high-priced markets, like Toronto and Vancouver, and consider all policy tools that could keep home ownership within reach for more Canadians.”

— NDP: Will introduce a green home energy program aimed at retrofitting at least 50,000 homes and apartment buildings and provide incentives to build 10,000 new affordable and market rental housing units.

You’re worried about ISIS and other terrorist threats.

— Conservative: Will continue Canada’s role in the combat mission fighting ISIS in Iraq and Syria and will stand behind Bill C-51 — the anti-terrorism law approved by the last parliament.

— Liberal: Will end Canada’s combat mission in Iraq and Syria and refocus the military contribution on training local forces. The Liberals have also pledged to provide more humanitarian support. “Problematic elements” of Bill C-51 would be repealed and new legislation introduced that “better balances our collective security with our rights and freedoms.”

— NDP: Will end Canada’s role in the combat mission against ISIS in Iraq and Syria. Will work with regional and international allies to cut off flow of cash and weapons to extremist groups including ISIS and prioritize de-radicalization efforts to stop ISIS’ recruitment of young people in Canada. The NDP would also repeal Bill C-51.

You’re thinking about retirement.

— Conservative: Will give seniors more flexibility to manage their retirement income by lowering the minimum withdrawal requirements from Registered Retirement Income Funds and raise the lifetime capital gains exemption.

— Liberal: Will restore the eligibility age for Old Age Security and the guaranteed income supplement to 65 (rather than 67) and increase the income supplement by 10% for low-income seniors. The Liberals would also maintain pension income splitting for seniors.

— NDP: Will expand the Canada Pension Plan and Quebec Pension Plan, increase the guaranteed income supplement and also return the retirement age to 65.

You’re getting older and in need of care.

— Conservative: Will push ahead with the previously announced plan to extend employment insurance compassionate care benefits period from six weeks to six months.

— Liberal: Will make home care more available by spending $3 billion over the next four years along with focusing on making prescription drugs more affordable and mental health care more accessible. The Liberals will also negotiate a new Health Accord with the provinces and territories including a long-term agreement on funding.

— NDP: Will immediately cancel health cuts to the provinces and develop a new health accord aimed at reducing waiting lists for family doctors, creating 5,000 new long-term care beds and slash prescription drug costs by 30%.

You don’t want to end up an adult with crippling student debt living in parents’ basement.

— Conservative: Will help families save more for kids’ education and allow students to work without losing student loans. Have already provided tax relief for scholarships, bursaries and textbooks; matched RESP contributions.

— Liberal: Will increase maximum student grant to low-income families; increase income threshold to qualify for more grants, freeze student loan repayment and pay interest until graduate earning at least $25,000 a year.

—NDP: Will invest $250 million more in student grants and phase out interest on federal student loans.

You care about government debt.

— Conservative: Will follow Federal Budget Balanced Act and not run a deficit for next four years by controlling spending. Act outlaws deficits except in recession, other unusual circumstances.

— Liberal: Will run deficit in each of next three years of less than $10 billion annually to pay for infrastructure and balance books by 2019-20.

— NDP: Will balance the books, including in the first year of an NDP government.

You’re worried about the economy.

— Conservative: Called their election platform “Protect Our Economy,” promising balanced budget, “tax lock” legislation, expanding trade and more jobs.

— Liberal: Vows to create economy from the heart out, quadrupling federal investment in public transit, investing in green and social infrastructure like child care and housing to create jobs.

— NDP: Promising to pass legislation to cut small business taxes to 9%, and fund priority transit and infrastructure projects to “get people and the economy moving.”

You have strong feelings about the niqab.

— Conservative: Would consider banning niqab for federal public services, has attempted to ban niqabs at Canadian citizenship ceremonies although overturned by courts.

— Liberal: Against Tory ban on niqabs at citizenship ceremonies.

— NDP: Opposes Tory ban on niqabs at citizenship ceremonies.

Refugees and immigration are important issues for you.

— Conservative: Will expedite resettling of Syrian refugees in Canada, 10,000 by next September; increase number of Canadian immigration personnel to speed up claims, double loans to immigrants to help get foreign credentials recognized, focus on attracting experienced business immigrants.

— Liberal: Will expand intake of refugees from Syria and Iraq to 25,000, invest extra $200 million to speed up refugee processing, double family reunification immigrants, grant immediate permanent residency to new spouses entering Canada rather than impose two-year wait.

— NDP: Will resettle 10,000 government-sponsored Syrian refugees by year’s end, increase the number of government-sponsored Syrian refugees by 9,000 a year for the next four years, accelerate immigration process time, offer temporary foreign works path to citizenship, work with provinces to improve recognition of foreign credentials.