If his four-year, $50 million contract extension didn’t make it clear, the NBA’s annual GM survey should: Executives across the clear have high hopes for Nuggets forward Kenneth Faried this season.

Faried, who is coming off somewhat of a breakout summer with Team USA during the FIBA World Cup, was voted as the league’s best role player (tied with San Antonio’s Boris Diaw), and earned the fourth-most votes for the best offensive rebounder (7.1 percent), as well as the toughest player in the league (7.4 percent, tied with Sacramento’s Reggie Evans).

Faried also garnered the fifth-most votes (7.4 percent) among players expected to have a breakout season in 2014-15.

Faried, now in his fourth season with the Nuggets, averaged a career high 13.6 points on 54.5 percent shooting from the field, along with 8.6 rebounds per game last year, saving his best play for the second half of the season. He averaged 18.8 points and 10.1 boards after the All-Star break, up from 10.4 and 7.6 before.

Over the summer, after Team USA lost a number of star players including Paul George and Kevin Durant, Faried helped to fill the void down low and lead the Americans to a gold medal, averaging a team-high 7.7 rebounds with 12.1 points per game along the way.

The Nuggets rewarded him for his improved play over the past year with a contract extension that could be worth nearly $52 million with incentives.

Arron Afflalo, who was re-acquired in a draft-day trade for Evan Fournier, received votes as one of the most underrated players, while the trade was voted as the third-most surprising move of the offseason (7.1 percent), behind LeBron James’ return to Cleveland and Chandler Parsons’ signing with the Mavericks.

The Nuggets earned the second-most votes (28.6 percent) as the team with the best home-court advantage, behind on the Thunder (42.9 percent); Ty Lawson received votes as one of the fastest players with the ball; Gary Harris earned 7.1 percent of votes for the biggest draft steal, tied with Colorado product Spencer Dinwiddie, who landed in Detroit; and Danilo Gallinari and Timofey Mozgov received votes among international players most likely to have a breakout season (Fournier earned 7.4 percent of votes, the third-most).

And lastly, Melvin Hunt received votes as one of the league’s best assistant coaches.

Not surprisingly, James and the Spurs were voted tops in numerous categories. NBA GMs expect the two to meet in the Finals, while James was voted most likely to win MVP and the player most GMs (50 percent of them) would want to build a franchise around.

Complete NBA.com 2014-15 GM survey