ANALYSIS/OPINION:

It looks as though the Democrats are panicking over the midterms enough that they’ve called out the warhorse, Gloria Steinem. Yes, the Democrats have worked very hard to keep women back in the ‘60s, and now they are, literally, trying to convince American women that nothing has changed, and victims all will be. If the “evil” GOP wins, of course.

The problem for the Democrats is that women have realized the supposed feminist movement hasn’t been about improving the quality of women’s lives at all, but about promoting the liberal agenda, which as we see, continues to destroy everyone’s quality of life.

Noting the use of Ms. Steinem, in this newspaper Cheryl Chumley writes, ” ‘The outcome of this election will be determined by one factor,’ [Ms. Steinem] writes, in an email filtered through the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee. ‘Women.’ The faults she slams as pure Republican: The GOP hasn’t passed ‘Equal Pay’ laws and they constantly deny ‘women their basic rights to make decisions about their own bodies,’ she writes, in her email.”

The irony, of course, is that same liberal agenda is on its way to destroying the very basic ability we have to control our own bodies. Obamacare not only canceled our insurance, it destroyed our ability to see our own doctors or use our preferred hospitals. Medical relationships between women and their health care providers for generations was destroyed because those same Democrats that harp about evil Republicans wanting to control your body, are actually the ones implementing an agenda that, well, controls your body.

It won’t work. All they need do is look at the Colorado Senate race. Incumbent Sen. Mark Udall is trailing badly his Republican challenger, Rep. Cory Gardner, after Mr. Udall’s one-note campaign about women’s rights. It has been viewed as pandering and so badly received in our complicated world that a Washington Post headline declared, “Mark Udall has been dubbed ‘Mark Uterus’ on the campaign trail. That’s a problem.”

The Democrats not only pander on the issue (while destroying our lives), they’re also fielding Democratic Party women as candidates who have nothing to do with feminism and everything to do with pandering, incompetence and embarrassment.

Wendy Davis, the Democratic nominee for governor of Texas, is the perfect example of the fraud liberals and the so-called feminist movement are perpetrating on women nationwide.

In her race against Texas Attorney General Greg Abbott, Ms. Davis illustrates the contempt liberals have for their own voters and for Americans in general. The absurdity of Ms. Davis and the Democrats as heralds for women and their concerns became even more apparent last week. On Oct. 20, Ms. Davis tweeted “Greg Abbott won’t say whether he’d defend an interracial marriage ban … .”

To use this as a base of attack is silly enough, but the more important revelation of the supposedly feminist Davis campaign is that she has never bothered to find out about Cecilia Abbott, the woman married to Ms. Davis’ opponent. If they had, they would have learned about the very impressive Mrs. Abbott, who also happens to be the granddaughter of Mexican immigrants. Mr. Abbott’s refusal to address a hypothetical query makes sense when you reject the nonsensical premise of your desperate opponent.

Democrats simply don’t think women have minds of their own. We not only see, but live, the results of their craven, inept and corrupt policies. Obamacare is one thing, the ongoing economic stagnation that continues to drive wages down as we become an Obama part-time-job nation also makes life more difficult, whether you are a married or single woman.

We have a world on fire because of Mr. Obama’s bizarre, passive allowance of tyrants to grow strong and wreak havoc. The Democrats think women care more about getting an abortion than the wars that will be fought by the loved ones and children of women, and by women themselves.

Single women have also had enough. All women must ask the question whether they’re better off now than six years ago, and the answer for them, like everyone else, is a resounding no.

In fact, the latest Associated Press poll of likely female voters confirms that women are not lemmings for any political party:

“Women have moved in the GOP’s direction since September. In last month’s AP-GfK poll, 47 percent of female likely voters said they favored a Democratic-controlled Congress, while 40 percent wanted the Republicans to capture control. In the new poll, the two parties are about even among women, 44 percent prefer the Republicans, 42 percent the Democrats … .”

That is a nine-point swing in one month, and gives the GOP the edge. As voters begin to look closely at their options for the midterm elections, they reflect on how things are going. For most, including the women the Democrats have taken for granted, misled, used and lied-to, reality is trumping pandering, sloganeering and miserably inept female candidates, who are embarrassments for all of us who know what’s truly possible.

In Ms. Steinem’s desperate email to Democrats, she implores, “This election is our chance to show them that their relentless sexism will not stand — in fact, it will cost them their seats in Congress … .”

Ms. Steinem is right, which is why the Democrats are losing not just the Senate, but the support of women.

Tammy Bruce is a radio talk-show host, author and Fox News contributor.