Unlikely political allies push along changes in state mental health system

The changes underway in Michigan's mental health delivery system are being pushed along at the top by two unlikely allies: Republican Lt. Gov. Brian Calley and Democratic Sen. Rebekah Warren.



Although they have taken different paths, Calley and Warren have been interested in improving the delivery of services to treat mental health, substance abuse and developmental disabilities in the state's children and adults for more than a decade.



Calley, who has a child with autism and successfully advocated in 2011 for an autism benefit insurance mandate, and Warren, who has advocated since 2008 to expand the federal Mental Health Parity Act in Michigan, discovered they could find common ground on behavioral health issues.



They served on Gov. Rick Snyder's Michigan Mental Health and Wellness Commission during 2013. Last month, that group released its first-year report, which highlighted legislative actions and improvements in how the state delivers publicly funded behavioral health care.



Calley and Warren believe much progress has been made the first year after the commission issued its recommendations. But they say real progress will take several years of continued efforts.

Access problems

Access to providers remains a major problem, despite the federal government's adding behavioral health coverage as an essential benefit to health insurance plans under the Affordable Care Act and the state's enhancing Healthy Michigan Medicaid with mental health coverage, experts said.



A 2013 survey by the University of Michigan's Center for Healthcare Research and Transformation found that one in five Michigan residents had been diagnosed with depression at some point in their lives, a number comparable with national averages.



But the same survey also found that 57 percent of primary care physicians in Michigan said the availability of mental health services in their community was inadequate for adults, and 68 percent reported it was inadequate for children.



"The commission's recommendations didn't focus on access to care areas," said Marianne Udow-Phillips, the center's director.



"It is a complex problem because it involves workforce issues. We don't have enough psychiatrists" and other mental health professionals.

Care coordination

One of the commission's main concerns is that care barriers exist between the mainstream medical system — led by hospitals and physicians — and providers serving in the behavioral health system.



Over the past two years, coverage for behavioral health care has improved somewhat, said Lynda Zeller, deputy director of behavioral health and developmental disabilities administration at the Department of Community Health.



For example, the Affordable Care Act increased private coverage for behavioral health, and Healthy Michigan Medicaid added benefits.



"It allows people access to specialty behavioral services, community mental health networks and services that wrap around a person," Zeller said.





Steve Candela, director of outpatient behavioral health at St. John Providence Health System, said efforts started two years ago to co-locate medical and mental health professionals in St. John's 10 outpatient locations in Southeast Michigan.



"Our biggest barrier is shortages of psychiatrists and access to outpatient care," especially with the expansion of mental health coverage under Obamacare and Medicaid expansion in Southeast Michigan, he said.



Candela said having a mental health professional in the same physician clinic increases the chances that a patient needing those services actually will get help.



"We are placing more than 200 psychotherapists, psychologists and social workers into our practices to increase access to mental health services," Candela said. "If you embed a therapist, a physician can let them know there is help right down the hall."



Debbie Brinson, CEO of the Pontiac-based Oakland Integrated Healthcare Network, a health center with four locations, said most people with private commercial health insurance coverage now have expanded behavioral health services.



"Care depends on the level of acuity you have with mental health issues," Brinson said. "With mild to moderate problems, it is often difficult to get into the (public) system."



But Brinson said Oakland Integrated's clinics help break those barriers by offering integrated care through a health team composed of combinations of physicians, nurses, psychologists and social workers. The team evaluates patients and devises treatment strategies.



"The way to make a radical difference in mental health services is to co-locate with primary care," Brinson said. "Another radical piece is to bring mental health services to schools."

Need for intermediate care

Of $14.3 million allocated last July by the Michigan Legislature in the state's 2014-15 budget to kick-start several recommendations by Snyder's commission, $1 million was earmarked to expand intermediate mental health care beds and services.



The commission said intermediate care beds should be made available regionally for stays of 48 hours to 30 days. Services also should include substance and alcohol use disorder as well as mental health.



Another recommendation: The state should develop performance criteria for adult foster care homes.



Calley said his No. 1 priority this year is to address the need for intermediate care. Community Health is undergoing a thorough review of options, he said.





Related Links