DALLAS, September 10, 2014 /PRNewswire/ --

MarketOptimizer.org adds CountryFocus: Healthcare, Regulatory and Reimbursement Landscape - Venezuela 2014 research report to its store. The report is an essential source of information and analysis on the healthcare, regulatory and reimbursement landscape in Venezuela. It identifies the key trends in the country's healthcare market and provides insights into its demographic, regulatory, and reimbursement landscape and healthcare infrastructure. Most importantly, the report provides valuable insights into the trends and segmentation of its pharmaceutical and medical device markets. It is built using data and information sourced from proprietary databases, secondary research, and in-house analysis by a team of industry experts. Complete report is available at http://www.marketoptimizer.org/countryfocus-healthcare-regulatory-and-reimbursement-landscape-venezuela.html .

The report CountryFocus: Healthcare, Regulatory and Reimbursement Landscape - Venezuela says population of Venezuela grew from 27.7 million in 2008 to 29.8 million in 2013, mainly due to increasing life expectancy. Domestic production of medicines meets approximately 50% of the total demand of the Venezuelan population. The government has introduced the Mision Barrio Adentro program to provide universal healthcare access and Farmapatria to provide medicines on a discount up to 54%. The future growth in the pharmaceutical market will be dependent on the resolution of concerns related to inefficient patent protection laws, drug pricing policy, and dependency on imports. The country's pharmaceutical market was approximately $10 billion in 2013 and is projected to reach $22.2 billion by 2020 at a CAGR of 12%. These positive growth trends can primarily be attributed to: Increasing elderly population and Government initiatives in healthcare sector.

Scope of this Venezuela healthcare market report covers: Overview of the pharmaceutical market of Venezuela including the market size, market segmentation, key drivers and barriers for the market; Profiles and SWOT analyses of the major players in the pharmaceutical market: Pfizer, GlaxoSmithkline, Sanofi, Novartis and Groupo Farma - order a copy of this report at http://www.marketoptimizer.org/contacts/purchase?rname=10413 ; Insightful review of the reimbursement and regulatory landscape, with analysis covering details of the country's healthcare reimbursement process, regulatory agencies and the approval processes for new drugs and medical devices; Detailed analysis of the political and economic environment, covering economic indicators, demographics, healthcare infrastructure and healthcare expenditure and an overview of the opportunities for and challenges to growth in the Venezuelan healthcare market

Reasons To Buy this Venezuela healthcare industry regulatory report:

Develop business strategies by understanding the trends shaping and driving Venezuela's healthcare market

healthcare market Drive revenues by understanding the key trends, reimbursement and regulatory policies, pharmaceutical market segments, and companies likely to affect Venezuela's healthcare market in the future

healthcare market in the future Formulate effective sales and marketing strategies by understanding the competitive landscape and analyzing the performance of various competitors

Organize your sales and marketing efforts by identifying the market categories and segments that present the best opportunities for consolidation, investment, and strategic partnership

Identify, understand, and capitalize on the opportunities and challenges in Venezuela's healthcare market

Explore more reports on healthcare market available with MarketOptimizer.org:

MediPoint: Sports Medicine - US Analysis and Market Forecasts is a 175 pages research report published in March 2014. This report focuses on the sports medicine market, which includes implants and arthroscopic capital equipment. The orthopedic sports medicine market has been estimated in this report and covers the US, France, Germany, Italy, Spain, the UK, Japan, Brazil, China and India. The report provides unmet needs, future adoption and compound annual growth rates (CAGR). The US sports medicine market is a strong and growing market, with prevalence of sports-related injury rising most rapidly among the young and old. The biggest player in sports medicine in the US remains Arthrex, leading with a 21% market share. This company has the strongest brand identity and offers a wide selection of products, which makes it competitive and able to maintain its market share. Complete report is available at http://www.marketoptimizer.org/medipoint-sports-medicine-us-analysis-and-market-forecasts.html .

PharmaSphere: Healthcare Information Technology Software and Services Report - Vertical Market Analysis of Leading IT Business Process Outsourcing and Electronic Medical Record Vendors is another research report of 120 pages. This report discusses the various platforms, service models, and go-to-market strategies of the major players in the IT BPO, and EMR markets. The research provides an assessment of vendor strategies, outsourcing agreements, significant deals and corporate developments, and contract vehicles signed by these BPO and EMR firms over the past three years.

This report also examines the impact of both the Affordable Care Act and the HITECH Act, Meaningful Use and the industry's transition to ICD-10, and how these vendors are helping healthcare organizations develop clear implementation strategies. This HITS&S report includes a drill-down analysis by healthcare subverticals Payers & Providers, Life Sciences, State/Local, and Federal and by three geographies Americas, EMEA, and APAC examining each of these segment's business development strategies. Read more at http://www.marketoptimizer.org/pharmasphere-healthcare-information-technology-software-and-services-report-vertical-market-analysis-of-leading-it-business-process-outsourcing-and-electronic-medical-record-vendors.html .

About Us:

MarketOptimizer.org brings to you to the latest reports in market research on multiple industries from leading research publishers across the globe. These reports also cover data and information on sub-segments and sectors under these categories. Contact us (sales@marketoptimizer.org / + 1 888 391 5441) for any of your research requirements or topics of interest. Our sales & research associates will be happy to help you find relevant market data.

Contact:

Ritesh Tiwari

TX, Dallas North - Dominion Plaza,

17304, Preston Road,

Suite 800, Dallas 75252

Tel: +1-888-391-5441

sales@marketoptimizer.org

Connect With Us on:

Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/MarketOptimizer

Google Plus / G+: https://plus.google.com/100862745608219066970/posts

Twitter: https://twitter.com/marketoptimizer

RSS/Feeds: http://www.marketoptimizer.org/feed

SOURCE MarketOptimizer.org