Opinion

Affordable Care Act has created competition for health care services

Photo: Nick Ut / Associated Press Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 Peter Lee is the executive director of Covered California, the state's Affordable Care Act agency. Peter Lee is the executive director of Covered California, the state's Affordable Care Act agency. Photo: Nick Ut / Associated Press Affordable Care Act has created competition for health care services 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

This year, the Affordable Care Act had a profound and rapid change on my professional life as a physician who works in an institution that forms part of California’s safety net. I’m the chief medical officer for San Mateo Medical Center, the county hospital and affiliated clinics in San Mateo County. I also provide primary care in one of our outpatient clinics.

As a result of the Affordable Care Act, many patients we serve in our county became newly eligible for Medi-Cal, California’s Medicaid program. With this transition, they were offered far more choices: They had access to services that were previously unavailable, such as dental services and expanded mental health services. And, instead of having to travel to our specialty clinic in the middle of the county, they could be referred to private specialists in their own communities.

Before the act, most of our patients were either uninsured or were enrolled in a county program that only covered services at our institution; they could not seek care elsewhere. So more choice for patients means more pressure on us; as patients become eligible for Medi-Cal, they may now choose to leave our organization to seek care elsewhere.

Competition has forced us to confront some difficult questions, such as: What is the role of the safety net in this new era when many more people are insured? Why should we, as an institution, continue to exist? Thankfully the answers to these questions came fairly easily.

As an integrated health system, we offer a range of services from outpatient to emergency services to inpatient to long-term care; we offer a distinct advantage over the traditional fragmented health care system. Embedded in the San Mateo County Health System, we can work with our colleagues in Adult and Aging Services, Family Health Services and Public Health to better meet all the psychosocial needs of our patients. For example, our partnership with the county’s Behavioral Health and Recovery Services has allowed us to embed behavioral health experts in our primary care clinics so that they can better address the mental health needs of our patients.

As our patients have moved to Medi-Cal, the Affordable Care Act has brought our institution some new funding. But many of the new programs of the act are funded by reductions to other parts of the safety net. So the act ramps up this pressure to find ways to do things cheaper and more efficiently.

Fortunately, we had a head start. We began a decade ago by redesigning our primary care services and establishing team-based care. The county implemented an electronic health record in our clinics long before there was a mandate to do so. Now, under the Affordable Care Act, we have repurposed some staff roles and brought in new staff members with new skill sets. For example, we have staffers who are specially trained to extract information from electronic records to better manage chronic disease, and pharmacists have been added to some primary care teams to assist with medication management.

The Affordable Care Act has facilitated new partnerships with other community providers, allowing us to focus on those services that we provide well while partnering to provide services that are best delivered by others. This is a transition from the past, when we were the provider of last resort, forced to provide as much as we could and living without the services we could not provide by ourselves.

There is much work ahead, but much has already been accomplished. In 2014, we brought almost 7,500 new patients into primary care, thereby facilitating better preventive health and chronic disease management. The majority of these patients are newly eligible for Medi-Cal. We have also seen a reduction of more than 20 percent in the number of patients leaving our emergency department without being seen due to long waits. And our pharmacy has reduced the time patients must wait for their prescriptions by about 75 percent. These are just a few of the gains. We look forward to many more.

Dr. Chester Kunnappilly is chief medical officer for San Mateo Medical Center, the county hospital and affiliated clinics in San Mateo County. He wrote this for Zócalo Public Square. To comment, submit your letter to the editor at www.sfgate.com/submissions/#1