E mployees are required to work, but they also make work for their employers, who need to process payrolls, comply with regulations, track and dispense benefits and programs -- and more.

Enter the outsourcers. As more companies decide to put all the data and technology that goes into human resources management on the Internet or "cloud," opportunities are rising for nimble providers of cloud-based solutions.

One of the fastest growing of these so-called human-capital management, or HCM, cloud providers isPaycom Software ( PAYC ). It helps businesses automate and manage what it calls the "complete employment life cycle from recruitment to retirement."

Founded in 1998 by CEO Chad Richison, Paycom has diversified from its roots in payroll processing into a broader range of HCM applications.

Since the company went public in April 2014 at an offering price of 15, its stock has more than doubled. Revenue last year soared 40% to $151 million.

Working New Angles

A majority of Paycom's revenue still comes from payroll processing. But now payroll is a starting point: the firm upsells customers higher-margin HCM products that handle such things as talent acquisition and time and labor management.

In December, Paycom launched a new "dashboard" to its existing compliance solution on the Affordable Care Act to navigate the new employer mandate that went into effect in January. Earlier this year Paycom rolled out a new "learning management" system.

Paycom targets midsize companies with employees of 50 to 2,000. But some customers are larger, including three added in the fourth quarter. One longer-standing client employs more than 8,000.

Paycom's services are delivered as a single software-as-a-service application, making use of a single, multi-tenant database. It's a relatively low-cost solution but one that still allows for decent returns, analysts say.

"A lot of SaaS companies of this size are losing money. This company is making money, though not much," said Jim Macdonald, an analyst with First Analysis Securities.

Small as that profit is, it is growing. In Q4, the company earned $3.1 million, or 6 cents per share, vs. a slight loss a year earlier.

Analysts polled by Thomson Reuters expect Q1 earnings of 8 cents a share, up from 3 cents a year earlier. They see a 47% gain in full-year earnings to 28 cents on a per-share basis, up from 19 cents in 2014.

In contrast,Paylocity ( PCTY ), which is viewed as Paycom's closest like-kind rival, has mostly logged quarterly losses, though revenue is growing at a fast clip.

Revenue in Paycom's fourth quarter jumped 45% year-over-year to $44 million, the highest percentage gain in a long string of strong double-digit increases. Analysts expect revenue to climb another 31% this year to $197.1 million, according to Thomson Reuters.

Sales People And Software

Much of Paycom's success has to do with its integrated software, says Richard Davis, an analyst with Canaccord Genuity.

"But in the end a lot of it has to do with paying attention to customers," Davis said. "It's good software with very good sales people.

"The (sales reps) at Paycom are hustling. They're out knocking on doors. It's as old fashioned as any American business out there."

Racing For Customers

Paycom opened five new sales offices in Q1, for 35 in total, all in the U.S. Paycom hires a lot of recent college graduates, with some work experience under their belts, and then trains them, Macdonald says.

Pricing is based on the number of customers' employees and the number of apps utilized. Davis figures that Paycom would get $20 per month per employee if all its apps were utilized, up from a starting point of around $10 or less per month. However, that could take some time.

"Right now it's a race to see who can get the customers," he said. "It's like an open field and everyone is trying to get as many customers as they can. Once you land them they are sticky because it's a pain to switch."

Companies typically switch payroll/HCM vendors every five to 10 years, he says.

At the end of 2014, Paycom served more than 12,000 clients and stored data for around 1.6 million of their employees.

Its high customer retention rate -- steady lately at 91% -- is "more reflective of an enterprise customer base and demonstrates the strategic value of Paycom's solutions," Jefferies analyst John DiFucci said in a research note.

Another successful cloud-focused firm isUltimate Software ( ULTI ), which saw revenue rise 23% in 2014 to $505.9 million.

Not to be left behind, much bigger incumbents with legacy technology are expanding into cloud solutions.Automatic Data Processing ( ADP ), for example, is "heavily investing in and quickly transitioning clients to new platforms," noted JPMorgan analyst Mark Murphy in a research note.

Paychex ( PAYX ), which targets small-to-midsize firms, has added an SaaS platform called SurePayroll, he added.

Citing industry estimates in government filings, Paycom sizes the U.S. market for HCM applications in 2015 at roughly $7 billion, excluding payroll services. For payroll services alone it's an estimated $16.8 billion. But more "narrowly defined" to address the midmarket cloud space Paycom targets, Davis says the firm's addressable market is much smaller, perhaps $3 billion or more -- "still plenty big."

"In a given year by our math $200 or $300 million in contracts are up in the air to be won" by Paycom, Davis said.

In payroll outsourcing, Paycom is displacing incumbents such as ADP, privately held Ceridian, Paychex andIntuit (INTU), Murphy notes. And in broader HCM solutions it's homing in on the likes of the fast-growingWorkday (WDAY) as well asCornerstone OnDemand (CSOD).

Oracle (ORCL) andSAP (SAP) are rivals in both payroll and the broader HCM space.

New products and new sales offices will continue to fuel revenue growth, analysts say.

Paycom's execs have said the firm can grow to more than 100 sales offices in the U.S. and may eventually expand into international markets.

DiFucci notes that some investors are concerned about the impact of low oil prices on employment in some of Paycom's mature offices in oil-patch markets.

But in a Q4 conference call on Feb. 10, CEO Richison said Paycom had not seen any impact from changes in the oil price.