Scott Walker (Photo: File)

Previous postings in the Fond du Lac Reporter have done much to illustrate the folly and mendacity behind Gov. Walker’s promises to dramatically change Wisconsin civil service. In particular, Paul Czisny did an excellent job in his Oct. 16 commentary of showing the harm that could flow from eliminating the requirement that jobseekers take competitive examinations to determine their qualifications for a job interview. For that reason, I feel compelled to concentrate instead on the harm threatened by another part of the Walker administration’s “reform” package, the substantial elimination of the requirement the state establish just cause before terminating employees.

I approach this task with some hesitation. After all, most American workers can be terminated at will. Why should they care about the alleged rights of someone else to a hearing, proof of wrong doing, and to present his or her side of the story? This is the essence of just cause, something all working Americans lack, except for a thin skim of unionized workers.

Just cause is important because it provides some guarantee that the state employee who chooses to do his or her job to the standard the law requires will not as a result be fired. Anyone doubting its value need only consider what happens when employees lose this protection. I offer specifically the example of the community development grant analysts who, in mid-2011, moved from the Wisconsin Department of Commerce, where they were classified state employees, to the Wisconsin Economic Development Corp.

This transfer made these grant analysts, who were charged with reviewing Wisconsin business applications for federal economic development money, private sector employees. One result of this change was that the analysts become private, at will employees. Their new supervisor at WEDC drove this point home with her inaugural speech to the analysts with one declaration: “I like to fire people”.

Across time, some community grant analysts left WEDC, while others chose to acknowledge the new reality and knuckle down. As a result, all efforts to ensure that development grants satisfied state and federal standards collapsed. Successful grant applicants with political pull received tens of millions of development dollars, and were relieved of any requirement to show that these grants resulted in new business enterprises or jobs. WEDC misallocated millions of dollars in federal development grant money so badly that it had to be disgorged, and returned to the U.S. government. And saddest of all, grants intended to aid blighted inner city communities were instead directed at prosperous, politically-connected suburbs.

Before Wisconsin citizens embrace Walker’s radical remake of Wisconsin civil service, they need to ask themselves a few questions:

1). Am I a veteran or do I have a veteran in my family? If so, am I willing to see the state veteran homes in King and Chippewa Falls run at the same level of competence and accountability as WEDC has been since 2011?

2). Will I feel safer and more secure if the prison guards and parole officers at the prisons Wisconsin Department of Corrections are run along the same lines of WEDC?

3). What of Wisconsin’s lakes, forests, and aquifers? What will happen when agency heads feel as free to threaten employees with summary termination as their counterparts at WEDC? Do I think the employees at the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources be better able to resist pressure from special interests seeking special exemptions from water quality standards so they can engage in fracking and unrestricted mining?

A “no” to any of these questions should mean a “no” to Walker’s proposed “reforms”.

Anthony Reeves is the vice president representing the State Employees Council on the Executive Committee of the American Federation of Teachers-Wisconsin. He currently works in Madison at the Wisconsin Department of Health Services as a research analyst.

Read or Share this story: http://fondul.ac/1Rf39bO