For New Jersey's hospitals, part of the gift of the Affordable Care Act, with its expanded Medicaid and reduced uninsured population, is going to have to be returned.



Hospitals across New Jersey this week are analyzing the potential impact of Gov. Chris Christie's proposed $148 million budget cut to the state's charity care subsidy program.



"We're still poring through the numbers," said Kerry McKean Kelly, vice president of communications and member services for the New Jersey Hospital Association. "There are obviously significant charity care cuts for some of our hospitals and we need to ensure the overall dollars ... are adequate to support hospitals and their care to patients."



Christie's proposed 2016 budget calls for slashing 23 percent from the $650 million the state had budgeted for charity care this year. In the proposed budget's summary, the administration said the reduction would be palatable because the federal health care law reduced the state's uninsured population, adding 390,000 individuals into Medicaid.



The "fundamental and welcome shift" of uninsured people into Medicaid, called NJ Family Care, still will allow the state to spend $502 million on charity care, it said. It also frees up budget room to add close to $30 million for graduate medical education.



"Providing $502 million in charity care funding will allow for a reasonable transition for hospitals while also giving the state the opportunity to invest in other programs such as investing in the future of our health care workforce, which is necessary to support the changing healthcare landscape," said health Commissioner Mary E. O'Dowd.



The proposed funding is based on preliminary charity care reported for 2014 of less than $580 million, which represents a 40 percent reduction in care provided to the uninsured in New Jersey, the state Department of Health said.



Sr. Patricia Codey, president of the Catholic HealthCare Partnership of New Jersey, said the budget cuts would be harmful.



"Cutting charity care funding would be devastating to our hospitals and ultimately to our patients," she said.



It would be especially devastating because New Jersey still has about 1 million people who are uninsured, Codey said. "Those most in need should not be sacrificed for balancing the budget," she said.



Cutting now also leaves federal dollars on the table, argued Suzanne Ianni, president and CEO of the Hospital Alliance of New Jersey. The Affordable Care Act, she said, will be reducing payments to hospitals that have large numbers of Medicaid patients in future years.



"We should take advantage of the funds while they're there," Ianni said.



In addition, hospitals lose money on patients who pay with Medicaid, which on average covers about 70 percent of costs, she said. Even with more Medicaid funding, "that ... is not enough to cover the cost of care," said Ianni, whose organization represents urban and teaching "safety net' hospitals.



Hospitals may have to turn to layoffs or cutting services in some cases, she warned. In addition, many hospitals hold state-backed bonds, so cutting their funding could backfire on New Jersey if hospitals' finances hit the breaking point, Ianni said.



Even though the state's funding formula gives added weight to hospitals that serve large populations of poor people, the cuts fall disproportionately on alliance members, she said.



For example, St. Joseph's Regional Medical Center in Paterson, which received $73 million in charity funding this year, would see a cut of nearly $10 million in the upcoming budget year - a cut of around 13.5 percent. University Hospital in Newark would have a cut of about 30 percent, to $53.4 million.



Those cuts were offset in part with increases in support for their graduate medical education of $3.1 million and $3.2 million, respectively.



Hospital representatives did not return requests for comment.



Under the administration's funding formula, a few hospitals, including St. Peter's University Hospital in New Brunswick, would get a boost in charity funding. The budget increases its charity funding by more than $300,000 to $6.8 million and graduate medical education by over $900,000 for a net gain of $1.3 million in state funding.



Facilities that received relatively low subsidies took some of the hardest hits. Memorial Hospital of Salem County would see its $434,300 subsidy cut to $18,963, a reduction of more than 95 percent. And Chilton Medical Center, in Pompton Plains, would be cut by almost 90 percent to $69,665.



Overall, funding for graduate medical education would be $127.3 million, the administration said.



Additionally, the proposed budget calls for $166.6 million for the Delivery System Reform Incentive Payments program, which rewards hospitals for achieving measurable quality improvements.



"New Jersey is using this budget to support the transformation of the health care system to better serve our communities and buy more of what we want," O'Dowd said.

Tim Darragh may be reached at tdarragh@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @timdarragh. Find NJ.com on Facebook.