All that beverage — and a petting zoo, too

Jon Justis dances with his wife Trista during Longmont's Oktoberfest presented by Left Hand Brewing at Roosevelt Park, on Saturday. ( David R. Jennings / Daily Camera )

One of the few people daring to show off his polka dance moves during the early Saturday afternoon resumption of this year's Longmont Oktoberfest is a native of Germany who now lives in upstate New York.

E.J. Mattson, who said he was born in Stuttgart "a long time ago," danced with his Boulder niece, Katie Ball, as the Colorado State University-based Neue Polka Colorado band played "Roll Out the Barrel" on the Oktoberfest grounds at Longmont's Roosevelt Park

Mattson, who said he'd actually recently gotten back home from Munich — the founding home of the world's largest and most celebrated Oktoberfest — and has been visiting family members in Colorado.

Mattson's family learned of the Longmont Oktoberfest online, "and we said, 'Let's Go!"

Oktoberfest got under way on Friday afternoon and night. On Saturday, crowds of Longmont festival-goers continued to grow during the afternoon and were expected to number in the thousands by Saturday night.

Beer was available from seven featured local breweries, including Left Hand, Oskar Blues, the Pumphouse, 300 Suns, Grossen Bart, Shoes and Brews, and the Longs Peak Pub and Taphouse that's set to open later this year.

The predominantly popular food appeared once again to be bratwurst sandwiches, with Randy Kemp of Berthoud pronouncing his brat-and-sauerkraut sandwich "pretty darned good."

Craft beers weren't the only options for people strolling the Oktoberfest grounds or seeking shade under awnings as the afternoon sun blared down and temperatures reached the high 80s.

Lemonade, ice tea, root beer, sodas and spring water could also be had.

Nor was the event limited to adult celebrants. It included a bouncy castle, a pool with children skimming in tumble bubbles, and even pony rides and a petting zoo.

"How many times do you hear of an Oktoberfest with a petting zoo?" asked Josh Goldberg of the Left Hand Brewing Company, which for the past two years has produced and promoted the Longmont event that began in 1988.

Another feature of this year's event was to be an attempt for the Longmont Oktoberfest to regain what Goldberg said would be the world's record for grilling a bratwurst.

He said the Longmont gathering achieved that record last year, grilling a 291-foot-long brat and festival organizers and volunteers were going to try to top that with a 200-foot sausage this year.

But an Illinois company recently brought a bratwurst in at 228 feet, Goldberg said, so "we're going for 230 feet, nearly the length of a football field."

Goldberg noted that the two-day fall festival is also a fundraiser, with this year's beneficiaries to include the Left Hand Brewing Foundation, Safe Shelter of St. Vrain Valley and A Precious Child.

Contact Times-Call staff writer John Fryar at 303-684-5211 or jfryar@times-call.com