Milwaukee County Sheriff David A. Clarke Jr. says he can't get any respect in his own community.

Clarke says his hometown paper — yes, that would be the Journal Sentinel — makes him out to be "crazy."

Not so Fox News and other national conservative media outlets.

In recent weeks, Clarke has become the go-to guy to discuss the recent decisions not to charge white officers who killed black individuals in Ferguson, Mo., and New York City — and the protests that followed.

"They appreciate my intellect, experience and insight," Clarke said via email.

And, no doubt, his humility.

Just since Dec. 1, the recently re-elected sheriff has logged at least 14 appearances on a variety of national radio and TV shows. Among them has been just about every major program on Fox News, from "Fox & Friends" in the morning to Megyn Kelly's show, "The Kelly File," at night.

Along the way, Clarke has used his blunt, freewheeling style to engage in a mix of cultural critique and name-calling. He has been quick to defend police and to denounce black leaders and Democrats.

For instance, Clarke said he is "disgusted" with Attorney General Eric Holder, whom he branded a liar and an "S.O.B." for throwing "law enforcement under the bus for political expediency."

The Rev. Al Sharpton is a "charlatan" and a "provocateur" who joined others in descending on Ferguson "like vultures on a roadside carcass," according to Clarke.

New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio is "irresponsible" and "shameful" for trying to "open an old wound" with his talk on racism, Clarke said.

As for President Barack Obama, Clarke suggested he tacitly encouraged the Ferguson riots and violence "with a wink and a nod." Improbably, he called on Obama to order audits of all anti-poverty agencies as a way "to stop propping up this welfare state."

Clarke has been equally harsh on Twitter, telling one critic: "You are up against a conservative that hits back. Libs are not used to that. I play smash mouth politics."

Of course, the residents of Milwaukee are used to Clarke's bomb-throwing rhetoric.

He did, after all, once accuse Milwaukee County Executive Chris Abele of having "penis envy" and also warned of a possible "second American Revolution" over gun seizures. And that's just for starters.

But Clarke is reaching an entirely new audience with his colorful TV performances in the wake of the grand jury's decision not to indict Ferguson police officer Darren Wilson for killing Michael Brown, an unarmed 18-year-old.

On just about every program, the sheriff has offered up bite-sized red meat for conservative viewers shaken by the riots and protests in Missouri, New York and elsewhere.

Fran McLaughlin, Clarke's spokeswoman, said her boss hasn't asked for this attention. Clarke is in demand, she said, because he provides an alternative to "prevailing orthodoxy."

"What he finds disheartening is that the people of Milwaukee County do not get to hear many of the things the sheriff has to say on important issues because his hometown newspaper has marginalized him and paints a false narrative that he's crazy," McLaughlin wrote. "Apparently, the national media doesn't think so."

This isn't the first time that Clarke has seen the national spotlight.

Earlier this year, he gave a well-received speech at the National Rifle Association convention, and he won a high-profile re-election contest in August, overcoming huge infusions of cash by former New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg and Abele.

But the recent spate of TV talk show guest spots goes well beyond his earlier exposure.

Several liberals have suggested there is a good reason that the African-American sheriff is showing up on the contact lists for so many national conservative programs.

It's all about race.

"Even Fox, by this point, has gotten wise to the fact that having an all-white cast of people demonizing black people doesn't look so good, so every once in a while, they need to bring in a black face," wrote Dexter Thomas, a graduate student at Cornell University who writes for many left-wing websites. "Clarke was that black face."

Clarke rejected that notion.

Fox News and others, he said, "see me beyond my skin color."

"Shame on lefties for racially profiling me," Clarke said.

Actually, as a black law enforcement leader, the sheriff does bring a perspective not seen on many national news programs.

On Thursday, he told Kelly of being a 15-year-old "punk" who raised a "black power" fist when a squad car drove past his family's Milwaukee house. He said his father intervened, telling Clarke to respect authority and quit "screwing with the police."

Too many young African-Americans, he said, don't have similar father figures to set them straight.

It was a compelling anecdote from someone who has seen both sides of the racial divide.

This newfound national prominence certainly wouldn't hurt if Clarke decides to run for something more challenging than sheriff, where he oversees a relatively small uniformed staff of 500-plus people, including 245 deputies.

He has talked repeatedly about the possibility of taking on Milwaukee Mayor Tom Barrett in 2016.

Earlier this year, he said he would sit down with advisers shortly after the election, which would be right about now, to decide the feasibility of such a campaign.

But when asked if his national TV and radio appearances would have this side benefit, Clarke responded in his email, "What mayoral bid?!"

What mayoral bid? Really? Is the guy crazy?

Yep, crazy like a fox — on Fox.

Contact Daniel Bice at (414) 224-2135 or dbice@jrn.com. Follow him on Twitter @DanielBice or on Facebook at fb.me/daniel.bice.