Texas Sen. Ted Cruz denounced the Supreme Court in an interview with Fox News host Sean Hannity on Friday, announcing that he would fight to undermine the court after its decisions regarding marriage equality and the Affordable Care Act.

“I’ve introduced a constitutional amendment that would protect the authority of state legislatures to define marriage as the union of one man and one woman. We should pass that amendment,” Cruz told Hannity. “I’ve also introduced legislation stripping the federal courts of jurisdiction over legal assault on marriage.”

The Tea Party presidential candidate also revisited his argument that Congress has the power to strip the high court of jurisdiction, after opening the interview by referring to the two rulings as “some of the darkest 24 hours in our nation’s history.”

“I couldn’t say it more eloquently,” replied Hannity, who earlier this week argued that rap music is as worthy of being banned as the Confederate battle flag.

Cruz then attempted to distance himself from other party members, saying they were “crying crocodile tears” because they were secretly gratified by the high court’s rulings.

“They’re thrilled, number one, that the court didn’t throw Obamacare back in the laps of Congress,” Cruz argued. “That they don’t want to actually stand up and do anything to stop it, and they were overjoyed at the marriage decision because they don’t want to defend marriage and they are running away from it. And it is fundamentally dishonest and corrupt.”

Update, 9:17 p.m. EST: Cruz also proposed a Constitutional amendment that would subject Justices to retention elections every eight years in an op-ed for the National Review. Each Justice, he said, would be up for election after the second presidential election following their appointment to the high court.

“Those justices deemed unfit for retention by both a majority of the American people as a whole and by majorities of the electorates in at least half of the 50 states will be removed from office and disqualified from future service on the Court,” he wrote.

If such an amendment is not passed, he said, he would support a states’ convention after Article V of the Constitution to propose them directly, arguing that the document itself is “sustained attack from an arrogant judicial elite.”

Read more at: http://www.nationalreview.com/article/420409/ted-cruz-supreme-court-constitutional-amendment.

Listen to the interview, as posted by Media Matters on Friday, below.