Thought you might find this interesting Submit

Conversa Health, a San Rafael, Calif.-based provider focused on automating digital conversations between physicians and their patients, announced it has closed a $2.5 million seed round. The funding was led by top-tier healthcare angel investors and has appointed industry veteran Daniel Dean as chief technology officer, responsible for all engineering and product management. Dean will lead Conversa’s talented team of Health IT engineers in building out a robust product roadmap for its expanding user base.

Conversa Digital Checkup Platform Overview

Conversa’s Digital Checkup platform provides ACOs, physician practices & hospitals an automated way to improve the huge gap in care that occurs between visits. “Digital Checkups” use data-driven algorithms to generate clinical questions, patient education, reminders & alerts. The platform collects, manages and analyzes PGHD (Patient Generated Health Data), including biometric sensor data (i.e. wearables, glucometers). The patient-facing web application is secure, responsive and works on all devices.

PGHD is filtered and entered into the EHR or population health management tool, triggering appropriate outreach and alerts for patients and providers. The Conversa Signal Control™ dashboard displays patient responses for physicians and care coordinators to view. Key clinical metrics identify patients who are not on track with their medications, treatment plan or who are experiencing worsening or new symptoms. The platform uses cloud-based adaptive technology.

The capital will be used to expand Conversa’s Digital Checkup service with leading distribution partners in care management, population health and customer relationship management.

“Patient relationship management is an exciting new category of health care solutions that addresses patient engagement and population health management,” said West Shell III, Conversa’s co-founder and CEO. “With this funding, the addition of Daniel Dean to our talented team and the formation of our Medical Advisory Board, we’re on the way to leading the charge in this newly defined space.”

Conversa’s newly formed Medical Advisory Board, under the leadership of Chief Medical Officer Dr. Danny Sands, a practicing primary care physician at Beth Israel Deaconess, will create clinical content for the company’s Digital Checkup platform. New advisory board members include Dr. Joseph P. Kannam, a cardiologist at Beth Israel Deaconess, and Dr. Lyle Mitzner, an endocrinology specialist at the Joslin Diabetes Center. All three distinguished physicians hold academic appointments at Harvard Medical School.