MONTEREY, Calif. and NEW YORK — Tensator, a provider of queue management and customer journey solutions, has announced that TY KU, a sake and spirits company, realized a 600% uplift in sales following the deployment of Tensator’s Virtual Assistant signage at a national retail chain in Monterey, Calif.

Tensator’s Virtual Assistant is an HD-projected imaging and audio-visual technology that creates the illusion of a real person, capable of delivering customized messaging.

A key point not to be missed: Such innovative signage is demonstrating that it can be a great way to help consumers navigate a confusing category. Perhaps even a category like health care? Maybe.

In fact, as previously reported by Drug Store News back in 2011, Duane Reade partnered with the Tensator Group Co., to employ at 40 Wall St. the industry’s first Virtual Assistant. Using holographic imaging and audio-visual technology, the Virtual Assistant created the illusion of a real person who greets customers when they enter the store, providing guidance on everything store related, including making suggestions and recommendations on products available to shoppers.



At TY KU, it worked with Tensator’s Customer Journey experts to identify the exact persona they wanted and developed the script they had in mind for a virtual sommelier. TY KU’s Virtual Sommelier was designed to provide an array of information about TY KU Sake, covering everything a customer would want and need to know about TY KU Sake — from how the sake is prepared, how best to enjoy various different kinds of TY KU Sake and even recommendations on which food pairings are best with which sake, along with the right temperatures to serve them. The Tensator Virtual Sommelier also included messages for health conscious shoppers to let them know that TY KU Sake is all natural, gluten free, sulfite free and has very low acidity — making it the perfect complement to seafood, sushi and lighter, health-conscious cuisine.

Before deploying the Tensator Virtual Sommelier, TY KU Sake sales were flat for six straight weeks. After the first week, TY KU saw a 500% increase in sales, followed by a second week of 600% lift.

“There is literally no other form of signage that could have achieved the amazing boost in sales that the Tensator Virtual Assistant delivered,” said Adrian Molina, brand communications manager, TY KU. “Its ability to captivate shoppers is unparalleled. Not only did shoppers stop, look and listen — they bought TY KU Sake — providing us with an amazing 600% lift in sales in the first weeks of deployment. We are delighted with the results of our Virtual Sommelier.”