Fremont County Sheriff's Blotter

Feb. 17

Sherman Avenue, Cañon City, reporting party reported someone had damaged some tarps. Deputy responded and determined the tarps had been damaged by the wind.

Cone Avenue, Cañon City, deputy dispatched to check for ID tags on a dead dog on the side of the road.

Broadway Street, Penrose, reporting party requested a welfare check on a tenant she hadn't seen for several days. Deputy checked the apartment but the party wasn't home.

Rockvale, reporting party reported he hadn't seen his wife since they had an argument. No report at this time.

Rockvale, report of broken windows. No details given.

Broadway, report of two intoxicated subjects in the alley. Deputies located the subjects who were not intoxicated.

Fourth Street, Penrose, reporting party reported her son was being harassed on Facebook.

U.S. 50, Cañon City, deputies arrested Glenn Vaughn, 24, on a Fremont County warrant.

Lincoln Park, Cañon City, sexual enticement of a minor. Report of a juvenile female being propositioned by an adult male. Case under investigation.

Rosedale Lane, Cañon City,continuation of a domestic disturbance call from the weekend.

CR 68, Cañon City, reporting party reported a lost or stolen license plate.

Advertisement

Raynolds Avenue, Cañon City, reporting party reported that a car pulled in his driveway looking for river access. Reporting party confronted the party who left before a deputy arrived.

Red Canyon Road, Cañon City, report of an underage party near MM 3.5. Deputies checked the area, no contact.

U.S. 50, Coaldale, deputy, CSP, medical and fire responded on a one-vehicle accident with vehicle in the river. Driver transported to Salida hospital. CSP investigated.

Feb. 18

Colo. 115, report of a stolen torque wrench.

Pathfinder Park, Florence, report of a party with an aggressive dog not on a leash. Deputy responded, no contact.

FCSO, Cañon City, party in the lobby reporting a stolen trailer.

Colo. 67, Florence, Eric Foster, 38, arrested on a warrant.

Rosedale Lane, Cañon City, return call regarding a civil standby from a domestic situation.

Rosedale Lane, Cañon City, minor accident related to the above disturbance.

Temple Canyon Road, Cañon City, deputy out with a vehicle abandoned in the middle of the road. Vehicle was impounded.

CR 132, Penrose, deputy out on a suspicious incident/possible burglary involving two males selling frozen meats door-to-door. Males were driving a white truck with a silver refrigerator box on the back.