'Moon shot' takes friendly fire

'MOON SHOT' TAKES SOME FRIENDLY FIRE — A letter from 70-plus public health deans to Vice President Joe Biden and congressional leaders on Sunday praises the new push to fight cancer — but urges lawmakers to not overlook the value of screening and prevention.

"Since the beginning of the “War on Cancer,” the most notable cancer successes have been due to the power and efficacy of prevention," the deans write, in an effort coordinated by the Association of Schools and Programs of Public Health. "The massive reductions in lung, cervical, colorectal and gastric cancer mortality rates are almost entirely due to a focus on public health and prevention approaches (including screening)."

Story Continued Below

See the letter: http://bit.ly/1RvuxwV

'MOON SHOT' GETS A PILOT, TOO — Greg Simon, the founding president of FasterCures, has been named by Biden to lead the national cancer moon shot initiative. Simon served as Vice President Al Gore's top domestic policy adviser in the 1990s and is a leukemia survivor.

— Biden will be at Seattle's Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center today as part of his "listening tour."

GOOD MORNING, IT'S MONDAY PULSE — Where we're suffering withdrawal after four straight days of March Madness. Send tips and cures to ddiamond@politico.com or @ddiamond on Twitter.

SIX YEARS AGO TODAY … The House of Representatives passed the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act by a 219-212 vote.

STATE WEEK: CALIFORNIA's EXCHANGE GETTING AGGRESSIVE ON PROVIDER NETWORKS — Covered California wants to drop hospitals from its networks based on poor performance or high costs, California Healthline reports. The move is being proposed as a way to improve the delivery system, Rachana Pradhan and Brianna Ehley report in the new edition of State Week: http://politico.pro/1T3VHk2

… Meanwhile, Louisiana may inject some conservative elements — like copays and work referrals — into its Medicaid expansion. Louisiana lawmakers are exploring potential legislation for the current session but officials in Gov. John Bel Edwards' administration say expansion is still on track for a July 1 rollout.

WE WATCHED; NO HEALTH POLICY ON SUNDAY — For the first time in weeks, perennial hot-button issues like Obamacare and Medicaid expansion were a non-topic on the Sunday shows. The most extended riff on health care? When Face the Nation host John Dickerson asked Sen. Lindsey Graham about his health, after Graham compared endorsing Sen. Ted Cruz to being poisoned.

COULD ZIKA BE AMERICA's SUMMER PANIC? — If the mosquito-borne virus linked to birth defects hits big - and that's a big if - it could stir a panic like Ebola, set off an epidemic of finger-pointing and create new fear and acrimony over reproductive rights, global warming and immigration, all at the height of a presidential campaign, Arthur Allen writes. The story for Pros: http://politico.pro/1PkTXfr

— CDC on Saturday issued a travel advisory that Zika is now spreading to people in Cuba. The agency has repeatedly warned that the virus is spreading in the Caribbean; CDC previously said that it expects one-quarter of Puerto Rico residents to contract Zika.

— The World Health Organization on Friday called for new pilots to test ways of tampering with Zika-carrying mosquitoes. Two proposals: Releasing males genetically modified to sire mosquitos that die young, and releasing insects that carry bacteria that cause eggs not to hatch.

FAH CONCERNED ABOUT RISE OF 'SKINNY' PLANS — In a letter sent to the heads of CMS and the IRS, the Federation of American Hospitals says it's worried about the growth of health plans that exclude coverage for outpatient care.

"FAH brought the issue to the attention of the Obama Administration back in 2014 and today reiterated its call for patients to be protected by [ensuring] full access to hospital inpatient and outpatient services," an FAH blog post to be published today will say.

"If the proliferation of these plans continues it could mean troubling results for patients and for healthcare delivery in our nation."

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): More transparency is needed into generic drug pricing and reimbursement rates set by drug plan middlemen. Bipartisan legislation (H.R. 244) would enhance oversight of federal health programs and help ensure pharmacy reimbursement for generic drugs reflects market fluctuations. Visit www.ncpanet.org/pharmacyaccess. **

WHY VENTURE CAPITALISTS ARE EYEING HEALTH INSURANCE — Venture capitalists poured more than $1.2 billion into health insurers and insurance-technology startups in 2015 because they think there's an opportunity to steal business from legacy insurers, brokers and third-party administrators.

“This is a market that's measured in trillions of dollars,” said Scott Raney, a partner at Redpoint Ventures, who led the firm's investment in Collective Health, a newcomer that helps employers self-insure. “That's appealing to us.” Modern Healthcare's Bob Herman has the story: http://bit.ly/1SbQqo0

AN EXTRA POINT — One of the biggest stories in sports last week was when Rep. Jan Schakowsky pushed an NFL executive to admit — for the first time — that there's a connection between playing football and suffering from brain disease. Schakowsky shared her strategy with me, and here's the story for Pros: politico.pro/1Rp5VMt

Speaking with PULSE, concussion advocates and researchers applauded how Schakowsky pinned down NFL executive Jeff Miller, after the league denied the link for nearly two decades. "I don't think it was the plan of the NFL for the first time to admit the link when in front of Congress and live on C-SPAN," said Chris Nowinski, cofounder of the Concussion Legacy Foundation. "The truth slipped out."

ON TAP TODAY — The National Coalition on Health Care is hosting a 10:30 a.m. briefing in the Russell building on the rising costs of health coverage, moderated by John Rother. In attendance: Paul Ginsburg of Brookings, Sara Collins of the Commonwealth Fund, AFL-CIO's Damon Silvers, and Milliman's Scott Weltz.

WHAT WE'RE READING

Indiana's alternate approach to Medicaid expansion imposes fees and other complexity on enrollees, but it's not clear if the experiment is working to save money or make participants healthier, Phil Galewitz reports. http://wapo.st/1SccMWG

Johnson & Johnson has settled nearly 70 lawsuits or legal claims — with dozens more still in progress — that allege J&J's now-discontinued morcellators spread cancer. http://on.wsj.com/1R9gvVS

What are the trade-offs of expanding Medicaid through Section 1115 waivers? Writing in Health Affairs, Rachel Sachs takes a look: http://bit.ly/1RvYJrU

Georgia's Piedmont Healthcare just got a $75 million donation — the second-largest gift ever given to a community hospital — with the goal of creating a regional heart center that rivals the Cleveland Clinic. http://bit.ly/1MiSQlR

The man who volunteered to run public relations for Martin Shkreli spills his secrets. http://bit.ly/1pW6KQF

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): While approximately 80 percent of prescription drugs dispensed are generic drugs, the reimbursement system for these medications is largely unregulated and a mystery to pharmacists and patients. The lack of transparency also raises questions as to whether drug plan middlemen, pharmacy benefit manager (PBM) corporations, are overpaid by Medicare and other federal health programs. Moreover, when generic drug prices spike, PBM corporations are slow to update reimbursement rates, leaving community pharmacies with payments that don’t cover costs and unsustainable financial losses. H.R. 244 would increase transparency and facilitate timely payment updates. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacyaccess. **