The December 2014 issue of the Harvard Business Review features an article that has already made the pages of the New York Times. Titled “Rethink what you ‘know’ about high-achieving women,” the piece presents the results of a survey of more than 25,000 graduates of Harvard Business School. The authors focused mostly on the MBAs between the ages of 26 and 67. They wanted to know if they could discover anything new about the gender gap in leadership.

Why do women end up rising to less impressive positions in the workplace than their male counterparts? It is happening even among the elite graduates of Harvard Business School. What’s that about?

There is a popular narrative: Women are “opting out” when they should be “leaning in.” They’re choosing the mommy track over the rule-the-world career track. But that’s not what the authors found. As they noted, with emphasis, “Only 11% are out of the workforce to care for children full-time.” They pin the gender differential in powerful workplace positions on different dynamics, which you can read about in their article or in the Times article, “Even among Harvard graduates, women fall short of their work expectations.”

What I care about here is what the study authors, the Harvard Business Review, and the New York Times apparently do not care about – anyone who is not married, especially if they are not in the category of married with children.

In the HBR article, we learn all about women’s and men’s expectations about whose career will be dominant within a marriage and who will end up doing most of the childcare. We also learn whose career within a marriage really does end up dominant and who ends up doing the most childcare. But we learn nothing about women – or men – who are not married and who do not have children.

The authors tell us that among the 32-67 year olds in their research, 83% were married. They don’t reveal the same figures for the younger participants. I don’t know the nationwide percentage of married people just for the 32-67 year-old demographic, but for everyone 18 and older it is much lower, about 56%. Still, even if 83% of the entire sample of 25,000+ HBS graduates (and not just the older people) had been married, that still means ignoring more than 4,250 people.

The authors are sensitive to other potential biases and isms. They realize they are discussing an elite group, and address that head-on. They are also careful about clarifying whether their results differ for different racial/ethnic groups. We all know about racism and classism, white privilege and economic privilege. But singlism – the stereotyping, stigmatizing, and discrimination against single people – is hardly recognized at all. And the set of privileges that come with being married (such as having your life considered important enough to be analyzed and discussed thoughtfully and respectfully in the HBR and the New York Times) apparently merit not even a nod.

Consider the title of the HBS article: “Rethink what you ‘know’ about high-achieving women.” But the article is not about high-achieving women; it is about high-achieving women who are married with children. The same is true of the article in the New York Times. It came with the heading, “Even among Harvard graduates, women fall short of their work expectations.”

When I first started out in academic psychology, back in the Stone Age, we could write articles that were only about men, for example, or only about white people, and never acknowledge that our results only apply to men or to white people. That’s not allowed anymore. Professionals are not supposed to disappear huge swaths of the human population, or pretend that the experiences of some people are representative of all people, or that the only experiences that matter are, for instance, those of white men. With singles, though, in the 21st century, it is still fair game to set them all aside with not even a shrug.

Never mind the singlism and the insensitivity to matters of privilege inherent in that practice. Ignoring single people is counterproductive to the ostensible goals of the authors. If they want to know why women do not ascend to the same positions of power in the workplace as men do, aren’t the experiences of single women (and men) relevant, too? If, for example, single women are also underrepresented in the most prestigious and powerful positions in business and industry, then doesn’t that tell us that something else is going on beyond the dynamics of equality in marriages?

[Note: For translations of some of my books into other languages, such as Spanish, Portuguese, Chinese, and Korean, click here. Also, the e-book versions of many of my books (in English) are now available in the Kindle Unlimited subscription program and in the Kindle Owners’ Lending Library.]