For disabled people like Matteo Taliaferro, seen above in a therapeutic riding session, independence can be a difficult goal to achieve. Aside from logistical problems like physical impairments that may interfere with the ability to perform tasks of daily living, many disabled people need help affording health care, housing costs and other expenses.

Their options when it comes to financial assistance have historically involved either relying on government benefits or working, if possible, even if this compromises their health in the case of people who have to work excessively or in jobs that aren’t good fits for them so they can access benefits and good pay. Finally, that situation is about to get better, now that President Obama has signed the ABLE Act, which allows disabled people with impairments acquired under the age of 26 to save money in specialized savings accounts, rather than limiting them to the $2,000 they were previously allowed to save before their assets started eating into benefits eligibility.

This has huge implications. Imagine if you were only allowed to save $2,000 before people started taking money for food, housing and health care away from you; and imagine how limiting that would be. You’d have trouble affording the deposit if you needed to move, managing expenses that weren’t covered by your benefits and even enjoying some fun times, something everyone should have access to. Yet, that’s what faced disabled people across the country as they had to effectively choose between benefits and enforced poverty, and saving money to use on their own to manage their life expenses.

Under the new law, people can save up to $100,000 without penalties, and they may still retain their Medicaid eligibility. That savings cushion allows people to live without fear that their independence will be compromised or taken away. For example, if the government refuses to provide compensation for caregivers or doesn’t allow a disabled person enough benefits hours (deciding, for example, that someone needs only five hours of help a week instead of 10 or 15), people can pay out of their savings accounts instead of being forced into institutions or relying on friends and family for assistance. The interest accrued will not incur tax penalties, and the funds can be used for a variety of purposes including opportunities like education, which will help lift disabled people out of a cycle of poverty.

Before the ABLE Act, friends and family who wanted to ensure that disabled people could live independently and support themselves after family members had passed away had few options. Funds couldn’t be provided directly to people so they could spend them as-needed and as they saw fit, and complicated trusts had to be arranged in order to support disabled people. This threatened independence for disabled people, and could be incredibly demeaning and frustrating — imagine being a grown adult having to go pleading to someone else for an allowance so you could get your oil changed or pick up some groceries.

Yet, the ABLE Act can’t be the end of the line. Independence for disabled people is still under threat by pressures to enter institutions rather than living in communities and transitional housing, disabled people and caregivers still struggle to retain positive and mutually rewarding relationships, and ableism still makes it difficult to navigate society. Furthermore, because the act only covers people who acquired their disabilities under the age of 26 (though beneficiaries can be of any age), it excludes people who become impaired after that age. If a 27-year-old is involved in a car accident that paralyzes her, for example, she’d still be limited to the $2,000 cap. A reform allowing all disabled people to be eligible for an ABLE account is critical, but this is a small step in the right direction.

Photo credit: Fort George G. Meade Public Affairs Office