The company fired by the feds for the botched rollout of the Obamacare website has been “fired” again — the time by the New York City controller.

Controller Scott Stringer’s office refused Tuesday to approve a contract awarded by the Bloomberg administration to the Montreal-based firm CGI to overhaul the city’s 311 information hotline.

The Daily News reported that the Department of Information Technology and Telecommunications, known as DoITT, approved the contract hours before Mayor de Blasio took office, and that rival companies questioned CGI’s qualifications to do the work.

Sources said the controller’s office had questions about the planning and scope of the project and was concerned that the cost could balloon to as much as ten times the original $10 million pricetag.

An additional concern, sources said, was that the outgoing administration pushed through the contract on its final hours, denying de Blasio a say in the 311 overhaul.

In a letter Tuesday, Deputy Controller Lisa Flores said that if the new administration decides to go through with the project, it should request additional companies to bid on the work.

“Our review produced a number of concerns with the project approach undertaken by DoITT,” Flores wrote to First Deputy Mayor Anthony Shorris. “My office has returned the contract to DoITT with additional questions.”

CGI, the company responsible for the early failures of HealthCare.com, pictured, has lost its $10 million contract with New York to overhaul the city's 311 hotline. (MIKE SEGAR/REUTERS)

The letter added, “If the city goes forward with the proposed project ... I would strongly encourage conducting an open competitive procurement to a robust pool of vendors.”

A spokeswoman for DoITT did not return a request for comment.

The News previously reported that Bloomberg administration officials were keen on approving the deal because former Mayor Bloomberg saw the 311 hotline as one his legacies.

The News also reported that a mysterious website, Dont911nyc311.com, was created to protest the contract award.

In early January, the Obama administration declined to renew its contract with a CGI subsidiary to design and build the Obamacare site HealthCare.gov after myriad glitches thwarted countless Americans trying to use it to buy coverage.