Agency extends 10th annual Women Build Project into month-long project, the House That Women Built

Loveland Habit for Humanity volunteer Sondra Friedrichsen works on a house in May 2014, during the Women Build event in Boise Village North. ( Special to the Reporter-Herald )

If you go What: The House That Women Built. When: Kicks off Saturday, May 2: build days are 8:30 a.m.-3:30 p.m. with lunch included; open days include May 2, 5, 7, 8, 9, 14, 15, 16, 21, 22, 23, 28 and 29. Where: Sierra Valley subdivision. Note: Lowe's Home Improvement, 1355 Sculptor Drive, will hold a Women Build clinic at 5:30 p.m. Wednesday, April 29, to teach building skills and tool usage. Cost: Individuals: $125; teams: range from $200 to $750, depending on size. Register: Call Vince Deely at 669-9769 or email vince@lovelandhabitat.org. More info: Visit www.lovelandhabitat.org.

By the numbers Loveland Habitat for Humanity worked with 1,059 volunteers in 2014, who volunteered 13,500 hours. The 73 key volunteers volunteered 5,100 hours, working in construction, on the board, on committees and in administration and support. There were 100 groups who worked on home-building projects, equaling 1,105 people from businesses, churches and service clubs.

Because four days wasn't enough to encourage women to help build a house, Loveland Habitat for Humanity turned the 10th annual Women Build Project into a month-long event.

Advertisement

The House That Women Built kicks off Saturday, May 2, when teams of women will spend four days a week for the next six to eight months building a house from the foundation to the roof.

"What can we do to make a bigger impact on affordable housing through Women Build?" said Vince Deely, resource development and marketing director for Loveland Habitat for Humanity, an affordable home-building program.

Loveland Habitat found that it couldn't fit in the number of teams wanting to participate and was limited in the amount it could raise for the days leading up to Mother's Day for Habitat for Humanity's National Women Build Week. This year, the nonprofit aims to encourage 150 women to build — men are welcome to join them — and to raise $30,000 through the fees the women will be paying to participate.

"We normally don't have a lot of women on the site. This is an opportunity for women to engage with Habitat and learn more about affordable housing and what we do," Deely said. "We find that women are the best advocates for affordable housing."

Learning How to Build

The idea is that at least 50 percent of the work on the Women Build home will be done by women. The fees they pay as individuals or part of a team up to 10 people help cover the cost of construction materials and supplies, including lumber, windows, roofing shingles and cabinets.

"For a little bit a month, you're helping build a home both with your muscles and your pocketbook," Deely said.

The home the individuals and teams will be building will be the eighth Habitat home in Sierra Valley, a subdivision that at full build-out will have nine quadplexes, five duplexes and 15 single-family homes, or 61 homes total.

The Women Build home will be the 126th for Habitat in Loveland. The homeowner will be a single father of four children, who requested confidentiality.

"Even though this home is built for a dad, it's a chance to engage with women and educate them and encourage them to advocate for decent, affordable housing in Loveland," Deely said.

The women builders will work on flooring, framing, drywall, siding, painting and landscaping, building every Tuesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday until the home is done. The plumbing and electrical work, which requires a permit, will be hired out to subcontractors.

"You'll have a chance to do things that you may have a need to do at your own home," Deely said. "It builds confidence learning how to use the right tool for the job and seeing the tangible results of your efforts."

Learning How to Use the Tools

Women will learn how to use power tools and other tools and what's involved in the different aspects of constructing a home, Deely said. They aren't required to have any experience to join a team, he said.

"I've seen them go from they can't even hammer a nail to being able to use power tools and read a tape measure. They leave confident," said Shelly Flores, construction director for Loveland Habitat, who oversees all of the operations on the site. "They understand what is inside the walls of a home."

Deserie Newton, one of the Women Build homeowners, moved into her home in Boise Village North in December 2009 after living in a two-bedroom apartment with her younger son in a not-so-nice neighborhood, as she describes it.

"Being a single mom and having all these women come along beside me to help me provide a home for my child was just amazing," Newton said, adding that she finally could live in a home she could afford. "I have a stable, secure place to be because I used my own two hands to help build it. ... It turned into more than a project of just building this building, this house; it also was people reaching out and building into my life."

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm