It’s not finance but it certainly is All About Money*. More importantly it’s simple math.

Most recently I discovered the wave enveloping the voters of our great land. It all came together in what is appearing to be a monumental third party which I named the IHNC (I Have No Clue) party.

The US Census Bureau has proclaimed that in 2015 the millennials, age 18-34, will exceed the baby boomers, age 51-69, in population. Increasing young immigrants are swelling the millennial ranks. Boomer death is exceeding the number of older immigrants arriving in the country thus decreasing their ranks. This pattern will not change and only accelerate.

Given the 26th Amendment to the Constitution, a resolution lowering the voting age from 21 to 18, the math becomes almost ridiculously simple. Between now and November 2016 the number of teenagers eligible to vote will increase dramatically. The number of baby boomers able to vote will decrease dramatically. So who really is the most important vote?

Does a 20 year old understand the significance of Iwo Jima, Gettysburg or Bunker Hill? Do they even know what they are? Do they even care? Asking them to be concerned about Hillary’s history is a non-starter since most think history was last year’s season of “Game of Thrones”.

Does Socialism, Totalitarianism or Fascism have any significance for the millennials other than a line or two in a textbook? They believe martial law is something out of a Jason Stratham movie and Brown Shirts are simply a women’s fashion essential.

Yet the millennials are smart. They can text, play computer games and recite the latest Tweet from Justin Bieber, Miley Cyrus and Kim Kardashian. But don’t ask them who the combatants were in the Spanish-American War since you may be surprised to learn it was the French.

Yes, it is high finance when deciding HOW to spend the billions for voter influence but when it comes to WHOM to spend it on it is simply low finance, a NO BRAINER-the millennials,

the next great voting block.

Yes, the IHNC party lives, is thriving and accepting new membership everyday!