News junkies will have to wait until Friday morning to hear Seattle’s Morning News’ Dave Ross and his interview with President Barack Obama, but the Ron and Don Show got a quick preview Thursday evening, and the story behind Ross’ big scoop of the day.

Related: President Obama: ‘Possible there was a bomb on board’ Russian plane

Ross was treated to a tour of the White House before getting to interview the president in the Oval Office.

“I would say that the real Oval Office is almost as good as the one Martin Sheen had,” Ross told Ron and Don, referencing the cult TV show “The West Wing.”

Ross was given 5 minutes to interview the president about the Affordable Care Act. In the end, he got more than 7 minutes.

“There are people who think it is unforgivable that you did this. What’s your message to them?” Ross asked the president.

“You don’t have to like me to say to yourself, ‘It makes sense to see if this is a good deal for me,'” President Obama responded. “I can’t tell you how many letters I’ve gotten from people that say, ‘I disagree with you on just about everything. But I got to tell ya, I went ahead and signed up anyway. It turned out you saved my life.'”

But Ross found a few points in the conversation to divert from the topic he had been called to Washington D.C. for, and got in some unexpected questions.

“You know if you really screw it up &#8212 because it’s being taped and fed to everybody &#8212 it’s going to be some kind of YouTube joke,” Ross told Ron and Don.

At one point, Ross asked the president about the mysterious Russian airplane crash in Egypt. There has been speculation as to what caused the tragedy, but no one knows the exact cause. Ross learned that the president feels it is possible there was a bomb on board. Obama’s comment to Ross quickly went viral and was carried on multiple news outlets.

“I knew the question about the airplane was legitimate, but certainly not on topic,” Ross said, noting he was there only to discuses the Affordable Care Act. “But he had no trouble &#8212 he knew the answer. He didn’t give me a funny look or anything. He answered the question and steered it back towards healthcare.”

“If I hadn’t have asked it, someone else would have,” he said. “I’m the guy who happened to hold the microphone when the question was asked.”

Ross’ full interview with President Obama will be aired on KIRO Radio during Seattle’s Morning News at 7:15 a.m.