Topics: 2016 campaign, 2016 election, 2016 Elections, 2016 presidential race, Bernie Sanders, Democratic Party, Democrats, Elections 2016, Elizabeth Warren, Hillary Clinton, Hillary Rodham Clinton, Martin O'Malley, Politics, Presidential election 2016, Presidential Race, U.S. Politics, Politics News

Maybe you’ve heard about this: Hillary Clinton, who used to be secretary of state and before that a senator from New York and is (of all things) married to a former president, is going to run for president herself! If elected, she would be the first female president in the history of the United States. Unless we decide to count Nancy Reagan, which looks like an increasingly viable hypothesis as we learn more about her husband’s mental condition. Anyway, it’s quite a story.

It’s possible that the least surprising candidacy in political history would be an even bigger story if it hadn’t all happened before. Admittedly, it’s pretty hard to imagine Hillary’s rollout week being any bigger than it was. One aspect of her immense and distorted cultural significance is the extent to which she drives us all crazy. She drives people who hate her crazy, on both the right and the left – for different reasons, and sometimes the same reasons – but beyond that she afflicts all of us with a strange combination of amnesia and déjà-vu. As my former Salon colleague Rebecca Traister, a forceful and unapologetic Clinton booster, mused this week in her cautious but celebratory essay for the New Republic, “Doesn’t it feel like she’s already been president?”

That is precisely Clinton’s biggest obstacle in her second run for the White House, not Elizabeth Warren or Martin O’Malley or whichever Republican is left standing at the culmination of their highly entertaining clown-car act, but our collective Hillary fatigue and Hillary derangement. Haven’t we already run the entire gamut of emotions associated with having a female president, and with having this one in particular? Going through with it in reality — slogging through the endless process of nominating her, electing her and swearing her in, and then subjecting ourselves to four years or eight years of Clinton and her husband back in the White House — that just feels like overkill. Or, to some of us, like a bad dream that refuses to end. (Sorry, Rebecca!)

But hey, this is America. Overkill is pretty much our jam. Just ask all the random villagers in Yemen or Somalia or Pakistan whom we have droned into oblivion in the uninterrupted secret war of the Bush and Obama years, vigorously embraced and defended by Hillary Clinton. Wait, that’s right — you can’t ask them, because they’re dead. And also because we’re not meant to know what places we have attacked and why, or whether the people in those places were killed by accident or on purpose. I’m sorry; am I ranting? Am I going off on an irrelevant tangent, when the real subject is the amazing symbolic breakthrough of putting a woman in the White House? Or is the real story about how nothing is more important than preventing some right-wing lunatic from appointing other right-wing lunatics to the Supreme Court, because that’s the end point of all political aspirations and the steel door that slams down on all political discourse? I have trouble keeping that straight.

We begin to approach the spirit of apology and contradiction that informs all discussion of Hillary Clinton, and that infects even her most ardent supporters, in this week of peak Hillary-mania, with a tone of pathos and anxiety. Amid a fervent and deeply personal essay thrumming with the possibility and pain she finds in the Clinton candidacy – an essay that embraces Clinton supporters with the first-person plural – Traister pauses to acknowledge that there are legitimate reasons not to like Clinton or vote for her. Despite the bitter aside in the paragraph above, I want to follow suit by acknowledging that good and decent people will find valid reasons for supporting Clinton, especially given the kind of Republican opponent she is likely to face next year. I’m not here to praise Hillary or to bury her: the first is unnecessary and the second impossible. I’m also not here to provide false hope for the so-called American left, which is far too mesmerized by the debased spectacle of presidential politics and is about to get patronized, bamboozled and bulldozed one more time, and I’m definitely not here to shill for the Democratic Party, whose current identity crisis is embodied with eerie precision in the personage of Hillary Clinton.

As I’ve already written, Clinton’s dominant position within her party, and the fact that she seems to have driven all plausible opponents from the field without a fight, is a symptom of the profound corruption and dysfunction of American politics. But Clinton herself is not really the problem. I’m less interested in the question of whether Clinton can be defeated (probably not) or what kind of president she will be (not much worse or better than the current one) than in her outsized and crazy-making symbolic potency, which has almost nothing to do with her cautious political identity as a creature of the “Washington consensus,” a follower of public-opinion polls, a foreign policy hawk and a defender of institutional power in every form.

We’re big on bigness here in America, and big on overkill. We’re also big on historical amnesia and doing the same thing over and over again and gritty, inspirational comeback narratives. Hillary Clinton’s latest reinvention – to call it Hillary 2.0 would be a severe undercount – offers all those things in spades, and if many of them would seem to contradict each other, well, we love that too. Hillary contains multitudes, or at least has worked out a strategy of appearing to contain multitudes, which may come to the same thing. Even after three-plus decades in public life, she remains a distinctively divisive and enigmatic figure, understood by different people in different ways, who has been careful never to attach herself too forcefully to any philosophical or ideological perspective.

Viewed through the prism of conventional politics and policy questions, Hillary Clinton can seem like a Zen koan with no solution. Last week the Economist ran an editorial headlined “What does Hillary stand for?” (it’s behind a paywall) and two days later Dan Balz of the Washington Post asked “Why does Hillary Rodham Clinton want to be president?” I would argue that those questions answer themselves: Clinton wants to be president because she is an ambitious politician and that is the apex of American political life; she stands for the things that will get her elected and enable her to wield power. But I suppose I’m a cynic. In practice, both articles went in circles and answered the questions with more questions, an advanced symptom of Hillary-related mental disorder. Is she hungry enough, Balz wonders, so descending into a pitch-perfect parody of semiotic horse-race punditry? Will voters find her “authentic and empathetic”? “Is she rusty or sharp, chilly or warm?” (“Rusty and warm” sounds to me like the winning combination for 2016. No one will ever accuse Ted Cruz or Rand Paul of being rusty or warm.) Balz did not bring up the presence or absence of fire in the belly, but I’m sure someone else did.

We’ll hear much more from that species of political reporter about how baffling they find Hillary, and about which adjectives best capture her demeanor in artificial encounters with the denizens of Iowa and New Hampshire, in which journalists outnumber the locals. People who already hate Hillary, or love her, feel no such bewilderment. But their exaggerated and defensive emotions are made noticeably crazier by the question of her gender. Which, as Traister correctly asserts, will be both an asset and a liability in the coming campaign. I personally suspect the balance has shifted on that issue, and that the enthusiasm Clinton generates among millions of women will outweigh the bitterness of Fox News troglodytes. But that’s easy for me to say, right?