(Photo: Doug MacGregor)

Hillary’s turn

Really, Hillary and Bernie scream they will make rich pay their fair share of taxes? This they scream to their devoted followers. Followers, in spite of being repeated over and over 45 percent of people pay no federal taxes. Yes Democrats, it is Hillary’s turn. Just shut up and vote for her.

- Alex Cerino, Cape Coral

National hero

On April 25, 2006, the Lee County School District named a new elementary school after Hector Cafferata, a recipient of the Medal of Honor. His heroic actions at the battle of the Chosin Reservoir in 1950, where he selflessly defended his fellow Marines by making himself a target and forcing a large enemy force to withdraw, was a tribute to his selflessness, great valor and strong character.

The naming of a public school for a national hero is a reminder to all students that the price of our freedom is paid for by the courage and self-sacrifice of our brave veterans. Cafferata passed away on April 12. He will be honored at Arlington National Cemetery.

A true hero inspires others to champion noble causes. Mr. Cafferata was a champion of noble American virtues. I was very proud to meet him and his wife, and I send my deepest condolences to his family. God Bless America!

- Robert Chilmonik, Black Mountain, North Carolina

Reducing emissions

The theme of Earth Day this year is Trees for the Earth, with a goal of planting 7.8 billion trees. That’s commendable, but planting trees is only part of the answer to reducing carbon emissions. One of the best strategies we can employ to protect the environment is to double down on an extraordinary source of fuel — natural gas. The U.S. is leading the world in reducing greenhouse gas emissions and natural gas is the reason why. Because we are using more natural gas for power generation, our per capita carbon emissions are now at the lowest level in 20 years. Using natural gas to generate electricity is an effective way to reduce carbon emissions and should be an integral part of our overall climate change strategy.

- Kathryn Cimato, south Fort Myers

Tomorrow not predictable

Notwithstanding great respect for learned meteorologists and oddsmakers, tomorrow will never be totally predictable. It will be a challenging and meaningful time for faith and trust in a loving and forgiving living God who had a rewarding plan for each of us even before we were born.

As a believer that we walk by faith and not by sight, cruel and horrific events that have always existed in an imperfect world do not deter my belief that a future tomorrow may be a “wonderful world” of compassionate diversity sans racism, sexism and injustice.

As an optimist, I’m hopeful that the tomorrow following Jan. 19, 2017, will find the oath of presidential office being administered to an honest person who places God and country above political bias.

- Gerald O. Dangler, Fort Myers

Readers beware

Don’t be fooled by the Affordable Care Act’s (Obamacare) impressive sign-up statistics touted by this administration and parroted by a complicit media. They are grossly exaggerated. My wife, along with countless others, were lured into sign-ups for Obamacare with subsidies offered by “official ACA navigators” only to find out a year and a half later that the “navigators” had supposedly made clerical errors. Now we are told my wife was not and is not eligible for the health care benefits that she previously had and was told she was entitled to. We are now required to pay back the entire year and a half subsidy ($4,200) and to add salt to our wound her $550 a month policy has now jumped to almost $900 a month or $10,800 a year at an increase of 65 percent, (this for one person with no medical issues). So now it’s either a $900 a month policy for one person (totally unaffordable), or an inferior $650 policy with huge deductibles and co-pays for less coverage.

The sleight of hand tactic that this administration and media perpetrated on the public is shameful. Since we had been lured into this Obamacare scheme and know of many others who have also been victimized, we firmly believe that this was done purposely to embellish sign-up numbers to disguise an otherwise unfavorable showing of Obamacare.

- William Farley, south Fort Myers

What makes brown water?

Has anyone ever analyzed exactly what makes Lake “O” water brown? Is it sewage (animal, bird poop, human), chemical nutrients, just plain dirt. Is it a resulting cocktail of growth (mold, etc). I buy Publix drinking water at 85 cents a gallon because I am under the impression it originates from Lakeland (Publix’s headquarters), which is north of Lake “O” and ahead of gravity flow.

- J. Harrington, North Fort Myers

Misleading commentary

The April 14, The News-Press Zika threat coverage is inconsistent, uncoordinated, misleading, and may confuse the public. The commentary by prominent MD, Marie Crandall, (Hendry County monkeys could spread Zika) features the Zika threat, monkeys, Hendry and Lee counties. That comprehensive guest opinion laudably suggests that monkey facilities amplify Zika, may pose a threat to citizens of Hendry and Lee Counties, and should be shut down.

Unfortunately, it also says Zika fever is a “mild illness,” and downplays that “severe (Zika) disease requiring hospitalization is uncommon.” Nowhere does it warn of “extremely severe” risks to fetuses of microcephaly, abnormally small heads and “extremely severe” brain damage, which were covered in articles on pages 8A (Timing on Zika funding uncertain, Associated Press) and 2B (Zika may affect babies in later stages of pregnancy, USA Today). Maybe the “guest opinion,” was published in the Tallahassee Democrat, before severe brain damage risks to fetuses were definite and published: 1. FSU reported first in world, March 4, that Zika virus targets brain cells in fetuses and stunts their growth. 2. Helsinki University confirmed March 30, that the (Zika) virus is detected in blood samples while brain damage develops and in cell cultures from brain tissue.

- Lex Hood, Lehigh Acres

Editor’s note: The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention lists the Zika virus as an illness with mild symptoms such as fever, rash and joint pain, etc. contracted after being bitten by an infected mosquito. However, the CDC has concluded that Zika also causes birth defects, such as microcephaly, in infants born to mothers infected with the virus during pregnancy.

Cobras in Florida

The article which appeared in your local section April 12 (Fla. could crack down on cobras, Florida Today) begs the question: Why would the state of Florida allow any venomous reptiles, not native to Florida, under any circumstance? Really?

- Steve Hunt, Naples

Sawicki’s NC travel ban

The Cape Coral mayor is trying to pass a rule to limit city travel to North Carolina for city employees. I am sure there is not a lot of travel to North Carolina, but who is she to decide that state’s law (bathroom birth sex only). I would think if there was a vote statewide, that law would be in Florida too! It just makes sense! This could cost her the next election (Cape Coral weighs in on bears, not on North Carolina HB2, April 18, Frank Bumb).

- Jack Kinser, North Fort Myers

Noisy restaurants

Thank you for the article about noisy restaurants (April 13, Eating in peace, Annabelle Tometich). I hope managers realize that I would gladly pay a little more for an entree if I could eat it where I can hear myself think. PF Changs and Joe’s Crab Shack are the worst.

- Elizabeth Lansky, Cape Coral

Hillary not the most qualified

Mailbag contributor Joan Fanelli (April 1, Best man for the job: a woman) says Hillary is the most qualified person to become our next president and lists her dubious reasons. Let’s take a look at some of them:

•Hillary got “legislation passed in a bipartisan manner.” Politifact (Spot check of Hillary Clinton's Senate record fails to support bipartisanship claim) rated this claim as false.

•Hillary “has worked with foreign leaders and represented America strongly,” well duh! Isn’t that what a Secretary of State does? And while we’re at it how did that turn out? The reset with Russia and Benghazi come to mind.

•Hillary expanded “TRICARE to the National Guard and Reserves.” The fact is active duty guard and reserve troops already had federal health insurance and 4 out of 5 inactive members had some form of insurance.

•Hillary “ensured child health care.” I assume she’s talking about the CHIP (Children’s Health Insurance Program), which was co-sponsored by senators Ted Kennedy and Orrin Hatch. In fairness to Hillary, as the First Lady, she did support it.

•Hillary “secured funding for the heroes of 911.” Hillary and fellow New York Sen. Chuck Schumer secured $20 billion for this tragedy. Fourteen-plus years later and I still don’t think we know what happened to that money.

So as Ms. Fanelli stated “It’s time to realize: Sometimes the best man for the job is a woman” and she is right but pardon my English, Hillary ain’t the one.

- Rick Manuel, North Fort Myers

Gotcha moment

Thank you Edward Christenbury for your letter “Make Peace in Israel,” April 17. Mr. Jack Ruzicho and his Presbyterian Church USA, are part of a movement called Boycott, Divestment, Sanctions (BDS) that try to delegitimize Israel any way they can.

For Ruzicho’s Christian tour to visit two obscure villages that were emptied and destroyed in northern Israel by the Israeli’s in the 1950’s is unbelievable. The villages were not destroyed because there were Christians living there but because they were too close to the Lebanese border that had an armistice line but no peace. This story is just a gotcha moment for the Israel haters.

Arab Christians living in Israel today are not required to serve in the Israel Defense Forces, but more and more are volunteering and serve proudly. They look around the Middle East and see the murder and mayhem to fellow Christians in other countries and are glad to be in Israel.

For Ruzicho and his band of BDS’ers, this is my gotcha moment. Happy 68th birthday Israel!

- Dottie Ruberto, south Fort Myers

Wrong message at tech awards

It was interesting to read your coverage of the annual technology awards sponsored by Southwest Florida Regional Technology Partnership (April 13, Tech excellence takes stage in Fort Myers, Casey Logan). Regrettably, your coverage focused on keynote speaker Carl Stringer of U.S. Sugar Corp.

As someone in the audience listening to his remarks on “singularity” and “black holes,” I thought about the singularity of SWFL beaches and waterways, and the economic black hole we’re destined to confront if efforts are not made to protect our water quality from agricultural processes spurred on by industry Stringer represents.

It was unsettling to sense no help in solving this environmental crisis may ever derive from Stringer’s camp given the bleakness of his assertions which you quoted, “The future is always unknown and unimaginable ... No radical and fundamental change in the fabric of human existence is around the corner.” I think it’s ridiculous to suggest the future is unimaginable nor deny reality of fundamental changes that have rapidly occurred, especially to an audience of imaginative entrepreneurs who are creating/using technology to advance change. Participants at the event were reduced to mere mentions in story that should’ve focused on great work coming from SWFL.

- Bill Schiller, Estero

The who, what, why of sugar

The letter of Mike DiCorpo (April 19, Time to break the cycle) is right on target. Sugar! This is a Pulitzer Prize story waiting to be written by a truth-digging journalist. Starting from the beginning: who are the original owners and farmers of this important crop?

How did they arrive here? Why do we, true or not true, pay more for sugar than it would cost us to buy imported sugar from our Caribbean neighbors? These poor neighbors could use the massive revenue available from this product. Instead, is it illegal for us to buy their product? If this is true, why? Who are today’s owners of Big Sugar? Where do they live?

What would our Everglades look like today? Who was the original cause of today’s condition? Why do we have to pay for it’s revival? Why don’t those who benefited greatly pay for it’s revival? So there are so many stories I’ve heard over the years. It would be great to actually know the detailed truth. Harm the existing workers? Of course. But what brought them here? I think we would hear names of our well-known politicians in this story. Who’s the brave soul that could do this?

- Leo J. Selvey, Cape Coral

Hillary should be in jail

Hillary and her minions want to convince those who are not aware of how classified material is handled that her messages were not classified when they were sent from her unprotected computer. She says they were later classified.

I handled thousands of classified messages during a 27-year military career. I know for certain that this is not the way classified materials are handled. All messages are clearly marked with the proper classification before they are sent and they are clearly marked when they are received as well.

It would be impossible to not read the level of classification. It would make no sense to make a message secret after it was sent because it would then be available for anyone to read, regardless of their clearance level. This includes our enemies. Some of my sources say she exposed the names of our undercover operatives in Pakistan and Afghanistan on her unprotected computers. Hillary and the media’s attempt to justify her casual and improper handing of this nation’s secrets is total nonsense. If I, or any of my staff, had handled classified material as Hillary has done, we would be serving time in Leavenworth prison. In my opinion, this is where she should be.

- James Whitfield, Fort Myers

Medical marijuana

The recent op-ed by Christine Rogers (April 5, Retired police say yes to medical marijuana) about legalizing medical marijuana reminded me that pretty soon this issue will find it’s way back on the ballot here in Florida, so get ready.

It was narrowly defeated the last time and I’m sure the John Morgans of the world and other proponents are working tirelessly on wording of the next marijuana ballot initiative so that the average person will have an even more difficult time deciphering it. My grand-daddy always told me if you don’t understand something, then vote against it. But I do understand this issue. This is really about big money, as there are a lot of investors that stand to make millions if this issue passes. So keep that in mind when you see this the next time.

- Joe Williams, Cape Coral

Read or Share this story: http://newspr.es/1SBudAq