NEW YORK , July 14, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- J.P. Morgan Alternative Asset Management ("JPMAAM") was honored by Institutional Investor magazine as "Firm of the Year" among Large Fund of Hedge Funds managers at the 12th Annual Hedge Fund Industry Awards. Honoring the achievements of the past year, Institutional Investor presented the award at a ceremony attended by more than 450 investors and hedge fund leaders at the Mandarin Oriental in New York on June 26.

With $11.4 billion under management (as of May 31, 2014 ), JPMAAM's Hedge Fund Solutions platform is comprised of commingled funds of funds as well as a substantial number of customized and advisory accounts.

"We are honored by this prestigious award, which is a validation of our commitment to delivering hedge fund solutions to clients," said Paul Zummo , CIO/CEO of the group. "This award also reflects our focus on unique investment strategies and our continual search for managers who can add alpha. Together, these factors have helped us drive outperformance for the benefit of clients."

Overall consideration for the award was given to "performance, innovation, due diligence, risk management, firm culture and the proven ability of the firm to provide overall value in constructing hedge fund portfolios for clients," according to Institutional Investor. Other finalists in the category included Goldman Sachs Hedge Fund Strategies , Morgan Stanley Alternative Investment Partners , Pacific Alternative Asset Management Company and Permal Group .

For more than 19 years, J.P. Morgan Alternative Asset Management has been dedicated to managing hedge fund products and solutions, and helping investors achieve their objectives. To that end, the unit employs 75 highly experienced professionals around the world. Clients of JPMAAM's Hedge Fund Solutions group include many of the world's largest and most sophisticated investors, including pension funds, sovereign wealth funds, university endowments, insurance companies and charitable foundations.

About J.P. Morgan Alternative Asset Management

J.P. Morgan Alternative Asset Management ("JPMAAM") is a part of JP Morgan Asset Management's Alternative Investments business, a $120 billion (as of March 31, 2014 ) global franchise providing clients with broad solutions across real assets, hedge funds, and private equity. J.P. Morgan Alternative Investments provides world-class investment opportunities to institutional, retail and high net worth clients through an array of vehicles including separate accounts, commingled funds, mutual funds and funds of funds.

About J.P. Morgan Asset Management

J.P. Morgan Asset Management , with assets under management of $1.6 trillion (as of March 31, 2014 ), is a global leader in investment management. J.P. Morgan Asset Management's clients include institutions, retail investors and high net worth individuals in every major market throughout the world. J.P. Morgan Asset Management offers global investment management in equities, fixed income, real estate, hedge funds, private equity and liquidity. JPMorgan Chase & Co. (NYSE: JPM), the parent company of J.P. Morgan Asset Management , is a leading global asset management firm with assets of approximately $2.4 trillion and operations in more than 60 countries (as of March 31 , 2014). Information about JPMorgan Chase & Co. is available at www.jpmorganchase.com.