Sensory Friendly Theatre series kicks off on 2 p.m. Sunday, September 21 with the inquisitive, lovable little monkey Curious George.

Curious George kicks off Union County’s Sensory Friendly Theatre Series (Photo: PHOTO COURTSEY OF THE OFFICE OF UNION COUNTY ) Story Highlights The series provides access for families with sensory, social, and learning disabilities

Autism Friendly Spaces provides specialists to train staff and volunteers

The theatre environment will be adjusted to provide a sensory-friendly and judgment-free space

Union County’s 2014-2015 Sensory Friendly Theatre series kicks off 2 p.m. Sunday, Sept. 21 with the inquisitive, lovable little monkey Curious George. This new musical, based on the books by Margaret and H.A. Rey, will be performed at the Union County Performing Arts Center in Rahway. All tickets are $8 per person and can be purchased through the Union County Performing Arts Center at ucpac.org or by calling the box office at 732-499-8226.

“The Sensory Friendly Theatre series provides access for our community’s families with sensory, social, and learning disabilities to experience the performing arts in a safe, judgment-free environment,” said Freeholder Chairman Christopher Hudak. “The Freeholder Board is proud to continue supporting this series.”

In this delightful new musical, George ends up on a mission to help Chef Pisghetti’s meatballs win a world-famous competition. With every swing and flip, George takes the audience on a fun-filled adventure in which he learns more about Rome, meatballs and the “secret ingredient” to cooking, than he’d ever imagined.

Bring your family to join the inquisitive, lovable little monkey Curious George, star of books, movies and the award winning PBS television show, in this delightful new musical at the Union County PAC on Sunday, Sept. 21.

The Sensory Friendly Theatre series, presented by the Freeholder Board, began in 2012 as an initiative of Freeholder Alexander Mirabella. It is designed according to guidelines that help reduce disturbances for individuals who experience heightened sensory sensitivity.

Implementing the supportive atmosphere is the organization Autism Friendly Spaces, which provides specialists to train staff and volunteers on working with children with autism and other special needs during Sensory Friendly Theatre performances, while providing comfort and help to families.

For each of the special performances in the Sensory Friendly Theatre series, the theatre environment at the Performing Arts Center will be adjusted to provide a sensory-friendly, comfortable and judgment-free space that is welcoming for all families. For more information on what to expect at a Sensory Friendly Theatre performance visit http://ucpac.org/html/sensoryfriendlytheatre.cfm

The Sensory Friendly Theatre series is paid for by the Union County Board of Freeholders, through the Kids Recreation Trust Fund. The performance of Curious George is made possible in part by funding from the NJ Department of Community Affairs through a Recreational Opportunities for Individuals with Disabilities Grant.

The next performance in the Sensory Friendly Theatre series is the winter adventures of Frosty on Nov. 23.

For more information or to purchase tickets call the Union County Performing Arts Center, 732-499-8226 or visit ucpac.org. The UCPAC Box Office, located at 1601 Irving Street, Rahway is open 11 a.m. to 5 p.m. Tuesday through Friday and is also open until 8 p.m. on Thursdays.

For information on additional Union County recreational programs for people with disabilities age five and up, call the Union County Department of Parks and Recreation at 908-527-4806 or visit ucnj.org.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1tWoY0g