Sanders showed class in a way that no one else has done yet in the debates of either party.

By Tony May

Bernie Sanders may have been the guy to say it, but he was speaking for all Americans when he declared during last week's Democratic Presidential debate:

"Enough of the e-mails. Let's talk about the real issues."

The facts are clear enough for people to make actionable individual judgments.

Hillary Clinton maintained a private email server while she was Secretary of State. It's likely that some or a lot of email traffic contained sensitive information that may or may not have been vulnerable to hacking by foreign governments.

If you like Hillary, you're probably willing to forgive her for her poor judgment.

If you don't like her, it's just another reason why you probably will vote for someone else for President. And, if you're not sure how you feel, it's probably important to begin looking at where she stands on other issues important to you.

As a voter, you want to concentrate on the principle summarized by the acronym WIIFM – What's In It For Me.

Where do the candidates stand on the issues that affect me, the voter, most?

Sanders offered his own laundry list: "The middle class of this country is collapsing.

We have 27 million people living in poverty. We have massive wealth and income inequality. Our trade policies have cost us millions of decent jobs. The American people want to know whether we're going to have a democracy or an oligarchy as a result of Citizens United (Supreme Court ruling on campaign finance)."

Reasonable people can add lots to the list:

Can we level-fund or reduce military spending?

Can we find the money to do right by our veterans?

Can we get our allies to help us bring peace in Syria without involving American ground troops? Can we work the kinks out of Obamacare and continue to improve access to affordable health care?

Can we add millions of meaningful, good-paying jobs to the American economy in the next few years?

Can we agree on a fair immigration policy that helps America and those who want to come and work and live here? Can we get Congress functioning again?

Can we make college affordable again for most Americans? The list goes on.

With this one moment of lucidity, Sanders set a new standard for the debates for both parties.

He showed class in a way that no one else has done yet in the debates of either party.

He stood up for an opponent – and he stood up for the voters. It was a Presidential gesture that a lot of Presidents haven't displayed often enough. And, he demonstrated that a honking, New York City accent can be used as a tool for good as well as a scimitar for personal attacks.

Sanders set a tone that was returned in kind by the other Democratic candidates.

When the Vermont senator railed against the fact that Wall Street has run rampant since the 2008 economic meltdown and called for reinstatement of Depression-era banking controls known as the Glass-Steagall Act, former Maryland Gov. Martin O'Malley was quick to add his endorsement.

Clinton agreed that something should be done to reel in financial services firms that were perceived as "too big to fail" but pushed her own package of reforms. She singled out regulating "shadow banking" firms which would be exempt from the provisions of 1930s era banking laws.

Doing something to create an economic firewall to protect American investors from the next economic collapse Is wildly popular among Democratic likely voters. While the national economy in general remains sluggish, Wall Street – as discussed by Sanders – has increased its influence internationally to the point where it controls more than half of the net worth of the world's markets.

Sanders' display of character as well as energy and passion made him the debate's big winner,. Even so, Clinton is still the odd on favorite to win the nomination. And her debate performance was relaxed and friendly which won her grudging recognition from even practiced Hillary-bashers.

Meanwhile, O'Malley – who at various points sounded like he might be running for Vice President – acquitted himself well. His closing remarks, focusing on the quality and conduct of the entire Democratic panel, underscored his understanding that it is critical to, first, sell the Democratic Party to voters.

Republican candidates would do well to emulate the standard set by the Democratic panel of candidates.