Hailey, a Boston terrier-beagle mix, can dunk a basketball, push a shopping cart and do a handstand.

But on Saturday, she will forgo her more than 100 tricks and focus on agility tasks such as weaving around poles, running through tunnels and scrambling over a see-saw.

Hailey is one of 15 mixed-breed dogs out of the 225 canines competing in the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show’s inaugural Masters Agility Championship Saturday, a rare chance for the non-purebred set to take part in the esteemed show. (The mutts only get the chance to compete in agility, not in the breed judging on Monday and Tuesday.)

Hailey’s owner, Karen Profenna of New City, N.Y., was excited about the competition but circumspect about Hailey’s chances. The energetic 8-year-old “Boggle,” as the mix is called, is an experienced competitor and practices in the winter months in indoor training facilities.

“Just like people, everybody has a good day, everybody has a bad day, we’re going to give it our best,” Ms. Profenna said.

Alfie, a mixed breed, demonstrates his mastery of an agility test during a news conference on January 15. Associated Press

The array of 15 mixed-breed dogs competing Saturday includes a handful of local dogs. Panda, a likely mix of Australian Shepherd or Australian Cattle Dog and Border Collie, according to her owner, Stacy Eastman, took her first agility course at about 12 weeks old; she is now 8. Ms. Eastman, who lives in Chester, N.J., adopted her through Petfinder.com.

“I never thought I’d get to go to Westminster with the dogs, because I have the mixes,” she said. (Ms. Eastman’s other dog, Barley, will not be competing.)

For Alfie, a 7-year-old poodle-terrier, agility was a way to harness his energy.

“The terrier in him, he was just bounding all over the place,” said his owner, Irene Palmerini of Toms River, N.J. “Agility was a way to focus that energy into something positive.”

To get her dog Crime used to a see-saw, Debra Lazaro of Jackson, N.J., trained him to close drawers, which got him comfortable with the feeling of things moving under his paws.

Ms. Lazaro said Crime, a Staffordshire bull terrier-Border Collie mix, was bred specifically for sports and performance.

“He has the musculature of the Staffie bull and the speed of a Border Collie and the brain of both,” she said. She credits his good looks with helping him land two film roles.

She said she has to stay in shape to keep up with him because he is so fast.

“It’s mentally and physically challenging,” Ms. Lazaro said of the agility course. “When it all comes together and it’s a great run, it’s like a runner’s high.”