Eagles jump on Rams early, Berk scores twice

Thompson Valley midfielder Ryan Berk (3) advances the ball around Green Mountain's Anthony Martinez (20), and Jacob Foust (6) on the way to scoring a goal in the second half of their match Saturday at the Mountain View soccer field. Berk had two goals in the Eagles' 4-0 victory. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

The Thompson Valley soccer team has a habit of scoring in unconventional ways.

Whether the set up comes off a free kick by senior goalie Jacob Sievers near midfield or a long throw in by senior midfielder Luke Beal, the Eagles have a knack for catching teams off guard and capitalizing.

And oftentimes, such atypical goals have a way of frustrating the opposition.

Saturday against visiting Green Mountain, it took the Eagles just 16 seconds after the opening kick to cash in on one of their unusual scoring chances. This time it was a long feed by Sievers to Ryan Berk, giving the Eagles a lead before most spectators could even settle into their seats.

"It's really unexpected from other teams, that's for sure," Sievers said of his role in the offense. "They don't expect it, so it's a good surprise for them."

Already a bit perturbed, Green Mountain's frustration level rose to a near boiling point eight minutes later when senior defender Reid Collins punched home a long-distance throw in by Beal to give the Eagles an early 2-0 cushion.

Soon after, the visiting Rams began losing their collective cool. Four minutes after Collins' goal, the Rams received three quick yellow cards for arguing with officials.

The second two cards put the visitors a man down, and from there the 4A non-conference matchup at MVHS Field was no longer in doubt.

For good measure the Eagles added two more goals — a header by Gift Chinda in the 29th minute and a second goal by Berk in the 56th minute — to give TVHS the 4-0 victory.

The Eagles' execution on the pitch was certainly up to par, but perhaps more impressive Saturday was their ability to keep their composure as the opposition began to lose theirs. By the final whistle, the Rams received eight yellow cards and three red.

Thompson Valley goalie Jacob Sievers slides out to make a stop in front of Green Mountain's Ryan Winkler in the second half Saturday at the Mountain View soccer field. (Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

In the past Thompson Valley might not have stayed so levelheaded. But thankfully for the Eagles, such discipline is something they've been working on lately.

"We've just learned to control our emotions, which it hasn't always been that way. We were just like that, nitpicking the referees and all that stuff," TVHS coach Chase Hammen said. "We sat down and talked about that's the stuff that can lose you games. That's the stuff that keeps you from playoffs, and we're walking that thin line of being either in or not in."

The win improved Hammen's team to 5-1-2 on the season and should be a nice boost to the Eagles' postseason resume against a Green Mountain team that fell to 4-3-1.

The Eagles haven't reached the playoffs in quite some time, providing the club with an obvious source of motivation day in and day out.

"We want to make it bad," Berk said. "We talk about it pretty much every practice, look forward to it. (We just need to) keep playing our hardest against conference."

Contact Reporter-Herald Sports Writer Sean Star at 970-669-5050 ext. 512, sstar@reporter-herald.com or twitter.com/rhpreps