K9 criticism unfair

Nothing is worse than piling on and being selectively informed. I’m referring to the barrage of negative commentary being levied at the North Port K9 unit. The dogs are indispensable tools that are controlled and constantly trained by sworn, qualified police officers who have volunteered their time and resources to provided additional protection to everyone.

When the situation calls for a canine, it’s due to its ability to track the scent of a child or a lost person, to indicate if illegal drugs are present, or to detain and control fleeing individuals who choose not to complying with our officers.

These K9s are not “let loose” on law-abiding citizens; they are used to de-escalate dynamic, constantly fluid and dangerous situations that place the officer, his dog and the public in harm's way.

So stop complaining, and be thankful that we have a K9 unit that is highly respected and is on call 24/7 to protect you from those who believe the rule of law and your safety does not matter.

Levko Klos

North Port

Climate change not debatable

A recent Herald-Tribune article by Harold Bubil, titled “Spirited debate on climate change,” is an example of the importance of the upcoming election. We voters will choose between candidates who are committed to us, or candidates who are mainly committed to the bottom line of business interests — profit-making.

I am a capitalist, which I am sure is true of the vast majority of Americans. I believe in free enterprise. so long as profit-taking does not take precedent over the need to protect us.

In Bubil’s more recent article he referred to his previous column about the choice of developers in Miami to disregard concerns for rising sea levels. That disregard is either born out of ignorance or it is sadly callous and dangerous.

Today, over 97 percent of the climate scientists are in agreement that global warming is occurring at rates never experienced before. There is irrefutable evidence that we would be in a cooling cycle if it were not for our human use of carbon fuels.

Given the overwhelming consensus by experts, it is incredibly irresponsible to deny this. Scientists admit that, yes, there is a remaining uncertainty in our understanding. The uncertainty today is just how soon places like Miami will be terribly flooded.

Isn’t it remarkable that our Republican Party stands alone on this? Every other country has opposing factions, but they all agree with the scientists on climate change. Please do vote.

Brad Hardin

Venice

Rubio's bad judgment

I seriously question the judgment — and, by extension, the ability to run our country — of a person who would risk his squeaky clean image for the sake of a convicted drug offender.

Maybe Marco Rubio can’t help the embarrassment of accidents of birth or a relative’s mate selection (his sister marrying Mr. Wrong), but he can help “endorsement without reservation” by not giving it: “Sorry, Orlando, but I cannot be associated with you, given your illegal behavior. Now get lost and never contact me again."

I do not believe it is too much to ask of those seeking to represent us that they exhibit legal, moral and ethical behavior.

Marco, you’re done.

David Timmerman

Nokomis

Obamacare ideologies

Regarding “Medicaid brawls reflect GOP split," an article reprinted from the New York Times that appeared in this paper Dec. 28: I call your attention to the following quote, mostly attributed to Joan Alker of Georgetown University: "... the divide was 'a reflection of the larger fight in the Republican Party between more pragmatic Republicans, including governors, and the ideological wing of that party that wants to stop Obamacare at all costs.'”

The “ideological wing” referred to understands the huge additional costs of Medicaid expansion, with a heavy financial burden to be the responsibility of the states in the years to come. Yet, at the same time the “ideological wing” has seen the studies showing increased emergency room usage in expansion states due to a lack of access to physicians (practices that accept large numbers of Medicaid patients can find themselves in bankruptcy) with dubious health outcome improvements.

Yes, the argument from “non-ideologues” will be that we all pay for uninsured health care one way or another. That’s an argument that might resonate better if not for skyrocketing premiums (for many, taxpayer-subsidized) and deductibles under Obamacare (as referred to by Ms. Alker) despite Medicaid expansion.

So I ask: Who really are the ideologues and who are the pragmatists?

Michael Shevach

Nokomis

Life-saving articles

Thank you for publishing the article about the unfortunate death of swimmer Tate Ramsden and the follow-up letter by Yale Emmer (Dec. 31).

Two of my grandsons are competitive swimmers in New Jersey. I sent the original article to my daughter, thinking that this might be something to be aware of. When I saw the letter, I told her, and she requested that I send it to her so that she can show it to their coach.

It seems that a few months ago, one of the girls on the team was doing underwater laps and fainted. Fortunately, my grandson and one of the other lifeguards on the team noticed and pulled her out. The letter may explain what had happened.

Apparently, this is not unusual. Coaches, swimmers, and parents and lifeguards need to be aware of this phenomenon and take precautions to prevent it.

Ruth E. Skole

Sarasota