Editor, Journal: I have taught as a part-time instructor in both sociology and criminal justice at several universities and colleges in the Chicago area for 44 years until I retired in 2014. I worked full-time in state and then federal law enforcement. I have a law degree plus a master’s degree and additional graduate work.

It used to be that adjuncts (part-time, non-tenured faculty) were a small minority of faculty, used to fill a few vacant slots either because of their special expertise or since another full-time slot was not justified to teach a couple surplus courses. But the situation has changed dramatically in the last 20 years. Now, the majority of college faculties not only at community colleges but four-year institutions are adjuncts.

A case in point is Oakton Community College, which has campuses in Des Plaines and Skokie. I taught there as an adjunct from 1989 until 2014 when I retired. When OCC first opened in the 1960s, it had 150 full-time and 250 adjunct faculties. At last count, it still had around 160 full-time faculties -- but around 400-plus adjuncts.

Why the huge increase? Adjuncts have no job security (tenure) and may or may not get a course assignment each semester. Their pay is a fraction of a full-time salary with a meager pension and probably no healthcare coverage. Adjuncts at Oakton make on average $2,000 to $4,000 per course. If an adjunct taught at several colleges -- as some do -- and taught a total of 10 courses (a full-time equivalent load), his or her salary would be $20,000 to $40,000 per year -- less than half of a full-timer. To thwart adjuncts qualifying for Obamacare, Oakton and most state community colleges and four-year schools three years ago significantly cut the number of courses an adjunct could teach -- resulting in a double whammy of lowered income and not qualifying for healthcare if they needed it.

Adjuncts are a very diverse group, which makes forming an effective adjunct union very difficult. Some adjuncts teach part-time alongside a full-time career. Some retired from a full-time job. Some teach at several colleges in an effort to eke out a meager salary with sparse benefits, if any. Some hope for an eventual full-time, tenured position despite the odds being stacked against them. Some love teaching at the college level so much and have other sources of income that they would consider teaching for free.

President Obama, Mayor Emanuel, Bernie Sanders and others have called for free college for everyone, especially for the financially disadvantaged.

But free education at whatever level -- community college or four-year institutions -- would inevitably mean expanding the pool of exploited adjuncts even more. Well paid college administrators and even full-time tenured faculty know that their financial well-being comes as a direct result of those at the bottom of the academic caste system: (college president, full professor, associate professor, assistant professor, and then adjuncts).

Once I asked a high-ranking administrator at OCC whether he would want his kid to be an adjunct. He got into his car without answering my question. Time and time again, adjuncts hear administrators tell them that they deserve higher pay, job security, health benefits, etc., but “we just can’t afford it.” Then you do a Freedom of Information request and find out that these outrageous salaries for presidents are very affordable for some reason.

Welcome to Adjunctville -- the wrong side of the academic track. Would you want your kid to be an adjunct?

Chester Kulis, Mount Prospect