Photo

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)

Good morning.

Here’s what you need to know:

• Confederate flag under scrutiny.

The South Carolina General Assembly is expected to vote today on whether to allow lawmakers to consider Gov. Nikki R. Haley’s suggestion that the state remove the Confederate battle flag from the State House grounds.

She called for taking down the flag on Monday, five days after nine African-Americans were killed in a historic black church in Charleston. Doing so requires the approval of the legislature.

• Obama is closer to trade win.

After weeks of procedural moves, Congress took a step today toward granting President Obama enhanced power to negotiate a sweeping trade accord with the Pacific Rim.

Senators voted to end debate on the legislation, virtually ensuring final passage on Wednesday of Mr. Obama’s top legislative priority in his final years in office.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

• Patriots star makes his case.

Tom Brady, a four-time Super Bowl winner, is at the N.F.L.’s headquarters in New York today to appeal his suspension over the underinflated footballs in the A.F.C. Championship game in January.

Commissioner Roger Goodell will hear the appeal in what has come to be known as “deflategate.”

• Talks and more talks.

The foreign ministers of France, Germany, Russia and Ukraine meet today in Paris to discuss the Ukraine conflict. Kremlin officials are furious about the extension of economic sanctions.

Separately, diplomats from six world powers and Iran are in Vienna for talks to seal a deal on Tehran’s nuclear future ahead of the deadline, which is one week from today.

• The state of our health care.

The share of poor Americans who were uninsured fell substantially in 2014, according to the first full year of federal data since the Affordable Care Act extended coverage to millions last year.

The findings are in the National Health Interview Survey, released today.

• U.S. and China come together.

Secretary of State John Kerry and Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew host the U.S.-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue in Washington, amid strains over the cybertheft of personal information from 14 million federal workers in the U.S.

• Extreme weather.

Pakistan’s military is responding today to a heat wave that has killed hundreds.

Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox. Monday – Friday.

In the U.S., severe storms with tornadoes have hit the Midwest and wildfires are spreading in four Western states.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Over the next century, more people than previously thought will be exposed to floods, droughts, heat waves and other extreme weather associated with climate change, according to a report in the British medical journal The Lancet.

• It’s still early, but...

Hillary Rodham Clinton is leading her nearest Democratic competitor by 60 percentage points, and she holds an advantage against the top Republican contenders.

It’s all in a new NBC News/Wall Street Journal poll.

MARKETS

• Greek debt talks continue, with an eye to the summit meeting on Thursday and Friday of all 28 European Union leaders in Brussels.

• Wall Street stocks are mixed. European shares closed broadly higher, and Asian indexes were up.

NOTEWORTHY

• U.S. advances at World Cup.

The American women prevailed, 2-0, over Colombia on Monday night. The U.S. face China in the quarterfinals on Friday.

It’s a rematch of the memorable final of the 1999 Women’s World Cup, won by the Americans on penalty kicks.

• California plane crash.

A small plane registered to James Horner, the composer who wrote the Oscar-winning score for “Titanic,” crashed in Southern California, according to The Associated Press, but the identity of the one person who died has not been released.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

• First lady, and editor.

Michelle Obama was the guest editor of the July-August issue of More magazine, which hits newsstands today. The issue’s theme is “More Impact.”

• Emergency visas only.

The State Department computer system that processes 50,000 travel visas a day is not expected to come back online before next week, the government said.

It was idled by an unexplained hardware failure.

• Royal travels.

Queen Elizabeth II arrives in Germany today for a four-day state visit. She will attend a state banquet, travel to the Bergen-Belsen concentration camp and meet with Chancellor Angela Merkel.

• New sounds.

Kacey Musgraves releases her second major label album, “Pageant Material,” and once again she’ll be pegged as an agent of change for the country music genre, according to our music critic.

• Fresh reads.

Milan Kundera, author of “The Unbearable Lightness of Being,” releases today “The Festival of Insignificance,” and Don Winslow returns to the drug wars in the thriller “The Cartel.”

And “How to Catch a Russian Spy” is the true story of an American civilian who became a double agent.

• In memoriam.

Walter Scheib, the executive chef of the White House during the administrations of Bill Clinton and George W. Bush, was found dead near a hiking trail in New Mexico. He was 61.

Daniel D. Villanueva, a former kicker for the Los Angeles Rams and Dallas Cowboys who also founded the Univision broadcasting network, died in California. He was 77.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

BACK STORY

Members of search crews in wooded areas of upstate New York who are looking for two prison escapees are at risk of contracting Lyme disease, and South Koreans face an outbreak of Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS).

On the surface, Lyme and MERS have nothing in common, but they were both named after a place — a practice that has recently been criticized.

Photo

A tick-borne disease that first sickened children and adults in the 1970s appeared in Old Lyme, Conn. It became known as Lyme disease, although it has been found around the world.

MERS is a viral respiratory illness that was first reported in Saudi Arabia, where more than 1,000 people have been infected since 2012 and about 450 have died.

The World Health Organization became concerned about the inaccuracies and stigmas that the names cause, and officials there recently gave guidance for naming new human infectious diseases.

They frown on names referring to animals (mad cow), places (West Nile), people (Alzheimer’s) and groups (Legionnaires).

New names might look like A (H1N1) pdm09 instead of swine flu. The pigs’ reputation would be better protected, and so would our health, the W.H.O. says, if names are more precise.

Victoria Shannon contributed reporting.

Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.