First-year pharmacy student Austin McCauley collects a voter registration form from student Jamie Moriarity on Monday, April 4 at Purdue. (Photo: Meghan Holden)

Purdue University students don't differ much from young people across the nation when it comes to the 2016 presidential election.

Liberal students feel the bern for Sen. Bernie Sanders and many Republicans want any GOP candidate who isn't Donald Trump.

On the last day to register to vote in Indiana's primary, the Purdue campus wasn't buzzing on Monday with political campaigns or rallies.

"Are you registered to vote yet?" first-year pharmacy student Austin McCauley politely asked passers-by in the Stewart Center, most of whom quietly kept walking.

McCauley, who began volunteering for the Sanders campaign on Monday, said most students he approached already had registered or were uninterested.

"I knew today was the last day to register, so I knew how important today would be to get the urgent last people to register to vote so they can vote, regardless of who it is for, and that's the most important because our age group is not the greatest at voting," he said.

McCauley said he hasn't seen too much political action on campus, but most of his friends are Sanders supporters.

The Sanders campaign recently opened an office in downtown Lafayette. Dozens of its volunteers are Purdue students, said Nora Belrose, a volunteer and Purdue student who was working at the office Monday afternoon.

"I think young people are just fed up with the establishment and the status quo, and they really want actual, fundamental change and that's really what Bernie's fighting for," she said.

Belrose wasn't aware of any student groups supporting Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton, and she echoed the rhetoric of other young women across the country who are throwing their support toward Sanders over Clinton.

"Yes, it would be nice to have a woman president, but I think it's much, much more important to have a president who is right on the issues and is the right president for America," she said. "It would be a good symbolic victory to have a woman president, but I don't think that should outweigh all the other considerations."

The local campaign's next initiative is to get students to vote early on April 19 at Stewart Center, especially since the May 3 primary election falls during finals week, Belrose said.

Purdue College Democrats didn't endorse a candidate for the primary because members had diverse opinions on the matter, said Leeza Kolesnikov, the group's vice president. The group wasn't available for further comment.

Purdue University College Republicans is waiting to endorse a candidate until the GOP selects its choice. Members' support varies, said Ross Smith, the group's chairman. But almost everyone in the group agrees: They don't like Trump.

One member out of 100 is a Trump supporter, he said, but several have said they'll vote for the Republican candidate if he's the nominee. He said most members, including himself, back Sen. Ted Cruz. Originally, Johnson said, he was pulling for former Republican candidate Carly Fiorina, and almost the entire club had supported Sen. Marco Rubio.

Engineering freshman Mark Johnson was running to catch a bus outside Purdue Memorial Union Monday afternoon to send off his absentee voter information to his home state of New Jersey.

Johnson, who is registering as an Independent, supports Cruz. He admires Cruz's dedication to following through with his promises and agrees with his stances on small government and disapproval of Obamacare and illegal immigration.

"I think Cruz has always stood for small government ... I don't see that in Donald Trump," Johnson said.

He'd begrudgingly vote for Trump if the presidential election was between him and a "socialist" or a "criminal," Johnson said, referring to Sanders and Clinton, respectively.

Related:

Read or Share this story: http://on.jconline.com/1MOIavq