It’s possible to see Ben Carson’s apparent entry into the 2016 presidential field, reported this week by a newspaper where he is a columnist, as a joke. In this view, Carson is another Pat Buchanan or Newt Gingrich: a candidate who runs not necessarily to win but to build a personal brand. (This is known as “affecting the conversation.”) Other people who know how this works include Sarah Palin, Mike Huckabee and Donald Trump.

Who’s Ben Carson? He’s a black Republican and a brilliant retired surgeon whose unvarnished conservatism has made him a rock star on the far right. He gained national prominence in early 2013 when, as keynote speaker at the National Prayer Breakfast, he stood three meters from Barack Obama and trashed the president’s healthcare law (previous speakers at the breakfast have included Tony Blair, Bono and Ben Carson, in 1997).

Carson, 63, also is an exponent of views that have drawn accusations of bigotry. In an interview on Fox News with Sean Hannity last year, Carson grouped gay marriage with bestiality and pedophilia. “Well, my thoughts are that marriage is between a man and a woman,” Carson said. “It’s a well established, fundamental pillar of society and no group, be they gays, be they Nambla, be they people who believe in bestiality. It doesn’t matter what they are. They don’t get to change the definition.”

Also last year, Carson told the Value Voters Summit, a conservative gathering, that the president’s healthcare law is – well, here’s what he said: “Obamacare is really, I think, the worst thing to happen to the nation since slavery. And it is slavery, in a way.”

Such comments have not diminished Carson’s standing with his core supporters. In August, an unusual number of fans traveled to Iowa from out of state to hear him speak at the Polk County Republican Party dinner, where Carson won the majority of an informal vote for the best Republican presidential prospect (Senator Ted Cruz came in second.) Some Carson backers worry, however, that for a candidate with so much potential, Carson has suffered from a clumsy political rollout, with too little media training and insufficient counsel about how to say, and not say, certain things.

Carson has an overwhelmingly inspiring personal story to tell. He was born in Detroit and raised in poverty by a single mother. He went to Yale and on to a spectacular medical career, becoming a pioneering pediatric neurosurgeon at Johns Hopkins hospital in Baltimore. He is credited with performing the first successful surgery to separate twins conjoined at the head. He was awarded the presidential Medal of Freedom in 2008 and was elected to the National Academy of Sciences’ Institute of Medicine in 2010.

Carson’s run at the presidency, such as it is, will begin with an hourlong ad to be broadcast this weekend in 22 states and the District of Columbia, the Washington Times reported. The self-produced documentary is called A Breath of Fresh Air: A New Prescription for America.

Carson’s long ad may be a sign that he is out to broaden his appeal, to sell himself to a group of voters with a real national profile. But if that doesn’t work, he happens to be the author of six books. His new one, out this year, is called One Nation: What We Can All Do to Save America’s Future.