May 16, 2014 -- Denver, COLORADO -- Tesoro Cultural Center is proud to announce the unveiling of a new panel honoring the life of fallen Marine Corporal Brett L. Lundstrom as part of the Remembering the Brave national exhibit. The panel will be unveiled at the Tesoro Patron Party, which kicks off the 14th Annual Indian Market & Powwow, during a ceremony which will feature a performance of the "Honoring Song" by Doug Good Feather, Lakota, and a blessing by Andy Cozad, Kiowa, with an expected attendance by more than 30 members of Lundstrom’s family who have traveled from South Dakota to be a part of the evening.

The Tesoro Cultural Center sponsored the creation of the panel honoring Corporal Lundstrom. The Remembering the Brave Foundation is a 501(c)(3) organization dedicated to preserving the memories of brave service members who have made the ultimate sacrifices for this country. The organization has prepared the eight–by–six-foot exhibit that will be on display from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. on the grounds of the landmark Denver restaurant, The Fort, throughout the Indian Market & Powwow.

Cpl. Lundstrom was born in Vermillion, South Dakota, on June 12, 1983 to Ed and Doyla Lundstrom. He was a member of the Oglala Siuox Tribe, who served his country as a United States Marine. Cpl. Lundstrom died while serving with the United States Marine Corps on January 7, 2006 in Fallujah, Iraq. He and his four fallen comrades were members of the North Carolina-based 2nd Marine Expeditionary Force, and were on a combat mission when they made the ultimate sacrifice.

It is an annual tradition for the Tesoro Indian Market & Powwow to honor outstanding military service members at the weekend-long cultural celebrations. This year’s honorees are members of the American Indian Veterans of Colorado, an organization that addresses the interest and concerns of veterans, specifically those with Native American heritage. This year’s honorees include:

Yancey Ramage – U.S. Air Force veteran;Jerry Fills The Pipe – U.S. Marine Corps veteran;James Ecoffey – U.S. Air Force veteran;Ace No Braid – U.S. Army veteran;Brad Bears Heart – U.S. Army veteran;Grant Davis – U.S. Navy veteran;Bill Cantrell – U.S. Air Force veteran;Marty Chase Alone – U.S. Army veteran;Tome Roubideaux – U.S. Army veteran;Greg Phillips – U.S. Air Force veteran;Benny James Jr. – U.S. Army veteran;Adrianna Rouilard – U.S. Marine Corps, active duty.