CENTER TWP. -- Democrat Erin McClelland drew clear distinctions between herself and Republican U.S. Rep. Keith Rothfus during a 12th Congressional District debate Wednesday while he focused on criticizing government intrusion and the Senate’s Democratic leader.

“I’m as frustrated as anybody with the brokenness in Washington, D.C.,” said Rothfus, a Sewickley resident, during the Beaver County Chamber of Commerce debate at Penn State-Beaver in Center Township.

Rothfus said he unsuccessfully argued for Congress to remain in session this past summer and he supports legislation that would withhold the pay of members of Congress if appropriation bills are not passed on time.

McClelland, a Harrison Township, Allegheny County, resident, scoffed at that, saying it would do little to entice the many millionaires in Congress to work together. That seemed to be a swipe at Rothfus, whose net worth in 2012 was between $4.6 million and $9.7 million, according to Federal Election Commission data provided by OpenSecrets.org.

Later, in response to a question from moderator Jon Delano of KDKA-TV on Congress working more, Rothfus said the GOP-led House has passed nearly 400 bills that have stalled in the Democratic-majority Senate because of Majority Leader Harry Reid.

“Harry Reid has basically shut down the Senate,” said Rothfus, who blamed Reid several times for the gridlock on Capitol Hill.

That drew a swift reaction from McClelland, who noted Rothfus’ support of the government shutdown led by Republicans angry over the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare.

“You can’t argue that Congress should work more and then just shut the government down,” she said. “It was irresponsible. It was negligent and it was completely unprofessional.”

While Rothfus supports repealing the Affordable Care Act, McClelland, who operates a behavioral health facility and has a background in health care policy, said she does not and wants to see medical errors reduced to save money. For every 10 percent reduction in medical errors, there would be $100 billion saved as well as the lives lost to those errors, she said.

Rothfus said he would be “open to a discussion” on raising the federal minimum wage, which President Barack Obama wants to increase from $7.25 per hour to $10.10, although he is concerned about lost jobs.

McClelland said providing a livable wage to the country's workers struggling to escape poverty is not only a "sound business practice," but reflects Christian values.

Using the natural resources in western Pennsylvania such as coal and natural gas is paramount for an economic rebirth, Rothfus said, and he bristled at environmental regulations that stifle those industries.

McClelland said “blame-ridden” policies will not make companies pursue environmentally safe habits. “If we do (drilling) right, we will do it better than everybody,” she said.

On the Ebola crisis, Rothfus said he wants travel from affected African nations banned while committing "full resources" to stemming the outbreak.

McClelland countered that the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have been "grossly underfunded" by Congress.

The debate featuring state Sen. Tim Solobay, D-46, Canonsburg, and Republican challenger Camera Bartolotta of Monongahela was canceled because the Senate was in session and Solobay could not make it back.

WMBA (1460-AM) and WBVP (1230-AM) will air the debate at 6 p.m. Tuesday.