The nation is nearly one year into the newest health care system required under the President's Affordable Care Act.

With only a few days into Kynect's open enrollment, the Governor's Office says Kentucky had the second highest reduction of uninsured people in the country for 2014.

Jill Schardein, local insurance agent, describes her experiences with local customers.

"We've had about the same amount of calls as last year," said agent Jill Schardein, Center of Insurance.

More than 521,000 Kentuckians enrolled in health care coverage through Kynect for 2014. Those already participating will automatically be enrolled in the same plans as last year, unless a change is initiated online or with an insurance agent.

"For those new to Kynect, they can get on the Kynect website themselves or they can contact an agent," said Schardein.

Randy Huff, Center of Insurance customer, suggests contacting an agent either way.

"I did try the website. I was very frustrated with it. It is nice to have somebody to go to and ask questions," said Randy Huff, insurance customer.

However, rates have fluctuated for the upcoming year, which can prompt changes for many.

"There has been about a 19% rate increase with Kentucky Health Cooperative. Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield has actually had a 4.3% decrease on their plans for 2015. Humana has had a slight increase, between 10% and 13%," said Schardein.

The cost of not purchasing healthcare coverage remains consistent with last year's law. If your household income is more than $19,650, the fee is 1% of your income. If you make less than $19,650, the penalty can be maxed out at $285 per family, costing $95 per person.

Huff says, if you're uncertain about the success in your own individual coverage, doing your homework is worth your dollar.

"I'm one of those people. I'm one of those people who thought they totally screwed up my healthcare. I remember questioning what I should do. For me, it wasn't anything bad," said Huff.

Two new insurance carriers have been added to the individual coverage in Kentucky, Well Care and Caresource.

Enrollment is open through February 15, 2015.