Competition included 28 participants from 7 schools

International Science and Engineering Fair qualifiers Tara Cook (Sterling), Best of Fair Runner-Up, and Arjana Begzati (Fleming), Best of Fair Overall Winner, pose for a picture at the 59th annual Northeast Regional Science Fair Thursday. ( Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate )

Pictured are the senior division state qualifiers at the 59th annual Northeast Regional Science Fair. Back row, from left; Taylor Lapp (Wray); William Mertens (Merino), third runner-up; Scott Rosas (Sterling); Tara Cook (Sterling), Best of Fair Runner-Up; Arjana Begzati (Fleming), Best of Fair Overall Winner; and Hannah Niccoli (Fleming). Front row, from left; Lauren Soehner (Wray); Megan Godsey (Wray); Kymbre Mitchell (Sterling), second runner-up; Lauren Montoya (Sterling); Emma Scholz (Sterling), fourth runner-up; and Jenna Dillenburg (Sterling). (Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

STERLING — — There were a variety of science projects on display Thursday at the 59th annual Northeast Regional Science Fair, held at Northeastern Junior College.

Approximately 28 students from Fleming High School, Liberty High School and Middle School, Sterling High School, Merino High School and Middle School and Wray High School participated in this year's event.

"Your work that you put in over the last year, your dedication to research, I know it's not easy," acting co-director James DePue told the students, adding that both he and the other co-director, Carlye Armstrong, "applaud your work and your efforts over the past year."

Of the students who participated, some were there for their first time; others had so much fun participating in previous fair's that they decided to do it again.

Hannah Niccoli, a freshman at Fleming High School, who qualified for the Colorado Science and Engineering Fair April 10-12 at the Hilton in Fort Collins, was among those experiencing their first time at the Science Fair. She said knew she wanted to enter the fair last summer.

"It's a chance for me to set up an experiment looking at an area I'm interested in," Niccoli said.

Her project looked at "The Effects of Adrenaline on Fat Metabolism." She got the idea because she was interested in looking at the most efficient way to exercise her livestock animals. Niccoli will use the results of her project to help her with the livestock she will be entering into the Logan County Fair.

Advertisement

Another participant at Fair, Kymbre Mitchell, was at her second fair. The Sterling High School senior was second runner-up in the senior division and will go to the International Science and Engineering Fair as an observer.

"I had a bunch of success with it last year and I like doing the experiment part of it and presenting," she said about why she decided to enter the fair again. Last year she was the third runner-up.

Pictured are the junior division state finalists at the 59th annual Northeast Regional Science Fair, Casey Shaw (Liberty Middle School), left, and Jordan Matthews (Merino Middle School). Shaw was the Best of Fair Overall Winner for the junior division. (Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

For her project she looked at "The Effects of Silver Nanoparticles on the Regeneration of Lumbriculus variegates." Mitchell said she came up with the idea for the project after she found an article about it.

Another Sterling High School senior, Scott Rosas was competing in his third Regional Science Fair.

"It's just a good learning opportunity and the trips we get to go on are pretty cool," he said about why he keeps entering the competition.

For his project Rosas did "A Study of the Most Effective Drought Resistant Corn Hybrid." He came up with the idea in his ag class last year, with the help of his teacher Jonathan Spreng.

Rosas said he enjoys the "hands-on learning experience" he gets when he does projects for the Science Fair, "rather than always looking at books."

Carlye Armstrong and James DePue, acting co-directors of the 59th annual Northeast Regional Science Fair, present the Directors Choice Award to Jordan Matthews (Merino), second from left, and Paulyna Alcom (Wray). (Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

A number of awards were handed out at an awards ceremony at the end of the day.

Students recognized as state qualifiers in the junior division included Casey Shaw (Liberty), who was the Best of Fair Overall Winner, and Jordan Matthews (Merino).

Qualifying for state in the senior division were: Arijana Begzati (Fleming), Best of Fair Winner; Tara Cook (Sterling), Best of Fair Runner Up; Kymbre Mitchell (Sterling), second runner up; William Mertens (Merino), third runner-up; Emma Scholz (Sterling), fourth runner up; Scott Rosas (Sterling); Lauren Soehner (Wray); Megan Godsey (Wray) Taylor Lapp (Wray); Lauren Montoya (Sterling); Jenna Dillenberg (Sterling); and Hannah Niccoli (Fleming).

Kymbre Mitchell, a senior at Sterling High School, stands next to her project on "The Effects of Silver Nanoparticles on the Regeneration of Lumbriculus variegatus," at the 59th annual Northeast Regional Science Fair. She was second runner-up at the fair will go to the International Science and Engineering Fair as an observer. (Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

Begzati and Cook qualified for the International Science and Engineering Fair May 11-16 in Los Angles. Mertens and Scholz are alternates.

Several students also received scholarships from the Frank and Gloria Walsh Foundation. In the junior division, Shaw received a $500 scholarship and in the senior division, Begzati, Cook and Mitchell each received $2,000 scholarships.

In addition to the student scholarships, the Foundation also provides numerous science teacher grants up to $5,000 and a travel stipend to pay for the ISEF finalists.

Two students also received the Directors Choice Award: Matthews and Paulyna Alcorn (Wray).

There were a number of special awards given out as well, including:

Scott Rosas, a senior at Sterling High School, stands next to his project, "A Study of the Most Effective Drought Resistant Corn Hybrid," at the 59th annual Northeast Regional Science Fair. He qualified to go to the Colorado Science and Engineering Fair. (Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

American Meteorological Association - Lauren Soehner (Wray), Emily Lovel (Fleming)

American Psychological Association - William Mertens (Merino)

American Statistical Association Colorado-Wyoming Chapter - Casey Shaw (Liberty Middle School), Emma Scholz (Sterling)

ASM Materials Education Foundation - Madison Rhea (Merino)

Association for Women Geoscientists - Tara Cook

Intel Excellence in Computer Science - Emma Scholz (Sterling)

Mu Alpha Theta - Arjana Begzati (Fleming)

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration - Brandon Soehner (Wray)

Ricoh Americas Corporation - Scott Rosas (Sterling)

Society for In Vitro Biology - Arjana Begzati (Fleming)

Stockholm Junior Water Prize - Kymbre Mitchell (Sterling), Lauren Soehner (Wray)

Sparkfun Inventor's Kit - Casey Shaw (Liberty Middle School)

U.S. Metric Association - Karlee Davis (Sterling)

U.S. Public Health Service - Hannah Niccoli (Fleming)

Yale Science and Engineering - Madison Rhea (Merino)

Broadcam MASTERS - Casey Shaw (Liberty Middle School), Jordan Matthews (Merino Middle School)

Contact Journal-Advocate staff writer Callie Jones at 970-526-9286 or cjones@journal-advocate.com