Abortion politics emerge with Zika funding

With help from Jennifer Haberkorn, Sarah Karlin, Brett Norman and Rachana Pradhan

GOP WARNS AGAINST CHANGING ABORTION POLICY IN WAKE OF ZIKA — House Republicans on Wednesday warned that they won't support any Zika funding that goes toward facilitating or encouraging abortion in the wake of the virus's correlation to the severe birth defect of microcephaly, Jennifer Haberkorn reports for Pros. We’ll see how this plays out at a Senate Appropriations health committee hearing on Zika today.

Story Continued Below

GOVERNMENTS, MEDICAL GROUPS PLEDGE TO SHARE ZIKA DATA — More than two dozen government organizations, medical journals, and non-governmental organizations have signed a declaration to share data related to the Zika virus, as soon as possible and free of charge. The CDC, NIH, Doctors Without Borders, the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, government groups in South Africa, Japan and India are just a handful that signed onto the pledge. http://bit.ly/1WeYrtb

OPIUM WARS — That harmonious bipartisan effort to address opioid abuse, addiction and overdose is suddenly … not so harmonious. Senate Democrats are now demanding that Republicans authorize new funding for opioid addiction as both parties struggle to claim leadership on an issue that is claiming thousands of American lives and is on voters’ minds this election year, Pro's Jennifer Haberkorn reports.

— The Senate Judiciary Committee is slated to start work today on a bipartisan bill that would authorize the Obama administration to use existing money to give grants to states and organizations for opioid education, prevention and treatment. But it’s getting more political.

— What's next: Democrats at a press conference on Thursday will insist that Republicans fund the measure — instead of merely redirecting existing funding. Sen. Chuck Schumer, who is a cosponsor on the original bill, will be at the press conference.

THIS IS THURSDAY PULSE — And rumor has it that #HealthPolicyValentines — the hashtag that has health wonks falling in love — will be sweeping Twitter today. Here's the backstory on how one HHS staffer's passion for puns sparked an annual social media frenzy.

Want to send a health policy valentine to someone special through PULSE? Let me know at ddiamond@politico.com or on Twitter at @ddiamond.

RWJF: NUMBER OF UNINSURED KIDS DROPS — A new Robert Wood Johnson Foundation report released today finds that the uninsurance level among children fell by 1 million between 2013 and 2014. The overall uninsured rate for Americans under age 19 dropped to 6.3 percent with significant variation between the states.

Highest uninsured rate: Alaska (12.3 percent)

Lowest uninsured rate: Vermont (1.2 percent)

About half of the remaining 4.9 million uninsured children nationwide lived in just six states: Texas, California, Florida, Georgia, Arizona, and New York. RWJF’s Katherine Hempstead suggests that outlier states have several options, including expanding eligibility and opting into Medicaid expansion; she notes that Texas and Florida are both in the top five states in terms of child uninsurance rate "and they also have high uninsurance rates for adults." Uninsurance among adults and children is often highly correlated, she reminded us.

BRADY HONES IN ON OBAMACARE ENROLLMENT NUMBERS — House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Kevin Brady questioned HHS Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell on Wednesday about whether CBO’s exchange enrollment projections were “fundamentally flawed,” given that enrollment growth is plateauing earlier than anticipated. “It’s no surprise the law isn’t working as advertised,” Brady said during a hearing on the president’s proposed fiscal 2017 budget, Pro's Rachana Pradhan reports.

— Burwell acknowledged CBO’s recent downward revision of exchange enrollment estimates — they’re now 13 million for 2016 — but said, “I think the most important thing to focus on is the number of uninsured,” which has fallen to a record low. The silver lining in the low exchange numbers — fewer employers dropped coverage and moved their workers to the exchanges than expected.

— Next up: Burwell testifies on the budget in front of the Senate Finance Committee today at 10 a.m.

ALEXANDER: NO JUSTIFICATION FOR FDA FUNDING THROUGH ‘CURES’ — The Senate’s counterpart to the House biomedical reform bill, 21stCentury Cures, has faced disagreements over whether to provide NIH with mandatory funding and at what point that would be worked out. Now disputes over FDA funding are complicating the Senate’s effort, Pro's Sarah Karlin reports.

“Sen. Alexander said that he believes the case can be made for one-time support for limited mandatory funding at the NIH for high priority initiatives, which have a beginning and end," an aide to the HELP Committee chair said. "There is no similar justification for mandatory funding at the FDA which is funded through both appropriations and industry user fees."

The panel’s top Democrat Patty Murray wants mandatory funding for both FDA and NIH as part of the innovation bill. Sarah tells us the odds of the Senate coming together on this package look slimmer and slimmer.

DEMOCRATS MAY DRIVE HARD BARGAIN ON BUDGET — New York Rep. Nita Lowey, the top Democrat on the Appropriations Committee, told POLITICO's Budget and Appropriations team that she hopes to force Republicans to accept Democratic health care priorities like efforts to prevent opioid abuse, lead poisoning and the spread of the Zika virus. And, of course, no "divisive and ideological riders."

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): More transparency is needed into generic drug pricing and reimbursement rates set by drug plan middlemen. Bipartisan legislation (H.R. 244) would enhance oversight of federal health programs and help ensure pharmacy reimbursement for generic drugs reflects market fluctuations. Visit www.ncpanet.org/pharmacyaccess. **

NEARLY 5,000 DOCS WARN CONGRESS ABOUT SHRINKING 340B — Thousands of doctors at safety-net hospitals sent a letter to congressional leadership Wednesday talking up the value of the 340B drug discount program, which has grown dramatically in recent years and is facing substantial reforms under sweeping proposed guidance. The docs write that limiting or shrinking it “would negatively impact our ability to care for the needy in our communities.” The letter, circulated by 340B Health: http://bit.ly/1T8qR8Y

OHIO LEGISLATURE PASSES BILL TO DEFUND PLANNED PARENTHOOD — Ohio's general assembly on Wednesday passed a bill that would prohibit the state's Department of Health from awarding state and federal grants to the organization. The legislation now heads to Kasich for his likely signature. One reason why this matters: The bill gives Kasich the opportunity to remind South Carolina voters where he stands on Planned Parenthood. (As POLITICO reported last week — he's no moderate on abortion.)

AMERICANS CAUTIOUS ON GENE EDITS IN UTERO — A STAT News and Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health poll released this morning finds that about two-thirds of Americans oppose gene editing in fetuses, and 83 percent oppose gene editing solely for intellectual or physical characteristics. Here’s the poll.

— ICYMI: Sarah Karlin explored how activists on both sides of the abortion debate have a common enemy — the use of a powerful new gene editing technology to tinker with the human race. Read her story .

NEW 'PATIENT CHARTER' CALLS FOR NINE CHANGES IN HEALTH CARE — The Partners for Better Care coalition is releasing today its new litmus test for presidential candidates that centers around principles like ensuring patient access to necessary medication and providers. The coalition counts 55 million members through participating organizations, which include AIDS United and nine other groups. "We’re declaring 2016 the year of the patient," says Mary Richards, the coalition's executive director, who added that the campaign will involve a presence at debates, conventions, and candidates' events.

CANCER TOOK HIS WIFE. NOW HE'S LEADING AN AUDACIOUS STARTUP TO FIGHT IT — A sad, fascinating story about Jeff Huber, a former Google executive who's now CEO of $100 million cancer startup Grail. http://onforb.es/1otxxTP

KEEPING SHKRELI'S MONEY AFTER ALL — A Democratic candidate for Maryland's 8th District raised 8 percent of his war chest from contributions made by employees of Turing Pharmaceuticals. Despite promises to return the money donated by former CEO Martin Shkreli himself, candidate Will Jawando only gave away half of what Shkreli donated, keeping the $2,700 earmarked for the general election on hand, reports Alex Glorioso for OpenSecrets. The campaign will also retain the $22,900 donated from six other Turing employees. bit.ly/1QruTo8

— Shkreli's rap sheet could grow. Shkreli infamously bought a $2 million Wu-Tang Clan album last year; he's now being sued by an artist who alleges that the album features the artist's work without his permission.

WHAT WE'RE READING, by Erin Mershon

Health insurers are under pressure to improve their exchange business, the WSJ reports. They've got a close look at BCBS filings from the first three quarters of 2015: http://on.wsj.com/1QsJQ9B

The Flint Journal has obtained emails showing that Gov. Rick Snyder and other officials withheld lead testing results while they tried to figure out how to handle the crisis: http://bit.ly/1QsKXWE

The Washington Post looks at a fight between dentists and teeth-whitening salons that is headed to the Supreme Court, in an op-ed: http://wapo.st/1QsLjfR

Education can decrease dementia risk, the New York Times reports: http://nyti.ms/1QsKO5D

Walgreens is threatening to end its agreement with Theranos unless it sorts out the issues federal regulators found at its lab in California. More from the WSJ: http://on.wsj.com/1QsKbcd

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): While approximately 80 percent of prescription drugs dispensed are generic drugs, the reimbursement system for these medications is largely unregulated and a mystery to pharmacists and patients. The lack of transparency also raises questions as to whether drug plan middlemen, pharmacy benefit manager (PBM) corporations, are overpaid by Medicare and other federal health programs. Moreover, when generic drug prices spike, PBM corporations are slow to update reimbursement rates, leaving community pharmacies with payments that don’t cover costs and unsustainable financial losses. H.R. 244 would increase transparency and facilitate timely payment updates. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacyaccess. **