PUEBLO — An apples-and-oranges comparison perhaps, but while big-school college football flounders on the Front Range, its small schools are setting a steep standard.

Sure, if Colorado State went head to head with CSU-Pueblo, the Rams probably would win. But we can judge a team only against its peers.

And CSU-Pueblo is the class of Division II — the defending national champion. Saturday, the No. 6-ranked ThunderWolves hosted No. 7 Colorado Mines in a Rocky Mountain Athletic Conference game.

Senior tailback Cameron McDondle, though, put some distance between Pueblo and Mines. His 308 yards rushing set a school record as he led the ThunderWolves (7-1, 6-0 RMAC) to a 49-21 victory over the Orediggers (7-1, 5-1) before 7,265 at the ThunderBowl.

“We just kept punching for little yards, punching and punching,” McDondle said, “and they finally started to break open.”

McDondle’s 70-yard run with less than a minute left in the first half — up the middle and through the hands of four would-be tacklers — put Pueblo ahead 28-0. He also muscled out runs of 58 and 53 yards and scored twice.

“I gotta get some wheels so I can finish those runs,” McDondle said with a laugh.

Put it this way: Mines, with one of the most explosive offenses in the nation, gained 367 total yards in the game. But that was only 59 yards more than McDondle, a Columbine High School product, gained on the ground. Pueblo’s total: 546.

Mines junior quarterback Justin Dvorak can sling the ball. His 34 touchdown plays (29 passing, five rushing) coming in led D-II.

But Pueblo blitzed Dvorak early and often, keeping Mines off the scoreboard in the first half. Six ThunderWolves defenders made tackles for a loss, led by Josh Croy’s two for minus-8 yards. Dvorak finished 26-of-36 passing for 226 yards and one TD, an 8-yard scoring toss to Cole Spurgeon early in the second half.

“He’s a dangerous quarterback when he gets out and scrambles,” Pueblo coach John Wristen said. “We tried to keep him in the pocket, then rally to the ball.”

Dvorak left late in the third quarter with an apparent concussion after he was hit in the head while sliding on a scramble.

Pueblo piled on with two more McDondle TDs — from Cameron’s younger brother, sophomore Bernard, who scored on runs of 5 and 7 yards in the third quarter to put the T-Wolves up 42-7, their biggest lead.

Pueblo improved to 12-4 against ranked teams in Wristen’s eight-year tenure, including 4-1 against teams in the top 10. And the T-Wolves won a fifth consecutive game over Mines.

“I have a lot of respect for what Mines does. We just got on a roll there,” Wristen said.

Nick Groke: ngroke@denverpost.com or @nickgroke