Webb reflects on accomplishments of Democrat presidents

Riste Capps is congratulated by her daughter, Lydia Kiser, after receiving the 2016 Democrat of the Year Award from last year's recipient, Janice Dermer (left), at the Logan County Democrats annual Jefferson-Jackson Day Dinner. ( Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate )

Logan County Democrats recognized Riste Capps as the Democrat of the Year at their annual Jefferson-Jackson Day Dinner Saturday at the Knights of Columbus.

The award was presented by last year's award recipient, Janice Dermer. She noted that Capps, who has called Colorado home for at least 40 years, was a playwright in elementary school, an award winning actress in high school, an insurance company employee handling disability claims and eventually a journalist.

"She has had a passion for finding the truth and her stories often created positive changes in the community," Dermer said.

Former mayor of Denver, Wellington Webb, recalls the accomplishments of democrat presidents during his keynote speech at the Logan County Democrats annual Jefferson-Jackson Day Dinner. (Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

Capps' 20-year professional career as a journalist began at The Beaver County Times as a copygirl/intern, she then worked at two other newspapers before moving on to the Commerce City Beacon. In 1997, she was awarded the Grange Community Awareness Award and as editor of the Brush News Tribune she won first place for a best writings series from the Colorado Press Association.

Married to her late husband Jim for 44 years, Capps is mother to two daughters, Lydia Kiser and Samantha Radford, and a grandmother.

"She has been active as a Logan County Democrat, being a part of the Central Committee, volunteering to help as needed, and has worked tirelessly for the Logan County Democratic Party Facebook page," Dermer said.

Advertisement

Additionally, Capps helped initiate the Logan County Citizens' Oversight Committee, which has brought to life an awareness of local issues.

"Thank you very much, I'm very honored to know all of you and for all of our friendships that I have developed in the nine years that I've lived here," Capps told her fellow Democrats.

Before the award was presented, Peter Youngers, party chairman, introduced Democrat candidates for Logan County Commissioner District 2, Allen Ramey and Don Simms, and passed along regrets from Paul Wiese, candidate for district attorney, who was unable to attend the dinner.

Jack McLavey holds up some dilly bread as Warren Dermer auctions it off during a fundraising auction that was part of the Logan County Democrats Jefferson-Jackson Day Dinner. (Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

Keynote speaker for the evening was former Denver mayor and Northeastern Junior College alum Wellington Webb. He recalled his time at NJC, "it gave me the opportunity grow up and be a man," and spoke about the good Democrats have done.

"I love being a Democrat, because I can defend us anywhere in the nation, anywhere in the world, at any given point in time. All we have to do is any time, any place, talk about our accomplishments," Webb said, reviewing the accomplishments of past and present democrat presidents.

Franklin D. Roosevelt started the Social Security program while he was governor of New York and instituted it on the federal level, in response to the issues the country was going through with the Great Depression. Webb noted had it not been for Roosevelt, who provided stability in office and got the nation through World War II, "this country would be a different place."

Guests look over auction items at the Logan County Democrats annual Jefferson-Jackson Day Dinner. (Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

Harry Truman instituted the Marshall Plan, which sent more than $60 billion of goods to Western Europe to help rebuilt it, and provided support for the United Nations. He was also one of the first to officially support the right of Israel to exist and he desegregated armed forces while at the same time issuing an executive order for the Hill-Burton Hospital Construction Act. Plus, Truman tried to implement a civil rights enforcement program and instituted the Fair Employment Practices Commission.

Webb noted John F. Kennedy's speech about "let the word go forth, the torch is passed to a new generation," sparked a belief that "in the United States one person can make a difference."

Kennedy implemented the Peace Corps, domestic programs, everything from economic aid to rural regions to government intervention to halt the recession, while at the same time dealing with the Bay of Pigs, the Cuban Missile Crisis and the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty. Webb noted Kennedy in many cases questioned what generals or professional soldiers would say, "to make sure there was another point of view saying, 'Is this the only course of action that we have to take?'"

He fought for and supported the introduction of a civil rights bill "that would change the course of this country," and he and Jacqueline Kennedy brought glamour to the White House, inviting artists, scientists, poets, etc., to visit.

Lyndon B. Johnson instituted the War on Poverty and programs like Model Cities, a program that trained thousands of community activists and neighborhood leaders throughout 1960s, including Webb. He pushed through the Voting Rights Act and implemented the Immigration and Nationality Act.

Webb recalled serving as a campaign manager for Carter's presidential campaign and he and his wife giving the first donation to the campaign. Carter returned the Panama Canal to its original owner among other accomplishments.

William Jefferson Clinton created more jobs than any other president, 22 million jobs; he passed welfare reform; started healthcare reform, which his wife Hillary Clinton took the lead on; and got through a children's health insurance program, CHIP. Also, he signed into law a bill that Webb helped draft, the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act, in response to gang wars going on in cities.

"Did it have some unintended consequences, it did," Webb said, noting there are parts in the bill that shouldn't have been in there. He explained the bill was meant to go after those who should be imprisoned for life for committing heinous crimes, not to have mass incarcerations of people based on drug use.

Upon taking office, Barack Obama had to deal with a country going into a recession. While in office he passed the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act; saved Detroit, passed the Tax Relief, Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization and Job Creation Act; passed the Affordable Care Act; and passed the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. Obama also had to deal with Afghanistan and Iraq and authorized the killing of pirates and the raid to kill Osama Bin Laden.

"When we look at what democratic presidents have done, from Roosevelt to Obama, we should be able to stand up in any audience, whether it be Republican or whether it be independents, and proudly defend the administrations of our presidents as a party," Webb said.

The evening ended with a fundraising auction.

Callie Jones: 970-526-9286, cjones@journal-advocate.com