Photo by Joe Raedle/Getty Images

The Affordable Care Act's rollout really got underway on Oct. 1, and since then voters have gone to the polls in a nice little sample of elections. New Jersey's Senate seat stayed Democratic; Democrats swept the statewide races in Virginia, but underperformed in House of Delegates races. Two Republican House seats stayed Republican. A Virginia state Senate seat stayed, narrowly, with the Democrats, though a Republican who lost by nine votes will probably ask for a recount.

David Weigel David Weigel is a reporter for the Washington Post.

Republicans have interpreted this as evidence that the Affordable Care Act is, indeed, hurting Democrats. McAuliffe's win was narrow; the state Senate seat had been won handily (57–43) by Obama. But the next federal election is a March special to replace the late Florida Rep. Bill Young, in one of the very few districts that voted for Obama but elected a Republican congressman. Are Republicans confident of winning?

No. They are telling everyone that Democrat Alex Sink is the favorite by leagues. National Journal's Scott Bland:

Democrats and some Republicans say that the 2010 gubernatorial candidate represents something close to an ideal special election candidate. She came with a strong political profile: Two runs for statewide office, including one victory, let her start the congressional race with big name recognition, a tested team of political advisors, and fundraising connections galore. That includes a near-immediate endorsement by EMILY's List, the powerhouse fundraising group for women Democrats, and the big-spending National Association of Realtors' political action committee.

Politico's Alex Isenstadt:

“You have a superior candidate with Alex Sink, and she is raising a lot of money, she is getting a lot of support. And you have two subpar candidates in Peters and Jolly,” said Mike Fasano, a popular former Republican state senator from nearby Pasco County. “The candidates that should have run did not run, so we’re stuck with Peters and Jolly.”

Tom Slade, a lobbyist and former Florida Republican Party chairman, said: “Alex Sink is going to be hard to beat. She is so well-known. … It’s not going to be an easy race for Republicans to win. I hope I’m wrong.”