Voters said human rights, women's rights and ISIS were some of the most important issues for why they came out on a dreary Tuesday to vote.

Rainy weather didn't kept voters away from the polls on Tuesday. A steady stream of people came out to their designated polling places to exercise their right to vote.

Young voters flocked to the polls including Chance Davis, 20, of Bethel, who registered for the first time to vote in order to support Hillary Clinton.

“The other candidates don’t seem as experienced,” he said, continuing, “she will better for the people."

Kenny Reddinger, 23, pictured in photo No. 1, was voting for the second time and said he was excited to vote for Ted Cruz because “he’s just like Bush, my favorite president,” noting, “Bush got rid of the terrorists and Ted Cruz will get rid of ISIS.”

Also supporting Cruz was Jennifer Nicoletti of Bethel who said, "Ted Cruz the only constitutional conservative who has a proven record of doing exactly what his constituents elected him to do, including standing up against Obamacare, amnesty for illegals and out of control spending."

Greg Middleton said he was voting for Clinton because of what she stands for including social issues and human rights.

Another Hillary supporter was Kiri Ryan, pictured in photo No. 2, who said gun control and women’s issues were the main reasons for her voting for Clinton.

“I wanted to vote for Sanders but I don’t think we’re ready for that yet,” she laughed.

But New Milford resident Mike Walsh is ready to "Feel the Bern."

"I voted for Bernie," Walsh said, because of "human rights, women's rights, economic equity. One of these candidates has to choose Elizabeth Warren as a running mate."

In Brookfield Matt Grimes said he voted for Kasich because he believes in "his fiscal conservatism, ability to lead, and record of using his elected offices not to “be somebody,” but to actually get something done."

He said Kasich has the most experience, qualifications and makes decisions on an ethical basis without fear of standing up for what’s right, and following the rule of law — whether or not he happens to agree with it personally.

How about you? Did you vote? Tell us who you voted for and why in the comments.

Photo No. 3: Bethel voting offials at Stony Hill Fire Department: Carol Olson, Eileen Freebairn and Linda Ryan



Photos by Wendy Mitchell