A Charlotte County deputy is off the streets and out of a job after an internal affairs investigation revealed he bought drugs and traded them for sex. But it doesn't end there.

We uncovered more details from the damaging report.

Deputy First Class Elio Santana was employed at the Charlotte County Sheriff's Office until a 23-page internal investigation was released outlining his crooked activity.

It also cost him his job. A report released by the Charlotte County Sheriff's Office Friday points out a long list of offenses connected to Santana.

“You never expect something like this to happen, especially from someone you know. Everybody is supposed to be looking up to the police,” said resident Dana Misinic.

According to the detailed report, a lot of Santana's cocaine purchases occurred during the day while was in uniform and driving a squad car.

Confidential informants and detectives for the sheriff's office are mentioned in the report. Investigators even took note of several pictures on social media with confidential informants.

Informants told sheriff staff on several occasion they saw Santana meet with someone named Kello Bonhomme to buy drugs.

Bonhomme was murdered last year in an alleged drug deal gone bad. His suspected killer, Dwayne Johnson, is currently awaiting trial..

Our crews spoke with a friend of Johnson's about Santana.

“He felt like he could get away with it, that's my opinion. He felt like he could get away with it. Like every officer that's crooked, he thought he could get away with it until he got caught,” said Johnson's friend.

One person interviewed in the investigation says they witnessed Santana pay up to $200 dollars for drugs. Another person believes Santana used the drugs in exchange for sex.

Other women came forward with claims of inappropriate flirty text messages they received from Santana along with info about informants.

People we spoke with Saturday say if the allegations are true, the right action was taken.

“We have a types of employers and all types of employees. Sometimes, you have one that comes off the path, and it's sad to hear that,” said Bob Murphy who supports law enforcement.

We spoke with Deputy Santana. He says he will consult with his lawyer about making a statement on Monday. Right now, he says he is willing to call what is listed in the report allegations.