"The Last Resort" is a provocative drama about an African nation that hatches an economic development plan to legalize physician-assisted suicide and attract "death tourism."

Set in 2021, the novel alternates between Mkanda and Sangamon, Ill., where Olivia Harper struggles to deal with the declining health of her father, Hank, whose insistence upon taking control of his imminent death runs counter to her religious beliefs.

Several similarities between Olivia and Holtz are not necessarily a coincidence. Both are writers (Olivia is rushing to meet a pressing deadline in the midst of her father's health issues), both live in a small Illinois town (Holtz lives in Monticello), and both were raised by devout Catholics.

The book's agonizing opening chapter, which charts the torturous passing of Olivia's hospitalized father-in-law, was based on the death of Holtz's own father, which served in part as the genesis of the book.

"I lived through it with my mother and father, my mother-in-law, my aunt, and a friend's mother," Holtz said in a phone interview. "Some years ago, I was watching '60 Minutes' and a story about medical tourism: people going to countries such as Indonesia, Cambodia and Mexico in search of good health care but at a much more affordable price. It gave me food for thought."

In the age of the Affordable Care Act, "The Last Resort" has the makings of a bleakly funny satirical comedy. But while the story contains some darkly cynical touches (the Mkanda law mandates a residency period so people will have to spend money before choosing to end their lives), Holtz considers her book more of a drama with some humor. "You have to be careful," she said. "I had to pull back several chapters because they were over the top. I didn't want to obscure the story."

Holtz, "60-ish" and now retired, worked in the computer software industry for more than 25 years. It was not until the late 1990s that she was compelled to carve out time for herself to write. On the downside of her career, she decided this was the proper time to retire.

"Not that I can manage on my writing income," she laughed. "I'm not J.K. Rowling."

She has published two nonfiction books about Chicago philanthropist Robert Allerton. Holtz took courses in writing and found a "glorious outlet" in the Urbana-based Red Herring Fiction Workshop, which was founded in 1980. At weekly meetings, members read works aloud and receive comments from the group.

"It's a safe environment," Holtz said. "There is nothing like hearing (your work) spoken aloud. I read a good two-thirds of the book to the group over a period of years and got wonderful feedback that helped me to flesh out the book, particularly the chapters set in Africa. I later found a developmental editor who was highly recommended and she, too, gave me excellent feedback that helped me to shape the book."

Holtz credited developmental editor Catherine Adams for feedback that helped shape the book further. Adams responded to the book's timely and provocative subject matter.

"It underscored for me what happens when we, as a society, do not face the stakes of our era," she said in an email. "Holtz's novel poses a crisis: What if another country understood our blinders and used them as a path toward economic recovery? The country and government officials (in the book) are ethical in the efforts of providing a safe space for dying with dignity. The true horror would be: What if that country or its officials were not?"

In writing the book, Holtz's own views on assisted suicide evolved a bit, she said, as she balanced her religious upbringing against painful realities she uncovered in her research.

"It is the Baby Boomer's lament," Holtz said. "We have started to think about what our end of life will be."

Holtz, currently developing two novels, one for young adults, the other about small-town politics, does not present herself as an advocate for physician-assisted suicide. "I don't have a hidden agenda," she said. "I tried to avoid saying, 'This is what I believe and you should too.' I want to start a conversation. People need to talk (about their beliefs and wants), so should a spouse or family member becomes incapacitated, there won't be any surprises."

Donald Liebenson is a frequent Printers Row Journal contributor.

"The Last Resort"

By Maureen Holtz, self-published, 352 pages, $17.95