In this Jan. 8, 2014 file photo, Sen. Marco Rubio (R., Fla.) speaks on Capitol Hill in Washington.

Florida Republican Sen. Marco Rubio had a rough time last year after he stirred a backlash among conservative Republicans with his quest to revamp the country’s immigration laws. As if to make up for lost time, the freshman senator is now speaking out on foreign policy, education and the consolidation of poverty funding , among a range of other policy proposals he has floated in recent months.

On Monday he will lay out an expansive economic platform in a Washington speech hosted by Google Inc. and the Jack Kemp Foundation. Here are the details, according to a text reviewed by The Wall Street Journal:

1) Wireless: Reallocate wireless spectrum currently controlled by the federal government and distribute it to private companies. This would be done through expanded federal auctions, with new incentives for agencies to participate. Mr. Rubio says this will spur innovation, keeps wireless costs from rising, prevent dropped calls, and keep networks from becoming overwhelmed from growing internet traffic.

2) Research: Increase coordination between national research agencies—such as the National Institutes of Health and the Pentagon—and private companies, “to bring groundbreaking research to fruition in the marketplace.”

3) Trade: Approve “trade promotion authority” for the White House, making it easier for the U.S. government to broker trade pacts with other countries. Also reach trade agreements with countries in Latin America, Europe, and Asia, which Mr. Rubio says will help “tens of thousands of small businesses” to grow.

4) Energy: Streamline the regulatory review process for natural-gas pipeline development. Repeal the ban on crude-oil exports.

5) Taxes: Overhaul the tax code. Lower the top corporate tax rate and allow businesses to immediately deduct all of their expenses and investments from their taxable income. He also proposes shifting the U.S. tax treatment for companies with overseas operations to a “territorial” system that would let U.S. companies avoid paying taxes on foreign earnings that are subject to taxes abroad.

6) Regulations: Create a “National Regulatory Budget,” which would be set by an independent board. Then the government would have to aggregate the total “cost” of all existing regulations to the economy. If the “cost” exceeded the budgeted amount, regulations would have to be reworked or reduced. And any new regulation, if it led to a “cost” that exceeded the budget, would have to be offset by the reduction of other regulations.