Contact: Timothy Sandefur

Principal Attorney

Pacific Legal Foundation

tms@pacificlegal.org

(530) 651-4897



Anastasia P. Boden

Staff Attorney

Pacific Legal Foundation

apb@pacificlegal.org

(916) 419-7111

Pennsylvania is sued for blocking start-up moving businesses

The Keystone State denies constitutional free-enterprise rights by allowing existing companies to “veto” new businesses that would compete with them



Telford, Pennsylvania; May 19, 2015: Cosmo and Mary Anne Losco, a married couple from Telford, filed a civil rights lawsuit today challenging Pennsylvania’s “competitor’s veto” law for moving companies, which is preventing them from realizing their dream of owning a small moving business. The law protects established moving companies by allowing them to veto license applications of start-up businesses, such as the Loscos’ College Hunks Moving franchise.

Filed in U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania, the Loscos’ lawsuit seeks an injunction and a declaration that Pennsylvania’s anti-competition licensing law violates constitutional protections for free enterprise.



The targeted law — the state’s “Certificate of Public Convenience” requirement, 66 Pa. C.S.A. § 3310 — requires a person to get a Certificate before starting a moving business. But when someone applies for a license, existing moving companies are allowed to file a protest. If a protest is filed — and if the license applicant does not agree to reduce the area in which the new business will operate — the applicant is then required to somehow prove that the business is “necessary or proper” to “the service, accommodation, convenience, or safety of the public.” None of those terms is defined in the law.



In essence, existing moving companies can veto their own competition.



The Loscos are represented, free of charge, by Pacific Legal Foundation (PLF), a public interest watchdog organization that litigates for limited government and free enterprise. This is the latest litigation in PLF’s nationwide legal campaign against competitor’s veto laws. PLF Principal Attorney Timothy Sandefur and staff attorney Anastasia Boden are litigating the case, with the assistance of attorney Mark Jakubik of The Jakubik Law Firm in Philadelphia.

Derailing the Loscos’ dream of owning a moving business

After years of working for other people — Cosmo as manager of operations for a medical device manufacturer, and Mary Anne in human resources for several companies — the Loscos decided that they wanted to start a business of their own.



They chose College Hunks Hauling Junk and Moving, a company that provides experienced managers the opportunity to lead a small business as franchisees, and to hire and mentor ambitious young people. HUNKS is actually an acronym for Honest, Uniformed, Nice, Knowledgeable, Service. The core values of the company include building future leaders, and listening to and delighting customers. Belief in these values led the Loscos to this service-focused franchise.



This past February, Cosmo bought a College Hunks Hauling Junk franchise based in Hatfield, and entered an agreement to buy a College Hunks Moving franchise.



The hauling franchise is up and running — but not the moving business. When he started researching the process of getting the required government license for the moving franchise, Cosmo learned about Pennsylvania’s competitor’s veto law for the moving industry.



“This was a shock,” said Cosmo. “It didn’t make sense that existing moving companies get a ‘vote’ on who gets to do business. This system makes it nearly impossible to be approved for the license.



“This law against competition isn’t just harming my wife and me,” he continued. “This is hurting the people we want to serve. I was looking for an opportunity to be my own boss and hire and mentor young people. We can have a positive impact on future leaders and on our community.



“A native Pennsylvanian, I have lived in the Telford area all my adult life,” he said. “I have given back to my community in various ways, including coaching sports for over 30 years. Moving is stressful for people. Providing top-notch service was appealing to me, as a way to help others, and as a business challenge for myself.



“The state should not be able to stop us from serving consumers and pursuing our dream, simply to protect other businesses from competition,” he added. “We’re grateful to Pacific Legal Foundation for helping us fight this unfair and unconstitutional law.”

Statement by PLF Principal Attorney Timothy Sandefur:

Pennsylvania is violating the constitutional right to earn a living

“Pennsylvania’s competitor’s veto law is a flagrant abuse of regulatory power,” said PLF Principal Attorney Timothy Sandefur. “The proper purpose of licensing is to protect the public from unsafe or dishonest business practices. Shielding well-connected businesses from new competition is not a valid government purpose. In fact, it’s flat-out unconstitutional. As our lawsuit emphasizes, laws designed to create monopolies violate the Constitution’s guarantee of due process of law and the constitutionally protected right to earn a living. Economic protectionism can’t be upheld by the courts, if they’re properly exercising their function to protect constitutional rights, because anti-competition laws serve no legitimate government interest.”

PLF’s nationwide “Fighting the Competitor’s Veto” campaign

As part of its mission to defend constitutionally protected free enterprise rights, PLF is challenging anti-competition, competitor’s veto laws in states throughout the country. The motto of PLF’s “Fighting the Competitor’s Veto” campaign is: “Because everyone has a right to earn a living.”



In his nationally syndicated New Year’s column at the beginning of this year, Pulitzer Prize-winning commentator George F. Will highlighted PLF’s 2014 federal court victory against Kentucky’s competitor’s veto law for the moving business. He called that ruling “a blow for liberty and against crony capitalism,” and the year’s “most encouraging development in governance.”



In three other states — Oregon, Missouri, and (just this month) Montana — PLF lawsuits have led to legislative repeals of competitor’s veto laws.



PLF’s newly filed Pennsylvania case is Losco v. Powelson. More information, including the complaint, a litigation backgrounder, and background on PLF’s “Fighting the Competitor’s Veto” campaign, is available at: www.pacificlegal.org.



About Pacific Legal Foundation

Donor-supported Pacific Legal Foundation is a legal watchdog organization that litigates for limited government, property rights, and free enterprise in courts nationwide. PLF represents the Loscos — and all PLF clients — free of charge.