By of the

Gov. Scott Walker spoke before a crowd packed with conservative mega-donors in California on Saturday at an event hosted by a group affiliated with billionaire brothers Charles and David Koch.

The Republican governor and 2016 presidential hopeful spent 30 minutes fielding questions from Politico reporter Mike Allen about a broad range of topics, including President Barack Obama's Christian faith, public subsidies for a new Milwaukee Bucks arena, same-sex marriage and his changing views on immigration.

Walker again said Saturday he doesn't know whether Obama is a Christian.

Walker was among only a handful of Republican presidential hopefuls who were invited to the weekend's event, hosted by Freedom Partners Chamber of Commerce, the umbrella group in the Koch brothers' influential network of conservative political and public policy outfits.

Notably absent from the event, which some have dubbed the "Koch primary," is billionaire real estate mogul and reality television star Donald Trump.

The gathering gives Walker and other 2016 contenders in attendance the chance to appeal directly to the Koch brothers and hundreds of other wealthy donors. The Koch brothers' network alone is expected to drop almost $1 billion on the 2016 election.

Allen asked Walker if his sons, Matt and Alex, and their support of same-sex marriage had caused him to "rethink" his view.

"No," Walker said, without elaborating.

Walker was again asked about whether Obama is a Christian. Again, he did not give a straight "yes" or "no" answer.

"You're not going to get a different answer than I said before," Walker said. "I don't know. I presume he is...But I've never asked him about that. As someone who is a believer myself, I don't presume to know someone's beliefs about whether they follow Christ or not unless I've actually talked with them."

He added, "But he's said he is, and I take his word."

In February, Walker told The Washington Post he didn't know if Obama is a Christian.

The packed field of 16 high-profile GOP contenders has been competing for the support of big donors heading into Thursday's first Republican primary debate.

Las Vegas casino magnate Sheldon Adelson and hedge-fund billionaire Paul Singer are reportedly being represented at the conference by advisers.

In April, David Koch showed his preference for Walker, saying Wisconsin's Republican governor could beat Democratic front-runner Hillary Clinton in a general election. Walker at the time said he was "surprised" by Koch's praise.

Walker is scheduled to participate Monday in Voters First Forum in New Hampshire, a crucial early primary state.