As the Affordable Care Act pushes healthcare consolidation – with hospitals buying physician practices – it is further compounding funding problems for the nation’s nursing homes.

Under the Social Security Act, Medicare payments for nursing homes are annually adjusted to account for differences in area wages. Rather than use highly vetted nursing home cost reports, however, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) have relied upon four-year-old hospital wage data as a proxy for nursing home labor costs. There are huge problems with this methodology.





ADVERTISEMENT

First, there is some irony in tying nursing home labor costs to those of local hospitals given that hospitals need not even have their own Medicare payments limited by where they are located. Thus, for example, in rural Skagit County, Washington, the two hospitals have successfully petitioned the federal government to be paid as though they are located in distant Seattle. However, the county’s six nursing homes are stuck with reimbursement based upon those hospitals’ actual wage costs.The Skagit County hospitals are not alone – perhaps 40 percent of hospitals nationwide enjoy exceptions or reclassifications for purposes of Medicare payment, which calls into serious question the integrity of their wage data being applied to nursing home labor. For the current federal fiscal year the American Health Care Association estimated that nursing homes in 89 counties would actually see a decrease of more than 5 percent in their Medicare wage indexes. As Medicare is often the only thing keeping a nursing home solvent, given how widespread state underfunding is for the vast majority of patients on Medicaid, Medicare cuts could easily force facility closures.It is perverse to have nursing home wages be driven down by hospital business practices. In Skagit County, for instance, one of the two hospitals acquired some physicians’ clinics in 2011. While this preserved the clinics, it had unintended consequences downstream. The clinic wages reported by that one Skagit County hospital, some from clinics not even located in the county, caused a severe deterioration beginning in 2015 in the wage index for the county’s six nursing homes. Already untenable, the problem almost certainly will bankrupt some, or all, of the nursing homes in the 2017 federal fiscal year – additional clinic purchases in 2013 will have been picked up by the four-year-lag in using hospital data as the facilities’ Medicare wage proxy.Because Washington’s nursing homes are still being “reimbursed” by the state based upon 2007 costs through July 1, 2016, an average state Medicaid increase of a nickel-a-day hardly gives Skagit County facilities any margin to weather their Medicare payments decreasing by hundreds of thousands of dollars countywide due to the acquisitions of one hospital. And the affected wage-earners are predominantly women, often single mothers. How is the federal government reducing the Medicare funding for caregiver compensation consistent with the president’s income inequality rhetoric?The discretion already exists for CMS to use nursing home-specific wage data for nursing home payment, and language in the ACA required very granular cost reporting by facilities that categorizes their Medicare expenses incurred for direct care, indirect care (such as housekeeping and kitchen staff), capital costs or administrative services. In 2011 CMS introduced a new ACA-compliant cost report form to capture these four Medicare cost centers. An agency long adept in piling costly new expectations upon nursing homes – with its latest regulations expected to cost over $50,000 per facility – should now use its authority to pay them accurately.Williams, an Olympia, Washington attorney, is a frequent writer on healthcare issues.