Shares of Medicaid insurer Molina Healthcare Inc. took a dive Tuesday after the company reported a fourth-quarter loss, but analysts say investors’ reaction may be premature.

Molina /quotes/zigman/317140/delayed /quotes/nls/moh MOH dropped more than 7% at one point Tuesday. Late Monday, the Long Beach, Calif.-based company reported losses that were double those of estimates from analysts polled by FactSet, and fell short of sales predictions. Shares fell 5% in recent action to $34.05.

Molina Healthcare Logo from Molina’s 2012 Investor Day program

Analysts say, though, that the real key to finding out where Molina is headed will come Thursday. That’s when the company holds its investor day presentations in New York and is expected to discuss its own 2014 forecast, as well as corporate strategy and business outlook.

“Guidance given at investor day, not [fourth-quarter] earnings, will be the main driver on sentiment for Molina, in our view,” Wedbush Securities analyst Sarah James said in a note to clients. She said that she sees 2015 results as a more important guide for future earnings, which she sees as being $14.7 billion to $15.7 billion, well above the current $12.28 billion now estimated by FactSet.

Molina could well offer its own updated 2015 number on Thursday, and James expects it to be above that FactSet estimate. Key to the Thursday meeting is Molina’s view on contracts in Ohio, South Carolina and Michigan.

Jefferies & Co. analyst David Windley agreed with James that the upcoming investor day was critical to the point where he simply titled his post-earnings note on Molina: “Thursday, Thursday, Thursday.”

“Management deferred the most interesting parts to the investor meeting on Thursday in NY,” he wrote.

Another thing that may be offering a false reading on the company’s stock is whether Molina actually missed estimates. The company said on its conference call that an unfavorable premium adjustment in one of its territories was responsible for some of its loss, and most analysts agreed the company met its numbers. But FactSet and investors apparently had something else in mind.

Molina said its net loss for the quarter was $9.13 million, or 20 cents a share, swinging from a gain of $25.64 million, or 55 cents a share, for the same period a year ago. The FactSet estimate called for a loss of 10 cents a share, but analysts individually said when the premium adjustment is taken into account, Molina finished on target.

What was clear, however, is that revenue fell short of forecasts. Sales were $1.71 billion against last year’s $1.58 billion, and 4% below the expected $1.78 billion.

Follow Russ Britt on Twitter @russbrittmktw.

Follow Health Exchange on Twitter @MWHealthBlog.

More health-care news from MarketWatch:

Smaller companies get another year to comply with Obamacare

CBO chief: Obamacare will reduce “incentive to work”

Analyst upgrade, not data hack, drives St. Jude shares