Imagine the kind of game Peyton Manning could have had if he wasn’t benched in the second half.

Mind you, Manning wasn’t pulled by the coach in favor of backup quarterback Brock Osweiler. Manning and his three, first-half touchdown passes were left on the sidelines through most of the second half by a Denver defense that couldn’t get off the field on third-and-long.

“It was a strange second half,” Manning said.

The first half was typical Manning. On the first play, he threw a 48-yard completion to Emmanuel Sanders, who ran a post route. Manning later threw touchdown passes to Julius Thomas, Jacob Tamme and Demaryius Thomas.

Entering the intermission, Manning had completed 15-of-19 passes for 191 yards and a remarkable 148.1 passer rating.

Talk about a guy sitting on his stats. In the second half, Manning essentially got the ball twice. The first time was after the Chiefs kept the ball for 19 plays and the first 10 minutes of the third quarter.

Luckily for the Broncos, the Chiefs have a rookie placekicker in Cairo Santos who is not yet ready for NFL pressure. Santos missed a field-goal attempt and couldn’t kick a touchback on a kickoff in altitude, allowing a nice return by Andre Caldwell that set up a Broncos’ field goal.

The three points was all Manning and the Broncos’ offense mustered in the second half. Can’t score when you don’t have the ball. The Chiefs kept the ball nearly 8 minutes to begin the fourth quarter, then for nearly the final 3 ½ minutes of the game.

“I’ve been in games before like that,” said Manning, who has six touchdown passes and zero interceptions through two games this season, and 497 scoring passes in his career. “Certainly, on third down you get excited when it’s third-and-long. You start warming up and you’re getting ready to get out there.”

PHOTOS: Kansas City Chiefs vs. Denver Broncos at Mile High

WATCH: Denver Broncos bend but don’t break against Kansas City Chiefs

In the second half, Chiefs quarterback Alex Smith converted third downs of 18, 11, 13, 8, 13 and 9 yards.

Yet, Smith’s clutch play wasn’t enough to overcome what Manning put together in the first half. Same with Indianapolis Colts’ quarterback Andrew Luck the previous week. Luck played well in the second half, but Manning built a 24-0 lead in the first.

“Sure, we’re always looking to play that four-quarter game,” Manning said. “It’s something we’ll keep striving for.”

Mike Klis: mklis@denverpost.com; Twitter: @mikeklis