Fox News favorite Judge Jeanine Pirro devoured President Obama in her weekly address Nov. 2, dining first on the ugly “who knew what and when” debate on Obamacare.

Pirro, like many others from both political parties, is fired up about the fact that no one has been fired over the fiasco.

“Did the president lie? Did the president know?” Pirro said in her tongue-lashing monologue, according to her video posted on Youtube. “And if he didn’t know because he wasn’t told or because he was hoodwinked — or worse, lied to — why aren’t heads rolling? Why haven’t people been fired? Why? Because that’s not Obama’s MO.”

Americans are sick of government bureaucrats not taking accountability, or feeling any consequences for their failures, Pirro said. Some Democrats, amazingly enough, are even patting U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius on the back.

“I literally thought I was in the Land of Oz. Democrats were actually congratulating her for a job well done, thanking her for the millions of Americans who owe her more than anyone else a debt of gratitude for their health care,” Pirro said. “I didn’t see any red heals clicking under the table that would magically turn on the website so that millions could actually get the health care that they were congratulating Sebelius about. But apparently, their yellow-brick road only holds six people.”

Pirro’s best sound bite came in pointing out perhaps Sebelius’ most outlandish statement to date, when she blamed a wireless provider for the HealthCare.gov disaster. Pirro played a clip that showed Sebelius claiming: “It is the Verizon server that failed, not Healthcare.gov. And it affected not only HHS but other customers.”

Who would buy that garbage? Feeling for the many who are being dropped from their health plans of choice, Pirro said:

“Why the lies? Mr. President, with all due respect, you lied to us. You sold us a bill of goods that puts many of us in a danger zone. Mr. President, you have promoted Obamacare for years. If it’s so great, why aren’t you on it? Why isn’t Congress on it? Why aren’t federal employees on it? Even simple Sebelius refused to go on the very program that you all think is so great for the rest of us. The website is not up and running. We can’t keep our health plans, and we cannot keep our doctors. The truth is, you have lost all credibility. No one believes you anymore.”

Post navigation

[poll id=”135″]