Daniela Hantuchova of Slovakia throws a tennis ball to stock traders as Carlos Moya of Spain looks on at the inaugural listing of the IPTL at the Philippine Stock Exchange in Makati city, east of Manila, on Friday. Photo: AP

Roger Federer's famous name was conspicuously absent from the star-studded original line-up lured to lend their cachet to the inaugural season of Asia's International Premier Tennis League. In September, after Rafael Nadal's withdrawal, it is believed there were more than 3 million reasons why Federer was persuaded to change his mind.

The Swiss owner of more singles majors than any other man in history has never played in the world's second-most populous country, so his wallet-opening appeal in India and elsewhere was guaranteed. With career prizemoney of more than $100 million - an amount that can safely be trebled when lucrative endorsements are factored in - Federer clearly does not need the rupees, but then nor do Novak Djokovic, Serena Williams, Andy Murray, Pete Sampras or Andre Agassi.

And yet from a draft pool of 80, they, plus a diverse group of other current, former and emerging local players that includes Australian trio Lleyton Hewitt, Pat Rafter and Nick Kyrgios, will spend the next 15 days in Asia representing the Indian Aces, Manila Mavericks, Singapore Slammers and UAE Royals in hit-and-giggle modified-rules matches.

Laughing? Yes, all the way to the bank.

Advertisement

"It's just another chance to get out there, have fun, and do what we love doing," insists Kyrgios, the Slammers' young signing. "That's certainly why I'm playing - just to be around legends of the game like Serena, Andre Agassi. Going out there, just doing what I love doing in front of a crowd, that's why I play the game. And obviously the money's a nice bonus, but that's probably the last priority."

Hewitt's take, in part, is that it ticks the box that is the Davis Cup star's fondness for team events. "So that was one of the big factors for me, obviously, and I think it's fantastic, bringing the likes of Agassi and Rafter into my team, as well," says one of 21 grand slam champions and 14 world No.1s spread across the four rosters.

"When I do retire, I'd hopefully like to keep playing in these kind of events, as possibly a legend in that group. So for me it's going to be interesting how it goes in the first year, but so far so good."

Likened to the annual, but lower-wattage World Team Tennis competition played in the US each July, and modelled on the successful megabuck IPL cricket concept, the league opened in Manila on Friday. The founder and managing director is India's former grand slam doubles champion Mahesh Bhupathi, and former cricketing great Sunil Gavaskar is listed among the franchise part-owners, with the investment per team estimated at $US15 million for a 10-year deal.

It works like this: four teams and host cities, 12 days, and 24 ties, each consisting of one single-set men's singles, women's singles, men's doubles, mixed doubles and past champions' singles. Each game - not set/match - counts, and the team with the most points on December 13 earns $US1 million as the IPTL champion.

There is no ad scoring, but there are timeouts, PowerPoints (in which the next point is nominated once a set to count as a double point), shootouts (the four-minute period at five-games-all that replaces the traditional first-to-seven tiebreak at 6-6) and a rolling shot clock (of 20 seconds between points and 45 seconds at changeovers, after which time a point is automatically lost).

Not only is the rule-tweaking considerable, but the rhetoric is formidable. The official IPTL website describes a "high-profile, high-energy tennis showdown" that is "all set to change the face and future of the game", a "fast-paced made-for-TV sport with an entertainment aspect", one "powered by its exciting format and unique innovations, the revolutionary new League promises to change the manner in which the world enjoys the top sport", etc, etc.

So, what, if anything, might eventually catch on for adoption in regular tournaments?

"For a long time, I think [the modifications] will be unique to the exhibition events more than anything, but it's a good starting point. We need different things to entertain the crowd, obviously, and I think the timing of the short sets [helps], as well," says Hewitt, who is resuming after a competitive year that ended in mid-September and is preparing next for the Australian circuit.

"I'm just looking forward to being part of the team. I don't even know how many matches I'll play: whether, singles, doubles, mixed doubles, whatever. But I still get to hit against the top guys - Tomas Berdych is in my team, obviously Nick [Kyrgios] is there as well, so I'll still be getting really good hits, which is important, and then I only have a couple of weeks after that before I head up to Brisbane, so hopefully it's a good hitout for me."

So too for many of the leading players, if not in Asia, then, chances are, somewhere else. This is the exhibition season, and there is big money to be earned, and plenty of promoters willing to pay it. Meanwhile, for those back home training in less exotic and lucrative surrounds after a long year on the road, there seems to be little idea of how the IPTL will work but a vague interest in gauging the success of the first instalment.

"[During] my pre-season I probably wouldn't want to go and do something like that, but it's an individual sport and if you want to do it, great," said world No.27 Casey Dellacqua, acknowledging that if, IPL-style, it promotes tennis in different ways to broader audiences, even better.

For former US Open champion Sam Stosur, injury would have precluded her from playing had there been an invitation this time, but what of the future? What if the wads of cash were tossed in her direction? "Oh, I'd put my name down, see if I get drafted," Stosur smiles. "I think it will be interesting to see how it all plays out this first year, and from then, who knows?"