In London, on June 17, Christie's, the international auction house, will be offering for sale a painting by the English Pre-Raphaelite artist William Holman Hunt. Entitled "Isabella and the Pot of Basil," it carries a presale estimate of $8.4 million to $13.4 million. Given its importance, the work may fetch much more than that. Such sales—and such prices—are commonplace in today's overheated art market. This one, however, is different because the seller, the Delaware Art Museum, is an institution that holds one of the finest collections of Pre-Raphaelite art outside of Britain. Why would it choose to part with a work of such quality?

ENLARGE The Delaware Art Museum is poised to auction off William Holman Hunt's 'Isabella and the Pot of Basil,' in violation of professional practice. Delaware Art Museum

The argument made by its trustees is that the museum is in such financial distress that it must sell some works from its collection or close its doors to the public. Deaccessioning, to use the obscure term that describes the process by which a work of art is removed from a collection such as Delaware's, has long been a standard practice in museums in this country and abroad. It has always, however, been subject to one important caveat: that the proceeds be used for the continued development of the collection and for no other purpose.

The trustees of the Delaware Art Museum have violated this principle by declaring that the proceeds from this sale, as well as the sale of up to three other works—expected to raise a total of $30 million—will be used to pay down $19.8 million in construction debt, with the balance to be added to the operating endowment to offset persistent operating deficits. (Also rumored to be on the block are "Milking Time," a great 1875 work by Winslow Homer, and Alexander Calder's "Black Crescent" from 1959.) However well-intentioned it may have been, their decision was ill considered, and it will ultimately weaken the museum.

This is not a matter, as is often claimed, of protecting the public trust, as important as that may be. Rather, it is about common sense. You don't cut out the heart to cure the patient; and yet this was the remedy chosen by Delaware's trustees to restore their institution to good health. Regrettably, they seem not to have understood their broader responsibility to care for all of the museum's assets—most significantly, its collection.

Not-for-profits have long used fund accounting to segregate different types of financial assets, most notably endowments and restricted operating funds, which should not be commingled. The same discipline should be applied to a museum's collection, which deserves to be treated as a separate asset that is equal—or, many would argue, even greater—in value to any other and not as a medium of exchange.

It is precisely in such circumstances that the trustees of the Delaware Art Museum should have stood up—and stood together—to champion a broader and more compelling vision of cultural stewardship by protecting their collection rather than monetizing it. That they did not do so is unfortunate for their institution and has set a dangerous precedent for the field.

With many art museums still suffering from the residual effects of the recent economic recession and the market continuing to push the price of works of art to stratospheric levels, we have good reason to be concerned that others will follow the same path. How tempting might it be for them to contemplate selling one or two masterworks to retire debt, bolster an operating endowment or renovate a building rather than undertake the slow and always difficult work of persuading donors to invest more in our cultural institutions?

On the other hand, we should take some comfort in the decision recently made by the trustees of another museum who believed that protecting the integrity of its collection was their highest priority. Faced with an ill-advised expansion that burdened it with a crushing debt load, the Folk Art Museum in New York sold its relatively new building and chose to do what had hitherto been considered unimaginable: continuing to operate on a much smaller scale, but with its collection intact. This was, to be sure, not a pretty picture; but the outcome was preferable to all of the other alternatives that the trustees considered and gave the museum the greatest chance of prospering once again in the future.

The Association of Art Museum Directors (AAMD), which has vigorously and consistently opposed unwarranted deaccessioning, whether it be by the Delaware Art Museum, the National Academy Museum or other institutions, has been criticized in the past for not offering constructive solutions to the problems that have led to the sale of works of art as a last resort. It is, however, rarely in a position to help in such situations because it—as well as donors, members and other interested parties—typically learns about such decisions after the fact. However embarrassing such disclosures might be for museums that find themselves in trouble, an early warning system is clearly needed within the field. So, too, is a proactive stance by the AAMD to help craft viable long-term remedies for fiscal problems encountered by its member institutions that were not created overnight and are, in fact, rarely solved by deaccessioning.

Still, it is important to recognize that the key to this issue is good governance. The authority to make such decisions ultimately resides with our trustees, and it is incumbent upon them to understand the long-term value of developing and protecting those assets—and values—that have made their museums what they are today.

Some years ago, in a conversation with several colleagues, Philippe de Montebello observed that the Metropolitan Museum of Art—simply by virtue of the significance of its collection—was, and would remain, a great museum even if it never welcomed another visitor through its doors. His statement was, of course, rhetorical, but it did underscore an important point. Dealing with financial pressures is a fact of life in the cultural sector and will always be challenging. Yet we should never allow this to cloud our understanding of—or compromise our commitment to—what matters most, the works of art entrusted in our care.

Mr. Rub is the director of the Philadelphia Museum of Art and a former president of AAMD.