WEST WINDSOR -- U.S. Rep. Rush Holt (D-12th), who is serving his eighth term in the U.S. House of Representatives, announced today that he will not be seeking re-election.

"I ran for office because I believed that a representative can build confidence in our self-government by providing conscientious service so that every person knows that he or she has a voice and a stake in our country," Holt said in an email sent to supporters today. "After nearly two decades in public life, I believe these things even more strongly."

Holt, 65, who lost the U.S. Senate primary in the special election to replace the late Sen. Frank Lautenberg last year, said he would not be stepping away entirely from public life, but made no mention of his future plans.

"This is not the time to discuss next steps in my career; that can come later," Holt said. "This is not a farewell."

State Sen. Linda Greenstein, a fellow Democrat, immediately announced her plan to run for Holt's Congressional seat.

Assemblymen Reed Gusciora (D-Mercer) and Upendra Chivukula (D-Somerset) said they were interested in the seat. Mercer County Executive Brian Hughes and state Sen. Shirley Turner (D-Mercer) both are considering jumping into what will likely be a crowded field of candidates hoping to replace Holt.

Republican Alieta Eck, a physician, filed to run for the 12th District seat in January. In her first run for public office last summer, Eck lost in the Republican U.S. Senate primary to Steve Lonegan.

Holt has long been known as a policy wonk in Congress, in part due to his background as a scientist. He has made several appearances on the game show "Jeopardy!" and famously beat IBM supercomputer "Watson." In the 1970s, he was a five-time winner of the show.

Holt was elected to Congress in 1998 after an unsuccessful run in 1996. He survived tough challenges by former Republican congressman Dick Zimmer, who previously represented the 12th District, in 2000, and former N.J. Secretary of State Buster Soaries in 2002.

He won re-election to his eighth term in 2012 with 69 percent of the vote.

Holt serves on the Committee on Education and the Workforce and the Committee on Natural Resources. He is the ranking member on the Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources. From 2007 to 2010, Holt was the Chairman of the Select Intelligence Oversight Panel.

Prior to serving in Congress, Holt was the assistant director of the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory.

His science background prompted supports to create bumper stickers saying "My Congressman IS a rocket scientist!"

"A tireless advocate for his constituents, there are few elected officials who have worked harder than Rush Holt or have served with such dignity, rising above the petty partisan fray that seems to be so commonplace in American politics," said Mercer County Executive Brian Hughes. "I’ve enjoyed a close working relationship with Rush, who is also my friend, and I’m grateful for and proud of the work he has done for the people of Mercer County and beyond."

Holt spent about 90 minutes on Saturday hosting a town hall meeting in East Windsor and fielding questions about the Affordable Care Act, but made no mention of his plan to step aside after this term.

“It is important for me to get a sense of your values, of what you think is important,” Holt told those at the town hall. “Anything you’re interested in, it is my job to be interested in.”

Holt is the third Congressman from New Jersey to announce he will not seek re-election later this year. U.S. Rep. Jon Runyan (R-3rd Dist.) announced in November he would not run again and U.S. Rep. Rob Andrews (D-1st Dist.) announced he was stepping down earlier this month.



Full text of Holt's letter:

"Today I am announcing that I will not seek re-election to the U.S. House of Representatives. It has been and remains an immense honor for me to represent the people of New Jersey’s 12th District. I first ran for office because I believed that government can be a positive force in our lives to build community and to increase individual opportunity. I ran for office because I believed that a representative can build confidence in our self-government by providing conscientious service so that every person knows that he or she has a voice and a stake in our country. After nearly two decades in public life, I believe these things even more strongly. I have been taught by the wisdom of my constituents and am as hopeful as ever about the strength of our community, constitution, and country. I started my career as a scientist and teacher. I have in my life sought many ways to serve, and I will remain involved and will contribute to our community to whom I owe so much. I am proud of my service in the House and am pleased to point to accomplishments in policy areas and in service to individuals in central New Jersey. There is no hidden motive for my decision. As friends who have worked with me know, I have never thought that the primary purpose of my work was re-election and I have never intended to make service in the House my entire career. For a variety of reasons, personal and professional, all of them positive and optimistic, the end of this year seems to me to be the right time to step aside and ask the voters to select the next representative. This is not the time to discuss next steps in my career; that can come later. This is not a farewell. My dedicated staff and I remain on the job this year and will work hard with the President and New Jersey's fine other members of the House and the Senate to continue to advance the public's interests. The people I am so fortunate to represent should have no doubts that I will maintain the high standards I have set and they deserve and I am confident my successors will do the same. I thank you for all your help.



Sincerely,

Rush Holt"

On mobile or desktop:

• Like Times of Trenton on Facebook

• Follow @TimesofTrenton on Twitter