Psychology professor Dale Larson had some unsettling news for the Tidewell Hospice volunteers who came to his recent appearances in Southwest Florida: "You're not normal."

But he had advice for them that could apply to any of us hoping to console someone who suffers a terrible loss.

Larson teaches counseling psychology at Santa Clara University in California, but his research focus is end-of-life care, and more specifically, what draws certain individuals to help others navigate this most stressful and profound stage of human existence.

"We are a death-denying society. The rest of the world is running away from this reality," he told a room full of Sarasota volunteers. "We’re the firemen going in."

What distinguishes hospice volunteers from other adults who may read to schoolchildren or build houses for low-income people or serve as ushers at their church? Larson described the altruistic impulse as "the pilot flame of caring burning in all of us."

But it takes something more -- a heightened sense of empathy -- to answer the demanding call of hospice work, which he defined as "courageously assisting others to live with hope in a world in which loss is inescapable."

To prove his point, he asked the audience to rate themselves on three questions in an "empathic capacity test," measuring how deeply they identify with fictional characters. With a possible point total ranging from zero to 15, Larson said, the national average is 7.6 for women and 7.2 for men. By a show of hands, a majority of the hospice volunteers had scores above 10, and there was even a 15 in the room.

"You’re all way out there on this scale. What does this mean?" Larson asked.

Empathy, he explained, can be a double-edged sword -- motivating people to act with compassion, but also causing them to take it personally when things go wrong. To manage these emotions properly, Larson said, it helps to constrain the altruistic impulse, and find a balance in the act of comforting families who are facing a death.

"If you go in thinking 'I’ve got to be the savior,' you’re going to end up in a lot of trouble," Larson warned the volunteers. "You should not try to be the center of all this activity. You want to help them find the support they need in their natural support system. If you become the focus, it’s a problem, because you can’t be there that way."

The cost of failing to find this balance, he said, is burnout. To stay engaged but not overinvolved, he told the volunteers, they should keep the focus off themselves, and do more listening than talking.

"You’ve got to find a way to reach into the pit and help them out, without falling into the pit," Larson said. "People are self-healing; they really are. They can figure things out, but they need someone to sit with them. When they can come out of this experience, and they’ve made some meaning out of this, that’s where the growth comes."

Follow Barbara Peters Smith on Twitter @BarbaraPSmith.