“Juan, fasten your seat belt,” Judge Andrew Napolitano warned liberal Juan Williams before he flabbergasted Williams with a lecture on the Constitution.

“You have abandoned the whole notion of conservatism tonight,” a shocked Williams responded to the judge’s lecture.

“You have abandoned the notion that the Constitution means what it says,” Napolitano retorted.

Wednesday’s Fox News’ “Special Report” panel sat back and smiled while Napolitano schooled Williams on how, in his world, the “government should live within the confines of the constitution.”

“Lay it on him, judge,” Bret Baier instructed Napolitano:

Juan, fasten your seat belt. The federal government should stay within the confines of the constitution. The constitution does not authorize the federal government to have anything whatsoever to do with healthcare. So, Obamacare should be abolished along with Medicare, Medicaid and Social Security, but the people who are on those programs should be grandfathered in because they paid money to be in there and they’ve ordered their lives to stay there. The states should regulate healthcare because the states retain that power under the constitution. So, if you want if you want mandatory healthcare, go live in Massachusetts. If you want the free market and you want individual savings accounts, financial money savings accounts, go live in Texas. As Uncle Ronnie used to say, you can vote with your feet.

“Let me just very quickly ask, you say you want to do away with Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid?” a stunned Williams asked the judge.

“Absolutely,” the judge told him. “In my world, where government lives within the confines of the Constitution, people are responsible for themselves. It’s not the Beltway world where you live. People don’t look to the federal government to take care of them.”

Two tweets summed the segment perfectly:

Watch Napolitano awesomely explain the Constitution to a liberal:

Share Tweet

H/T: Twitchy

Watch: Hilarious video of NYPD trying to stop skateboarders goes viral

[poll id=”138″]