This week rocks with Cher and Cyndi Lauper, plus Shakespeare and the Gay Men’s Chorus

Cher (Photo: Special to the Register) Story Highlights Cher and Cyndi Lauper perform Monday at Wells Fargo Arena.

“We Will Rock You” opens Tuesday at the Des Moines Civic Center

1 If “all God’s critters got a place in the choir,” as the song goes, they have a place in the orchestra, too, at Westminster Presbyterian Church. A “Triple Concerto Plus” program at 4 p.m. today includes an organ concerto by Handel, a bassoon concerto by Vivaldi and an orchestral version “Kashmir” by Led Zeppelin. Free admission and child care. www.westpres.org

2 Cher and her jewel-encrusted false eyelashes — seriously, have you seen those ads? — will make an appearance at 7:30 p.m. Monday at Wells Fargo Arena for her “Dressed to Kill” tour. But let’s be honest: Those lashes won’t be ready at 7:30. Good thing Cyndi Lauper opens. $28-$108. www.iowaeventscenter.com

3 “We Will Rock You” — either a promise or threat, depending on your tastes — opens Tuesday at the Des Moines Civic Center. The Queen hit machine is set in the future, where renegades fight a government that has outlawed all music except computer-generated schlock. (Guess who wins?) 7:30 p.m. Tuesday through Friday, 2 and 7:30 p.m. Saturday, 1 and 6:30 p.m. June 15. $30-$99. www.desmoinesperformingarts.org

4 It’s summer Shakespeare time. The Iowa Shakespeare Experience presents “Tempestuous,” a comic riff on “The Tempest,” at 8 p.m. Wednesday through Friday at the Simon Estes Amphitheatre. Free admission; gates open at 6 p.m. www.iowashakespeare.org Meanwhile, Repertory Theater of Iowa’s “The Merchant of Venice” plays at 7:30 p.m. Thursday through June 15 on the Salisbury House lawn. $25 for adults, $15 for students, free for kids 8 and under. www.salisburyhouse.org

5 Ames Community Theater caps off the fiscal year with “How to Succeed In Business Without Really Trying,” the 1952 musical about a Dilbertian climb up the corporate ladder. Scheming and romance ensue. 7:30 p.m. Friday and Saturday through June 28, plus one 2 p.m. matinee on June 29. $20. www.actorsinc.org

6 Put down the knitting, the book and the broom, and come to the cabaret with the Des Moines Gay Men’s Chorus at 7 and 9:30 p.m. Friday. It’s at the Temple for Performing Arts. $20. www.dmgmc.org

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1poVfMC