Thinking of taking your business international but not sure how to export? Global Small Business Forum, coming up in Chicago, is aimed at taking the mystery out of exporting.

Unlock the potential in your business with the help of keynotes and panel discussions on traditional exporting, eCommerce and service exports. You will also get the chance for some face time with panelists as well as opportunities for networking and forging connections to further your exporting pursuits.

Put on by Global TradeSource, a company that’s been around since 1985 helping entrepreneurs and small business owners take their businesses global, Global Small Business Forum could help you on your way to exporting success.

To see a full list or to submit your own event, contest or award listing, visit the Small Business Events Calendar.

Featured Events, Contests and Awards

Global Small Business Forum

October 23, 2015, Chicago, Illinois

The Global Small Business Forum 2015 held in Chicago will help entrepreneurs and small business owners export successfully and network with their peers. It will answer such questions as: What’s the best way to ship goods? How will I get paid? Do I need a license? Should I sell direct or indirect? Does my business have what it takes to sell in China?

Bizapalooza

October 28, 2015, Online

Bizapalooza is an online event that begins on October 28, 2015, and brings together the “rock stars” of small business success, entrepreneurial expertise and marketing wisdom, sharing their sought-after insights during this virtual festival — 3 days of Peace, Planning and Profits. Discover the best business building techniques from the world’s leading experts. You’ll rub shoulders with the biggest names and brands in small business marketing, soak up countless tips and new strategies and enjoy extensive networking opportunities all from the comfort of your home, office or local coffee shop. This is a unique opportunity for you to connect face-to-face with the top small business experts while networking with like-minded peers from around the globe.

UnGagged LasVegas 2015

November 9, 2015, Las Vegas, Nevada

Google now makes 1 to 2 algorithm adjustments each day. With change happening that fast, the best efforts on the planet won’t help you without the right knowledge of what’s working today.

Ungagged is an intimate setting limited to just a few hundred attendees. You’ll hear from some of the most respected speakers in the world in their specialties — people like Duane Forrester of Bing; Loren Baker, founder of Search Engine Journal; Ruth Carter, a lawyer who knows social media law; Kaspar Szymanski, formerly of Google; and many more.

They’ll be talking about topics like how to get PR for your startup, streamlining your content marketing, social media horror stories, how to launch a software-as-a-service (SaaS) business, how to scale your business to a multi-million dollar valuation in 12 months, SEO myths debunked, and lots more. Anita Campbell, founder of Small Business Trends will be there and invites you to attend with our special community discount.

Discount Code

SBT (20% )

World Business Forum New York 2015

November 12, 2015, New York, New York

In 2015 the World Business Forum will present two days of powerful stories; of individuals who face shocks – both personal and organizational – and who use those shocks to achieve the extraordinary. Speakers include Sir Richard Branson, Jim Collins, a former faculty member at the Stanford Graduate School of Business, Walter Isaacson, once the 14th editor of TIME magazine in 1996 and named Chairman and CEO of CNN in 2001, Adam Grant, author of the New York Times bestseller Give and Take and Herminia Ibarra, Professor of Leadership and Learning and Professor of Organizational Behavior at INSEAD.

SleeterCon

November 16, 2015, Las Vegas, Nevada

SleeterCon is the accounting solutions conference for professionals to learn and differentiate their practices, with in-depth education to prepare for the future.

Discount Code

CRUSHZONE50 ($50)

More Events

More Contests

Plastec South

November 19, 2015, Orlando, Florida

November 19, 2015, Orlando, Florida NASE Growth Grant Awards

December 10, 2015, Online

This weekly listing of small business events, contests and awards is provided as a community service by Small Business Trends and SmallBizTechnology.