Embed See More Videos at AlliSports.com

Shaun White’s anticipated slopestyle debut at Breckenridge’s Dew Tour shined bright on Friday, with the snowboarding kingpin locking down a top qualifying spot heading into Sunday’s finals.

The halfpipe wizard is aiming to compete in both slopestyle and halfpipe in the Sochi Winter Olympics. That’s not an issue in the pipe, where the 27-year-old is untouchable. He easily qualified in the top spot for Saturday’s Dew Tour halfpipe finals.

Slopestyle is another story for White, who has been eclipsed in recent contests by powerful Canadians like Sebastien Toutant and Mark McMorris. White dashed any doubts on Friday, with a solid run that featured unwavering double-cork trickery, but not the triple-corks that earned McMorris a Dew Tour title last year.

Breckenridge’s Eric Willet qualified second, joining fellow Americans Chas Guldemond, Sage Kotsenburg, Brandon Davis, Eric Beauchemin and Spencer Link among the 16 finalists in Sunday’s slopestyle showdown.

Snowboarder Jamie Anderson continued her snowboard slopestyle dominance with a gold on Friday. The 23-year-old South Lake Tahoe rider boosted a huge backside 540 on the final hit of her second run – the last run of the event – to cinch gold, besting Finland’s Enni Rukajarvi and Norway’s Silje Norendal.

“It’s nerve wracking,” Anderson said of her final run. “But it’s good for the heart and good for the soul.”

The halfpipe skiing fellows debuted their soon-to-be-Olympic talents under the lights Friday night, with the most technical tricks of the Dew Tour so far. Of the 26 competitors, eight hailed from Colorado, including 18-year-old Torin Yater-Wallace of Aspen, whose massive first hits and floating 1260s on both runs drew gasps from the crowd at the base of the pipe.

Yater-Wallace grabbed the top qualifying spot, besting Frenchman Kevin Rolland. Crested Butte 17-year-old Aaron Blunck qualified third. Seven Colorado skiers made it into Saturday’s finals, including 19-year-old Alex Ferriera of Aspen, 23-year-old Taylor Seaton from Avon, Boulder 19-year-old Lyman Currier, Telluride 22-year-old Gus Kenworthy, (who also qualified for slopestyle finals) and Broby Leeds, 19, of Vail.