WASHINGTON — When the cameras blink on for Sunday night’s address on the San Bernardino, California, shootings and the threat from the Islamic State, President Barack Obama will deliver it from the Oval Office, a venue for speechmaking that he has largely shunned during his presidency.

The choice of the Oval Office as the location for the address to the nation was partly the result of holiday happenstance: The rest of the White House is decorated for the many parties that Obama will be hosting this week for his staff, members of Congress, journalists and others.

But the decision also reflects the gravity of a subject that has come to define Obama’s presidency, especially in his second term: how to reassure Americans of their safety even as the United States faces an increasingly aggressive terrorist foe.

Advertisement

And it suggests the importance that the president and his advisers place on responding to criticism of his strategy for defeating the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria. That criticism has grown more fierce in recent months, as the terrorist network has initiated or inspired attacks beyond those borders — in Paris; in Beirut; in the Sinai Peninsula in Egypt; and, perhaps, last week in the United States.

Obama has delivered formal remarks to the nation from the Oval Office twice before — in the summer of 2010, as oil gushed into the Gulf of Mexico from a broken well, and a few months later, as he announced the end of combat operations in Iraq, declaring that he had made good on a central promise from his campaign.

He has not done it since.

Most of the dramatic moments of Obama’s presidential oratory have happened outside the Oval Office. He announced the killing of Osama bin Laden in a speech from the East Room, a location that allows him to stride up to the lectern through the Cross Hall of the White House as the cameras are rolling.

He used the same location to hail the passage of his signature health care initiative, the Affordable Care Act.

Advertisement

And throughout his presidency, Obama and his aides have sought backdrops outside Washington. A speech directed toward Muslims worldwide was delivered at Cairo University in Egypt. He talked about the economy at Georgetown University. He celebrated civil rights at the Edmund Pettus Bridge in Selma, Alabama. And he discussed the war in Afghanistan at the United States Military Academy at West Point.

Aides have said the Oval Office is suited more for a short address than the longer speeches Obama sometimes favors. And in today’s media age, it can sometimes be difficult to persuade networks to carry a short Oval Office address live in the middle of a lucrative prime-time television lineup.

Some of Obama’s media advisers have long believed that sitting behind the desk in the Oval Office, as presidents like Ronald Reagan usually did, is no longer an effective image in a fast-paced, YouTube world. The desk, sitting between the viewer and the president, becomes an obstacle for those watching, a distraction from the president’s message, they said.

Those aides — some of whom have left the White House — also believed in the power of the image of Obama walking up to a lectern in the East Room.

But there is also history to think about, and there is no doubt that the Oval Office backdrop conveys the historic nature of a moment. In addressing the terrorist threat on Sunday, Obama clearly hopes to achieve that goal.