Topics: DAME, kill bill, Melissa McCarthy, Life News, Entertainment News

This piece originally appeared on DAME

I was a size 18 at the time, at times needing a 20 to cover the amplitude of my hips, ass, and the soft petals of backfat that bloomed from my sides. Kill Bill, vol. 1 had come out only a few weeks before Halloween 2003. I’d already seen it more times than could be counted on one hand. I’d sneak off to the theater between my college classes and my part-time jobs. So, when one group of pals decided that we’d all go to some campus Spooktacular as the Deadly Viper Assassination Squad, I immediately called dibs on the Bride. Then, of course, a comment from the peanut gallery, an acquaintance of my good friend’s roommate: “Do you really think you can pull off a yellow tracksuit?”

Her question, snide enough to contain its own answer, was the record scratch that brutally stilled the images I’d had of moving through the party with Uma Thurman’s leonine strut, pointing my plastic sword at fellow revelers and dramatically intoning, “Those of you lucky enough to have your lives, take them with you. However, leave the limbs you’ve lost. They belong to me now.” I saw myself as she saw me: as round and garish as a plastic lemon. Never mind that this girl had often defined her day’s eating—and, by extension, herself—as “good” and “bad,” that she approached life the way she took her salad dressing, always on the side and never really touched. In that moment, she’d said something irrevocably, elementally true about me.

More from DAME: “‘I Don’t Want to Be a Girl'”

And so, on Halloween night, the night when everyone has carte blanche to reveal their secret selves in grease paint and Lycra, I eschewed the me I wanted to be and went as a zombie, loud and lurching in ripped, filthy clothes. Time has thickened my hide, and in time, I’ve become more at ease inside my stretch-marked, cellulite-pocked, size-24 skin. And yet, years later, I still think of those two images of my fat body—the chic, wisecracking assassin and the grunting, lumbering monster—whenever I settle down in the dark to watch Melissa McCarthy, “America’s Plus-Size Sweetheart,” take pratfall after pratfall, belch and curse, hit on every dude in a room with a toxic obliviousness that would make even the greenest pick-up artist cringe and, in the same breath, threaten to shove a man’s balls “right back up his scrotum.”

I’d wanted to embrace McCarthy before I ever attended a screening of Bridesmaids (my first exposure to her work); I’d needed to see a body like mine belong to anyone other than the sad-sack best friend or the mother of the bride, to see my own arm flab and heavy belly alongside the wasp-waists and toned shoulders of the leading ladies. When samurai badasses must possess the leggy grandeur of Uma Thurman and love interests can only be played by Natalie Portman; when “ugly ducklings” are just Anne Hathaway in a frizzy wig and an oversized sweater and when my thinner friends (rightly) rail against seeing women with their body types flattened into sex objects and tied to so many railroad tracks, all I hoped for was visibility.

And then I watched McCarthy’s character, Megan—clad in orthopedic sandals and a boxy, shape-obscuring pant-and-Guy Fieri bowling-shirt combo—look at a random man at a party and loudly announce that she was “going to climb that like a tree.” The audience erupted in laughter but I pursed my mouth. This still wasn’t as painful as the moment later in the film when the titular characters are on a flight to Vegas and Megan flirts with her cringing male seatmate by slapping her stomach and offering him access to her undercarriage. This gag shares an unspoken punchline with that misogynist old chestnut about rolling a fat woman in flour and seeking out the wet spot: that fat women’s bodies are inherently disgusting, especially when displaying sexual desire, and courting desire in turn. Visibility alone was no longer enough. I’m left longing for stories about fat women that don’t tumble off the wrong side of that thin tightrope between laughing with and laughing at.

Bridesmaids, and the woman-centric bawdy comedies it was supposed to inspire, became a cinematic cause célèbre, and McCarthy was championed as the architect of the masterful vulgarity that would supposedly build a new wing on the boys’ club. And she was supposedly the avatar of a more radical kind of body acceptance, one that wasn’t limited to girls with Lena Dunham’s Raphaelite build, Christina Hendricks’ immaculately overripe Old Hollywood curves, or J. Lo’s booty, but included women who shopped in the higher end of Lane Bryant’s size spectrum. Women like me.

In interviews, McCarthy speaks candidly about the “strange epidemic of body image and body dysmorphia” and how she serves as a buffer against it for her two young daughters; she dismisses a particularly vicious critic who turned his review of Identity Thief into a schoolyard diatribe about her “tractor-size” body by describing him as “swimming in hate” and flouting a home life rich in love and a professional success larger than a full fleet of tractor trailers. She bristles when that success is qualified with epithets like “plus-size sweetheart:” “It’s like I’m managing to achieve all this success in spite of my affliction … would you ever do that to a male comedian considered overweight?”

More from DAME: “Is Melissa McCarthy a Big Sellout?”

She calls out the fashion elite for failing to court her and clothe her the way they would any other Emmy-award-winning and Oscar-nominated actress. And, in a recent People magazine cover spread to promote her latest film Tammy, she calls out the fashion industry as a whole for failing to court and clothe the legions of women who look just like her: “ Just because I’m a different size doesn’t mean I … turned off a desire for anything current or modern, or a desire to look good and feel good … I was like ‘Where is a cool T-shirt? Where is a great sweater that’s not built like a tent?” That same spread is refreshingly void of any diet or exercise talk, any attempts to position herself as “a good fatty” (a term coined by Dances With Fat blogger Ragen Chastain to describe “a fat person who is viewed … as taking ‘appropriate steps’ to lose weight, or, at the very least, ‘struggling’ with their weight, thereby earning a modicum of very contingent respect from someone who would otherwise be a fat hater). Indeed, she decapitates the “good fatty” narrative with the roundhouse kick and katana strike of a rhetorical question and four blunt words: “My weight? It is what it is.”

But in McCarthy’s film roles, especially in Tammy, hardly take such a revolutionarily blasé approach to her weight. McCarthy’s size is always implicitly, and sometimes explicitly, the brunt of the joke. Tammy follows its heroine’s cross-country road trip with her alcoholic grandmother, Pearl, who is portrayed by Susan Sarandon as a sex kitten gone to seed. In one early scene, Tammy and Pearl get blitzed in a cow pasture; Tammy rides the hood of Pearl’s powder blue Cadillac, her broad body splayed against the windshield, as Pearl spins donuts into the grass and the cows loudly moo. “Sorry, cows! You taste so good!” Tammy bellows. As soon as Tammy is bucked from the hood, the camera pans to a single cow snorting and chewing. The correlation, and the (supposed) joke nested inside it, is clear: Fat women are just dumb animals.

The film, which was co-written by McCarthy and her husband, Ben Falcone (who also directed it), imprisons its titular character in a petting zoo with bars of fast food wrappers, dirty T-shirts and busted Crocs, and badly bleached hair. From her cage, she “entertains” with displays of bovine obliviousness—Tammy doesn’t know who Mark Twain is, or how to pronounce his name (“Mark Twon? He was a good guy”); she’s enthralled by a garish wood carving of a giant bald eagle carrying an American flag in its talons; and she fumes “Thanks Obamacare!” while setting the Cadillac, which she’s used to rob a fast-food joint for some quick cash, on fire (proving that McCarthy’s humor is arguably as classist as it is sizeist)—and an unquenchable zest for food.