River Radamus may never forget the spectacle he experienced on his birthday nine days ago, but even bigger celebrations were soon to follow.

Radamus, an alpine racer from Vail, turned 18 the day the Youth Olympic Games began Feb. 12 in Lillehammer, Norway. The Youth Olympic Games are a creation of the International Olympic Committee, and the opening ceremony took place at the ski jump where the opening ceremony of the 1994 Olympics was held.

“It was a pretty amazing experience,” said Radamus, a product of Ski & Snowboard Club Vail. “When the torch was lit and the fireworks started going off, it really hit me where I was. And, regardless of the result, the sort of experience I was about to have.”

The next day, Radamus won the gold medal in super-G. The day after that, he won the super combined (super-G and slalom). Three days later he won the giant slalom.

The IOC created the Youth Olympics in 2010 for athletes 14 to 18 years old. The first Winter Youth Olympics were held four years ago in Innsbruck, Austria, where Olympics were held in 1964 and 1976. There have been two Summer Youth Olympic Games (Singapore in 2010 and China in 2014).

The world junior championships have long been an important proving ground for young ski racers, but the Youth Olympics are a bigger event because they take in athletes from other winter sports.

“The atmosphere is completely different,” Radamus said in a telephone interview. “Because it’s probably the biggest event that most of these athletes have ever attended, the energy is a lot different. The people are all anxious an excited and nervous, just having a lot of fun here.”

Princess Ingrid Alexandra of Norway, age 12, lit the Olympic caldron at the opening ceremony. The ski races took place on the slope at Hafjell where Picabo Street and Diann Roffe-Steinrotter won medals at the 1994 Olympics.

Radamus’ parents are ski coaches. His father, Aldo, has been the executive director of Ski Club Vail since 2002. Before that he was director of development for the U.S. Ski Team, a U.S. team coach and the head alpine coach at the Steamboat Springs Winter Sports Club. River’s mother, Sara, has been a coach since the 1980s and conducts annual summer camps in Whistler, British Columbia.

“He literally grew up on the side of the mountain,” Ski Club Vail alpine director Karen Ghent said of River. “He was skiing summer and winter from a young age, and he was exposed to some really good skiing at a very young age because of his mom and dad. Skiing is really second-nature to the kid.”

Aldo declined to be interviewed, preferring for the focus to be on his son, but River acknowledges the debt he owes his parents.

“Aldo is really a legend in U.S. ski racing development history,” River said. “He’s been integral in so many parts of how we develop athletes in this country, and he’s been an integral part of the athletes that have been developed.”

River had other advantages: The men’s World Cup visits Beaver Creek annually, and Ski Club Vail racers get to work on “slip crews” who side-slip the course periodically during races to keep the track clear of loose snow. He’s been around the world’s best racers and got to fore-run two races at the world championships last February.

“He’s a very dedicated ski racer,” Ghent said. “He is as knowledgeable as they come in understanding the sport, understanding what makes someone fast, understanding the equipment. He is as mature as he can be, beyond his years. He’s among the best in the world at his age for sure.”

He’s poised too. After winning the super-G by 0.03 of a second and winning the super-G portion of the combined by 0.89 of a second, things got a little dicey on the slalom portion of the combined. Cross blocking a gate, he lost his grip on one of his poles.

Negotiating fast-approaching slalom gates, he made several attempts to grab the pole while cross-blocking gates with his open hand.

“It was a little bit of a mess,” Radamus said. “I was not panicking but knew I had to do something fast, because as big a margin as nine-tenths is, I knew I was not holding on to that very well. I kept frantically grabbing at the pole. Finally I grabbed the tip of the pole with my other hand and forced it back into my grip, just in time for the last four gates. I pinned it through there and dove for the finish line.”

And won the race by 0.03 of a second. That was last Sunday. Wednesday he won the GS by a more than a second, a substantial margin.

He failed in his attempt for a clean sweep Friday, failing to finish the slalom, but Lillehammer marked a major breakthrough for a young racer with Olympic aspirations.

“It’s something that I’ve become good at, and I wouldn’t rather do anything else on a daily basis,” Radamus said. “I would love to make ski racing a career and continue doing this thing I love for as long as I possibly can. After this week I’ve had in the Youth Olympic Games, it’s definitely a dream to be able to compete in the real one one day.”

John Meyer: jmeyer@denverpost.com or @johnmeyer