A new political ad accuses Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump of having the same position on health care as President Obama and Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton.

(Watch the entire ad here.)

“First, there was Hillarycare,” the announcer says at the beginning of the 30-second ad by Ted Cruz's super PAC.

“We have to get universal health care,” Clinton says in a news clip from a campaign appearance.

“Then there was Obamacare,” the announcer continues.

“It moves us in the direction of universal health care coverage in this country,” President Obama says in another news clip.

“We can’t afford Trumpcare,” the announcer proclaims.

What follows are excerpts from an interview with Trump on CBS' "60 Minutes."

“Everybody’s got to be covered," Trump tells CBS' Scott Pelley. "This is an un-Republican thing for me to say. I am going to take care of everybody. The government is going to pay for it.”

"Donald, don’t you know Hillarycare, Obamacare and Trumpcare are government-run healthcare?” the announcer says.

The clips seem to prove that Trump supports "government-run health care," as the ad says.

But Trump's position on health care is ambiguous at best. Unlike the Democratic opponents to whom he's being compared, he has not unveiled a detailed plan.

Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders advocates a single-payer system, which would provide Medicare for all.

Clinton has vowed to uphold and build upon the existing Affordable Care Act.

Trump has made a number of statements indicating that he wants the government to be involved in the nation's health care.

In one interview, he suggested that the government should negotiate with hospitals and drug companies for lower prices.

Trump also said insurance companies that are deemed "financially responsible" by the government should be allowed to sell health plans across state lines.

Trump told "60 Minutes" last September that he will replace Obamacare with his own plan.

"I don't care if it costs me votes or not," Trump said. "Everybody's going to be taken care of much better than they're taken care of now. The government's going to pay for it. But we're going to save so much money on the other side."

Regardless, Truth Check believes that the claim in the ad that compares Trump's position on health care to the Democrats' is false. Until the presidential candidate provides a detailed plan, it's impossible to make a comparison.