Brandon M. Marshall, who was born and raised in Las Vegas and played college football at the University of Nevada, gambled.

And he won the jackpot.

Marshall could have been playing for the Oakland Raiders on Sunday. He might have been playing for the Jacksonville Jaguars. Marshall once was told he shouldn’t be playing anywhere in pro football.

He will be playing Sunday for the Broncos as the No. 1-ranked inside linebacker in the NFL, according to Pro Football Focus. He has a rating of plus-8.7. Next on the list, at 5.3, is the Jets’ David Harris.

Although others on the league’s top-rated defense have been named players of the week, or the month, Marshall is the Broncos’ MCP (most consistent player).

After being drafted by Jacksonville in the fifth round of the 2012 draft, Brandon was cut by the Jaguars three times. The Jags considered him a JAG (just another guy).

“My (position) coach said I wasn’t good enough to play in the league, and I should find another profession,” Marshall told me. “I was determined to prove him wrong.”

When he was released the last time, at the end of training camp in 2013, Marshall pondered three alternatives: quit, take an offer to join the Raiders’ practice squad or sign with the Broncos.

“I knew Denver was stacked (at outside linebacker),” Marshall said. “They had Von (Miller) and Danny (Trevathan). I had a better chance to play with the Raiders.”

But first he made a phone call to former Jaguars teammate Terrance Knighton, then the Broncos’ Pot Roast.

“He said if I worked very hard, I’d have an opportunity with a great team, and who knows what would happen?” Marshall said.

Knighton also sold the Broncos on the young linebacker, and the Broncos added him to the practice squad Sept. 2, 2013.

On Dec. 23, Miller was diagnosed with a torn ACL and declared out for the postseason. Marshall was elevated to the roster Dec. 24.

“Greatest Christmas gift I could ever get,” he said. He played in the regular-season finale and three postseason games, including the Super Bowl.

A year ago, Marshall was supposed to be Trevathan’s backup. But Trevathan suffered a knee injury before the regular season, and Marshall became the starter at weakside linebacker as well as the defense’s play-caller.

All he did was lead the Broncos in tackles with 110, and his ninth start was his best. He recorded 13 tackles (11 unassisted) against … guess who: the Raiders in the Broncos’ comeback victory at Oakland.

He added 15 more the next week and became an “overnight star.”

Soon after, I was talking with Marshall and brought up the fact he was a serious contender to make the Pro Bowl.

“That would be incredible, especially because of what happened to me in Jacksonville,” he said.

Marshall prematurely had to end the interview because that night he was hosting a clothing drive to benefit domestic violence victims, and his mom, Barbara, had arrived in town.

“I’m trying to make her proud of what I’m doing on and off the field,” he said.

Three days later, Marshall tore up his foot in a game at San Diego. He missed the final two regular season games but returned, albeit injured, to play in the divisional round playoff loss to Indianapolis.

Marshall is a classy, sharp young man. Now he’s a cinch 2016 Pro Bowl candidate at linebacker.

When the Broncos switched to a 3-4 scheme under defensive coordinator Wade Phillips during this offseason, Marshall moved inside. Miller and DeMarcus Ware are outside. There were suspicions that Marshall was too small (238 pounds on a 6-foot-1 frame) and maybe too fragile after foot surgery to handle inside duties. But he and Trevathan (back from his own surgeries) have teamed to give the Broncos a terrific Bran-Dan Tan-Dem.

Playing every down, Marshall again leads the Broncos in tackles, with 33, and had the forced fumble on Jamaal Charles that led to the Broncos winning in Kansas City. Trevathan is second in tackles with 22.

The Broncos’ greatest inside linebackers in the 3-4 were Randy Gradishar and Bill Romanowski. Marshall could someday rank with those two.

“He has speed and quickness; he can defend the run and the pass, and he’s a special player. … It’s just a matter of how bad he wants it,” Romanowski said.

Marshall didn’t listen to his Jag detractor.

He bet on the Broncos instead of the Raiders, and his gamble paid off.

Brandon Markeith Marshall has made a name for himself.

Woody Paige: woody@woodypaige.com or @woodypaige