It is often said that “when China sneezes, the rest of the world catches a cold” to describe the economic impact of China on the rest of the world. After all, China is the world’s second-largest economy, boasts growing financial ties around the world, and is a major driver of global economic growth. Therefore, China’s stock market fluctuation and economic slowdown merit global attention.



While many analysts, pundits, and China-watchers offer competing opinions about China’s stock market and economic slowdown, one aspect of the conversation has been largely ignored: Can China’s adverse economic situation have serious consequences for its strategic and military capabilities? Furthermore, if China’s military is impacted by the recent economic trends, how will that impact U.S. foreign policy in the Asia-Pacific?





ADVERTISEMENT

In a recent journal article published in the Washington Quarterly, entitled China’s Economic Slowdown: What are the Strategic Implications?” John Lee assesses that “the capacity of Beijing to allocate [monetary resources] to building its military power is diminishing…” According to the author, there are three disparate, yet intrinsically linked, factors hampering China’s ability to distribute national wealth towards its military: 1) a real estate bubble; 2) a growing shadow banking system; and, 3) local-central government expenditure imbalances. The real estate sector claims nearly half of China’s total national debt, the Chinese banking system provides backdoor credit to borrowers unable to secure credit from commercial banks, and as local government expenditures increase (e.g., healthcare, education, pensions, infrastructure, and other social and public goods), growth in land revenues for local governments decline. The combination of these three forces, in effect, make it exceedingly difficult to continue enhancing national power and security near the pace of the past decade.Like many other countries (the U.S., Japan, and Australia included), China may likely be forced to accept a fiscal reality and wind back growth in its military—assuming other policy responses like reforms that widen the tax base fail. If China chooses not to roll back military expenditures, it is likely that other social and public goods could be impacted then. Such trends might give further reason for the Chinese public to call into question the legitimacy of the ruling leadership. With modest resources ahead, strategic and military priorities could be contested, especially between the People’s Liberation Army (PLA), PLA Navy, even domestic public security apparatus that administers China’s rogue “provinces,” Xinjiang and Tibet. Core missions such as monitoring China’s coast, Air Defense Identification Zone, and borders could undercut one another.A shift in China’s military expenditures is significant because such trends complicate claims in Washington advocating for an increased, robust military presence in the Asia-Pacific. If China’s military presence in the South China Sea is expanding, then, as proponents of a strong military in the Asia-Pacific argue, the U.S. should strengthen its security guarantee for threatened allies (e.g., the Philippines). In 2015, China increased its military expenditure by 10 percent, a double-digit percentage trend that has continued since 1997. China is one of the biggest spenders on its military, only second to the U.S. Combined with the terra-forming of islands in dispute waters of the South China Sea, and increasingly forward leaning posture, it follows then that the U.S. maintain a robust military presence to respond to China. Yet, the aforementioned logic assumes China’s military expenditures will remain the same. Given the recent economic slowdown, if resources are limited moving forward, then this calls into question the demand for a strong military presence in the Asia-Pacific. In fact, as the U.S. military still copes with the effects of sequestration, manages crisis’ spreading horizontally around the globe as a result of renewed Russian expansionism, percolating terrorist networks, and other international threats, such trends bolster alliterative approached beyond a military response to China’s rise.Therefore, U.S. lawmakers should be paying close attention to China’s economic slowdown and stock market fluctuations, not only because of its potential impact on global emerging markets, but also, and more importantly, its potential to impact China’s military priorities, and U.S. foreign policy as a consequence.

Ford is a Master’s of Arts candidate at the School of International Service at The American University, and a 2015-2016 Boren Fellow living in Beijing, China.