FRIGHTENING FEAR FOR AMERICA

PART 2

By Gianni DeVincent Hayes, Ph.D, D.Min

September 22, 2015

NewsWithViews.com

This article—Part II—is a continuation of my piece on what might happen come near the end of election time. It is a frightening thought. Be sure to read Part I to follow what is presented below, and to understand the premonition I had that still stays with me.

How It Will Happen..If It Happens

During his presidential campaign, Mr. Obama has given enough speeches to take me back to that feeling I had in 2004—which only got worse with time--where he stood at the Democratic National Convention platform giving his speech boasting on John Kerry. My feeling was right after all. I had seen the writing on the wall and predicted the horror of horrors from my nagging vision of Mr. Obama’s 2016 ploys. As I see it and feel it, he will, as we near the election, declare that our country is in serious crises and he will stay on for a few months until matters are stabilized enough for the new president to take office. His reasons could be a few or many, such as race riots, the economy, looming war with Russia/China and others, ISIS, and so on.

The incoming new president will fight this as will the House and Senate but to no avail; people will cry out, protest, and even riot but the law and National Guard will fight in droves and Martial Law will be imposed. Guns will be confiscated, and America will come to a screeching halt while our new dictator will dictate what we can and cannot do. Some will call him the Antichrist; others will willingly bow to him, but all the same, Mr. Obama will remain as the most powerful leader in the world, having created the first, and likely last, American dictatorship. Even our allies will back away from us.

Even when Americans finally get angry and impassioned enough to mutiny and rebel, storming Pennsylvania Avenue or their own streets with whatever weapon they can get, there will be little ammo available—unless gun owners make their own. We already see the government buying up ammo, around 90% of it—on a national basis. The Marstial Law that will be slammed down on us will be severely and strictly enforced, so thousands and thousands will be jailed or killed. This likely has been in plan for well over a decade, as Mr. Obama arose out of nowhere and ascended to the highest office in the world. There is no doubt by most researchers that he was groomed to take office and do what he has done and will yet do to devalue, weaken, and even destroy our beloved country.

I have been pronouncing this since 2007 but more heavily in the last 6-plus years. Everyone said that would never happen, that we have laws in place, that we have a Constitution forbidding such actions, that we have checks and balances in place, and that the people will get him out. Yet, we have seen and still witness that none of these methods have worked to stop the president from doing what he pleases in spite of our sacred United States charter by our founding fathers.

He will get away with this simply because no one—not Republicans, not Democrats, and not Independents—have ever put him straight when he willfully violated our revered Constitution the number of times he did. His vetoes and EOs and convincing—however, he does it with those not in agreement with him—to support his ideas. We see this happening now with the Iran peace treaty. Not only is the issue of his unwillingness to work with Congress but he also has demonstrated his distain and a total disregard of our rights when in fact it is we American citizens who really are the United States government; still, he shows no concern for nor any fear of we the people.

Why are Americans just now waking up to the evils of this nearly 7-year-old administration that wants America to fail?

President of the World

A secondary thought badgers me constantly with almost the same gravity as the first premonition bothered me. If my prediction that Obama will remain in office proves incorrect, then I foresee him moving up in a different capacity. I predict—based on my on my research, that he, like many political candidate--butt more so with Obama—is being groomed to serve in a higher office which may be the president of the EU or the chief of NATO or the UN. In summary, if he departs the office of president of the United States, he will become a world leader…or, more likely, THE world leader.

In other words, eventually he will be a world dictator. As the globe is being divided into 10 unions (i.e. the EU, the African Union, American Union, Asian Union, and so on), there will be a ruler for each union, meaning ten unions have ten rulers or governors, or whatever they may be called. Each ruler of a union will participate in a global panel; thus there will be ten rulers on the panel ruling ten districts on the globe. Maybe one of these ten rulers will oversee the entire panel but it may be more probable that an eleventh person may control the ten rulers.

To push this theory/premonition a step further, I envision this leader over the panel of ten rulers to become a despot, a totalitarian, an evil tyrant. This scenario can be likened to biblical prophecy where Revelation and Daniel foretell End-Times in which a worldwide leader will judge and rule autocratically, sternly, unfairly, and sinisterly. The universe will be under one man’s thumb, his demands, his cruelty, and his régime of ten union leaders will fall at his feet and murder, maim and destroy everything good. This man would be the Antichrist.

Some of us may never see this, and some of us may. My worry is our children and grandchildren, and the future of our America. We can only hope—strongly pray—that this will not happen…and if it does, that the Lord is there for us because this will be a hell on earth that supersedes any woes we are experiencing now.

What has Mr. Obama Done?

The Proof

We must step back and look at the past six years to question ourselves as to whether Mr. Obama is the great Destroyer of America, or has he just been given a bad rap? No matter what logic we apply, the truth is that he has defiled our Constitution—an irony in light of him being an expert of the U.S. Constitution; or perhaps that’s the very reason why he does obliterate the guidelines of the Fathers’ Declaration.

There is a long list of what Mr. Obama has done in opposition to the Constitution and the will of the people. This list is voluminous but all that has to be done is to go online and search for his violations. Well, let’s look at just a few of them:



1. Took Iran deal he made to UN before the 60-day review as well as made “silent” agreements with Iranian leaders unknown to Congress and American citizens. The president has proclaimed that the UN supersedes Congress’ powers (see #8 below.)

2. Violated statute on “Material Support of Terrorism” by returning top terrorists back to terrorist organizations. Article II Section 3; Dereliction of Duty Article II Section 4. [1]

3. Wrote EO 13603 NDRP that the government can take anything it wants, likely including our savings, as the rumor goes.

4. Violated Section 9 when he took chair of the UN Security Council.

5. Had Supreme Court rewrite Obamacare as a tax so it would pass.

6. Fails to recognize states’ rights on many levels, such as on Obamacare, thus forcing each state to provide it.

7. Violated 10th Amendment (again, states’ rights) to uphold individual state’s position on immigration.

8. Obama refused to gain Congress’ approval to fight the war in Libya.

9. “Obama altered law – (A president has no authority to alter law) Delayed upholding the Employer Mandate Law (ACA) until 2015 – Individual Mandate will be enforced. A President does not have that authority – Article. I. Section. 1. All legislative Powers herein granted shall be vested in a Congress of the United States; the president “shall take care that the laws be faithfully executed” -Article II, Section 3; Equal Protection Clause -14th Amendment.” [2]

10. “Obama's unconstitutional assault on your Second Amendment Right to keep and Bear Arms. President Obama issued, in one day, 21 separate Executive Orders that attack and undermine your Second Amendment right to keep and bear arms. Especially egregious is President Obama's Executive Orders amending the ObamaCare law to allow doctors and hospitals to investigate which patients own a gun. This outrageous Executive Order could allow the federal government to track and monitor law-abiding gun owners simply because they sought medical care.” [3]

11. And why does our president get involved with state matters, such as racism, but fails to get involved with national matters, such as Planned Parenthood selling baby parts? Why will he not call radical Islam “terrorism” instead of using euphemisms for murders?

12. Let’s not forget the IRS scandal, his termination of the space program, his cut-back in our military, his appointing 45 czars and making Americans pay for them, just as we pay for his wild and expensive junkets, and the endless entitlements he gives to the illegals and the lazy citizens who want “stuff” without working for them.

13. In the first “32 months of Obama White House we the people have accumulated national debt at a rate more than 27 times as fast as during the rest of our nation’s entire history, as the Obama’s plan their next extravagant vacation to the Indonesian Island nation of Bali” [4] It is predicted that by 2016, when (if) Mr. Obama goes out of office, our national debt will be over $24 trillion dollars. [5]

14. ”… President Obama presented his $4 trillion budget for FY 2016….The projected deficit is $474 billion (revenues – expenses). That means we are overspending $1.3 billion every day...just under $40 billion every month. The federal government will add another $474 billion to our current national debt of $18.1 trillion as of February 1, 2015... It took our nation 233 years to reach $10 trillion and only 6 years to add an additional $8 trillion. And it is projected we will possibly reach $20 trillion in 2016 or 2017. That will represent a 100% increase in 8 years.” [6]

We all know this list could go on, and many places on the Net offer unending lists of the since of our president, but for purposes here, the above examples suffice. Yet, the naïve or those ignorant of great rhetoric do not always understand that a candidate’s oration is platitudes and false hopes; however, Obama did tell the world what he was going to do but people didn’t listen or really care about what he was saying, only that he was speaking elegantly and he would be our first elected African-American, and high-time to elect one. And they jubilantly celebrated his wins. And now they realize they’re losing our once great nation of the entire globe. Even worse, he may have placed the kindling for an all-out nuclear war by negotiating such a questionable deal with the world’s most evil land—Iran.

Summary

So you say, ‘what if he doesn’t proclaim himself the Great Dictator, and elections go on as usual…what then? My only response is for you to vote in the right person—one who will fix our problems—from improving our economy, to ending terrorism, to overpowering Russia, eliminating illegal immigration, stopping entitlements, cutting taxes, returning to good education, promoting old-fashioned quality values and morals, to wiping gangs off the street, preventing crime and punishing criminals instead of getting them off scott free, to ceasing racial dissension, and so on.

Granted, we aren’t the only country facing major problems. Nations are devaluing their currencies, energy shortages are creating immense losses, ISIS is destroying the world’s sanity, food and water shortages loom as a serious problem, deemed only to worsen. Displacement of people into haven bordering countries because of war and dreadfulness, terror and shock is out of control, the drug trade is on the rise, and so many other concerns.

In spite of all of these problems, America’s future truly rests on the next incoming president, for if we fail to re-establish our grand ol’ America and stabilize her pillars, we cannot help ourselves, let alone any other nation. Thus the end might be around the corner.

© 2015 Gianni Hayes - All Rights Reserved

Do not copy or distribute without the author’s permission

Click here for part -----> 1, 2,

Click here to visit NewsWithViews.com home page.

Footnotes:

1. Truth Seekers. “A List of Obama’s Constitutional Violations.” March 27, 2013; Updated 08/06/15

2. Ibid

3. Committee for Justice. “25 Violations of Law By President Obama and His Administration.”

4. Fact Spy: “Barack Obama’s Failures,” by TSurF in People. Posted on November 14, 2011.

5. Pozzuoli, Ed. “What Obama Has Done, Not What He Says—Matters.” Forbes/ Union; Nov 3, 2012 @ 1:21 AM

6. Prepare. “$4 Trillion Federal Budget.” Posted by Ethan Pope in Federal Budget, National Debt. 04 WednesdayFeb 2015. [Link]





Dr. Gianni Hayes is a former professor, and the former host of “The New World Order Disorder” on American Voice Radio. Currently, she continues to speak internationally on politics, religion, world affairs and current events, among other subjects, and is a chaplain a fairly large hospital, a part-time pastor, and an author of 24 published books and hundreds of articles and short stories. She also has had two screenplays options. She is completing her eight-year odyssey on a book tentatively titled, “Current Events and Bible Prophecy.” The University of Maryland System Libraries has honored her by establishing an archive in her name for her works of writing, teaching and speaking. Dr. Hayes earned a bachelor and two masters in chemistry, biology, bioresearch, and in education, as well as a Ph.D and a doctor of ministry (D.Min). She is the recipient of both her undergraduate school’s Distinguish Alumni and her high school’s Hall of Fame Distinguished Alumni.” Please contact her at giannidhayes@gmail.com with your feedback or to invite her to speak.

E-Mail: giannidhayes@gmail.com