Every year at this time I look in my rearview mirror to see what the heck just happened. I flip through my 50 columns, extract my favorite nuggets of advice from each month and serve up 12 lessons. Here are my top takeaways for the first six months of 2014:

January

While researching a column on linen, I interviewed Richard Ostell, a respected fashion and home designer from Westchest-er, N.Y. He made me love linen even more, which I thought not possible. Linen in a home is like a sigh of relief. “Linen is honest, simple, humble, and durable,” he reminded me in an hour-long linen love fest.

What’s more, and here’s where I really fell for the classic material, linen never needs to be ironed.

“Ever?” I asked.

“It defeats the point of it,” he said. “The rumpled look is part of its beauty. It should be left as it is.” I let this sink in: I can get a better look with less effort. I am all over that.

Lesson: Linen, like life, is better relaxed.

February

I was awakened to the genius in everyday design when I heard about an exhibit, “Hidden Heroes: The Genius of Everyday Things,” opening at the Museum of Design in Atlanta. Laura Flusche, the museum’s executive director, reframed great design for me: It is not some hoity-toity, fancy-pants status symbol reserved for only those who can afford it. It’s the opposite. The exhibit paid tribute to 36 ordinary objects that have become indispensable — the zipper, bubble wrap, the light bulb, the corkscrew, the rubber band, the paperclip — items so useful billions have been made.

Lesson: Great design blends well, and is so useful we don’t even notice it. Therein lies its genius.

March

Readers raised my consciousness. They cried fowl after I wrote a column about how feathers were trending up in interior décor. Feathers are fine when the plumes are a reflected as a motif in, say, wallpaper, fabric or tableware. But when actual feathers from endangered flocks are used for decoration, that is a bird of different color. My dear readers raised their concerns and my awareness, causing me to look into the impact other home décor choices have on our planet.

“Most people aren’t thinking about what impact their purchasing decisions have on animal and plant life around the world when they buy home furnishings,” said Craig Hoover, chief of wildlife trade and conservation for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, a federal agency that protects nature.

Items made of carved ivory or tortoise shell come at a steep price to elephants and sea turtles. Showy pieces of pilfered coral deprive the thousands of species of fish that rely on reefs for food and shelter.

Lesson: If a home accessory comes at a cost to our planet or its wildlife, just say no.

April

I moved for the fourth time in three years. Which awakened me to the importance of patterns in daily living.

Though we take our routines for granted, they are the tracks that ground our days, the rudders that guide and tether. When all your things are in place, you can swiftly get dressed, put on mascara, feed the dog, pay a bill, check Facebook, scramble an egg, floss, set the table, and recycle the newspaper without thinking. When you move, you take every one of your earthly possessions and put them in a new place. Patterns get destroyed.

But moving also gives you another chance to streamline your acts of daily living and create new, better patterns.

Lesson: Living well is less about where you live, and more about how you live.

May

I found more color courage. On a fear scale of one to 10 — 10 being skydiving naked while speaking in public — putting big bold color in a room is a 12, for me and lots of others. The idea causes us to dodge tango tangerine or sassy cerulean or marvelous Marsala — and default to benign beige and safe-harbor gray.

“Color is such an affordable pleasure, yet many people get stuck living in bland spaces because they’re afraid of making a mistake,” said color consultant Barbara Schirmeister. “It’s a shame.”

One cure for the color-shy is color blocking, which Schirmeister defines as the unexpected use of color in a large confident way in a spot.

Make you nervous? Try this. Picture a completely white room. Now on top of your neutral background, add a turquoise sofa, a lemon-yellow chair and hot-pink window shades. Don’t worry about using unexpected combinations. Congratulations. You just color blocked.

Lesson: Color takes courage. But dive in! Don’t be dull.

June

I discovered the role of irony in design. My ninth grade English teacher was the first to define the word irony for me. “Irony,” Miss Krisko said, “is the opposite of what you expect to happen.” That word sprang to mind as I looked through a new design book: “Think Home: Everything you need to plan and create your perfect home,” by Judith Wilson.

I expected the usual eye candy. I found instead pages of the unexpected. For instance, the author placed a muted celery green sofa against a wall papered in acid lime. Pairing a subtle color and its electric counterpart gave the room a welcome jolt.

Lesson: Next time you decorate, try doing the opposite of what’s expected.

Join me next week when I share highlights from the second half of 2014.

Syndicated columnist and speaker Marni Jameson is the author of “House of Havoc” and “The House Always Wins” (Da Capo Press). Contact her through marnijameson.com.