Two bills on tiered networks — one placing a freeze on enrollment, and the other setting ground rules for tiered network structure — were opposed by a state commission Friday.

The bills, which include both the Assembly and Senate versions, totaling four, were heard by the Pension and Health Benefits Review Commission in Trenton.

More about the bills Five tiered network bills sent to full Assembly on divided 3-2 committee vote

The first set of bills calls for a freeze on enrollment in tiered network health plans, until legislation regulating those types of plans is passed into law.

The second set mandates inclusion of University Hospital in any top tier of a tiered network plan; plan values to be tied to silver plans on the Affordable Care Act exchange; and transparency of cost sharing.

The New Jersey Association of Health Plans and Horizon Blue Cross Shield of New Jersey, which rolled out a controversial plan in September that spurred these bills, opposed the bills in written comments submitted prior to the hearing.

The New Jersey Hospital Coalition supported the bills.

Some arguments submitted to the commission "Horizon supports the transparency provisions included in the proposed legislation (sections (2)a and (4)), which require health plans to educate consumers about their cost-share and how cost-share will vary depending on the setting in which the consumer receives care. However, section (2)b is problematic because it ties a member’s cost-share to the silver metallic tier. As drafted, this section could effectively eliminate tiered bronze and silver products, which are often the most cost efficient options for consumers. By requiring the preferred tier cost-share to match the silver metallic cost-share, plans will not be able to comply with the bill and the actuarial value calculator under federal law for a bronze or even a silver tiered network offering. Both the bronze and silver products on the federally facilitated marketplace (FFM) have been well received by consumers who are focused on affordability." Steve Goldman, a former state Department of Banking and Insurance commissioner currently representing hospitals opposed to the plans: "It is critical that the commission support these measures, as well as legislation to freeze enrollment into Horizon’s OMNIA plan, to ensure that the state does not enroll its employees into a deeply flawed plan. Horizon — New Jersey’s largest health care insurer, which administers the State Health Benefits Plan — has failed to provide any transparency to health care consumers and providers as to how the providers were being placed into tiers. Furthermore, they continue to go to great lengths in court to block the discovery of this information. This creates a terrible precedent for the needed revisions to the health care delivery system in New Jersey, and compromises patients' access to care. No one but Horizon knows the matrices and criteria used to place providers into tiers and some of the state’s highest rated hospitals and doctors have been placed into tier 2."

Horizon's OMNIA tiered network health plan split virtually all the state's hospitals into two tiers.

Commission member Robert Pittfield said the bills that made demands about which hospitals to include — namely University Hospital — water down the integrity of the idea of a tiered network.

Commission member Thomas Hastie called it "market meddling."

The State Health Benefits Plan has 1,100 subscribers in tiered plans, out of 840,000 covered lives, meaning the impact of such plans is minimal, according to David Pointer, assistant director, New Jersey Public Employees' Health Benefits Program.

But the SHBP also offers, in addition to Horizons plan, a tiered network plan from Aetna. The Aetna Liberty plan is similar to the OMNIA plan, but includes many of the "Tier 2" hospitals in its top tier.

Aetna previously told NJBIZ it had created the plan at the request of the state pension and benefits division.

Currently, there are 614 members signed up for Horizon’s plan and 524 signed up for Aetna’s in the SHBP.

Pointer said the plans are a response to the market and are a favorable option for employers preparing for the “Cadillac Tax,” which will penalize for high-cost plans.