MINNEAPOLIS--(BUSINESS WIRE)--The Medica Research Institute today announced the hire of Angela Fertig Ph.D., as an investigator. Her work at the Medica Research Institute will begin on October 21, 2013.

Prior to joining the Medica Research Institute, Fertig was Associate Professor at the University of Georgia, Department of Public Administration and Policy, School of Public and International Affairs. She holds a Ph.D. from Brown University in Economics and completed her undergraduate and graduate studies at Stanford University.

Fertig publishes extensively on the economics of maternal health, mental health and health related behaviors. Her work has been published in the American Journal of Public Health, the Journal of Health Economics, and the Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, among others. She conducts her work using data from educational, employment and health care settings for econometric assessment and modeling. In service to her field, Fertig is a journal referee for over 30 prominent journals. She has been an invited presenter for seminars held at academic institutions with highly respected programs in economics and public policy in the United States and also at the London School of Economics.

In her role at the Institute, Fertig will develop a research program in behavioral economics. Her scientific contributions are intended to inform public policy, health promotion interventions and health care delivery models. Initially, she will focus on adolescents to understand relationships that exist with trusted adult role models in the educational system and their ability to influence student health attitudes and outcomes. Fertig also intends to examine aspects of the cost of care related to the implementation of the Affordable Care Act.

About the Medica Research Institute

The Medica Research Institute is a nonprofit health services research organization committed to public domain research. The Institute is governed by a Board of Governors, separate from its parent company, Medica. Its mission is to conduct research that generates information for timely translation into activities which protect health and improve lives. Investigators at the Institute develop their own research programs to contribute to an organizational research agenda addressing; healthy communities, consumer/patient engagement and health care delivery. For more information about the Medica Research Institute, its investigators and their publications visit: www.MedicaResearchInstitute.org.

About Medica

Medica is the parent company to the Medica Research Institute and operates as a health care services company headquartered in Minneapolis and active in the Upper Midwest. With nearly 1.5 million members, the non-profit company provides health care coverage in the employer, individual, Medicaid, Medicare and Medicare Part D markets in Minnesota and a growing number of counties in North Dakota, South Dakota and Wisconsin. Medica also offers national network coverage to employers who also have employees outside the Medica regional network.