More than a decade ago, David Fater and Richard Cohen merged their companies on a handshake.

Now the duo — whose long careers have taken them from China to Wall Street — are mentoring less-experienced start-up business owners at Enterprise Development Corp.'s technology incubator in Boca Raton. They're building their own new company as well.

Fater, 67, and Cohen, 69, are more gray-haired than most of the incubator's entrepreneurs, some straight out of college. They were recruited by EDC's president, Rob Strandberg, to help mentor at the incubator. He got a bonus: Fater and Cohen's company, Consolidated Biomedical Solutions, is growing so quickly it will soon need additional space.

"They have a very experienced team. I think they're going to do great things," Strandberg said.

Lawrence Newman, a Boca Raton lawyer who has known Fater for several years, said he has the finance and leadership experience for the job, both for building a new company and serving as a mentor.

"He still has the same energy and enthusiasm for developing new companies," he said.

Consolidated Biomedical Solutions offers what it says is a more affordable option for physicians' offices and other medical centers for converting medical waste to non-hazardous trash on-site.

The Demolizer uses dry heat sterilization, heating up to 385 degrees and holding that temperature for 90 minutes. The air flow and temperature sterilize the contents — such as used needles and gauze — and turn the medical waste into a harmless solid.

The solid remains in the metal collector with a sealed lid and the entire collector is thrown away in the regular garbage. "The contents have been rendered sterile, non-reusable and non-recognizable," Fater said.

The machine has been approved as an alternative biomedical waste disposal method by 78 governmental entities — in Florida and all other states except Rhode Island.

The Demolizer, which was recognized with the 2009 North American Frost & Sullivan Award for Product Innovation, could save physicians and medical offices hundreds of dollars a month on medical waste disposal, Fater said. Currently, haul-away trash companies including Waste Management and Stericycle have the largest share of the $6 billion market, he said.

David Vasquez, part-owner of Advantage Medical Waste Solutions in Lake Worth, which provides a haul-away service to doctors' offices, said that Consolidated Biomedical Solutions has an interesting idea, but that doctors have a minimal amount of waste and the cost to haul away is only about $50 a month.

Mona Fisher, office manager for a solo physician's office, Dr. Mitchell Karl in Boca Raton, said that office spends only $40 a month, or about $600 a year, including their $85 Florida permit, for medical waste removal.

But Fater said that haul-away services vary vastly across the country and that the Demolizer will be priced below what doctors and medical offices are currently paying.

"Outside of Florida, doctors are paying through the nose," he said.

Fater and Cohen acquired the intellectual property rights and licenses for the machine from a Colorado company. The business partners said the product has potential, as the health care industry is moving away from hospitals and toward more outpatient services to trim costs under the Affordable Care Act.

Strandberg introduced Fater and Cohen to an Orlando manufacturer, and Consolidated Biomedical Solutions plans to start production early next year.

They're also setting up a sales and distribution network. Fater already had connections with physicians from his previous work in his health care consulting firm ALDA & Associates International,and with Coastal Physicians Group, which he helped build into a $1 billion company.

He has found that if doctors like a product, "they'll tell all their friends."

The machine also can help doctors' offices with safety, he said. Needles are placed in a proprietary "spinner top" that enables a one-hand deposit, to avoid the risk of staff members sticking themselves and potentially contracting Hepatitis C.

Cohen, who in the 1960s established Chinese manufacturing for U.S. apparel company Genesco, wants to keep this new venture closer to home for better control over the manufacturing process.

But Cohen and Fater said they'll keep their headquarters in Boca Raton, preferably at the incubator, so they can continue to be mentors as well as company developers.

"We've got the right device at the right time and the right price," Cohen said.

mpounds@sunsentinel.com or 561-243-6650