Photo

Once again, here at You’re the Boss, we spent the year in the small-business trenches. Rather than hyping the stories of rock star entrepreneurs who never seem to struggle, we focus on the struggle.

Our journalists look for issues and trends that small businesses need to understand. And our bloggers – most of whom actually own and run businesses – write about their experiences on the front lines. They share the ups and downs, what’s working and what’s not, the lessons learned. And along the way, they benefit from the feedback of some of the smartest small-business readers around. A sampling:

Paul Downs wrote about how he found a surprisingly good health insurance plan and how he managed to save money on it. He also wrote about what happened when he introduced profit-sharing at his company. And why he decided to hire a sales consultant. And how he decides what to pay his workers. And his search for a fair and reasonable credit card processor. And how much money he took home in 2012.

Jay Goltz wrote about a business owner who was too quick to say she’s not a numbers person. And what happened when a couple decided to pursue their lifelong dream and buy that old general store. And how Web retailers threaten local businesses.

Eilene Zimmerman wrote about a start-up that sells “sprayable caffeine,” the many companies started by the alumni of MySpace, whether Silicon Beach is over-hyped, and whether small businesses understand the customer-relations software they buy.

Adriana Gardella continued to track the ups and downs of the She Owns It group of business owners — including their efforts to manage sales reps and to get software vendors to complete their projects. They also discussed their tricks for getting things done, and the truth about working from home, and releasing new Web sites, and whether employees can be rehabilitated.

Ami Kassar wrote about his struggle to balance the needs of his start-up and his own health. He explained how one start-up got a $1.9 million S.B.A. loan, and he assessed the deal another start-up made on “Shark Tank.” He challenged Mark Cuban’s statement that only a moron would borrow money to start a business, and he challenged alternative lenders to set some standards. He wrote about the price small businesses pay for poor bookkeeping, and he suggested a clever way to direct more capital to small businesses.

Robb Mandelbaum devoted much of his year to covering the impact of the Affordable Care Act, including the many companies that found a way to avoid confronting the new law this year and the many workers who might be better off if their small-business employers do NOT offer coverage. He wrote about whether paid sick leave is as damaging as some businesses fear and what words merchants might use to confront “showroomers.” He also found a business owner who says that higher taxes make him want to hire more, not fewer, employees.

Melinda Emerson wrote about how social media put a tiny yarn shop on the map. And the problem social media cannot solve. And what social media can do for businesses that aren’t sexy. And where a remodeling business should invest its marketing dollars.

Josh Patrick analyzed a bunch of businesses that were for sale: Would you pay $170,000 for this restaurant? Or $2.5 million for this distributor of electrical components? Or $2.2 million for a long-haul trucking company? Or $6.2 million for a heating and air-conditioning business. He also explained why business owners shouldn’t feel bad about selling their businesses to the highest bidder. And he wrote about the worst two weeks of his business life.

Cliff Oxford wrote about the differences between happy-talk cultures and high-performance cultures and why “innovate or die” is a lie and why he likes to hire “Great Recession” graduates and why there is no such thing as work-life balance.

Colleen DeBaise — and the Story Exchange — brought us the story of how an entrepreneur bet her family’s house on a bilingual school she started.

Deb Weidenhamer started writing about her experiences setting up a subsidiary of her auction company in China — including this post about the biggest mistake she has made there (so far).

Richard Demb wrote about one start-up’s struggle to market its iPhone app.

And every day, Gene Marks scours the Web so that you don’t have to — looking for links to all of the stories that have the biggest impact on small-business owners. On Monday, he selected the best of those stories from the past year.

This year, we also asked small-business owners to send us photographs that capture the soul of their businesses in a single shot for a feature we called The Small Picture. The one at the top of this post came from Michael Hanna of the Mattress Lot in Portland, Ore.: “We deliver mattresses by bike,” he explained. “We started our mattress and furniture store in 2010 at the height of the recession. Yes, we deliver by truck too. But our customers in Portland, Ore. love it when we can deliver by bike.”

You can see all of our Small Picture photos here. And if you can you capture your business in a single photo, please submit it here.

Happy New Year from all of us at the You’re the Boss team.