Buy Photo Brian and Heather Pontius are opening a Jimmy John’s on Tuesday in downtown Chillicothe. (Photo: Jess Grimm/Gazette)Buy Photo

A Jimmy John’s restaurant along West Main Street, the latest business to come to the downtown, is set to open Tuesday.

The sub sandwich chain known for its “freaky fast” delivery will be operated by Brian Pontius and his wife, Heather, who are excited for the store’s opening at 22 W. Main St.

Initially, the husband-and-wife team looked at locating a store on Bridge Street, but they eventually shifted gears and decided to settle on a downtown location.

Brian Pontius said the existing store was a good fit for them, noting that the renovation of the Carlisle Building was a major factor. The store will employ 30 people.

The Pontiuses are expecting business to do well, especially after the $400,000-plus investment that has been made.

“Each positive seems to snowball after another positive,” Heather Pontius said. “I’m just excited to be downtown. I grew up in Chillicothe, and I’m excited to be in the area.”

The Pontiuses got the idea to open up a Jimmy John’s store when they were visiting their children at Ohio University in Athens. The store will be open seven days a week from 11 a.m. to 10 p.m., with a ribbon-cutting scheduled for 10:30 a.m. Tuesday.

Heather Pontius said what she enjoys most about Jimmy John’s is the freshly baked bread, adding that the meat and produce are sliced each day.

“It’s just simple, but it’s good,” she said, referring to the sandwiches.

She also said she thinks the store will be a good thing for downtown, noting that the pair has had a lot of feedback about the store and anticipates a good turnout.

“I hope it’s going to be crazy,” she said.

Randy Davies, president and CEO of the Chillicothe-Ross Chamber of Commerce, also said the store’s presence in the downtown area will be a good thing.

“We’re very excited that Jimmy John’s chose to invest in downtown Chillicothe and to make a first appearance in our community and our revitalization efforts,” Davies said. “We wish them the best.”

For more information on Jimmy John’s, visit www.jimmyjohns.com.

Read or Share this story: http://ohne.ws/1FmB0IU