Criminal justice reform, a perennial lost cause for civil rights lefties, had its surprise bipartisan moment this year. Conservative Republican voices like anti-tax activist Grover Norquist and the Koch brothers led campaigns against mass incarceration and mandatory drug sentences. GOP presidential candidate Jeb Bush has embraced the pro-reform Right on Crime initiative, while Rand Paul and Ted Cruz have co-sponsored reform bills with liberal Democratic senators.

But the Kumbaya reform moment may not survive the Summer of Trump.

After roiling the politics of immigration with jeremiads about border walls and Mexican rapists, Donald Trump has scrambled the politics of crime by running as a pro-cop, anti-thug “law-and-order” candidate, denouncing rioters in Baltimore and Ferguson, vowing to “get rid of gang members so fast your head will spin.” And as with immigration, his rivals are echoing his appeals to the angry id of their party’s white base, distancing themselves from bipartisan reform. Bush is now touting his own “eight-year record of cracking down on violent criminals” as governor of Florida, while attacking Trump as “soft on crime” because of his past support for Democrats and marijuana decriminalization. Candidates like Cruz and the usually Koch-friendly Scott Walker are also trumpeting their toughness on criminal justice issues, blaming President Barack Obama and the Black Lives Matter movement for recent attacks on police officers. In this climate, it’s even harder than usual to imagine GOP congressional leaders bucking their base to push reform.

Trump has been dismissed as a sideshow, but for now at least, he’s the main show. His brash pronouncements, brazen insults and absurd promises are not only dominating the 2016 political discussion, they’re also driving the Republican policy agenda. And while most of the commentary about Trump — aside from “He said what?” — has focused on his potential impact on the campaign, as well as the long-term future of the Republican Party, criminal justice is just one example of an issue currently pending in Washington that Trump could affect right now.

By riling the Republican base, Trump could poison the congressional well against initiatives on which bipartisanship has seemed possible, like the Trans-Pacific Partnership free-trade agreement or the rewrite of the No Child Left Behind education law. And by forcing his rivals to get louder and more extreme if they want to get noticed by the media, he can inspire political gamesmanship that could end up having very real consequences, from scuttling hopes for a long-term highway bill to shutting down the government or even forcing the U.S. Treasury into default.

The most obvious example of the Trump effect has been the GOP get-tough-athon over illegal immigration, triggered by The Donald’s offensive gibes about Mexicans and exuberant vows to build an awesome wall along the southern border. Republican leaders had hoped to soften the party’s rhetoric to reach out to Latino voters, but now Trump rivals like Paul, Ben Carson and Bobby Jindal have echoed his call for ending birthright citizenship; Walker has suggested he would consider building a wall on the northern border; and even Bush, a supporter of comprehensive immigration reform, has jabbered about “anchor babies.”

Then again, immigration reform was already dead on Capitol Hill before Trump entered the race, so the short-term effect of the Republican rush to the right will only be political. Similarly, entitlement reform is nowhere near the congressional agenda right now, so Trump’s opposition to Social Security cuts will have no legislative impact before 2016, even though it could conceivably help shift his party in a more populist direction in the future. Trump’s scorn for the “carried interest” tax break for Wall Street financiers is another intriguing populist stance, but it’s equally moot for the moment because the current GOP-controlled Congress isn’t going to eliminate the carried-interest tax break or any other tax break.

But the Obama administration hopes to complete TPP this fall, and the effort to lower tariffs and other barriers among a dozen Pacific Rim nations is sure to face a close vote in Congress. Most Democrats are expected to oppose it, while most Republicans are currently leaning yes. But Republican supporters could face extreme pressure to flip if Trump is still in the race. He’s called TPP “a disaster” that will destroy American jobs. He’s attacked “incompetent people” in the administration for negotiating a deal that is “so weak and so pathetic.” He’s suggested that it’s a bonanza for China, even though China isn’t involved in it.

If the deal comes up for a vote, Trump is likely to go full populist — and Republican lawmakers could face another choice between their wealthy donors and their angry base. House Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio) and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.), who have fought Obama on almost every other issue, have been true partners with the president on this one, and the GOP “jailbreak” that the administration fears has yet to materialize. But Trump could change that. If he can gin up grass-roots anti-China and anti-Obama opposition to “Obamatrade,” it shouldn’t be hard to persuade a handful of Republican lawmakers to deny Obama a big victory.

Similarly, the House and Senate have both passed new versions of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act updating the widely reviled No Child Left Behind law. The Senate bill attracted broad bipartisan support, passing 81-17. The House narrowly passed a much more partisan bill, 218-213. Still, most insiders expected the two chambers to forge a compromise this fall that Obama could sign into law, rolling back some federal powers and easing up on unpopular high-stakes testing without stripping out all national standards and accountability.

But that was before Trump left his tower to run for president. He’s had a lot of fun trashing the Common Core academic standards that states have adopted around the country — another “disaster,” also “pathetic” — and even more fun mocking Bush for supporting them. Republican leaders in the House and Senate describe their bills as reining in Obama administration overreach and restoring local control, but it will be tough to hammer out a compromise acceptable to Obama and the anti-Obama right now that Trump and the Republican base are primed to attack anything that doesn’t instantly obliterate all traces of “Obamacore.”

Meanwhile, the Trumpification of campaign media coverage has created perverse grandstanding incentives for the other candidates, who get noticed only when they attack Trump, praise Trump or try to one-up Trump. By cornering the media market with his verbal bombshells and other antics, Trump has forced his rivals into an arms race of ideological and theatrical extremism in pursuit of attention. The Trumpettes need to prove that they’re as bold and unyielding as the front man, which is why Jindal proposed an essentially criminal plan to unleash the IRS on Planned Parenthood on his first day in the White House, and why Mike Huckabee offered to go to jail in place of the Kentucky county clerk who declined to issue marriage licenses for same-sex couples.

This is bad news for criminal justice reform, where Trump’s belligerence is framing the issue as a with-us-or-against-us battle against longtime GOP opponents like the NAACP, ACLU and Obama. And while Trump has been a tough-on-crime true believer for decades — he called for the death penalty for five teenagers who were accused, and later cleared, of raping a woman in Central Park in 1989 — this can-you-top-this dynamic could have consequences for issues on which The Donald hasn’t even taken a stand, like the highway bill that finances transportation projects around the country.

Trump hasn’t mentioned it, but the Trump effect could doom any chance of a long-term extension when the current highway bill expires at the end of next month. The congressional debate will provide Paul and Cruz with an opportunity to flaunt their conservatism and divert some of the spotlight from Trump by holding up the bill over unrelated amendments attacking the Export-Import Bank, Planned Parenthood and “sanctuary cities.” McConnell has an incentive to try to muffle them, so Republicans don’t get blamed for killing a popular infrastructure bill, but attention-starved candidates in a field of 16 have an even stronger incentive to wage a high-profile war with McConnell and the party establishment. And highway projects must be financed by some kind of revenue, which means taxes, which means more gridlocking opportunities for ambitious anti-tax Republicans.

And the highway bill is not the only canvas on which Sens. Paul, Cruz, Marco Rubio and Lindsey Graham could paint their presidential ambitions. Any Senate bill could become a showcase for their campaign priorities, and holding up Senate business might be their most reliable strategy for getting the Trump-obsessed media to send some cameras their way. That would be especially true if they could hold up or insert poison pills into the bills financing government agencies or raising the debt ceiling, creating a high-stakes confrontation with Obama over a government shutdown or a default on the federal debt.

When you see Cruz stand beside Trump at a rally trashing the president’s Iran deal, it’s easy to imagine him insisting on an amendment to trash it in one of those must-pass bills. It’s tough to imagine his fellow Republicans resisting an amendment like that, and almost impossible to imagine Obama signing a bill with an amendment like that. It’s an entertaining game of political what-if, except that a government shutdown would be bad for America, and a default on the full faith and credit of the United States would be a catastrophe for the world.

In fairness, these brinkmanship scenarios would have been possible even if Trump had never entered politics. In year seven of the Obama era, the Republican base is more than ready to be weaponized against enemies real and imagined; Eric Cantor, after spending six years keeping House Republicans in lockstep opposition to Obama, was ousted by GOP primary voters last year for displaying insufficient anti-Obama fervor. Trump is harnessing and exploiting that fervor, not creating it.

Still, Trump matters, and even if he flames out, it will be tough to extinguish the fires he’s fueled among grass-roots Republicans. The Republican Congress didn’t get much done before Trumpmania. He could make sure it gets nothing done for the foreseeable future.