Hillary Clinton rode the subway. She added the short meet-and-greet event Thursday, taking the 6 train from Manhattan to the south Bronx, where she shook hands and talked to potential voters. (Published Thursday, April 7, 2016)

Race to New York Primary: Candidates Try...

Hillary Clinton, Ted Cruz and John Kasich all took on some New York City institutions Thursday as they ramped up efforts to court primary voters in the Empire State.

Clinton rode the subway in the Bronx, and got to feel the frustration of repeatedly swiping a MetroCard at the Yankee Stadium subway stop.

Kasich, meanwhile, took in a taste of the city's iconic Italian delis on Arthur Avenue. Cruz started his day upstate, but finished up by rolling out matzo while members of a Jewish bakery sang children's song.

Here's what else the presidential candidates were up to Thursday:

Democrats

Hillary Clinton rode the subway, taking the 4 train from Yankee Stadium to 170th Street - Jerome Avenue, where she shook hands and talked to potential voters.

During the ride, Clinton said the subway was "the best way to get around" but admitted she hadn't taken the city's mass transit system in about a year.

Bernie Sanders had campaign events in Philadelphia.

Top Tri-State News Photos

Republicans

Ohio Gov. John Kasich tries deli sandwiches and Italian food at Mike's Deli on Arthur Avenue in the Bronx on April 7, 2016.

Photo credit: NBC News

John Kasich met potential voters at a Mike's Deli in the Bronx Thursday afternoon and tried some of New York City's signature sandwiches. After the event, Kasich said "I love New York values" when asked about the phrase Cruz coined while attacking Donald Trump.

"(New York values mean) innovation, great neighborhoods, great food," Kasich said as he left the deli.

Later, he was set to appear at a town hall in Brooklyn with veterans. Television personality Montel Williams was scheduled to join Kasich for the 7 p.m. town hall at the Bay Ridge Manor.

WATCH: Ted Cruz Rolls Matzo in Brooklyn Ted Cruz rolls matzo at the Chabat Neshama Center in Brooklyn on Thursday, April 7. (Published Friday, April 8, 2016)

Ted Cruz spoke at a town hall in Scotia, a village outside of Schenectady, in the morning. The event took place at Mekeel Christian Academy.

At the event, Cruz told voters that his recent wins in Utah and Wisconsin are giving him momentum ahead of New York's April 19 primary and that he promised to repeal the Affordable Care Act and the IRS.

Cruz then headed back to New York City, where he rolled matzo at the Chabat Neshama Center.

Donald Trump had no campaign events scheduled for Thursday.

Highlights From the 2016 Campaign Trail