After a popular restaurant in Vernon burned down a few weeks ago, the community has mobilized to get everyone back on their feet. And in this town, getting back on your feet doesn't take many hands.

"A small town with a big heart" is exactly how the big hearted small towners describe Vernon. Though they may be small, the things they accomplish together are much larger than they ever anticipate.

"I expected it a little bit," Johnny Curlee said. "But I didn't know it was gonna be like this, like this big."

This is love, dished out in bigger heaps than Freddie Whitfield's shrimp n' grits.

"I've lived here all my life," Jimmy Cook said. "And this is the kind of thing people do."

The kinds of "things they do" is much like what Cook has done, volunteering his plot of land for a benefit concert for Gunner's Oyster Bar. The benefit concert is a direct benefit to the crew at Gunner's after the restaurant burned down several weeks ago.

"People just found out about it,” co-owner and manager Vic Starling said. “They were starting to pour in the place. Waiting lines on Friday and Saturday night and then we had this catastrophe.”

“It’s kind of like a hang out spot,” Jordan Tomlin said at the concert. “I mean, they took our Tom Thumb so we had to re-migrate.”

Investigators say arson is to blame.

“It’s been weird,” Gunner’s employee Andrea Wright said. “It ain’t the same.”

But they say they aren’t too bitter, just a little, and they are just hoping to get better.

“It’s been a tough two or three weeks,” Starling said. “We finally licked our wounds and we’re trying to come out of it. We’ve had a great fundraiser today.”

Dozens of concert goers streamed onto Cook’s property as the sun and the temperature dropped. Earlier in the day, Gunner’s cooks helped a cookout at Vernon High School. They donation dishes sold out at 300 plates.

“Put money in the pockets of the people that lost their job,” a Cypress Spring lead singer, Kalan Miller, said. “To help them for Christmastime.”

“Gunner’s has always been a big part of the community,” another lead singer, Paul Roche, said. “We go down there. We drink beer. We eat their seafood… We found out it got burnt down and the community took a hit.”

The band members, in addition to Christon Birge, said they felt obligated to give back to their hometown. From the ashes – a rebirth.

“Everything’s coming together,” Starling said. “We’re getting quotes from our wood and what it’s gonna take to build this place. And all I can tell you is it’s gonna be bigger and better. The quality is gonna be back and we’re gonna be back to a packed house very soon.”

Starling said he’s been overwhelmed with the passion of the community and “how they’ve just all come together.”

“Y’all just come out and have a good time,” Tomlin said. “We’ll be here.”