What are the signs that your community has been secretly selected for an infusion of refugees from Muslim nations like Syria or Somalia, or migrant workers from Central America?

The Obama White House released a report last week on the integration of immigrants and refugees that provides some clues.

It could be something as simple as a new billboard along the highway touting the contributions of diverse immigrant populations and refugees. Or maybe you’ll hear a radio spot or see a TV ad delivering the same type of message.

Your city council may pass a proclamation “celebrating” and “welcoming” the “cultural diversity” and economic benefits of refugees and other “new Americans.”

Your local public library will start hosting “story times” that glorify the role of immigrants and the value of diversity in your community.

You may also see a new HUD-backed subsidized housing project rising from the ground. But the biggest sign that new arrivals are on their way, will be the “messaging” sent out through local media and official government offices.

Below is an example of the ads circulating in North Carolina sponsored by a group called Welcoming America, which was started in 2010 with seed money from billionaire George Soros and now works with the federal government to influence Americans’ attitudes toward immigration.

It’s all part of a strategy, reported on last week by WND, to “water the soil” and “plant seedlings” into host communities, also called “receiving communities.”

WND also reported last week how the federal government withholds key information from the public in host communities until right before or after refugees arrive, and how one congressman, Trey Gowdy, R-S.C., is demanding answers to 17 questions about the program.

Obama’s ramped-up strategy to integrate new immigrants is about to be unfurled upon unsuspecting cities and counties across the U.S. They will be expected to follow the federal plan to “build welcoming communities” that empower migrants and refugees, turning them into “new Americans.”

Once the soil has been prepared, the seedlings will arrive. And the seedlings, according to those planning the changes for your city or town, need to be nurtured and cultivated into healthy communities of their own. They will eventually be fully “integrated,” meaning they are firmly established and able to grow within their host community, eventually overtaking the host.

The plans to transform America through immigration, as spelled out in the new White House report, involves almost every government agency working in tandem with community organizers from immigrant-rights groups like National Council for La Raza and the National Partnership for New Americans. The White House task force is headed by Cecilia Munoz, former top executive with La Raza and now Obama’s top domestic policy adviser.

The report is chock full of programs, goals, plans and strategies to build welcoming “receiving communities” and give immigrants all they need to prosper economically, linguistically and politically.

The document is permeated with Orwellian euphemisms, starting with the title, “Strengthening Communities by Welcoming all Residents,” and continuing with its declaration of the “economic benefits of immigrant and refugee integration.”

Critics argue the plan will do the exact opposite, weakening stable communities by delivering a steady dose of low-skilled immigrants who will place a burden on schools and social services. The new arrivals are likely to be seen working as hotel maids, toiling in meat-packing plants, as cashiers at big-box stores, dishwashers or other low-wage jobs that require food stamps, subsidized housing and other forms of government assistance.

Judicial Watch, the Washington, D.C.-based government watchdog organization, predicted Wednesday that cities and counties will be “strong-armed into participating in this immigrant welcoming effort.”

One way that could happen is through the withholding of various federal block grants for development projects for cities that don’t participate, while showering communities that do participate with new grant money.

The report cites, “A large body of academic research has shown that immigration benefits the U.S. economy as a whole, the communities in which immigrants live and the businesses where they work.”

Conveniently omitted, says Judicial Watch’s review of the report, are the devastating impacts of illegal immigration, “like the billions of dollars American taxpayers spend annually on their education, health care and incarceration.”

The White House plan calls for the marshaling of almost every federal agency to participate in creating welcoming communities.

For “effective integration we need a comprehensive national and local effort that draws on the strengths and capacity of all sectors of society and all levels of government – a ‘whole of society’ approach,” the report states.

Partners will include schools, libraries, corporations, universities, and community-based organizations, to name a few. In other words, an army of community organizers, bureaucrats and technocrats who will soon descend on local communities nationwide pushing for more welcoming environments for refugees and immigrants.

The plan calls for using existing federal funding opportunities and putting pressure on Congress to create a new “revenue stream” that will fund a host of new integration programs.

Obama created the Task Force on New Americans in November after he unilaterally granted amnesty to more than 5 million illegal aliens. The administration’s robust refugee resettlement program has been added to the mix with a focus on refugees from Somalia, Iraq, Syria, the Democratic Republic of Congo and other Muslim nations.

Making immigrants feel welcome

The task force will also consider holding regional summits to encourage state, regional and local planning.”

States already ahead of the game in preparing to welcome “new Americans” are Illinois, Michigan, Massachusetts and New York, the report said. These states have created new offices to serve immigrants, offered new programs to meet their needs, and provided mobile units to “help new Americans feel welcome.”

Illinois, for example, uses mobile units to hold “service fairs” or “welcoming days.” These programs will “ensure that approximately 11,000 new Americans receive access to services,” the report says.

The cities of Dayton, Ohio; Baltimore, Maryland; High Point, North Carolina; Chicago; New York City; Los Angeles and Boston were held up as examples for other cities to emulate in the way of welcoming and integrating new immigrants and refugees.

Boston, L.A., New York and Chicago were all lauded for creating new bureaucratic offices with the sole purpose being to “serve immigrant populations.”

Chicago, for instance, created a “New American Plan” in 2012 that includes “strategies to ensure that the city’s diverse immigrant population is empowered.”

Cities are also encouraged in the report to “celebrate World Refugee Day on June 20” with film screenings, soccer tournaments and community dialogues.

‘Feeding growth in government’

Steven Comarata, director of research for the Center for Immigration Studies, said these types of government overreaches should be expected when immigration levels are as high as they are today.

“It seems almost inevitable with an immigration policy of open borders and the numbers that we’ve seen, both legal and illegal, coming into the country, to the point where one in 10 Americans are now recent immigrants,” he said.

According to new Census projections, the U.S. immigrant population is on track to reach its highest percentage ever of the overall population in just eight years.

“The rise of identity- and grievance-based politics will take over,” Comarata said. “Immigration is not the reasons for multiculturalism, but it is the pure oxygen that allows the fires of the progressive ideology to burn so hot.”

Comarata’s organization, CIS, has been pushing Congress to reduce the numbers of immigrants entering the country, which would reduce the pressure on government to accommodate their needs.

“Now you could say, ‘Hey, they can fend for themselves,’ but the reality is the presence of enormous numbers will create tremendous pressure for the government to do more,” he said.

You can say, ‘Tough, what do I care,’ but the fact of the matter is that in that environment the argument for the government to do more is going to be heard all the more sympathetically, by folks who are not even necessarily liberal. They’re going to say, ‘Hey, we’ve got an explosion of child poverty.'”

For example, he said 68 percent of the growth in the uninsured population comes from new immigrants and their children. “And what is one of the main arguments for Obamacare? It’s the growth in the uninsured.

“So immigration, without question, creates pressure for more government programs. It’s a powerful motivator, and that’s where we’re headed.”

Studies show that immigrants themselves generally have a more positive view of government action than indigenous Americans, Comarata said.

“So you can see why Democrats have an interest, even if it means there may be fewer benefits available for their traditional voting bloc,” he said. “Their political interests trump concern for their constituents.”

So these are not your great-grandmother’s type of immigrant, when loads of Italians, Germans and Irish came to the U.S. in the early 1900s with nothing and had to work hard and scrape their way to a middle-class lifestyle.

“That era is gone and long dead,” Comarata said. “In 1900, federal and state and local expenditures amounted to 5 percent of GDP; it’s now up to 35 percent of GDP. That was before the rise of things like race-specific policies, before the rise of identity-based and grievance-based politics. La Raza didn’t exist back then. We’re looking at truly unprecedented numbers and percentages, and you get an inevitable rise in government services and the overall size of government.”

Comarata also stresses that legal immigration is a much bigger piece of the overall immigration pie than illegal immigration, with 1.1 million legal immigrants entering the country each year. That compares to approximately 100,000 to 200,000 illegals.

“And we’re having absolutely no debate at all on that,” he said.

More from the report

Here’s a sampling of goals and objectives contained in the White House task force’s 70-page report:

Reduce “barriers to citizenship,” such as making the citizenship test easier for elderly immigrants.

Train immigrants and refugees to be citizen activists, expanding opportunities for them to “engage in their receiving communities,” because, coming from various Third World environments “they may not be aware of its importance or how they can effect change at the local, state and federal levels.”

Lower citizenship fees for some immigrants and allow others to pay by credit card.

Make sure immigrants and refugees wanting to start small businesses have access to start-up capital.

The federal government will actively “encourage local governments to develop and implement local immigrant and refugee integration strategies – providing technical assistance and other opportunities to participating communities and put them on the path to building welcoming communities.”

The federal task force will provide a toolkit to the “willing but unable” cities and counties “to guide these communities in their welcoming efforts and share information on federal funding streams and initiatives.”

A New Americans Corps will be created through the existing AmeriCorps volunteer program and these armies of volunteers will work to “build capacity” in the movement to welcome and integrate New Americans into communities nationwide.

Emphasize existing funding opportunities to assist new Americans.

Increase opportunities for communities to use federal funding streams to develop and implement local integration plans.

“Culturally and linguistically appropriate services” must be delivered to immigrants in health and health care and other areas of need.