Photo

Good Friday morning from Washington, where President Obama is mulling the appointment of an Ebola “czar” and the son of Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. is apologizing after a failed drug test. Meanwhile, Michael R. Bloomberg is taking his anti-soda crusade to the West Coast, and Democrats are getting little credit for one positive trend: plunging gas prices.

Bracing for a grim election on Nov. 4, the White House is grappling with what should come afterward — and how quickly to move to overhaul the nation’s immigration system.

After initially promising action before the end of the summer, President Obama last month delayed any announcement until after the elections on Nov. 4. The White House has said the president will take executive action “before the end of the year.” Significant changes are expected that could affect millions of immigrants living in the country illegally.

One camp inside the West Wing is arguing for a quick announcement right after the elections. That could help change the subject from what aides fear will be big losses in the House and Senate. They also worry that further delay will allow any immigration action to become mired in legislative negotiations over budget and other issues during a contentious lame-duck session in December.

Other aides want to wait until Senate control is firmly determined, even if that means postponing an announcement until January after possible runoffs in Georgia and Louisiana. They argue that early action could doom Democrats’ immigration hopes.

Exhibit A for that argument: Senator Mary L. Landrieu, the Democratic incumbent in Louisiana, said this week that she was flatly opposed to Mr. Obama taking action on his own. “I support congressional action,” she told reporters.

The pressure to wait could fade if control of the Senate is decided on Nov. 4, but the debate continues as White House officials try to map out just the right moment for what could be a highly divisive announcement.

— Michael D. Shear

It has been something of a mismatch in Berkeley, Calif., where a campaign is on to persuade voters to impose a 1-cent-per-ounce tax on sugary drinks.

The beverage industry, which has successfully blocked just about every attempt to impose any kind of soda tax across the country, has already dropped $1.4 million to defeat the initiative in Berkeley — just shy of $12 per resident. Opponents have raised $135,000.

Now, Michael R. Bloomberg is riding to the rescue. Aides said that he has decided to spend money in Berkeley – they did not say how much – to help counter the beverage industry, most likely paying for mailings and get-out-the-vote efforts.

“We want to come in and try to equalize the spending disparity – which is enormous,” said Howard Wolfson, a senior adviser to Mr. Bloomberg.

As New York’s mayor, Mr. Bloomberg tried to ban the sale of supersized soft drinks and to persuade the State Legislature to impose a soda tax. The industry defeated him on both counts.

In reliably liberal Berkeley, the industry sees an opportunity to kill the soda tax idea for good – though acknowledges it could be a tough fight given the community’s political history.

Interestingly, Mr. Bloomberg is staying out of a similar battle across the bay in San Francisco. By every account, that is a much tougher battle for the soda opponents.

Because of how that ballot measure was written, it requires a two-thirds vote for approval, compared with a simple majority in Berkeley. And Mr. Bloomberg has never been known as a man to invest in what he sees as a losing cause.

— Adam Nagourney

Few political surrogates are as grateful to the states they visit as Bill Clinton was in New Hampshire on Thursday night.

“No family in American public life owes more to the people of New Hampshire than Hillary and I do,” he told about 1,200 cheering Democrats at the Jefferson-Jackson Day dinner in Manchester.

New Hampshire primary voters rescued Mr. Clinton’s faltering presidential bid in 1992, and the state breathed life back into Hillary Rodham Clinton’s 2008 presidential campaign after a lackluster showing in the Iowa caucuses.

This trip, Mr. Clinton was stumping for Senator Jeanne Shaheen, who is fighting off a challenge from Scott P. Brown. New Hampshire has the nation’s first and only all-female congressional delegation, and its governor is also a woman. “I’m quite comfortable being here just campaigning for women and taking orders,” Mr. Clinton told the crowd. “It’s just like being at home.”

He joked that the family achieved “gender parity” when his daughter, Chelsea, married, but lost it last month with the birth of her baby girl.

Mr. Clinton acknowledged that his campaign speech extolling Democratic values was not a new one. “I feel like an old racehorse in a stable,” he said at one point. “People put me on the track and slap me on the rear to see if I can run around one more time.”

— Katharine Q. Seelye

President Obama will remain at the White House, where he will offer remarks on consumer financial security safeguards and convene the National Security Council to discuss the status of Operation Inherent Resolve, the campaign against the Islamic State.

Michelle Obama heads to Florida to campaign for former Gov. Charlie Crist, who is again running for governor.

Representative Paul D. Ryan will be in Kansas to offer support to Senator Pat Roberts in his re-election bid.

Gov. Scott Walker of Wisconsin faces off with challenger Mary Burke in a governor’s debate at 8 p.m.

In Georgia, it was only a matter of time before college football became an issue in the governor’s race.

On Thursday, Gov. Nathan Deal and his Democratic rival, Jason Carter, engaged in a Twitter war over who was the bigger fan of the University of Georgia’s star tailback Todd Gurley, who has been suspended over accusations that he took money to autograph sports memorabilia.

Mr. Carter, who earned his law degree at Georgia, started it with a Twitter photograph of himself with three raised fingers – in honor of Mr. Gurley’s jersey number – and the hashtag #FreeGurley.

Less than two hours later, Mr. Deal struck back with his own tweet: a picture of the governor with Mr. Gurley and other Georgia players.

“I’ve always supported Gurley,” Mr. Deal said, “not just during election season.”

Mr. Deal earned undergraduate and law degrees from Mercer University in Macon, Ga., and is one of the few governors in recent times who did not pick up any degrees from the state’s largest university.

The previous governor who was not a Georgia Bulldog? Mr. Carter’s grandfather, Jimmy Carter, who graduated from the United States Naval Academy.

— Alan Blinder

More than 900,000 people have already voted in the midterm elections, with 600,000 of those votes cast in Florida, according to The Associated Press.

The Financial Times documents the rise of Google as a powerhouse among political donors.

Politico reports that President Obama is under pressure from Hispanics, labor groups and immigration advocates to name Labor Secretary Thomas E. Perez as attorney general.

Salon says Senator Ted Cruz of Texas has replaced Rick Santorum as the Republican Party’s “anti-gay rock star.”

The Daily Beast sums up the strange turn in the Oregon governor’s race, where the incumbent’s fiancée has admitted that she once entered into a sham marriage for money.

John Dickerson in Slate says the debate spat between Gov. Rick Scott of Florida and former Gov. Charlie Crist had its roots in Richard M. Nixon’s sweat-soaked performance against John F. Kennedy in 1960.