Indoor team signs former LHS standout Lewis

Former Loveland and CSU Pueblo standout running back Jesse Lewis is returning to Northern Colorado, signing a contract to play with the Colorado Ice. (STEVE STONER)

The film was more than enough for Heron O'Neal.

It was on tape, watching Jesse Lewis shine as a running back at CSU Pueblo, the Colorado Ice head coach realized contact needed to be made.

And Lewis, a Loveland graduate a few months removed from playing in the Austrian Football League, was intrigued about another chance to play football in Northern Colorado.

This week, the Ice signed Lewis to a contract in advance of camp beginning on Feb. 5.

"I think it will be cool," Lewis said. "It's always fun, small town or big town, to have people in your corner from the get-go. A big thing for me is my family will be able to come watch games."

Loveland should definitely remember Lewis, a standout running back for the Indians who was a two-time All-Area performer and the offensive player of the year in 2006. After that, he helped resurrect the football program at CSU Pueblo, rushing for 3,541 yards and 16 touchdowns in four seasons. Twice he was a Harlon Hill candidate, the Division II equivalent of the Heisman Trophy.

He's never been the biggest guy on the field (5-foot-7, 185 pounds), but that never slowed Lewis down, a trait O'Neal saw on tape.

"Once I got a hold of his film, of what he did at CSU Pueblo, it was a no-brainer to get him on board," O'Neal said. "We reached out to him to see if he was interested first. It was a pretty easy marriage to make once we got a hold of him."

Advertisement

The Ice had first talked to Lewis the year before, but by then, he had already committed to playing for the Raiffeisen Vikings in Vienna, Austria. Just like everywhere else he had suited up, Lewis made a difference.

He led that team to the Austrian Football League championship, and the Vikings went on to win the EuroBowl, a champion's league playoff.

Lewis was named the offensive MVP of that game, rushing for 164 yards and a touchdown, capping off a record-setting season where he rushed for 1,721 yards and 23 touchdowns as the Vikings went 15-0.

"It was definitely a good experience for me," Lewis said. "It was honestly the coolest thing I've ever experienced in my entire life. There were a lot of things that I had to get used to that were different. I had never been to Europe, so I was there for six months. It was cool. I got to see a lot of different places, meet a lot of different people, see a lot of different cultures."

He thought about returning, but league rules further limited the number of American football players on teams. By the time teams from Germany and Poland had called, he had already made a commitment to the Ice.

He's actually seen the team play at the Budweiser Events Center, going to games with his parents. Now, they get the chance to return and watch Lewis on the field.

O'Neal, on the other hand, is fascinated by what Lewis can possibly bring to the Ice offense.

"Explosive ability. He's able to read blocks. His vision is impeccable," O'Neal said. "The way he runs, he runs physical for a guy of his stature. He'll drop his helmet and fight for yards, but it was his explosiveness and ability to make big plays. His play-making ability is well needed in our run game."

Mike Brohard can be reached at 635-3633, mbrohard@reporter-herald.com and @mbrohard