Advertisement - story continues below

This election, are you better or worse off than you were before President Obama took office?

CONSIDER HEALTHCARE.

The Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare, was President Obama’s single legislative accomplishment, passed solely by Democrats.

Advertisement – story continues below

President Obama knew in 2010 that nearly 93 million Americans would lose their existing health insurance plans. That’s nearly one third of Americans.

In addition to the millions who lost their coverage last year, millions more recently learned their existing health insurance plan will be cancelled by year’s end. New and/or renewed plan options are at least triple the cost due to premium and deductible increases, some by 400 percent. Nearly 66 percent of those employed by small businesses will lose their health coverage within one year.

Democrats voted into law the ACA’s numerous regulations, penalties, and taxes imposed on the healthcare industry, effective Jan. 1, 2015, which will:

Advertisement – story continues below

Eliminate most existing health insurance plans by December 31, 2014,

Eliminate access and affordability to doctors patients have seen for years,

Eliminate care for nearly 60 percent of seniors dependent on Medicare (the ACA cut over $200 billion from Medicare),

Enroll nearly 75 percent of Obamacare subscribers into Medicaid, which most doctors no longer accept,

Provide no health insurance to people who need it the most: the unemployed who are uninsured,

Create a greater number of uninsured who cannot afford and don’t qualify for health insurance.

Obama’s claim, “If you like your private health insurance plan, you can keep your plan. Period” (PolitiFact’s 2013 “lie of the year”) delivered on Obama’s campaign promise of “change you can believe in.”

CONSIDER LONG-TERM UNEMPLOYMENT.

If your Senator or Congressman is a Democrat, ask them why they did not implore Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid to even acknowledge the more than 300 bills on his desk (many of which relate to job creation) he’s refused to consider.

America’s economy is no longer wage-based. Only 58 percent of working-age Americans are working, and wages account for only 44 percent of the economy. This has created an economic crisis on par with the Great Depression.

Advertisement – story continues below

Today, one quarter of Obama’s America has been out of work for over one year. The actual 2014 long-term unemployment is 25 percent (September 2014 U-3 and U-6 rates), exactly the same as it was in 1933 during the Great Depression.

Congress repeatedly chose not to extend long-term unemployment benefits throughout 2014. Americans who paid into the system who not only deserve, but also really need their insurance money, were brutally ignored and forgotten.

CONSIDER YOUR DEBT vs. CONGRESSIONAL BAILOUTS.

Obama and your Senator or Congressman chose not to include eliminating your credit card or mortgage debt when they gave $182 billion to AIG–the company primarily responsible for the mortgage crisis in 2008–and gave $1.2 trillion to Wall Street banks, which by all accounts would be insolvent for their fiscally negligent investments resulting in total loss of their assets. And don’t forget GM’s failed bailout.

The Federal Reserve, which is not a federal institution, unexplainably lost $9 trillion of federal money and has no solution to recover it. What are your Senators or Congressmen doing about this?

CONSIDER YOUR SAFETY AND FREDOM.

Do you live in one of 17 states where your neighbors are Islamists training at a Jamaat ul-Fuqra jihad camp? If so, what are your Senators or Congressmen doing about this? And why have these Islamists not been deported?

Did your Senator or Congressman work with Obama to send $8 billion to the Muslim Brotherhood? Does it bother you that your tax dollars are funding terrorists?

Does your Senator or Congressman support Agenda 21? This initiative became a “soft law” under President Clinton. With Secretary Hillary Clinton’s support, Agenda 21 incorporates an Arms Trade Treaty, which authorizes the United Nations to confiscate Americans’ private property and guns.

By all accounts, Americans are far worse off under President Obama than ever before. As Russian Xavier Lerma said:

“Obama was elected [twice] by an illiterate society and is ready to continue his lies of less taxes while he raises them. He gives speeches of peace and love in the world while he promotes wars in Egypt, Libya, and Syria. He plans his next war with Iran as he fires or demotes his generals who get in the way. “O’bomber even keeps the war going along the Mexican border with projects like ‘fast and furious’ and there is still no sign of ending it. He is a Communist without question promoting the Communist Manifesto without calling it so. “His cult of personality mesmerizes those who cannot go beyond their ignorance. They will continue to follow him like those fools who still praise Lenin and Stalin in Russia. Obama’s fools and Stalin’s fools share the same drink of illusion.”

Therefore voters have an immediate opportunity to fire every incumbent and every politician who voted in favor of Obama’s disastrous policies, and has contributed to the lowest approval rating of Congress of 7 percent.

Americans must demand constitutional amendments and ballot initiatives in their states, mandating term limits, a balanced budget, and fiscal transparency.

Otherwise, Lerma and many others, including Mark Twain, will be proven right. They assess that Americans are “a horde of ignorant, self-complacent simpletons who failed at [working]” and got swept up by sensationalism promoted by the media “on their way to the poorhouse.”

The views expressed in this opinion article are solely those of their author and are not necessarily either shared or endorsed by the owners of this website.