How could a Republican win the governorship of Maryland? That is a question many Democrats posed on Tuesday night, as it became clear that Larry Hogan had defeated Anthony Brown, the current lieutenant governor, in an upset that the National Review called “stunning.” As it happens, that was also, in essence, the first question that Hogan had to answer during a debate last month. The host was Bruce DePuyt, a local political reporter and television anchor, and he prefaced the question with a very condensed history of Maryland politics. “Maryland voters have approved, at referendum, gay marriage, the DREAM Act, a very liberal abortion-rights measure, and a ban on Saturday-night specials,” he said. “If you’re a mainstream Republican, you likely voted no on each of those. Are you, this year, asking voters to elect someone who doesn’t share the state’s basic values?”

If Hogan objected to this opening gambit, he didn’t show it. “You know, all of those decisions are settled law, at this point,” Hogan said, as affably as he could. He added, “We’re not going to be taking any actions to roll back or change any of those measures.” Brown tried to parry, accusing Hogan of bad faith—he suggested that Hogan would actually try to roll back gun regulations. (Hogan won over the N.R.A., though he refused to say how.) But Hogan declined to engage, and the debate soon moved to other, less Brown-friendly topics, like the state’s attempt to build a health-care exchange: the site, built under Brown’s watch, was an expensive failure.

Hogan isn’t particularly mediagenic—he is a fifty-eight-year-old former real-estate broker whose disposition suggests a high aptitude, and tolerance, for paperwork. By contrast, Brown is much slicker and peppier: a Harvard-trained lawyer and colonel in the Army Reserves, who looked likely, until Tuesday, to become the first African-American governor of a state that is thirty per cent black. You could imagine Brown playing a chief executive—perhaps even a President—in a big-budget television show about spies or the end of the world.

After a seemingly strong candidate like Brown loses an election, there are always lots of observers eager to talk about how his campaign could have been better. In Brown’s case, the talk began well before Election Day, with complaints that his strategy was too cautious and that his ads were too negative. Still, none of this seemed enough to deny him the governorship, especially considering that, just two years ago, Obama won Maryland by nearly a two-to-one margin—making it, by that measure, the fifth-bluest state in the country.

Brown’s biggest problem seems to have been his link to Martin O’Malley, the governor under whom he served—who has been considered something of a Democratic star, and a possible Presidential candidate. (Tuesday’s shocking result is already helping to change that.) One poll suggested that in the past year, in particular, O’Malley’s approval rating has declined, and so Brown sometimes seemed to downplay his close relationship to the Governor. As many Democratic candidates discovered on Tuesday, it’s not easy to distance yourself from an unpopular leader whom you can’t denounce.

In many ways, Hogan ran an old-fashioned campaign, brushing aside many of the issues that have dominated political headlines in the Obama era in order to focus on taxes. The most consequential document in the race may have been a report, prepared by Hogan’s campaign, that documented what it said were forty new or increased taxes and fees enacted under O’Malley. Some of the entries seemed trivial, or obscure, or both, but taken together, they suggested a state government with an unseemly habit of dunning its citizens. The list included a “stormwater remediation fee,” which became known, and reviled, as the rain tax, which seemed irritatingly petty partly because it was so low: in Baltimore County, it is thirty-nine dollars per year for a single-family house.

One damning—though very indirect—indictment of Brown came from a putative ally, Peter Franchot, the Democratic comptroller. In September, when Franchot announced that tax revenues would be lower than expected, he issued a brutal statement acknowledging that in Maryland, “sluggish growth and challenging economic conditions have become our new normal”; he asserted that the problems stemmed from “political problems and decisions, as opposed to global economic conditions.” (He didn’t call for tax increases to offset the decline in revenue.) Franchot appeared on Brown’s list of endorsers, but perhaps Franchot was considering his own political future: unlike Brown, he was reëlected this week.

Tuesday was a bad day for Democrats, and perhaps an even worse day for pollsters, virtually none of whom predicted the size of the Republican victory. RealClearPolitics aggregated eight nonpartisan polls conducted in Maryland, all of which showed Brown ahead, mostly by double digits. FiveThirtyEight suggested that Brown had a 9.7 per cent lead, with a ninety-four per cent chance of victory. (The site now says that a lack of final-month polls made it impossible for analysts to detect a late-breaking surge for Hogan.) There were some counterindications, but they came from Hogan-friendly sources, like the Weekly Standard, which reported last week on internal polls that showed Hogan ahead. But campaigns habitually release optimistic data to sympathetic outlets—there’s no way to know which internal polls to trust.

There are a few different explanations for Hogan’s victory. One, palatable to shell-shocked Democrats, is that national trends often don’t determine local elections. Brown seems to have lost for reasons wholly unrelated to ISIS or Ebola. Voters blamed him for the health-care Web site disaster, but that was only an indirect result of Obama’s Affordable Care Act, as well as an unnecessary one. The story of Brown’s loss might be a story about Maryland, rather than a story about the Democrats.

But there is another, broader story about what happened to Brown, one that should make Democrats even more nervous and Republicans even more cheerful. The backlash against O’Malley and the implosion of Brown show how vulnerable Democrats are, still, to being identified as a party that is insufficiently interested in economic growth and insufficiently allergic to taxes. A popular candidate or a sudden crisis might shift voters’ attention elsewhere, but the issue of taxation doesn’t tend to stay out of the spotlight for too long. Even in deep-blue states, voters have the sense that Democratic politicians don’t hate taxes as much as they do. And sometimes it doesn’t take much—maybe only thirty-nine dollars—to remind them.

Read more analysis and commentary at our 2014 midterms hub.