This is the second of three profiles of Democratic candidates for U.S. Senate before the April primary.

WASHINGTON — Joe Sestak was nearly elected U.S. senator six years ago, so it made sense when a man at a recent Muhlenberg College appearance asked him not about the foreign-policy strategies he was there to discuss but how he planned to edge out the same opponent.

"Do the same thing I did last time," Sestak replied, "but even more."

Republican Pat Toomey held off Sestak six years ago by just 80,000 votes out of 4 million cast, so the retired two-star Navy admiral and former Delaware County congressman might seem like a shoo-in to be the Democratic Party favorite this year.

Instead, Sestak is still fighting the Democratic establishment and has yet to build a commanding lead over three other candidates also hoping to unseat Toomey. Plus, Sestak's shoe-leather campaign will take him only so far, analysts warn.

But they also point out that Sestak's go-it-alone strategy — bolstered by examples that show him standing up to party leaders as he once did to military higher-ups — is more likely to resonate in an election year that has seemed to favor outsiders.

(Emily Paine)

"This worked for him in 2010, and the conditions are even better [now]," said Thomas Baldino, a political science professor at Wilkes University. "There's a sense across the country — and we'll see shortly to what extent in Pennsylvania — that voters are unhappy with the status quo."

Last time, Sestak ran against the status quo in the primary, defeating longtime incumbent Arlen Specter, who had switched his party affiliation to Democrat to avoid a primary contest with Toomey. That November, a strong election for Republicans nationwide, Sestak lost to Toomey, but not by much.

Asked why his last campaign fell short, the 64-year-old Sestak has a ready answer. Part of it had to do with fundraising, as well as the misfortune of running in what turned out to be a historic GOP wave.

In addition to electing a Republican senator, Pennsylvania voters that year picked the GOP's gubernatorial candidate, ended the tenure of several Democratic U.S. House members and flipped the state House of Representatives back to Republican control.

Sestak, who served in the U.S. House from 2007-11, credits the statewide network he built, and since has worked hard to maintain, for allowing him to get within striking distance. Still, those supporters weren't quite enough, with voter turnout figures in Democratic strongholds unable to match the GOP wave.

"The fact we came so close," he said, slightly trailing off. "I should have done a little better in getting them out, so that's why over these past years, I've done so many events."

Joe Sestak EMILY PAINE / THE MORNING CALL Pennsylvania U.S. Senate candidate Joe Sestak visited Muhlenberg College in Allentown and talked about national security Tuesday afternoon, Feb. 23, 2016. Pennsylvania U.S. Senate candidate Joe Sestak visited Muhlenberg College in Allentown and talked about national security Tuesday afternoon, Feb. 23, 2016. (EMILY PAINE / THE MORNING CALL)

After his loss, Sestak barely paused his campaign. He replaced his congressional duties with stints teaching at several universities and at the Army War College in Carlisle, Cumberland County. But he also visited hundreds of local Democratic events in the ensuing years.

Perhaps the most defining aspects of Sestak's previous campaign were the marathon days he logged on the trail and in his congressional office, where staffers handled an unusually large number of constituent cases.

In 2010, he toured all 67 Pennsylvania counties before formally entering the race. This time, he spent nearly a month trekking on foot from the state's eastern border to the western state line.

His schedule on a recent Tuesday was reflective of his grueling pace. After waking up at home in Edgmont, Delaware County — where he grew up and now lives with his wife, Susan, and their daughter, Alex — he did a phone interview with a conservative talk-radio show host before heading to Lancaster for the first of a seven-stop, statewide tour on foreign policy.

Sestak doesn't mention his three primary opponents — Katie McGinty, a former state environmental protection secretary; Braddock Mayor John Fetterman; and Joe Vodvarka, a small-businessman from western Pennsylvania who has not been active in the race. On the stump, though, Sestak does occasionally critique Toomey on certain votes.

Those who listened to Sestak's pitch six years ago will find his speeches familiar. The Naval Academy graduate still peppers his remarks with military analogies and anecdotes, meandering through glimpses of the three-decade-long military career during which he commanded an aircraft carrier group, and of how caring for Alex during her fight against brain cancer led to his support of the Affordable Care Act.

In another anecdote, Sestak further brandishes his outsider credentials, talking about how he recommended in the early 2000s that the Navy could reduce its fleet, a position that was unpopular among higher-ranking officers. He was relieved of his post in 2005 when a new chief of naval operations took over. Five months after that, Sestak retired.

"That's the kind of thinking we need in politics today, being willing to stand up to the establishment and say, 'This doesn't stand, because it's not working,' regardless of the impact on yourself," Sestak said.

He lingered for questions in Lancaster before heading to the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia for the second stop around lunchtime. After that, it was north to the Lehigh Valley for the visit to Muhlenberg. By then, the career sailor's day was starting to run aground. He and the sole staffer traveling with him missed their Turnpike exit, forcing them to drive an extra 30 miles.

Sestak apologized profusely to the waiting crowd, and despite running behind, hung around to greet attendees. Then it was off to Wilkes-Barre for the evening's final foreign-policy event, where more TV interviews awaited him before a long, dark drive across the state to Erie.

Sestak estimated they would arrive about 2 a.m., just hours ahead of another day of foreign-policy events that kicked off at 8:30 a.m.

Even some who have sided with his primary opponents have a grudging respect for his style. Former Gov. Ed Rendell, who is backing McGinty, has said Sestak is a candidate who "is not to be treated lightly." State Democratic Party Chairman Marcel Groen has described him as someone who will not be outworked.