Posted on February 8, 2014

Michelle Obama Makes Push For Obamacare: We Have To Get "Our Folks" Signed Up

Michelle Obama: And that’s, you know, one of the things that I want to encourage your listeners to do. That if you’re listening and you have healthcare but you know that there’s somebody in your life, a young person in particular, who thinks ‘Nah, I don’t need it, I don’t want to spend that money.’ You got to shake them and make them understand that this isn’t a joke. And that we never know what curveballs life is going to throw us. And now we don’t have to guess. We don’t have to pray and hope that things will go okay. With the ACA everybody can have access to insurance. And that’s what we need, to begin that process of economic stability and growth and competitiveness that we need in our communities to stay strong and stable. So I’ve been pushing that. And people need to sign up by the end of March.



Tom Joyner: What’s the website?



Michelle Obama: Healthcare.gov.



Tom Joyner: Healthcare.gov.



Michelle Obama: But people who aren’t comfortable going online, there’s a phone number, 800-318-2596 I know you guys have that. People can call. They can get in person, one-on-one assistance. They can go into community health clinics who are all working to get people signed up, if they want to sit down with somebody, there are a lot of providers out there that are reaching out and I just urge people to, you know, if they aren’t comfortable going online, they can do this in person as well and they can use the phone number to find out how to get help in their area.



Tom Joyner: All right.



Michelle Obama: But we have to get our folks signed up for insurance.



Tom Joyner: All right, Mrs. First Lady.



Michelle Obama: Yeah, so that’s one of the things I’m doing this February. What you all doing? (Laughter)



Sybil Wilkes: Well, we celebrate black history every day.



Tom Joyner: Every day.



Jay Anthony Brown: Every day.



Michelle Obama: Every day. That’s what I tell my kids every day. Because our young people have to, you know, they have to understand where we come from in order to know where we go to go.



Tom Joyner: That’s right.



Michelle Obama: We still have a lot of work to do. A lot of work left to do in our communities.



Tom Joyner: Good job. The First Lady of the United States, Mrs. Michelle Obama.



Sybil Wilkes: Black history, right here. (Laugh)



Tom Joyner: Black history, right here.



J. Anthony Brown:



Every day.



Michelle Obama: (Laughs)



Tom Joyner: All right?



Michelle Obama: All right.



Tom Joyner: Tell the big chief I said hello.



Michelle Obama: I will. It’s always a pleasure to talk to you all. You all be good, okay?



Tom Joyner: All right, homie.



Michelle Obama: Thanks so much, you guys.