Healthcare IT firm Indegene targets $250 million in revenue by 2020, looking at Nasdaq IPO

Indegene, which reported a topline of roughly $40 million at the end of 2013, has been growing at 35-40% year-over-year for the last few years. More growth will come in from the company's bet on the changes in the US healthcare law, the company's CEO Manish Gupta told ET.

MUMBAI: Indegene Lifesystems, a healthcare IT firm backed by Infosys co-founder NS Raghavan , is targeting $250 million in revenue by 2020 and is looking at a Nasdaq IPO, a top executive said.

The company's 'Obamacare' business is growing at 200%, albeit off a small base, Gupta said. Indegene is also looking at spurring growth inorganically.

"We are in the process of closing one acquisition. It should close in the next few days. Obviously, we have grown further from that $40 million mark and we are targeting $250 million in revenue by 2020. It will be a mix of organic growth as well as further acquisitions," Gupta said in an interview.

Gupta added that the company was currently working on acquiring a firm with intellectual property in the population health management analytics space and that the size of the acquisition is similar to the deals Indegene has signed in the past.

In 2012, Indegene acquired Aptillon for $4 million, and it acquired outcome research and clinical engagement services company Total Therapeutics in 2014. More deals will likely materialize, Gupta said.

"We are constantly talking to potential acquisition targets. It's a process we run constantly," Acqusitions in the healthcare space have been growing. Last year, Cognizant agreed to buy healthcare IT company TriZetto for $2.7 billion.

Indegene, which has been around for about 15 years, is also thinking about helping its investors monetize their investment.

"We don't think we would sell. We think a Nasdaq IPO would be the way we would want to go. It will happen in the next few years. I can't say whether it will be in the next two years or four years but we are in the process of preparing for a public listing," Gupta said.