Election Cycle Sets Up Bullish Quarter

Stocks have been a roller coaster this October, but one historical pattern suggests the market is entering a bullish phase that could go on through next year. Today, we’ll look at the “Presidential Election Cycle.“

This cycle isn’t really about which party controls the White House, though that can be a factor. The bigger point is that all sorts of other events hinge on where we are in the election cycle.

Right now, history suggests you bet on the bullish side.

***

Do political factors really drive the stock market? Well, they can certainly play a factor in the short run, especially when government policy forces change on particular sectors. Obamacare and the Healthcare sector is a good example.

Moreover, the fact that we have congressional and/or presidential elections in November of every even-numbered year creates a recurring rhythm that shows up in the economy and the financial markets.

Every new president, from either party, wants to make an impact as fast as possible. Ergo, we are likely to see trend changes in the months following an inauguration. You can see this in the stock market benchmarks over time.

The table below comes from Stock Trader’s Almanac. I found it in this Kenjol Capital blog post.

What you see here are the average returns in three key benchmarks (the Dow, S&P 500 and NASDAQ) for each quarter of the election cycle. The cycle consists of four years.

“Post-Election“ is the year after a president is elected or re-elected. That means 2013, 2009, 2005, 2001 and so on.

“Midterm“ year is when we have House and Senate elections; but the president isn’t on the ballot. We are in such a year right now with 2014. Before that was 2010, 2006, etc.

“Pre-Election“ is the year before a presidential election. That’s what 2015 will be; just like 2011, 2007, 2003 and 1999.

“Election“ year is when we vote for a president — most recently in 2012, and before that in 2008 and 2004.

So in the table, the top right number tells us that the Dow Jones Industrial Average typically lost about -0.4% in the first quarter of all the Post-Election years since 1949. The S&P 500 and NASDAQ also lost ground in those quarters.

Look at the blue box around Q2 and Q3 of Midterm years. We just finished that six-month period on Sept. 30. Historically, it has been the weakest part of the presidential cycle. It was better than average in 2014 but still a generally soft period.

Now look at the red box around Q4 of Midterm years and all four quarters of pre-election year. We are just now entering this part of the cycle — and it has historically meant five consecutive winning quarters for all three benchmarks.

The impact is especially obvious in the NASDAQ Index. If it can match historical averages this time around, we will see the benchmark gain 8.9% this quarter and 13.8% in the first quarter of 2015.

Keep in mind these are averages. Plenty of factors can cause a quarter or year to deviate in either direction. Still, it adds to the bullish forecasts many experts are issuing for next year.

We’ll learn more in the coming weeks as the Federal Reserve ends its QE3 program and companies release their quarterly earnings reports. Bears may get some ammunition from those events.

As one pundit says, you can count on history to repeat itself … until it doesn’t.

***

Here is a letter responding to my Friday story, Why Ebola is Great for Gold Stocks.

Reader Elliot S. says: “Dear Sir: The title, ‘Why Ebola is Great for Gold Stocks,’ is insensitive and in bad taste.“

Brad: Thanks for writing Elliot. It’s fair to say that my headline was a bit provocative. The purpose of a headline (or subject line of an e-mail) is to provoke interest and engage readers on a point they might otherwise miss. Many readers asked us how Ebola might affect their investments and I wanted to respond.

Nevertheless, every news event is positive for some people and negative for others. Hurricanes are terrible for people whose homes are damaged, but great for unemployed construction workers. Explaining these facts isn’t insensitive.

What would be insensitive, in my opinion, is to avoid discussing events that make us uncomfortable. Truth is never the enemy. We need more of it, not less.

What does everyone else think? Did my Friday story tell you anything useful or interesting? I want to know what you think so I can do better in the future. You can leave a comment on our website or send me an e-mail.

***

Stocks couldn’t repeat Friday’s big rally, but they also avoided the kind of losses we saw last Thursday. Here are some of the day’s key stories…

The S&P 500 is having a hard time recapturing its 50-day moving average. Until it does, we have to say the large-cap benchmark is in an intermediate-term downtrend.

Meanwhile, the Russell 2000 resumed its downward slide after a brief rally attempt last week. The Small Cap gauge just finished five consecutive down weeks.

Small cap bears got some ammunition today with a surprise bankruptcy filing by GT Advanced Technologies (GTAT). The company’s shares plunged last month when Apple’s new iPhones rolled out without GT’s Sapphire glass touch screens.

GTAT fell even more today … -93%, to be precise. Bankruptcy is never a bullish sign.

Hewlett-Packard (HPQ) said it will undergo corporate mitosis, splitting itself into two publicly traded companies. The company’s PC and printer businesses will be separated from its consulting and enterprise technology units.

This looks to me like a tacit admission from H-P. I’ll bet that half ends up in Chinese “can’t compete in manufacturing“ hands.

Gold and crude oil stabilized after a sharp plunge last Friday. Traders are watching to see if gold can maintain at $1,200 or better, while energy bulls hope WTI crude will stay above $90. Both hit their marks today.

Former Treasury Secretary Hank Paulson testified today in a trial over the Bush Administration’s 2008 AIG bailout. He surprised the court by admitting he had talked with China about possibly buying troubled U.S. financial firms.

According to Paulson, he didn’t press the Chinese because he thought they wouldn’t be interested without a U.S. government guarantee.

Good Luck and Happy Investing,

Brad Hoppmann

Publisher

Uncommon Wisdom Daily