Lisa McCune and Teddy Tahu Rhodes set to team up for latest production of The King and I

IT is a relationship that neither Lisa McCune and Teddy Tahu Rhodes are yet to speak publicly about.

But it seems two of Australia's most prominent musical theatre stars are happy to let their performances do it for them, with the pair set to return for the upcoming production of The King and I.

Produced again by music theatre guru John Frost, the new show will see the rumoured off-screen coupling again thrown into each others arms in the same sort of 'art imitating life' that has helped make their current musical a smash hit.

The pair reportedly fell for each other while rehearsing the long-running South Pacific - also produced by Frost - which has broken all sorts of box office records at the Sydney Opera House where it plays for a further three weeks.

And Frost candidly admits he debated the idea of bringing McCune and Tahu Rhodes back for what could be viewed by some as a publicity stunt.

"My view was this ... we sat down and we talked about it and talked about if it would be overkill if (McCune and Tahu-Rhodes) do the King and I after doing South Pacific and my view was ... not really," Frost told The Sunday Telegraph.

"The fact is, and this is going to sound silly, but we're in the business of making magic and one thing Australia doesn't do well is make people stars.

"They don't hold them up and support them as much as they should and part of the triumph of South Pacific was that the public did see this whole other ... you know, 'whatever' ... play out," he said in reference to the offstage controversy.

"So to be honest I thought we'd be crazy and almost irresponsible not to capitalise on it.

"But in saying that they also had to be right for the role ... and they're both perfect."

Neither McCune nor Rhodes have ever addressed their personal relationship or the photos of the pair getting intimate which began to circulate in tabloids in around July last year.

McCune, who by all accounts remains married to husband Tim Disney, only went as far this week of admitting she shares a great onstage chemistry with her co-star who will play The King to her Anna - roles made famous by Deborah Kerr and Yul Brynner in the 1956 film version.

"It's an interesting thing to look at because producers do have to find performers who do have that chemistry and looking back I remember Blue Heelers ... Marty Sacks and I did have that innate chemistry and I don't know why we just did," McCune said.

"In saying that I've never had any problem with my leading men

"I always get along well with any of the colleagues I've had to work with."

McCune did however admit that Tahu-Rhodes is perfect for the role of The King in the production which will go into rehearsals not long after the closing night of South Pacific which still has legs in Adelaide and Perth yet to run.

"For Teddy, he had to act in (South Pacific) and he loved it but there's probably more for him to do in the King and I which is great because he's actually a very funny guy so I think he will enjoy it very much."

The King and I is set to open in Brisbane next September and will travel to Melbourne and Sydney though Tahu Rhodes will be replaced for the Melbourne run due to a conflict of commitments.