Anaheim — A few years ago — geez, maybe LAST year — Catharine Baker wouldn’t have got a second look as a candidate in the California Republican Party. Why? She’s pro-choice and supports same sex marriage — virtual disqualifiers in a party long ruled by social conservatives.

But now the Dublin attorney is getting the blessing of party activists (like the CA GOP’s county chairs) behind her run for what’s shaping up to one of 2014’s hottest Assembly races: The 16th District.

First Abel Maldonado goes all pro-choice, pro-gay marriage. Now Baker. We’re beginning to think that being pro-gay marriage, pro-choice is the new black for the GOP….well, OK, maybe not yet.

Regardless of Baker’s stand on those social issues, it’s not going to be an easy race for her. She facing two well-connected Democrats. One is Tim Sbranti, the Dublin mayor who will bring the power of one of California’s most powerful unions — the California Teachers Association — where he was its political czar. Another is Democrat Steve Glazer, a longtime political adviser to Gov. Jerry Brown. Also in the mix is Danville Mayor Newell Arnerich.

Baker, a 42-year-old married mother of 10-year-old twins, is undaunted. A lifelong Republican, the Cathedral City native is attracted to the party because of its focus on “smaller, limited government and economic freedom.” She talks about juggling the demands of work (she helps start-up companies and nonprofits get on their feet) with shuttling kids off to soccer games and school — a real person quality that may play well with suburban parents that dominate the Contra Costa/Alameda County district.

The downside for her: Dems have about a seven-point advantage in registered voters here. Better news for her: About one in every five voters is a decline-to-state…which in many cases in the burbs translates to “Disgruntled Republican.”

A University of Chicago grad (where she met her husband, a financial analyst), she worked as a legislative analyst for the late Rep. Sonny Bono…including during the LAST government shutdown in 1995.

Her advice, based on that experience, to DC Republicans now mired in another stalemate: “If you want to change Obamacare,you have to win the votes to be in the majority so you can change the law….Obamacare will speak for itself when it implodes.” A shutdown is not the right way to accomplish change, she said.

Here’s an introduction to Baker courtesy of SFGate.com/San Francisco Chronicle’s Shaky Hand Productions: