She had warned him not to ride across the highway. Take the path through Leyland Avenue, she said.

But you know how 13-year-olds can be. Jehovah Copeland rode his bicycle across Route 22, the new bicycle that his great-grandmother and legal guardian had just bought for his younger brother.

The car accident nearly ended his life.

It wasn’t clear whether Jehovah would awake from his coma and doctors suggested his great-grandmother, Patricia Copeland, call a priest.

Jehovah did survive but the traumatic brain injury he suffered left him forever changed. He has impulse control problems and anger issues. He is in a wheelchair and can’t remember to wash himself or brush his teeth.

It’s an all-too-common story. A child is hurt diving into a swimming pool or is in a bad car accident. He needs to relearn how to walk, write or speak. Sometimes these children make remarkable progress, sometimes they never fully recover. After the media goes away, after the community stops holding fundraisers, the children continue to battle — sometimes for years — at Children’s Specialized Hospital in Mountainside — a nursing home for children.

There is another branch in Toms River, and between them the facilities house about 70 children, most of whom have congenital defects that have left them physically and mentally incapable of living at home.

The concept of a nursing home for children, where kids might spend 21 years, is unsettling, almost unnatural, but there is a growing need for places like these, and Mountainside recently received state approval to add four new beds. Because of improvements in neo-natal care, babies have a better chance of survival than ever before, but surviving and thriving are two very different things. Some children are mobile and communicative, some have very little brain activity at all.

"We have a vision that every child should reach their maximum potential," said Amy Mansue, president and CEO. "For some that means going home, for others, that they can somehow let us know they are not feeling well, maybe through a grunt or blink of an eye."

For Ivy Goldstein, a 4-year-old born three months’ premature with a host of medical problems, the goal is getting her to recognize the difference between yes and no, her parents, Heather and Scott, said. That’s ambitious given her cognitive impairment, but her parents have hope and have seen progress. Ivy can now grab at something she wants. She seems to recognize mom and dad.

But her father, Scott, says he knows there will be limitations. He will never take her for ice cream, or play with her the way he does with Ivy’s twin sister, Cara.

That’s a common theme at this hospital — there is a mix of hope and heartache, small steps and impossibly long journeys. The hospital’s stated goal is to have every child return home, but in reality only about 5 percent ever live outside a hospital or nursing home.

To work as a staffer in a room full of these children is to redefine success. Maybe a child will one day learn the difference between yes and no or be able to express approval or disapproval.

"When you’re here your expectations change," said Jeanette Golden, nurse manager at the Toms River facility. "We do see the progress others might not see. When new people come on board, I tell them, ‘You will with time — if you invest the time — you will see it.’"

TYPICAL DAY

During the week, the day begins around 6 a.m. New Jersey law requires that every child receive a free and appropriate education. About one-third are too fragile to leave the facility, so teachers are brought in. The rest attend special schools. That means getting up, getting fed, getting dressed and getting on a bus.

"Getting 44 kids ready for school, fed by a tube, and giving them all their medications is no minor feat," Mansue said.

The school day varies depending on the program. Ivy, for example, is in school from 8 until 3.

After they return, there is recreational activity, then dinner, which many take though a tube. After dinner the children might watch television or listen to music, "gearing them down, making them realize we are going to sleep soon," Golden said. Lights are usually out by 10.

The long-term care unit is a small wing off the main hospital, brightly lit and colorfully painted. It is hard to forget this is a hospital: There are children lying in hospital beds, a nurses station and rounds when medication is dispensed.

But the staff works hard to have it feel like something else. There are plenty of toys and games, soft music, large-screen televisions, special programs and activities tailored to meet a child’s needs. Most of the day, the children are outside their room, either at school, at therapy or sitting in special wheelchairs in front of the television.

Regardless of their conditions, they receive attention, care and a personalized education plan paid for with a mix of Medicaid, private insurance, state funding and private donations.

The care for each child costs about $800 per day, or nearly $300,000 per year, Mansue said. Most of the costs, she said, are paid by Medicaid.

That does not include costs for education, which are paid for by the child’s local school district. Those costs are harder to measure because each child’s needs are so different, but it can run into the hundreds of thousands of dollar per year.

What we pay for says something about a society, said Peter Smith, associate professor of pediatrics at the University of Chicago.

"When we spend money on the most vulnerable citizens that says something about us that’s good," said Smith, who also is medical director at Almost Home Kids, a transitional home for children with complicated medical needs.

"Just like how the Romans spent money on big circuses says something about them. As a society, do we get a bang for a buck when we spend money on the opera? I think we do. When opera goes away, even those of us who don’t go are lessened."

Judy Marie Potter, a nurse and administrative director at Mountainside, faces complex decisions every day.

"My personal feeling and philosophy is: Our job is to always be the best stewards of the money that we are given so that we maximize it to care for as many children in the best way possible," she said. "If we are not wasting, if we are figuring out how to do things efficiently, being vigilant to reduce costs, that answers that question across the board."

THE SUCCESSES

Jehovah, a year after the accident that nearly took his life, is walking. It’s a slow process. He needs a walker to balance but the leg braces he needs are getting smaller. There has been significant improvement in the last few months, and he may well one day return home.

The former safety, running back, tight-end keeps pictures of his uniformed self in his room.

"I’m going to play again," he said. "I have to."

Aside from the therapy and the school, there are special programs to try to give the kids a sense of normalcy. Santa comes in the winter with his elves. There is a "Beach Day" in the summer, complete with buckets of sand, shells and shovels. The children are wheeled to different stations where their hands can be dipped in sand or their faces painted.

Some of the children seem to react, squeak or squeal. Some smile, but many seem not to notice or understand what is happening.

"Just because we cannot tell, we’re not going to not do it," Potter said. "We do know it gives great joy and comfort to the families."

That’s an important mantra for the staff and volunteers who regularly walk the halls. A child may make little progress, but the comfort afforded to a family who knows their son or daughter is safe may be the greatest benefit provided.

And there is satisfaction in knowing the children are well cared for and protected.

"You are not sure if they hear you or if they understand you, but you touch them and you know they are safe, and if that is something they can experience, you are giving them that," Potter said.

"There are definitely times we cannot tell, but we know they are safe and are well cared for and we know the parents know that, too. This place allows a parent to put their head on a pillow and think ‘I don’t have to worry about my child.’ If (parents) do that, then I’ve done my job."