The 67-year-old man was a 19-year-old boy when he started doing this, back when it was still cover songs and the band was called “The Big Thing.”

When people approach trombonist James Pankow to tell him they grew up with Chicago’s music, Pankow responds with a joke that has become more true with each new year.

“So did I,” said Pankow on the brink of Chicago’s 48th consecutive touring season. “This has been a lifetime.”

The spring months of Chicago’s tour this year will be something of a warm-up for the band’s late summer leg with Earth, Wind & Fire, but Pankow said it only takes a few practices with the current alignment before finding the familiar groove that’s been forged over the decades. By the May 20 show at the Peoria Civic Center Theater, Chicago’s nearly 30-song set list will be fine-tuned and ready to wow the generations of fans that have encountered the band’s music.

Classics like “25 or 6 to 4” and “Saturday in the Park” will find their way onto the set list just like 1970. These concerts are for the fans after all, according to Pankow, otherwise they would be considered rehearsals. The whole show is littered with the most popular of Chicago songs, dating back to the days of the band’s old name, Chicago Transit Authority. The real surprise would be if any of Chicago’s new work made it into a concert.

Unlike many legacy acts that continue to tour for any variety of reasons, Chicago keeps cranking out new albums with a steadfast persistence. Five albums have been recorded in the last eight years, each bearing the Roman numerals that keep track of the sheer volume of them all. 2014’s “Now” was the 23rd studio album and 36th overall album from the band. Chicago has managed this feat despite all of the touring with the help of a recording rig — a portable studio that can fit in almost any setting.

“We can make records backstage, in hotel rooms, on the bus,” Pankow said. “In the old days, it was a matter of everybody flying to a place and convening in a classic recording studio environment and making a record. Now, it is spur of the moment. Nothing is lost. Ideas are captured when they’re fresh.”

It’s the type of evolution one witnesses when they’ve been doing something for almost half a century. At this point, Chicago has outlived some of the buildings it performed in 48 years ago. Pankow can still vividly recall the band’s biggest break, when Jimi Hendrix saw Chicago as the house band in Los Angeles’s famed Whiskey A Go Go. Hendrix then uttered the now-famous line, “Your horn players are like one set of lungs and your guitar player is better than me,” before asking the band to go on tour with him.

Much has changed in the intervening decades, but Chicago still aims to woo a crowd just like it floored Jimi Hendrix in the late 1960s.

“Every night you walk on that stage, it’s like the first night,” Pankow said. “This is the fountain of youth.”

Thomas Bruch can be reached at 686-3262 or tbruch@pjstar.com. Follow him on Twitter @ThomasBruch.

___

If you go

* What: Chicago.

* When: 8 p.m. Wednesday, May 20.

* Where: Peoria Civic Center Theater.

* Cost: $56, $70.50, $90.50 or $121. Tickets are available at the Peoria Civic Center box office, ticketmaster.com, all Ticketmaster locations or by calling (800) 745-3000.