When terrorist shooters killed 14 innocent people and injured 21 others in San Bernardino, President Obama’s first instinct, as always, was political. He blames, but never steps up and leads.

Found in the shooters' garage were various bombs, detonators, guns and more than 1,000 rounds of ammo. The Muslim couple had recently been to Pakistan and Saudi Arabia. Obama’s folks are still trying to find their motive.

Then Obama blamed guns, which is like blaming forks for the obesity epidemic.

This administration could not run a church bake sale. It spent $2.1 billion on an unworkable Obamacare website, but somehow it wants to convince you that having one more technical gun law on the books would have kept this from happening. Keep in mind, these folks can't even keep terrorists on the "no-fly list" from legally buying guns. And the "G-hottie" terrorist wife got into our country by giving a false address on her visa.

The Obama administration's goal is to make it harder for law-abiding citizens to get guns. The liberal premise? Yes, murderous terrorists who kill 14 people -- including a woman who threw a baby shower for these two -- will always fill out the right government paperwork for their guns. Murder, yes, but monkey with government forms? Who would do such a thing?

Gun myths from the Left:

1) It's an article of faith that we can get rid of 310 million legal guns in America, but we cannot deport 12 million illegal immigrants. They say gun violence is "skyrocketing" yet, according to Pew Research, it is down about 50 percent since 1993.

2) Gun control works. Cities like Chicago and Baltimore, where gun controls are strongest, have the worst gun violence. Most of the violent acts, from Fort Hood, Sandy Hook, the Washington Navy Yard, San Bernardino, to the recruiting station in Chattanooga, were committed on gun-free government property. I can assure you that no shooter would get very far in the bars I frequent. Every fifth guy has a carry permit. In the South, male hairdressers pack heat.

3) Guns harm their owners more than they protect them. It's a lie. In 2013, there were 505 accidental gun deaths in America, but surveys clearly show that, each year, 100,000 to 2 million Americans use a gun for self-defense, chasing off a potential robber or rapist. Having a gun provides immeasurable peace of mind for those of us not protected by the Secret Service, as Obama and Attorney General Loretta Lynch are, or by the private, gun-toting security of Hollywood celebs or corporate security of the front desk of the New York Times. If you are in a dangerous trailer park or ghetto, a gun provides comfort.

According to television host John Stossel, reviews of 29 states that loosened their gun carry laws found that 18 had less crime, and crime rates in10 states stayed the same. Gun crimes increased in only one. The Left acknowledged in a New York Times op-ed, “Even gun control advocates acknowledge a larger truth: the law that barred the sale of assault weapons from 1994 till 2004 made little difference.”

Most of the responsibility for the growth in mass shootings lies with Obama’s buddies. Via its violent movies and video games, Hollywood desensitizes young men to killing. Then, the media spew stories about mass killers, allowing them a platform to advance their "cause" and to become famous.

To this witches' brew is added the PC culture cultivated by the Left. A neighbor admitted she saw the San Bernardino terrorist couple preparing for their attack. But for fear of being called racist, she didn’t report it.

In general, Obama has struck about the right tone in fighting these Middle East wars against radical Islam. Not getting more of our soldiers’ legs blown off when we have no grasp of the complexities of these conflicts is the right decision. Not sacrificing our freedoms and values over an occasional attack is correct, too. Donald Trump is wrong with his populist rhetoric; his next book might be "Mein Trumpf." But on Second Amendment limitations, Obama is way wrong.

Stay away from our guns, but keep up the drone attacks overseas. It seems that every month we hear of us killing the No. 2 leader of ISIS or al Qaeda. On the surface it sounds great, until you realize Joe Biden is our No. 2 guy.

Hillary Clinton said we need a new approach, and her "woman’s touch," to deal with terrorists. Maybe she's right; we've tried everything except the silent treatment.

A libertarian op-ed humorist and award-winning author, Ron’s a frequent guest on CNN. He can be contacted at Ron@RonaldHart.com or @RonaldHart on Twitter.