Each year, Open Enrollment provides UF faculty and staff an opportunity to evaluate current benefits to determine if adjustments are needed for the new plan year.

This year’s Open Enrollment period began Oct. 19 and runs through Friday, Nov. 6, at 6 p.m. Changes made during Open Enrollment will take effect January 1, 2016. The Benefits Office will be closed on Nov. 6 for the Homecoming holiday. So, employees are encouraged to submit their enrollment selections prior that date in case assistance is needed from the Benefits staff.

Employees should plan to complete elections early. All State of Florida plan changes must be made online using the People First portal. UFSelect and GatorCare changes must be completed online using the myUFL portal. Instruction guides and a tutorial detailing how to complete online enrollments may be found on the Benefits Enrollment section of the HRS website. Employees should also note that moving from a state plan to a UF plan, or vice versa, will require two transactions—one in People First and one in myUFL. Prior to finalizing elections, plans should be carefully reviewed to avoid duplicate coverage. For example, participation in both a state health plan and a GatorCare health plan is not permitted.

OPS/other temporary employees’ time worked is measured during the Open Enrollment measurement period (10/3/14 to 10/2/15). Those who work an average of 30 hours per week will be eligible to enroll in state plans, as mandated by the Affordable Care Act.

To learn more about your plans, you can attend the annual Benefits Fair at the Touchdown Terrace in Ben Hill Griffin Stadium between 9 a.m. and 3 p.m. on Wednesday, Oct. 28. Insurance and retirement vendors will be on hand to explain the available plans. Additionally, free flu shots will be available to employees with a UF Gator1 ID and insurance card.

Changes for Plan Year 2016





Employees enrolled in basic life insurance may cover their legal spouse and eligible children under the new State of Florida dependent spouse and child life insurance plan.

Employee rates for the state’s basic and optional life insurance plans are decreasing for 2016. More information, including the new premium rates, can be found online here: State Life Insurance and Premium Changes

Remember, all Open Enrollment changes to state-sponsored, GatorCare and/or UFSelect plans must be completed by 6 p.m. on Nov. 6.

Please visit HRS’s Open Enrollment webpage for more details on plan changes for 2016, employee eligibility, enrollment and more. If you have general questions, please call 352-392-2477 or email benefits@ufl.edu.