Letters to the editor: letters@tennessean.com (Photo: The Tennessean.com)

Haslam still supports Insure Tennessee

Re: "Haslam: Insure Tennessee is 'right idea' but lacks support," March 22.

Reporters Holly Fletcher and Joel Ebert’s story about the potential for passage of Insure Tennessee in the current session of the legislature contains a quote from Jennifer Donnals, Gov. Haslam’s press secretary, attributing to the governor the statement “something would have to change for that to happen.”

The Tennessean’s headline, seemingly translating the governor’s position to a lack of support, is overtly misleading as it implies general support is lacking. The governor still supports it, and Donnals also attributed to the governor the clear statement “the need still exists, and Insure Tennessee is the right idea.”

The only place Insure Tennessee doesn’t currently have support is in the Tennessee legislature, particularly from its leadership. Over 60 percent, some say closer to 70 percent, of Tennesseans favor its implementation.

Only politics and the fear of the accountability a vote would bring keeps it from a full vote in our state legislature. Many Tennesseans remain hopeful that ultimately the people’s best interest will be served by their elected officials.

If not, a lot of people are paying attention and there are other options. I suspect that Tennesseans will have long memories on this issue, as they should.

Frank M. Garrison, Jr., Nashville 37204

State leaders lack leadership

Who are our state leaders?

By their words and actions, neither Gov. Bill Haslam, nor Senate Speaker Ron Ramsey nor House Speaker Beth Harwell are. They have not used their considerable clout to bring to fruition Insure Tennessee.

Meanwhile, 280,000 in Tennessee are dying without affordable health care and rural hospitals are in danger of closing. Listen to the will of the people now, "leaders", or later at the ballot box.

Phyllis Gordon, Nashville 37215

Insure TN has health, economic impact

How many more working, low-wage Tennesseans must die?

How many rural hospitals must close?

How many times will Tennessee turn away over $6 billion?

These are the questions seven out of 10 people in Tennessee are asking because our lawmakers, our Speaker of the House refuse to accept Insure Tennessee. Speaker Harwell's response is motivated solely by politics while the majority of citizen responses see Insure Tennessee as a moral issue.

If compassion for the sick does not move our legislators, how about the economic aspect. Taxpayer money designated for Tennessee is going to other states. Hospitals unable to continue to operate due to lack of funds, which in turn results in unemployment for their staff.

Perhaps a year without health insurance for the legislators who refuse insurance to their constituents might bring a common sense response to vote in favor of Insure Tennessee.

Ann Lucas, Mt. Juliet 37122

Harwell’s priorities

Buy Photo House Speaker Beth Harwell, R-Nashville, celebrates after winning the corn shelling contest during Agriculture Day at Legislative Plaza, Tuesday, March 22, 2016, in Nashville, Tenn. (Photo: Andrew Nelles / The Tennessean)

Re: "House wins corn competition again," March 22.

I had been concerned that Beth Harwell was weak and ineffectual when she stated that she was unable to bring Insure Tennessee to a floor vote after being unable to get any meaningful legislation combating sexual harassment.

What a relief it was to see that she could forcefully drive her team to victory and bring the corn shelling trophy back to the House.

The picture of her determination was worth a thousand words. I guess it's all about priorities.

Corn shelling trumps saving lives of our most vulnerable any day!

Beverly Weems, Nashville 37215

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1Mtq3uE