Want more hot BPR News stories? Sign up for our morning blast HERE

The U.S. House of Representatives erupted into chaos Thursday after Republican lawmakers narrowly defeated an amendment to the National Defense Authorization Act that would have provided protections to members of the LGBT community.

The amendment, introduced by Rep. Sean Patrick Maloney, a New York Democrat, appeared as though it would pass, 217-206, but in the remaining seconds GOP leaders persuaded party members to switch their votes.

The measure failed by one vote: 212-213.

The Huffington Post’s Jennifer Bendery reported:

Here’s the before and after votes on striking anti-LGBT language from NDAA. They had it til some GOPers flipped. pic.twitter.com/yokSeFsyOO — Jennifer Bendery (@jbendery) May 19, 2016

The Hill reported:

GOP leaders held the vote open as they pressured members to change sides. Infuriating Democrats, they let lawmakers switch their votes without walking to the well at the front of the chamber. Twenty-nine Republicans voted for Maloney’s amendment to a spending bill for the Department of Veterans Affairs and military construction projects, along with all Democrats in the final roll call.

This prompted chants of “Shame! Shame! Shame!” from Democrats as the numbers went from victory to defeat for the amendment.

“This is one of the ugliest episodes I’ve experienced in my three-plus years as a member of this House,” Maloney, who is openly gay, said.

He should have been there when Democrats steamrolled in the Affordable Care Act without a single Republican House members’ approval. That was truly ugly.

Sign up for our morning blast HERE

C-SPAN video clip via The Hill.

As for the GOP defeating Maloney’s amendment, reaction was mixed. There were these:

@jbendery Yeah, the government should definitely intervene into businesses because of a word to ‘protect’ less than 2% of the population. — John Locke (@LockeJohn_) May 19, 2016

@jbendery If these gasbags need help.,, If you have a penis, your a male, if not, you’re a female. If you can figure it out, seek a shrink. — BANK vs YOU | TV (@BANKvsYOU) May 19, 2016

@jbendery @MaryDram …this is BULLSHIT social engineering politics capitulating to an insignificant minority of We the People! CAPITULATION — justacracka (@ebgbz1) May 19, 2016

But there were also these.

@jbendery @asmith83 Spineless gits!! — Shauna L. Jones (@ShaunaBeeBee) May 19, 2016

@BANKvsYOU @jbendery how can one with nothing between the ears understand TG is an issue of gender identification not physiology — Mike Mastela (@mmastela) May 19, 2016

@jbendery this isnt NDAA this is Mil-Con VA approps. The amdt would have prevented govt contactors from discriminating against #LGBT — Kyle J. Hill (@kylejhill) May 19, 2016

Still others realized it wasn’t entirely the Republicans’ doing.

@bwcorb @jbendery Yes, I’m curious about that too. — Rocketsquirrel (@cristygodin23) May 19, 2016