STONY BROOK, N.Y., April 21, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- Softheon, Inc., a proven leader in health insurance marketplace integration and business operation, has confirmed its status as a Web Broker Entity (WBE) with the Centers of Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS). Under this agreement, Softheon will establish an enrollment channel with access to the Federal Data Hub to assist and facilitate the enrollment of eligible consumers into qualified health insurance plans.

Through this agreement, Softheon will exchange real-time eligibility information with the Federally-Facilitated Marketplace that will provide information regarding eligibility as well as the amount of subsidy for which consumers qualify. Softheon has completed all necessary training and requirements needed to meet the Federally-Facilitated Marketplace (FFM) standards. This integration resembles the Direct Enrollment solution utilized by all of Softheon's Health Plan Partners offering Qualified Health Plans in FFM States.

"As a Web Broker Entity, Softheon will provide an enrollment channel for licensed Brokers and Agents to enroll eligible consumers into QHPs, thru the FFM," stated Eugene Sayan, Softheon Founder & CEO. "This is a great opportunity for Softheon to cast a wide net through multiple channels that are self-sustaining and continue to leverage our success integrating with CMS," added Sayan.

By establishing agreements with Web Broker Entities, Public Exchanges can now utilize a non-Federally-Facilitated Exchange site to assist applicants, qualified individuals and consumers with their QHP selection and the enrollment process. As a WBE, Softheon will exchange information, such as eligibility determinations, with the FFM and provide a Web Portal for individuals eligible for federal subsidies.

Softheon offers industry leading solutions for State & Federal Marketplace Integration, Direct Enrollment, Premium Billing, Edge Server, and Private Exchanges. Working with health plans, brokers, and employers to enable seamless enrollment, streamline administration, and provide continuous customer support, Softheon MC2 Plan Management, Enrollment, and Premium Billing platforms have effectively enrolled and effectuated over 1 million lives.

About Softheon

Empowering the nation's first state health benefit exchange since 2008, Softheon's vision and strategic direction address healthcare payer, provider, and government agencies' goal of meeting Affordable Care Act (ACA) milestones. Softheon provides solutions for interacting with Federal and State Health Insurance Exchange (HIX) Marketplaces, while measurably reducing administrative costs, improving member and provider satisfaction, as well as addressing regulatory compliance challenges in all managed care administrative processes.

Softheon's Marketplace Connector Cloud (MC2) has been trusted by health plans, in all 50 states, as an accelerated federal, state, and private exchange integration platform. Softheon MC2 is a Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) solution where insurers pay a one-time activation and ongoing PMPM fees for exchange members only, while eliminating most, if not all, risks associated with ACA enrollment compliance and other mandates.

To find out more about Softheon, visit www.softheon.com

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20130725/SF53717LOGO

SOURCE Softheon