Coordinator/instructor has background in welding, education

Jack Marrs, right, instructor and coordinator of the new welding program at Northeastern Junior College, looks over a student's work. Marrs brings experience from both the welding and education fields. ( Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate )

STERLING — After almost not being able find an instructor so they could start a welding program this year, Northeastern Junior College is excited to welcome Jack Marrs, instructor and coordinator of the new program.

"We've been working, I think almost two years, to really get someone hired, get classes started," Jason Hazlett, chair for the transportation and wind energy departments, told the NJC Advisory Council at a recent meeting.

They were "probably within days of cancelling the classes for the fall" when Marrs applied.

Marrs grew up in Skiatook, Okla., where he lived all his life until he came to Sterling.

He happened upon the position at NJC when he was looking through different teaching jobs listed online in states that he frequents the most - Florida and Colorado - and decided to apply.

"I'm proud to be here. I'm proud to be a part of NJC. I'm impressed with the classes they offer and their expectations for their students. That's one reason I chose to come here, is because of their high expectations," Marrs said.

He has family in the education and welding fields, so it only made sense that he would want to teach welding himself. Marrs' grandfather has a doctorate's degree in education and was superintendent of a couple different school districts in Oklahoma and his father started the welding program for the State Department of Vocational Education, in Tulsa, Okla., in the early 1970s.

Advertisement

"So, I've been around it all my life," Marrs said.

He went to work with his dad starting when he was very young and did welding in high school. But it was when he graduated from Northeastern State University, in Tahlequah, Okla., that he really got into welding. At that time the job market wasn't very good, so he went to work with his dad, which afforded him the opportunity to take any courses he wanted to for free.

NJC welding program coordinator and instructor Jack Marrs, left, watches as a student completes a welding project at one of the stations in the welding shop. There are nine students enrolled in the program right now, Marrs hopes to grow that number. (Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

"I knew that I already had skills developed in welding," Marrs said. "But, I finished developing my skills in welding to where I could go out and get a good job."

After a few years he started teaching at Tulsa Tech and was the head of the night program classes. He did that for three years, while at the same time working on getting his Trade and Instruction Education Teaching Certificate and starting his own business.

"That was a quite a load, so I quit teaching and I quit my job and went into business head first and fortunately it worked out, it worked out well for over 12 years," Marrs said.

During that time he was building between 3,000 and 4,000 hot tap fittings a year for natural gas lines.

Then the company he was building them for decided to have someone do it "turnkey," meaning one company would do all the work on the parts, instead of multiple companies.

"Overnight everything went away as fast as it came. I still had my business and I still had other work, but that was the bread and butter of my business. So, I decided to get back into teaching," Marrs said.

He still has his business; one of his co-workers and his father are taking care of it for him now. "It's still doing pretty good," he said.

Marrs does miss his two children, ages 11 and 13, but, he's excited to be in Sterling.

"I think its fate, things just added up and things worked out," he said. "For me coming here to start a welding program, I think it's quite ironic that my dad did how many decades ago, now I have the opportunity. I'm really blessed."

He's looking forward to the challenge of developing a new program.

"I've been around training facilities all my life and I've had a lot of good input from different people, especially my father, a lot of good input from his decades of teaching. So, that's why I like going to a new program, I can develop it in the way that it would be most successful," Marrs said.

There are nine students in the program right now, and that's with "little to no advertising." Marrs says it's a really good class, "they're a good group of young men, that makes my job a lot easier, and they want to be here, that's a big deal."

He hopes for the program to grow and would like to develop it into a certified AWS (American Welding Society) training facility and testing facility. Marrs also wants his students to be able to become AWS certified.

"I think it's important when people get out of school to not just put on their application that they completed a certificate program, but also have something stating that their welding meets AWS standards. That will look really good on their application for potential employers to see that," he said.

His ultimate goal is just to make sure that students succeed.

"I do care about my students. I'm willing to spend even more time than I'm obligated to spend with them, just to see that they get where they need to be in their skill set," Marrs said.

With that in mind, while some students will only go through the certificate program or get their associate's degree, he will encourage some to go on to a university to obtain a welding engineering degree.

He wants them to always have goals.

"Even where I'm at, I'm still learning, I always will be and I'm going to eventually get my certified welding inspector's license and my certified welding educator's license. So, I want to lead by example, to show them that throughout life, you can always have goals to learn more and to grow," Marrs said.

To find out more about the welding program contact Marrs at 970-521-6668 or Jack.Marrs@njc.edu.

Contact Journal-Advocate staff writer Callie Jones at 970-526-9286 or cjones@journal-advocate.com