Topics: Comedians, Coupling, Editor's Picks, Elliot Rodger, Gaming, Life stories, Love and Sex, Masculinity, New York City, Sex, Stand-up Comedians, Virginity, Life News

Well, let’s just get this out of the way: I am a 33-year-old virgin.

I’m not a virgin for religious reasons. I was never waiting for marriage or “the right one.” Mine is a case of bad luck. Wrong women, wrong times.

My story doesn’t fit the profile you’d expect. I’m a comic in New York City, and I’ve worked in and around this scene since I was 22. I’m a good comic. Some nights, I’m even great. You know what comedians do after shows? Drink, smoke or fuck. They do that because all three are easy to find after-hours, when our shifts end. I’ve gone out with female audience members on occasion, but those nights somehow fall apart, and I end up at home playing “Sonic the Hedgehog.” A comic once said to me, “It’s impossible for even a mediocre comedian to not get laid doing this. And you’re good and you’ve never gotten laid. I don’t know how you do it.” Nice to know: In one area of comedy, at least, I’m a groundbreaker.

So why am I writing about all this? Because I know there are more guys out there like me. I was reminded of that last weekend, when 22-year-old Elliot Rodger went on a murderous rampage, saying that part of his rage was because he was still a virgin. He describes his existence as “torturous.” I can relate to that feeling. Not only have I never had sex, but I’ve never had a girlfriend. In my entire life. But I wish I could’ve told that guy life without sex is only as torturous as you want it to be.

It hasn’t been easy. Every girl I’ve ever cared for has rejected me. The last big rejection was April 29, 1999. I was in high school, and I was fairly certain this girl was interested in me, too. But her ex told her I was going around school saying she was already my girlfriend. The next day she told me to fuck off and never talk to her again in front of the entire school. OK, not the entire school. Just the drama club. And the kids in detention (chanting “ECW!” because extreme wrestling was big up here and “Jerry! Jerry!” because ahhh, the ’90s). And the dance company. And the cheerleaders. So, you know, most of the school. When I got upset, as one does when his heart is broken in front of the senior class, a teacher grabbed the girl. “Don’t you remember what happened last week in Columbine?” Gee, thanks.

But that wasn’t enough for this girl. She also framed me for a bomb scare at my school. She also called my mom to let her know she only hung out with me because she felt bad for me. As the days turned to weeks and the months turned to years, I realized that perhaps I was wrong. She never did care about me. And in fact no one has.

This is the part that stings. It hurts like a motherfucker that no one has ever seen me as a boyfriend. But of course, the part people want to talk about is the sex. When you’re a virgin this late in the game, it bothers people. They ask questions. They judge you. There is ridicule. As I got older, it presented a huge handicap with women. They saw me differently, I suppose, or didn’t want the burden that came with being my first. There was just so much at stake. But the virgin part doesn’t really bother me anymore. If I really wanted to just lose it, there are ways. I made a choice 10 years ago that if I had already waited this long, then I wanted my first time to be with someone who cares for me. A woman who does it because she wants to — not because she was paid to do it.