I tuned in the other day to a live chat on Twitter about universal design, hosted by The Hartford Center for Mature Market Excellence. Like a lot of online chats, it turned out to be a bit of an echo chamber, where a panel of aging experts agreed with each other about how very marvelous universal design can be.

At least they agreed with each other in short soundbites.

Universal design is the currently accepted term for building features into your home that make it age-appropriate no matter how young or old you are. Its proponents argue that universal design is the best of all possible worlds, with -- for instance -- electrical outlets that are too high up on the wall for a baby to reach, and yet handy for an elder who can no longer squat down to plug in his iPhone adapter.

You're familiar, probably, with many of the other hallmarks of universal design. Besides those ugly grab bars nobody really loves, they include stepless porches, multiple counter heights in the kitchen, and handheld showers in stalls you could roll into if you had to. The problem is that most of us don't want to think about having to wash our hair while in a wheelchair. And, as builders keep pointing out, we certainly don't like to think about it when we're buying or remodeling a house.

The term "universal design" was considered an easily negotiable step up from "handicap accessible." But there are those who think it needs to get sexier. The Better Living Design Institute, a project of the Universal Design Institute, is one such attempt at jazzing things up. But doesn't that seem like swapping one euphemism for another?

Resorting to Twitter didn't appear to get very far in making universal design more with-it and hip. My favorite part of the chat was a contribution from Jon Pynoos, a professor of gerontology, policy and planning at the University of Southern California Davis School of Gerontology. He quoted the late, great Brit Winston Churchill: "First we shape our houses, and then they shape us."

But something didn't sound right about that, so I looked it up. Turns out Churchill said, "We shape our buildings, and afterwards our buildings shape us." It was part of his plea in 1941 to rebuild the House of Commons just as it had been before it was destroyed by German bombs -- small, dark and historically resonant, and without enough room for all its members to sit. And no grab bars.

Makes me wonder what Churchill would say about universal design. Maybe that we humans have been bumbling along on the road from young to old for centuries, stubbornly preferring the unique over the universal.

Library science

Age-Friendly Sarasota -- a countywide initiative funded by The Patterson Foundation to earn an official designation as one of the better places in the world to grow up and grow old -- is seeking input from residents 50 and older about what needs to change around here, or not. You can complete the survey at the website. Or, beginning this week, hard copies of the form -- that's paper, folks -- should be available at all nine Sarasota County Libraries.

Follow Barbara Peters Smith on Twitter @BarbaraPSmith.