HOBOKEN — Hoboken has 13 political candidates who will be on the ballot in just a few days, all vying to represent one of six wards on Nov. 3. Who are they?

The candidates angling for votes in each of six wards include three candidates in Second and Fourth Wards; two candidates each in the First Ward, Fifth Ward and Sixth Ward; and one unopposed candidate in the Third Ward.

RELATED: 7 Hoboken school board candidates vie for 3 seats

Five incumbents (represented by a *) are running. All candidates are listed in their ward category in alphabetical order by last name.

First Ward

*Theresa Castellano

Castellano, the incumbent, was voted in to office in 1995 and is vying for her sixth term. Born and raised in Hoboken, the mother of two operates a business on Washington Street, the women's boutique City Discount, that her parents started in 1969, and also owns and operates three multi-family buildings that are rent-controlled. Castellano has served on the Hoboken Historic Preservation Commission and Zoning Board, and worked with Fund for A Better Waterfront to help create Hoboken's waterfront parks, including Pier A Park.

Priding herself on being "independent" of past and current city administrations, she also touted her experience. She said that her experience negotiating with Port Authority over the waterfront shows she knows how work with NJ Transit to ensure the best redevelopment of the Hoboken rail yards. She said she would continue to support development that "fits the scale of the community," while addressing traffic problems on the Observer Highway.

Castellano also wants more trash cans in residential areas, more affordable housing, and said she would advocate for "more sensible parking regulations," particularly two parking garages in the downtown business area.

Michael DeFusco

DeFusco, who has lived in Hoboken for 12 years, has served as Commissioner on Zoning Board for five years. A graduate of George Washington University, he said he works as a "creative marketing" professional, who sells commercials, TV programs and sponsorships for a national broadcast network.

He has touted himself as new blood on the council, who could address "common-sense" issues that he believes have gone unaddressed, pointing to potholes, crumbling curbs and trash on the streets and the need for better lighting on Washington Street. He said he would address all these issues, installing crossing signals and demand trash receptacles at every intersection, and exercise fiscal discipline.

He said his five years of experience in zoning has prepared him to ensure "responsible development" at the Neumann Leathers factory site and NJ Transit Rail Yards. He has pledged to "work with everyone" on the council, and wants to create green space adjacent to the PATH terminal for outdoor cafes and recreation.

Second Ward

Peter Biancamano

Biancamano is a five-term elected second ward committeeman and two-term elected school board trustee, where he was the youngest ever elected trustee. He also volunteers as a food protection manager for the state, and is a supporter of the Hoboken Family Alliance.

The son of Washington Street deli owners and a lifelong resident of the second ward, he is also the co-founder of an uptown small business association. A graduate of Seton Hall University, he attained his master's degree in strategic communications and now works in the private sector as a producer for NBC.

Citing his family's business, he said he will be an advocate for the business community, and would act to reverse the regular turnover of businesses. He said he will work to revitalize Hoboken's business community and would act as a proponent of responsible spending.

Tiffanie Fisher

Fisher, who has lived in Hoboken for 21 years, has worked in finance for 22 years. She most recently worked two years ago as the CFO of a large real estate company, and now is the president of her Hudson Tea Buildings Condo Association, which she has been on the board of for seven years and which includes about 1,000 residents. She has been a Zoning Board member for the past two years, and volunteers as an advocate for foster care youth.

She said her work on the condo association has led her to prepare and distribute information to inform her fellow residents about the reevaluation. She has pledged to "inform," "engage," and advocate" while on the council.

Her main priorities going forward, she said, include, first reducing congestion, traffic and road safety. She also plans to repave Washington Street, ensure "responsible" development, continue fighting against the controversial Monarch high-rise project on the waterfront, repair or replace Hoboken's aging infrastructure, and support affordable housing, streets clean of dog waste, and free metered parking for the handicap, as well as "continued fiscal responsibility."

Bonnie Murray

Murray, who is running as an "independent," said she and her husband are raising two children in Hoboken, where they have lived for eight years. For 20 years she has worked in sales and marketing, and is currently doing marketing for Nintendo. She is pushing her experience working as a "concerned citizen" this year to ensure that traffic officers were assigned to help pedestrians cross the busy intersection at 11th and Hudson and 11th and Sinatra.

Saying she has no allegiance to the so-called "Old Guard" or "The Reformers," she pledged "open communication" and said she would hold regular meet-ups for residents, where they can voice to her their concerns and share ideas.

Also, she promoted herself as a mother who would be focused on family's concerns, like the schools, open space, the need for more three-bedroom housing. She said she would fight for Washington Street's repaving and other issues like better maintained parks and pedestrian safety.

Third Ward

*Michael Russo

Russo, who is running unopposed, was born and raised in Hoboken, where he graduated Hoboken High and now raises two children with his wife. A physical therapist for 15 years, he owns multiple private practice locations. He has volunteered as a football coach with Hoboken High School for 12 years, and has also worked as an assistant scoutmaster and high school summer supplemental education instructor. In 2000, he joined the Zoning Board of Adjustment, and was elected councilman in 2003. He has also served as a commissioner of the Hoboken Housing Authority.

Among his campaign promises, he plans to increase community policing in his ward, create 450 new private parking spaces for public use, resurface roads and find ways to enhance public safety, fight for middle-class housing, and identify land for pocket parks, while fighting for the best outcome for the West End Park.

Fourth Ward

*Timothy Occhipinti

Occhipinti, who was elected to the council in 2010, has worked the past eight years at an asset management company in Information Technology and is currently an application support analyst. He attended the University of Virginia and graduated with a degree in government in 1999. In 2009, he founded Hoboken Volunteers, a non-profit organization for local residents and groups who require the assistance of volunteers.

Championing his council experience and work on the budget, he said he upgraded the playground equipment in two parks and championed the renovation of the Hoboken Housing Authority's Mama Johnson Field.

He has plans to adopt a redevelopment plan for southwest Hoboken with retail, commercial and residential uses. He said he will be advocating for the expansion of the new Southwest Park, and continue advocating for new open space on the vacant lots at 1st and Jackson Streets, where the city has already negotiated to demolish a vacant structure destroyed by a fire. He said he will continue to enhance public services, like Movies Under the Stars at Mama Johnson Field, and fix traffic issues at Paterson Ave at the Light Rail, and fight for repaved roads.

Ruben Ramos

Ramos, a former N.J. assemblyman, previously represented Hoboken and the 33rd Legislative District in Trenton, starting in 2008. A Paterson public school teacher for 15 years, Ramos live with his wife and three children in Hoboken.

He has also served as a Hoboken City Council President, and as the chairman of the Assembly Regulatory Oversight and Gaming Committee, where he said he helped implement the recommendations of Governor Chris Christie's Red Tape Review Commission, which reviews pending and proposed rules and regulations and their effect on the economy. In Trenton, he said, he advocated for better health coverage and education funding, including funding for the Connors Elementary School rehabilitation in Hoboken.

Ramos, who is a cancer survivor, touted his experience in Trenton and his willingness to cross party lines to get things done. He said his career has been focused on fiscal accountability and he will continue to push for transportation solutions for Hoboken.

Dana Wefer

Wefer, the current chair of the Hoboken Housing Authority, is an attorney with her own practice focusing on general business litigation, condo/co-op law, landlord/tenant issues, and construction law.

She also served as also served as a Democratic Committeewoman and Treasurer of the Hoboken Democratic Committee from June 2013 through June 2015. She said she is a "whistleblower" who has called out mismanagement on the HHA, leading to an independent audit and HUD procurement review. Focused on fiscal accountability and transparency, she became the vice-chair of the Economic Advisory Committee in Jefferson Township at the age of 19. She later served as a county representative to Norwescap, a community action program that serves low-income adults and children, and as regional vice-chair of the Morris County Democratic Committee and the Board of Trustees for The Silver Brigade, a grassroots taxpayer organization.

She emphasized her desire to work with the administration and mayor and encourage retail development. She emphasized the detailed plans she has developed and laid out on her website to address taxes, parking and transportation and responsible development as evidence of her preparation. She also said she would plan to work with the mayor and administration.

Fifth Ward

*Peter Cunningham

Incumbent Cunningham, who was elected to the council seven years ago, is a business executive with a global financial services company headquartered in New York City. A Lehigh University graduate with a finance degree, he lives on Garden Street with his wife and two children and father-in-law. He also founded the Hoboken Dog Association.

Touting his experience, Cunningham said he will keep taxes steady over the long-term by continuing "sound fiscal practices, such as maintaining an adequate reserve fund for any emergencies that may arise." He pledged to implement new cost-efficiencies. Also, Cunningham promised to effect "smart, well thought out and appropriately scaled development" and stand up against out-of scale over-development that doesn't meet real community needs.

Cunningham has also pointed to finding new parks and open space as a priority, with an emphasis on securing the BASF site at l2th and Adams streets for a new 6-acre park. He said he sponsored an initiative this spring to move forward with an application for a low interest loan from the New Jersey Environmental Trust in order to eventually construct a large, multi-purpose park and install an underground storm water retention chamber to tackle flooding.

Eduardo Gonzalez

Gonzalez, who has lived in Hoboken for eight years, works for a multinational bank as a portfolio manager. The father of three is the son of Cuban immigrants, and currently serves as Board President at Elysian Charter School, where his two oldest children attend school.

He touted his leadership as being behind the school's new attractive facility, which was obtained through negotiations with the developer. He also served as commissioner on the Hoboken Housing Authority, and as board member of the Hoboken Quality of Life Coalition for the last five years. He is also a member of the Elks.

Gonzalez, who is critical of Hoboken's tax levy increase, said he would spend money wisely. To fix some parking issues, he said he would start by implementing perimeter parking. He promised to keep developers accountable to the city and find ways to incentivize the creation of green roofs and implement strategies that address flooding. He is pushing his plan for the BASF site as an alternative to Cunningham's, saying that the city should be investigating a deal with the landlord who would pay for the site in exchange for a residential building on a portion of the site.

Sixth Ward

Carmelo Garcia

Garcia, a licensed mortgage banker, has made a career in government. Elected as an N.J. Assemblyman for Hoboken's district in 2013, he previously worked as a legislative aide for the Hudson County freeholder board from 1999 to 2011, and was the board's chief of staff from 1999-2002. He was a Hoboken school board trustee from 2002 until 2014. He also was Hoboken's first minority Director of Health and Human Services, and has served as the president of various boards.

Carmelo, who was later hired as deputy director at the Hoboken Housing Authority and is currently suing the mayor for wrongful termination, has also touted his educational background: a double master's degree in management and information systems from Stevens Institute of Technology, and certifications in human resource Management from Rutgers University, and leadership and organizational development from Cornell University. He completed Harvard's Achieving Excellence in Community Development Program in 2013.

If elected to Hoboken's council, he plans to lower taxes by using a portion of the municipal and parking authority budget surpluses, and improve parking by exempting residents from municipal meters and offering monthly parking spots in municipal garages at a reduced rate. Pledging "24/7 availability," he said residents will be able to text him if they see "a broken light, an unclear sign, a pothole or cracked sidewalk, or debris."

*Jennifer Giattino

Giattino, who has lived in Hoboken 18 years, was elected to the council in 2011. A mother to three young boys, she previously worked as a specialist and a broker for a major brokerage firm and a professional ballet dancer. She is currently the owner of a small internet business for kids, Fun Well Done, and a local realtor.

Also, she has coordinated the after-school Arts and Open Play Program for Calabro Primary School, has run Hoboken's "Art in the Park" program for the past three summers, and is co-Chair of the Kaplan Cooperative Preschool Parent Organization and Class Parent at Elysian Charter School.

Giattino pointed to her experience as a council person, but says she is not a "career politician," but rather a concerned citizen. She said her biggest priority will be BASF site, noting that her goal in 2011 was to aquire the property and she wants to see that through. She is also focused on a Washington Street redesign, including repaving the road and adding pedestrian walk signs at the corners. Another priority for her would be advocating for commercial, rather than residential, development in the north end.

Laura Herzog may be reached at lherzog@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @LauraHerzogL. Find NJ.com on Facebook