Everyone knows it is true, and no one has the courage to say it. The American people are letting Barack Obama destroy this country through illegal executive orders for one reason and one reason only. In his latest FIREWALL, Bill Whittle has the courage to speak out and make the case that no one else will make. See the video and transcript below.

TRANSCRIPT:

Well, Barack Obama has proclaimed amnesty for millions of illegal aliens. Conservative pundits have called this act illegal, saying the President does not have the power to unilaterally circumvent Congress on any issue, let alone one of this magnitude. Senators and Representatives have called his act illegal. Saturday Night Live called it illegal, Jon Stewart on The Daily Show called it Illegal, and President Obama himself, on two dozen occasions, said he did not have the Constitutional authority to do this and was therefore illegal.

He didn’t care. He did it anyway.

Many of us knew before his election what he really thought of the American people, but for those who didn’t we have Jonathan Gruber, one of the Chief Architects of Obamacare, saying repeatedly on camera that they had intentionally mislabeled what was obviously a bill-killing tax on the American people. He then told his elitist, left-wing audience that the entire sham depended on the stupidity of the American voter. Furthermore, Gruber has stated, on camera, that the President was not only well aware, from the beginning, that they were lying to the American people – Obama actually led the discussion of how this could be done.

We will set aside, for a moment, the fact that Obamacare passed without a single Republican vote – so when Gruber and Obama say they are depending on the stupidity of the American voter, they are really saying they are depending on the stupidity of the half of the country that votes Democrat. The bottom line is that there can no longer be any question of the contempt in which this President holds the American people. Do we suddenly think that now, after dictating amnesty into law, this man is suddenly going to constrain himself out of respect for the American people and the Constitution?

Please. A few days before his election he said we were on the verge of fundamentally transforming the United States of America. He has fundamentally transformed it. When a man can dictate law…that’s a dictatorship. It’s pretty simple really. Any questions?

Both Gruber and Obama are wrong about the American people. We’re not stupid.

We’re scared. In fact, we’re not just scared – we’re scared senseless. We see the American nightmare of not just single-party rule but actual illegal dictatorship unfolding before our eyes, and we are as paralyzed as cavemen frozen in fear, eyes closed, as the leopard growls quietly, inside the fire and the sentry.

Many Americans think Obama is the problem. Obama is not the problem. Our Constitution was written for one purpose and one purpose only: to prevent the rise of a dictatorship. So what failed? How did we build this tyranny?

When the Progressive Left began their takeover of academia in the 1960’s, they began inculcating their radical worldview all across the spectrum – and we let them get away with it. Three generations later, journalism students are no longer encouraged to seek out the truth, whatever the cost – they are taught which stories to promote, and which to suppress, in order to advance the Larger Truth of left-wing utopian philosophy.

When a President that they despise – such as Richard Nixon – acted illegally they hounded him out of office. With a President they adore – like Barack Obama – they see to it that stories such as Gruber and his multiple on-camera admissions of deception never see the light of day.

Why? We know why. Everybody knows why.

We are allowing Barack Obama to get away with this because he is black. That’s it, and that’s all. To say if he were white he would have been impeached already is a non-sequitor; if he were white a man of his inexperience and radical background would never have been elected in the first place. America voted for him to prove they were not racist, and now we will let him destroy this government for the same reason.

It’s guilt that paralyzes us – this Progressive Obama dictatorship is built on guilt over the original sin of slavery.

It’s guilt – and also fear. That’s why Obama and Eric Holder have been encouraging the Ferguson protestors to stay the course. “We don’t give a fuck about your laws,” said one of them, and the President and the disgraceful Attorney General obviously don’t either. They need Ferguson to remind the American people of what will happen should they decide to hold the first black President accountable to the same rules as the previous forty-four.

Everyone knows it is true, and no one has the courage to say it.

As for me… I know what people have said, and will say about me, and I’d love to tell you that I don’t care but I do care. Charges of racism only work against people who are not racist. Real racists revel in the name.

((MARTIN LUTHER KING)))

So I am going to stand with this man. I believe that Barack Obama and his multiple, flagrant and impeachable illegal actions should be judged not by the color of his skin, but by the content of his character.

Freedom Center pamphlets now available on Kindle: Click here.

Subscribe to Frontpage's TV show, The Glazov Gang, and LIKE it on Facebook.