Emergency personel from Berkeley County stand outside a campground surrounded by yellow police tape on McCrae Drive, near Moncks Corner, South Carolina Tuesday afternoon. A midair crash was reported after 11 a.m. Tuesday between a Cessna 150C and an F-16 fighter jet based in Sumter, South Carolina. (Brad Nettles/staff)

MONCKS CORNER — Air traffic control warned the pilot of an F-16C of approaching traffic roughly a minute before the midair collision that killed a Berkeley County father and son earlier this month, a preliminary report released by the National Transportation Safety Board stated.

The report shed light on the jet pilot’s flight plan and other details leading up to the July 7 collision over Lewisfield Plantation. Additional reports and ultimately a ruling on what caused the crash are expected to follow in coming months.

Mike and Joe Johnson boarded a single-engine, two-seat Cessna plane with plans of spending the day in Myrtle Beach.

The bodies of both father, 68, and son, the Cessna’s 30-year-old pilot, were recovered in the Cooper River.

The jet’s pilot, Air Force Maj. Aaron Johnson parachuted to safety. He was said to be on a solo mission to practice instrument-assisted approaches at Charleston Air Force Base and intended to return to Shaw Air Force Base that day. He was picked up at Medway Plantation shortly after the collision.

Weather conditions were favorable, with calm winds and visibility up to 10 miles the day of the crash, the preliminary report stated.

The Cessna first appeared on air traffic control radar at its take-off time, 10:57 a.m., according to the report. The private plane hadn’t submitted a flight plan, according to the report, but was headed for Grand Stand Airport in North Myrtle Beach.

“For the duration of its flight, the pilot of the Cessna did not contact CHS approach control, nor was he required to do so,” the report stated.

A traffic controller advised the jet’s pilot of the Cessna’s presence two miles away at 18 seconds past 11 a.m. The pilot confirmed that he was “looking,” the report stated.

The traffic controller and pilot spoke again 8 seconds later when the controller advised the pilot to turn if the Cessna wasn’t within sight. The pilot responded asking the controller to confirm the Cessna’s distance.

Another 8 seconds passed before the controller told the pilot to turn “immediately,” the report stated.

The jet began a southerly turn over the next 18 seconds, the report stated, and by 52 seconds past the hour it appeared as though the Cessna was preparing to pass below the jet’s 1,500-foot altitude.

“At that point the targets were laterally separated by about 1,000 feet,” the report said. “No further radar targets were received from the Cessna, and the next radar target for the F-16 was not received until 1101:13.”

A distress call from the jet’s pilot came 6 seconds later. The jet continued to fly for about 3 minutes before its pilot ejected in the area of the F-16’s crash site.

Debris from the wreckage was scattered over an 8-mile stretch throughout rural Berkeley County.

No injuries were reported on the ground, but authorities fielded one report of damage when the jet’s falling engine landed within a cluster of residential campers that sit beneath a bay of trees on McCrae Drive.

The Cessna was not carrying a black box, but the F-16 had a flight data recorder, an NTSB official reported the day after the collision. Both planes had working transponders that send traffic controllers information about position.

The Cessna’s pilot also was in contact by radio with the Berkeley County Airport, where it had launched minutes before the collision, NTSB reported.

Mike Johnson was a former teacher, carpenter and 1969 graduate of The Citadel,

Joe Johnson, a student pilot, was the registered owner of the Cessna, whose model is listed in FAA records as a 150M.

He recently had worked for Delta with the goal of flying for an airline.

Reach Christina Elmore at 937-5908 or at Twitter.com/celmorePC.