Teresa Miller was appointed Insurance Commissioner by Gov. Tom Wolf and confirmed by the state Senate in June. On Wednesday, she visited the Neighborhood Health Centers of the Lehigh Valley in Allentown to promote open enrollment under the Affordable Care Act. Miller is the former administrator of the Oregon Insurance Division. As Oregon's top insurance regulator, she helped implement the early stages of the ACA. Previously, she worked as a partner at private law firm, and before that for Medicare & Medicaid Services under U.S. Department of Health & Human Services. While at CMS, she helped the agency develop and implement the policies and rules governing state-based exchanges. She is the subject of this week's Q&A.

Q: Why did you choose to visit Neighborhood Health Centers?

A: During this open enrollment, we're really trying to reach the communities who need the most assistance to make sure they're aware of the options that are available to them. The Affordable Care Act and the federal marketplace have increased insurance accessibility and options, but we are dedicated to making sure that consumers understand the factors that must be considered when purchasing insurance so they can make the best decision for their families. Within these communities, it is also important to reach people through places that are known and trusted within the community and, even better, through places that they go to when they have questions about their health care coverage.

Q: What did you learn from the people you met in Allentown?

A: It's important to meet with people around the state and understand how their needs may vary. Engaging consumers and the people who work with them every day helps us gain a better sense of what works and what doesn't, and that's information that is very valuable as we consider our consumer outreach and education strategies. The consumers and advocates I met in Allentown told me how important it is for them to have affordable health insurance, but they are concerned about premium and deductible increases and about being moved from one plan to another by their insurer. They need information to be able to shop for the best plan for their needs.

Q: What kinds of problems are ACA marketplace consumers reporting this year?

A: There's a lot of concern over changes to plans such as discontinuations or increases in rates. I understand the frustration that must occur when you hear that your payments are increasing or the plan is disappearing all together, but I strongly encourage consumers to shop around and consider all of their options. These changes could lead you to find a better plan that offers more services or saves you money that you might not have seen had you repurchased the same coverage from the previous year. If consumers need help, the department recently put out a shopper's guide and short video that help consumers understand what they need to know when shopping, and these materials are available under the Health section of our website, www.insurance.pa.gov.

Q: What do ACA marketplace consumers need to know when shopping this year?

A: Consumers should know that they have options, and even if they already have coverage through the federal marketplace, they should check to see if the options have changed. Plans change every year, and there are often new options available, so it's worth the time for people to go back and take a look. Plans may be cheaper than people think, especially for those eligible for the subsidies that are only available through the marketplace. For those who have not yet purchased coverage, they should know that the federal health care law established a mandate requiring all Americans to purchase health insurance coverage. The tax penalty for not having health insurance started at $95, and some consumers preferred to pay this than obtain coverage. However, for 2016, this penalty increases to $695 or 2.5 percent of your income, whichever is higher. Consumers need to know that this is increasing significantly and if you factor in subsidies that may be available, the monthly costs related to health insurance may be much less than this penalty.

Q: How does Pennsylvania compare to Oregon when it comes to ACA implementation?

A: ACA implementation work pre- and post-2014 were very different. So my work on ACA implementation in Oregon is hard to compare to the work happening in Pennsylvania post-2014. What I can say is since January, Gov. Wolf has been focused on expanding access to affordable, quality insurance coverage to all Pennsylvanians. He accepted the Medicaid expansion, was ready to move over to a state-based exchange before the Supreme Court's decision, and now we're really entrenched in helping consumers to be educated and understand the importance of the federal government's open enrollment period. Most people will only get the chance to select a plan during this period, so we want to be sure that they feel empowered and confident that they have the information they need to make the best decision for themselves and their families.

Q: What did you learn in Oregon that will help you do your job better in Pennsylvania?

A: My experiences in Oregon helped me understand the balance that is necessary in acting as a regulator. We work very closely with both consumers and companies, and sometimes their interests conflict. We're here to protect consumers while also promoting a vibrant business environment that is attractive to companies. Having experience maintaining that balance previously has been very valuable since coming to Pennsylvania. Our companies may be different, but the goals are the same.

Q: Insurance isn't exactly sexy. What drew you to it?

A: It might not be exciting to everyone, but it's an important field. I've always been drawn to work in consumer protection, which is why this job was so appealing. I don't want a consumer to purchase insurance solely because it is required. I want them to understand the peace of mind it can provide. If you find yourself in an accident or a medical emergency, you don't want to worry about how you're going to pay for services or repairs – you want to focus on your health or security. We often forget what insurance can do for us until we need to use it, and I want to continue to work to ensure that companies offer robust products and services and help consumers understand their needs so that when it comes time to purchase, they're making the best decision rather than the first or quickest.