When it comes to your career, the persistent question is: “What’s next?”

What’s next for the job market? What’s the next skill I’ll need to stay competitive in the constantly evolving economy? What’s my next career move?

To help answer those questions and more, UC San Diego Extension is holding its UCSDnEXT event Sept. 10-12 at its University City Center location, which is located at 6256 Greenwich Drive, San Diego, 92122.

Filled with workshops, panels, information sessions and networking events, the free three-day event will give attendees an insider’s view on a wide-range of industries from health care to computer science to marketing to accounting. UCSDnEXT will also cover what’s happening in some of the region’s most cutting-edge and emerging careers in such fields as big data, cybersecurity and health care information technology.

The event is part of UC San Diego Extension’s larger mission to ensure everyone is able to take the next step in their careers and in their lives, and UCSDnEXT is designed to provide attendees the best and latest information about the skills they will need for some of the most in-demand careers.

Some highlights of UCSDnEXT event include:

Data analytics: Three leading experts from the San Diego Supercomputer Center will explain the size and scope of the ever-growing “big data” field from 7:30-10:30 a.m. on Thursday, Sept. 10.

Internet of things: With everything from clothes to cameras to cars now connected to the Internet, there is a growing need for people who can help secure these new networks and devices. Find out more about these jobs of the future from 6-8 p.m. on Thursday Sept. 10.

Health care: Come hear from some of San Diego’s top health care executives as they detail how the Affordable Care Act continues to reshape the industry and its workforce from 5:30-8:30 p.m. on Thursday, Sept. 10.

Sustainability: Join a breakfast presentation by Beth Brummitt, president of Brummitt Energy Associates, as she explains how the push for Zero Net Energy buildings, which are designed to produce as much energy as they consume, is creating new opportunities in the construction industry from 7:30-9:30 a.m. on Friday, Sept. 11.

Project management: Key industry experts will discuss how changes in the workplace and workforce are remaking the project management field from 11:30 a.m. to 1 p.m. on Friday, Sept. 11.

For more information about each session and to register online, visit extension.ucsd.edu.

Jennifer Davies is the assistant dean of external affairs for UC San Diego Extension. She can be reached at jadavies@ucsd.edu.