By ,

Style, elegance and unforgettable tunes were on Friday evening's docket, as the Milwaukee Symphony Orchestra Pops presented "S'Wonderful: The Music of George Gershwin."

Guest conductor Michael Krajewski led the concert and served as emcee, introducing tunes and providing a bit of Gershwin's biography during the concert.

The show blended wonderfully elegant orchestral arrangements of such Gershwin classics as "Fascinating Rhythm" and "Strike Up the Band," the overture from "Girl Crazy," and a "Gershwin in Hollywood" medley of tunes from such films as "A Damsel in Distress" and "The Shocking Miss Pilgrim."

The orchestra brought polish and style to this music, from lush string sounds to character-filled brass playing and principal clarinetist Todd Levy's teasing take on the opening bars of "Rhapsody in Blue."

They delivered a vivid performance of "An American in Paris" and were joined by pianist Michael Chertock for a bold, striking performance of "Rhapsody in Blue."

Chertock brought an improvisatory, free feel to the piece. Although his interpretation left a few sections feeling a bit glib and hurried, the raw energy and sheer power he brought to much of the piece was simply thrilling.

Vocalist Lisa Vroman, a longtime portrayer of Christine in productions of "The Phantom of the Opera," joined the orchestra with several Gershwin favorites, including "S'Wonderful," "Someone to Watch Over Me" and "Summertime."

Vroman gave thoughtful renditions of the tunes, blending a powerful, clear, beautifully controlled sound and lovely interpretive details, despite amplification that created an uneven balance with the orchestra and blurred some of her work.

Vroman, Krajewski and the orchestra added a delightfully appropriate, if seldom heard, Gershwin brothers tune to the program, announcing it from the stage: "My Cousin in Milwaukee."

As an encore, Vroman and Chertock gave an unplugged rendition of "Love Walked In" that let the audience hear what she's really made of. Lovely vocal colors, a present, focused sound, rich interpretive nuance and a crystal-clear delivery of Ira Gershwin's lyrics brought the show to a perfect close.

IF YOU GO

This MSO Pops performance will be repeated at 2:30 p.m. Sunday, in Uihlein Hall of the Marcus Center for the Performing Arts, 929 N. Water St. For ticket information, visit mso.org or call (414) 273-7206.