Doctors Chane Price, right, and Jordan Klein, second from right, confer as University of Miami interns Ignatios Papas, left, and Tim Sterrenberg look on in the Rehabilitation Unit of Jackson Memorial Hospital in Miami in 2013. (Joe Skipper/Reuters)

If Obamacare had met its projected enrollment of 20 million (instead of 10 million) or if it had stemmed rising health-care costs (and kept premiums flat), it would be hard for conservatives to advocate repeal based on abstract arguments about compulsion and centralization. Fortunately for Obamacare critics, they have no problem identifying serious deficiencies:

This month the Health and Human Services Department dramatically discounted its internal estimate of how many people will join the state insurance exchanges in 2016. There are about 9.1 million enrollees today, and the consensus estimate—by the Congressional Budget Office, the Medicare actuary and independent analysts like Rand Corp.—was that participation would surge to some 20 million. But HHS now expects enrollment to grow to between merely 9.4 million and 11.4 million. . . . Among this population of the uninsured, HHS reports that half are between the ages of 18 and 34 and nearly two-thirds are in excellent or very good health. The exchanges won’t survive actuarially unless they attract this prime demographic: ObamaCare’s individual mandate penalty and social-justice redistribution are supposed to force these low-cost consumers to buy overpriced policies to cross-subsidize everybody else. No wonder HHS Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell said meeting even the downgraded target is “probably pretty challenging.”

Republicans convince only other Republicans when they decry Obamacare and point out its disappointing results. They win converts when they offer an improved alternative. Given that Obamacare’s flaws are coming into plain view, it is a particularly opportune moment for presidential candidates and Republicans in Congress to provide a thoughtful alternative.

Republicans are so used to making ideological arguments that they forget utilitarian ones generally work better. “Obamacare is a bust, and we have something better” is the most effective message in a general, presidential election since it would appeal to those who don’t think some form of government-subsidized health care is a nonstarter. (For this reason, repeatedly voting to repeal Obamacare with no alternative has virtually no political benefit for Republicans.)

Right now the bar for “something better” is fairly low: Cover more than 10 million people; do it without forcing people to overpay for insurance they don’t want; and use market competition to reduce premium costs. In other words, instead of “repeal and replace,” the formulation should be: “Do much better than Obamacare.” Voters fear something being taken away; Republicans can offer something better because they are not stuck defending the status quo.

That obviously means having something better at the ready. The good news is that presidential candidates (e.g. Jeb Bush, Sen. Marco Rubio) and several Republican plans in the House and Senate have the same essential features:

The plans all center on a tax credit intended to help people afford health insurance, along with more limited protection for people with preexisting health conditions and a cap on federal payments to states for the low-income Medicaid program. Bush’s plan “seems to reflect an emerging consensus among Republicans about what the Affordable Care Act (ACA) should be replaced with,” said Larry Levitt, senior vice president at the Kaiser Family Foundation, which conducts nonpartisan health analysis. “For folks who want to move in the direction of the patients, the options are pretty clear, I think,” said Rep. Tom Price (R-Ga.), who has authored a plan that is similar to Bush’s, Rubio’s and [Wisconsin Gov. Scott]Walker’s.

In short, take care of the problem of the older, sicker uninsurable people rather than force healthier, younger people to overbuy insurance. Give self-insurers the same benefit via a tax credit that employer-provided health care insurance gives employees.

With a new speaker like Rep. Paul Ryan (R-Wis.) running the show, the House could pass such a plan, even if on a party-line vote. The fine print matters less than the overall structure, since it is not going to survive a Senate filibuster or a presidential veto.

With a House version of health-care reform and a nominee with a viable alternative to Obamacare, the argument is no longer whether the public wants Obamacare or not; rather, it is whether we should stick with the status quo or get something that works as advertised. That is where Republicans want to be in 2016. Let Hillary Clinton defend an underperforming, more expensive plan that was fraudulently sold (e.g. “you can keep your doctor”).