As many as 75 people who now do work on behalf of Oneida County through contracts with agencies and groups could become county employees next year.

That was the message delivered by County Executive Anthony J. Picente Jr. when he spoke at Wednesday’s Board of Legislators meeting.

He said that as a result of the ongoing implementation of the federal Affordable Care Act, it was recently determined that 50 to 75 agency employees who do work the county pays for through contracts held by their current employers and are also supervised by county personnel need to be placed directly on the county payroll. They work side-by-side with county employees in county offices in some instances.

He stated the determination of whether an agency position should become a county one is based on the work being done and not the level of benefits received or not. Picente said these workers already receive health care coverage.

The county’s share of the unbudgeted cost of creating creating the jobs next year could be as much as $750,000, Picente said.

The new budget takes effect Jan. 1. The total impact could be as high as $1.5 million when adding in reimbursements from the state and federal governments.

The new positions will be covered by Civil Service requirements, which means eligibility tests and lists will be in play. Some of the current job descriptions of the affected agency employees match up with county ones while others do not.

“The sooner we can get this done in the first quarter, the better,” said the county official. Only minutes earlier he had said there are costly penalties for not coming into compliance with the Affordable Care Act. The minimum compliance rate increases to 95.5 percent next year, according to Picente.

The county contracts for many services, including mandated ones — a practice that has been followed for a number of years. The overall number of county jobs has gone down in recent years through contracts with outside groups, attrition and layoffs. Some of the agency contracts include state and, to a lesser extent, federal dollars.

Penalties for non-compliance could be as much as $3 million a year — an estimate that far exceeds the additional cost of transitioning the agency positions to the county. Picente said the penalty is calculated based on a rate of $166.34 for each employee per month.

The county reviewed more than 2,000 contracts to check for compliance with the complicated law that’s often called Obamacare. Outside groups that stand to be affected the most are the North Utica Community Center, 29 positions, and Kids Oneida, Utica, 15 jobs.

“It’s been a very trying task,” he said of the county’s scrutiny. The county attorney’s office and personnel department were largely responsible for the review.

The county executive said because Civil Service requirements are applicable, it is not automatic that all of the affected agency employees will be moved to the county.

“Our hope is that all of them can,” he said.