“Go Knoxville.”

It’s an exhortation. It’s a cheer. It’s an action plan.

And starting this week, “Go Knoxville” will be the News Sentinel’s new guide to things to do in the greater metropolitan area.

“Go Knoxville” — or “Go,” for short — will appear in the paper Friday in place of the “Knoxville.com” section.

In addition, “Go” will be available for free in special racks in busy parts of the city starting on Thursday afternoons.

The new section retains our popular features: authoritative coverage of the local music scene by Wayne Bledsoe and Jer Cole; stories by Amy McRary on the arts and on family happenings; dining reviews by our mysterious Grub Scout; Kevin Saylor’s wacky Notsville parody column; Matt Ward’s pub crawls; Chuck Campbell’s music reviews; coverage of all the new movies; and listings of everything from concerts to corn mazes.

“Go” also will have several new features:

n A calendar of outdoors activities provided by the Outdoor Knoxville initiative of the Legacy Parks Foundation.

n A profile of an outdoor excursion, sometimes written by freelancer/adventurer Ben Pounds, other times by the News Sentinel’s own nature expert, Morgan Simmons.

n Once a month, Simmons will guide readers on a special Hike of the Month illustrated with the spectacular photography of Adam Lau.

n News of the Weird, a popular feature in Metro Pulse when it was publishing. Here Chuck Shepherd gathers bizarre and absurd items from across the globe in a column that has been delighting readers for more than two decades.

n Comics. Yes, a new pair of cartoon panels will add to the grins in “Go.”

As time goes on, we’ll be looking for additional content to ensure that “Go” is as comprehensive and entertaining a guide to our fair burg as possible.

Meanwhile, Knoxville.com will live on as a Web address, though not as a print section. Here is where all the “Go Knoxville” content — and much more — can be found digitally. Our team updates the site several times a day with the latest entertainment news.

With the emphasis on outdoors moving to “Go,” the Friday features section will adjust its theme. “Get Active” will become “Home & Garden.” We’ll still offer our “Green Thumb” and other gardening content, but we’ll also present ideas on making the most of the great indoors.

While I’m discussing new features, I should also mention the latest upgrades to our apps, as well. The News Sentinel iPhone and iPad apps have been merged, so the app on your phone will configure beautifully on your tablet. The new apps have a slicker look and feel, with edge-to-edge images, cleaner fonts and new animation. Video plays with a single touch on an article, and alerts include links that let readers go straight to hot news stories.

The new versions are compatible with the latest Apple operating system, so they’ll run great on the iPhone 6 and iPhone 6 Plus. To get these latest versions, just update your iPhone app or go to the App Store to load the new version onto your iPad. An Android version is coming.

As always, we welcome feedback on all of these changes.

Jack McElroy is editor of the News Sentinel. He may be reached at 865-342-6300, at editor@knoxnews.com or through The Upfront Page at http://knoxblogs.com/editor.