The decision on whether or not to expand Medicaid is one that many states are struggling over.

In Virginia, lawmakers have been debating the issue for two years now, with some saying that it cost too much and others saying it is needed to protect thousands of families.

Dornita Herndon of Charlottesville is one who is caught in the middle of this debate.

“My medication is so expensive and a lot of times I can't afford it,” says Herndon.

Herndon recently lost her health insurance and access to her physician.

“I've been seeing one doctor for many years and without Medicaid or insurance I can't afford to see him, because he's mostly in the private sector,” Herndon explains.

Not only is she a diabetic, but she also suffers from Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder, which prevented her from keeping her full-time job. She now works part-time and her wages cover some bills, but the $186 in medication she spends per month is putting a strain on her pocketbook.

“With co-pays being anywhere from $45 to $65 without insurance or Medicaid, it's difficult,” says Herndon.

Herndon is in the so-called "Medicaid gap" where she makes too much money to qualify for Medicaid, but not enough money to qualify for subsidized Obamacare coverage.

The proposed Medicaid expansion would take that gap away.

“You're talking about individuals who do not have very many dollars to live on,” says Robert Johnson, executive director of Region Ten in Charlottesville.

Johnson says thousands of people in Charlottesville and Albemarle County would be eligible for health insurance if Medicaid expanded.

“So it's quite a disappointment to have this not happen for our state,” says Johnson.

Many are wondering why this hasn’t happened yet.

Republican Delegate Robert Bell says it would cost the state too much money.

“Medicaid has already expanded very substantially in the last few decades and in fact in the last 10 years spending on it has doubled,” says Del. Bell, (R) 58th District. “The concern would be if we are going to have sort of very big cost drivers already in the program, we have to address those before adding more people.”

Delegate Bell explained that the state budget grows four percent each year, where Medicaid grows eight percent per year and already takes up 20 percent of the state's budget.

“I think expanding the program now and promising that we will reform it down the road just is not a good way to do this,” says Del. Bell. “This has been growing for quite some time; it’s coming.”

“We could see that it was coming for years and it's almost here, where we have to start to do something to reign in the cost of Medicaid program or else it's just unaffordable, it's not sustainable.”

Governor Terry McAuliffe has been pushing for the expansion since 2014, when it was first introduced.

Last year, the General Assembly rejected it, but this year the Governor once again spoke to lawmakers urging them to reconsider.

“With one vote this session we can get healthcare for 400,000 of our fellow Virginians, create up to 30,000 new jobs and save our current budget $105 million,” says Gov. McAuliffe.

“We can't find a good reason not to expand Medicaid and that's why there is such disappointment about it,” says Johnson.

As for Dornita Herndon, she hopes it gets sorted out, so she can go back to her doctor and lower the amount coming out of her pocket for medical expenses.

“It's not just for me, but for everyone who needs medical attention, but can't afford it,” says Herndon.

Governor McAuliffe is currently working on initiatives that will help nearly 25,000 Virginians with health insurance. However, he knows that an expansion will reach more people.

Now it’s up to lawmakers in Richmond to see if Medicaid expansion can fit in this year’s budget.