Topics: Barack Obama, Doctors, Editor's Picks, health insurance, healthcare, Healthcare Reform, Obamacare, policy, Business News, Politics News

As a single-payer advocate who is also a doctor, I was concerned after the Affordable Care Act was passed that it didn’t do enough to combat rising underinsurance. A recent study by the Commonwealth Fund, which used new data to demonstrate that in 2012 some 31.7 million Americans were underinsured (i.e. insured, but still with heavy additional out-of-pocket health care expenses), argued that the burden of underinsurance will likely lessen as the ACA fully unfolds. But is there really reason for such optimism?

This is a complicated issue with many moving parts, so one way to tackle it (before immersing ourselves in the exhilarating policy literature) is to pose a simpler question: if your family is insured, and someone gets seriously sick, can you not worry about going broke?

The short answer: it depends on how much you have in the bank, and on the “out-of-pocket maximum” established by the ACA for your particular plan. The out-of-pocket maximum is the most that you would have to pay (after premiums) on things like co-pays for medications or deductibles for hospitalizations, and it can go as high as $12,700 annually for exchange plans under the ACA. But doesn’t the law provide protection for lower-income individuals, for instance, in the form of reduced out-of-pocket limits? The answer is yes – but to a lesser extent than we initially thought, even though, somehow, no one informed us that things had changed.

After it passed, my concerns about underinsurance re: the ACA revolved around codifying cost sharing measures, like large deductibles and copays, into law. But the out-of-pocket maximums that the law created were admittedly better than nothing, and – as important – were based on income. According to the text of the law, once your family income goes below 400% of the federal poverty level (which for those enrolling now would be less than $94,200 for a family of four) the maximum out-of-pocket limit (now $12,700) would be progressively reduced by either one-third, one-half, or two-thirds, giving (roughly) the following figures for 2014:

In other words, if you make less money, you have less liability for medical expenses. Putting aside the question of whether any out-of-pocket liability is a good idea (I think not), this makes sense. But, though the two-thirds/one-half/one-third limit reductions were written into law, they no longer hold.

In what seems to have gone essentially if not entirely unreported, a densely written rule issued by the Department of Health and Human Services in March 2013 eliminated the reduced out-of-pocket maximum for those making above 250% of the federal poverty level. Additionally, for those making between 200 – 250% of poverty, the limit was raised from one-half to four-fifths of the $12,700 maximum (i.e. $6,350 to $10,160). These limits were then rounded up a bit more to account for “any potential inaccuracies” in estimates, to give us today’s actual limits:

To summarize: everyone who makes between 200% and 400% of the federal poverty level (i.e. a good portion of the middle class) quietly had their Obamacare out-of-pocket liability raised substantially: for a family of four with an income of $60,000, it suddenly doubled to $12,700.