What’s one thing you’d like to see happen where you live next year?

That’s the question Spokesman-Review staffers posed to people in the political, educational, culinary, industrial, health care and other fields over the past few weeks. Some paused, reflecting on the challenges of 2015 and what could likely be achieved in the coming year. Others answered with little hesitation, their priorities already set.

The act of looking back, then forward, is one most of us routinely do in our personal lives this time of year. We wanted people in positions of power and influence, and those representing influential groups in the community, to do the same for our region. Here are their answers.

Kip Hill

A successful medical school

Lisa Brown, 59, president of Washington State University Spokane: “We are hoping and expecting to hear this year that we get the green light from the national accrediting body to accept our first class of medical students.”

Scott Morris, 53, CEO of Avista Utilities: “The continued support of medical education in Spokane and the greater region, and support for both medical schools. The community has been fantastic getting the two medical schools funded and here, but we’re about halfway home and we need to keep our eye on the ball.”

Building new things

Andy Billig, 47, Democratic state senator from Spokane: “I look forward to the groundbreaking of the U-District bike and pedestrian bridge, an early and important product of the bipartisan transportation infrastructure package that passed the Legislature earlier this year. The U-District bridge will increase accessibility, safety and community connections. This bridge is a key to fulfilling our bold community vision for a vibrant U-District that will pay dividends in education, economic development and quality of life for generations to come.”

Kris Dinnison, 47, local author and co-owner of Boo Radley’s and Atticus: “I’d like to see our part of the Inland Northwest continue to make the arts an integral part of our community, infrastructure and culture. Our region is finally starting to see the payoff that comes from making the arts a part of our lives, not just a thing that happens once in awhile.”

Glenn A. Johnson, 71, announcer for WSU football and basketball games and mayor of Pullman: “I would love to see the state add some passing lanes to Highway 26 to help insure safer travel from Pullman to Seattle.”

Mike Leach, 54, head football coach at Washington State University: “I would like for us to get an indoor facility that would benefit all of the sports at Washington State. From a football standpoint I would like for us to continue improving as a team and have a lot of our young guys emerge as players.”

Kelly Prior, 43, chief financial officer and executive vice president at Litehouse Foods Inc. in Sandpoint: “In this digital age I would like to see more affordable and accessible high-speed fiber and cellular broadband in our community. Many of our residents live in rural areas and have a need to be connected to the rest of the world. These more affordable and accessible networks would allow our community to enjoy the beauty of North Idaho while still being able to connect to their family, their employer or to each other.”

Marcus Riccelli, 37, Democratic state representative from Spokane: “I would like the greater Spokane region to come together to pass a ballot measure to not only maintain but significantly enhance our public transit. This is important for economic development, and will fund critical projects across our region like the Central City Line to accommodate job and population growth. It is vital for the well-being of our community and will foster healthier neighborhoods, reduce traffic and ensure mobility for those with disabilities.”

Jon Snyder, 46, outgoing Spokane City Council member and future adviser to Gov. Jay Inslee: “I would like to see folks be able catch a bus above Francis on Nevada on Sundays. And riders should be able to reach the Valley CHAS Clinic. Saturday night symphony-goers should be able to take the bus home late. People on transit from Cheney to Airway Heights need a direct connection that doesn’t go through downtown Spokane. Basically we need a ballot measure to pass the Spokane Transit Moving Forward Plan in 2016.”

J.J. Wandler, 44, owner of Garageland: “I’d love to see a weekly downtown street market featuring local farmers, vintage dealers, retail sellers and food vendors.”

Walt Worthy, 69, prominent Spokane developer: “I would like to see the people of Spokane agree to move forward with financing the new SportsPlex. Spokane needs to attract more citywide events and this would help greatly.”

Protecting what we have

Adrienne Cronebaugh, 33, executive director of Kootenai Environmental Alliance: “The one thing I would like to see happen in Coeur d’Alene/North Idaho in 2016 is a ban on phosphorus in fertilizers. High phosphorus levels in our water bodies have led to toxic blue-green algal blooms and increased aquatic plant growth. Preserving and restoring our waters to the cold clear lakes that make this place so desirable to live and play should be a priority.”

Scott Fields, 44, Water Resources program manager, Coeur d’Alene Tribe: “I would like to see increased collaboration. In a world where it seems everyone is always fighting, we need to remember that we have so much more in common than not. In 2016, the Tribe would like to see all of the regional stakeholders and government agencies set aside our differences and come together to find real ways to work together to protect our gem, Coeur d’Alene Lake, for the benefit of everyone in the region.”

Sam Mace, 47, Inland Northwest director, Save Our Wild Salmon: “I’d like to see more people join the growing call to do right by one of our region’s most valuable and iconic species – wild salmon – and support removal of the four lower Snake River dams. With the value of the dams declining and the costs of maintaining them rising, it’s time in 2016 for an honest assessment of what restoring the lower Snake to free-flowing could bring the Inland Northwest in terms of salmon, jobs and recreation.”

Amanda Parrish, 29, watershed program manager for The Lands Council: “I’d like to see Spokane County really take on water conservation. We had one of the worst droughts we’ve ever had last year and we don’t know what 2016 will bring. Maybe we’ll have a lot of moisture from an El Nino year; we don’t know. But enacting water conservation measures and getting into those habits is going to be really important. I’d like to see our leaders taking proactive steps. … We need that type of leadership right now.”

Sharma Shields, 37, local author: “I’d love to see people come out and really support their public libraries, passing the bonds they need and fueling them with donations or volunteerism or even just membership. Libraries are the great equalizer and they really do help our communities from the inside out. A healthy, robust library directly contributes to a healthy, robust and most importantly, educated community. I was very sad when the Spokane County Library District 2015 bond failed. I’m hoping we can all make this an issue and ensure that our libraries thrive in 2016 and beyond.”

Jerry White Jr., 52, Spokane Riverkeeper: “What I resolve to do is to educate the Spokane area about the issues that face our tributary rivers like Hangman Creek, which is critical to the health of the Spokane River. … Hangman is a particular focus because it’s so polluted and so damaged. The soil erosion is incredible, and it’s really hard on the creek.”

Turning the economy around

Mike Allen, 48, outgoing Spokane City Council member: “Economic development. We lost momentum when economic development was folded into GSI. We need to step back as a community and examine how we are conducting economic development and really discuss where we’re going in the future. That includes mom-and-pop stores to recruiting large corporations. Economic development happens in many layers.”

David Condon, 41, Spokane mayor: “Spokane has experienced more than $1 billion in new economic investment citywide over the past three years. Those investments have helped grow community events and attract new national brands while generating momentum and a renewed confidence that is good for Spokane. It has created new jobs, greater opportunities for families and invigorated an already compassionate community to support each other in new ways. The next year will be full of exciting new opportunities.”

Cheryl Kilday, 54, president and CEO of Visit Spokane: “My hope is that we have genuinely all four seasons so that all of our seasonal businesses prosper and that visitors have four different, great reasons to come throughout the year.”

Tyler Lafferty, 40, principal at Seven2, digital advertising agency in Spokane: “We have a number of successful current and retired executives who have a wealth of knowledge on starting, operating and growing businesses. I’d really like to see them get connected through GSI’s Startup Spokane program as a mentor to entrepreneurs in our region. Often times these entrepreneurs just need a bit of guidance to get them to the next level in their business.”

Raul Labrador, 48, Republican U.S. representative from Eagle, Idaho: “My hope for 2016 and beyond is more economic growth, including robust revival in our natural resources industries and expansion in the promising high-tech sector. Idaho’s entrepreneurial spirit, work ethic and quality of life are unmatched, and I hope that we can create the environment to allow all Idahoans to thrive.”

Cathy McMorris Rodgers, 46, Republican U.S. representative from Spokane: “Let’s continue to open our region to the future by leading the way in innovation and technological development. From the farmer on the Palouse to the programmer in the University District, I believe this is how we can empower every person to pursue their own dreams – regardless of who they know, how connected they are, or what box they check on a census form.”

Todd Mielke, 51, outgoing Spokane County commissioner and future Greater Spokane Incorporated CEO : “I would certainly like to see a real economic recovery for the Spokane area.”

Susan Meyer, 58, CEO of Spokane Transit Authority: “My hope for 2016 is sustained economic growth throughout the Spokane region. Prosperous communities not only grow jobs, invest in infrastructure, prioritize education, improve recreation, and attract visitors; they connect it all with terrific transit service. That’s how great cities (and regions) move.”

Ben Stuckart, 44, Spokane City Council president: “I’d like to see a unified vision of economic development for the whole region, including all the cities, counties and economic development agencies in one agreed-upon document so we’re all speaking the same language.”

Bring on the fast food

Jim Hayford, 48, head men’s basketball coach at Eastern Washington University: “I would like to see In and Out Burger start a franchise in Spokane.”

Rod Sandberg, 46, head football coach at Whitworth University: “Bring a Chick-fil-A franchise to Spokane!!! #2 is bring a Dunkin’ Donuts franchise to Spokane!”

And other types of food, drink

Renee Cebula, 58, owner of Raising the Bar barware company: “Public education – connecting people to the stories behind the classic and craft-cocktails. Each glass contains huge swaths of history, of humanity, of experiences. Cheers!”

Adam Hegsted, 35, chef/owner of The Yards and member of Eat Good Group: “To have our culinary and arts community continually growing in a positive direction with the support of our great local cities! Hard not to be positive about our scene’s growth. Let’s keep it progressing and pushing forward.”

Ryan Stoy, 31, chef and owner at The Wandering Table: “Spokane is ready for a Northwest Food and Wine extravaganza! A true block party worthy of our region. We all work so hard to create and inspire, it’s time we share with the world!”

A safer, friendlier community

Deb Conklin, 62, chair of the Office of Spokane Police Ombudsman Commission: “What I would most like for Spokane in 2016 is that we all learn how to be a community that comes together and gets things done that improve life for all our residents – especially those with the fewest resources and most challenges – and that we adamantly reject the cultural invitation to live ‘me first’ lives.”

Rick Dobrow, 55, interim Spokane Police chief: “We all see that we need to continue to work very diligently to rebuild trust between the community and the police. … I think that’s always a good thing – to go into a new year with that as a reminder.”

Al French, 64, Spokane County commissioner: “What I want for everyone is love, wisdom, health and happiness.”

Mark Kadel, 60, director of World Relief Spokane: “The biggest thing for World Relief is that Spokane would continue to be a welcoming community to refugees fleeing for their lives and being resettled in our community.”

Lynn Kimball, 33, executive director at Aging & Long Term Care of Eastern Washington: “I would like to see more families, seniors and people with disabilities in our region aware of community resources to help them plan to stay at home and age in place.”

Lori Kinnear, 62, incoming Spokane City Council member: “Given the two major events this year, the fires and windstorm, I’d like us to make some meaningful headway on our emergency systems. We need to fully fund our fire department. We have to fix this before the next big thing happens.”

Matt Logie, 35, head men’s basketball coach at Whitworth: “Less gun violence!”

Rob McCann, 46, executive director at Catholic Charities: “My hope … is that the entire community would embrace the idea that every human being is made in the image and likeness of God. And if we believe that, we have to believe that human beings deserve respect and compassion and basic human dignity.”

Kahlil Moore, 18, senior at Lewis and Clark High School: “My hope would be for people’s outlook on the homeless community in Spokane to turn around. For people to be willing to say hello when you pass a homeless person and not being afraid of being near them.”

Tom Sahlberg, 63, member of the Washington Parole Board and lifelong resident: “Something I’d like to see happen in our community in 2016 is that we regain the spirit of community. If we can build on all that is good in our area, we can make it great together. We need each other to build consensus for the common good and to make needed changes that benefit us all. The credit and the responsibility for the issues we face rests squarely on each of us.”

Karen Stratton, 56, Spokane City Council member: “For 2016, I would like for every homeless person in our community to have a safe place to live and I would like for all of us to be kinder to each other.”

Beck Taylor, 46, president of Whitworth University: “My prayer and hope for the region is unity. May we be a community known for its love, cooperation, understanding and inclusion, where all people have the opportunity to flourish.”

Taking care of children

Mark Hurtubise, 67, president and CEO of Inland Northwest Community Foundation: “Our wish, at Inland Northwest Community Foundation, is that all of us in this region embrace and act upon the belief that every child is ours, regardless of background or circumstances. If this becomes a community resolution, then a child’s achievements are lasting triumphs for every neighborhood and household.”

Luke Malek, 33, Republican state representative from Coeur d’Alene: “I see many neglected, abused and troubled kids. If I could change anything in the region, it would be a loving, safe home, good educational resources for every child in the region.”

Tom Rockefeller, 59, superintendent of Mead School District: “For me it’s just the safety of the kids, creating an environment where we can ensure the safety and harmony for our kids to be raised and educated in.”

Early, secondary and higher education

Mary Cullinan, 65, president of EWU: “I would love this region to be more intentionally focused on increasing the college-going rate for students in this region. I think we really need to be getting the word out to everyone in elementary and high school that college is affordable and that you need to be making plans all along. And that means getting families involved.”

Lynn Kimball, 33, executive director at Aging & Long Term Care of Eastern Washington: “I would like to see more families, seniors and people with disabilities in our region aware of community resources to help them plan to stay at home and age in place.”

Max McCullough, 17, senior basketball standout at Post Falls High School: “I would like to see the Greater Spokane League schools compete more with the Inland Empire League schools.”

Shelly Redinger, 48, superintendent of Spokane Public Schools: “It is my wish that the new year brings joyous and fulfilling education opportunities for all of our students in Spokane Public Schools.”

Ben Small, 41, superintendent of Central Valley School District: “The thing that I would love to see in the region is for us to build on the tremendous strengths of an education system that spans K-20. Specifically, I think highlighting the relationship between K-12 education and higher education and building a STEM-ready workforce.”

Taking care of minds and bodies

Tom Martin, 65, chief executive officer and superintendent of Lincoln County Public Hospital District No. 3: “I would like to see the proposed 100-bed inpatient psychiatric hospital at Sacred Heart Medical Center become a reality. I have witnessed, over my career, an ever-growing need for intensive mental health services within our region and across the state.”

Joel McCullough, 56, chief medical officer for the Spokane Regional Health District: “We’re hoping to be more effective in what we call ‘health in all policies.’ It’s an approach where all sorts of policymakers would take health considerations into account when they adopt new public policies, whether it’s a housing or transportation or economic development issue. Most policies that get enacted have a health impact, whether policymakers realize it or not.”

Lora Whalen, 55, director of the Panhandle Health District: “It would be that people make healthy choices and thus lead healthy lifestyles. Obesity is an issue in Idaho – the adult obesity rate is around 30 percent. All of us, perhaps, want to lose a few pounds as part of our New Year’s resolutions. If we could take steps to lose the weight, maintain that weight loss and choose to be more physically active …We live in the most beautiful place. There are so many things you can do that don’t require a gym membership.”

Criminal justice reforms

Larry Haskell, 61, Spokane County prosecutor: “Next year, I will ensure that we continue to hold offenders accountable to the law and to each of you. We are committed to accomplishing this with the most effective use of your tax dollars consistent with your safety. To that end, we have joined forces with several other agencies in a significant grant application that, if awarded to Spokane, will greatly assist the county with additional staffing and resources.”

Shelly O’Quinn, 40, Spokane County commissioner: “I would like to see Spokane County reduce the number of mentally ill individuals in our jail. Each year, there are an estimated 2 million people with serious mental illnesses admitted to jails across the nation … The human toll of this problem – and its cost to taxpayers – is staggering.”

Mike Padden, 69, Republican state senator from Spokane Valley: “I would like to see the Spokane region benefit from strengthening Washington’s felony DUI law, something that would not only benefit the Spokane area, but the entire state. We currently require five convictions in 10 years for a prison term. Idaho and Oregon require three. All other felony DUI states require four or fewer. By increasing our standard to four, we can reduce the pain and suffering caused by this most preventable crime.”

Jackie van Wormer, 48, Spokane Regional Criminal Justice administrator and Washington State University professor: “I want to see continued collaboration among the criminal justice stakeholders, so that we can continue to see efficiencies in the criminal justice system, and cut costs.”

Saluting and taking care of our veterans

Ernie Kent, 60, head men’s basketball coach at Washington State University: “My New Year’s wish would be for all of our troops, including those in Eastern Washington and Western Idaho, to be kept safe and that they are able to return home to their loved ones.”

Patty Murray, 65, Democratic U.S. senator from Bothell: “One of my highest priorities is making sure we improve care for the men and women who’ve served our country. There have been too many problems with the Veterans Choice Program for local veterans, so I’ve challenged my colleagues in Congress to join me to overhaul it in 2016 so we can help veterans around Spokane and the country receive better coordinated care. We must fulfill the promise to take care of veterans long after the war is over.”

Making the most of each day

Edmund Schweitzer, 68, founder of Schweitzer Engineering Laboratories in Pullman: “Thomas Edison said, ‘Opportunity is missed by most people because it is dressed in overalls and looks like work.’ You never know where the next big breakthrough or discovery will come from. … So in 2016 I’d like to see people seize the many opportunities that exist throughout our region and share Edison’s work experience: ‘I never did a day’s work in my life. It was all fun.’ ”

Go Zags

Don Kardong, 66, Bloomsday founder/director and Olympic marathoner: “I’d like the Zags to make the Final Four.”

Candace Mumm, 54, Spokane City Council member: “That’s an easy question. Both Gonzaga basketball teams in the Final Four.”

The following Spokesman-Review staff contributed to this project: Rachel Alexander, Alison Boggs, Jim Camden, Erica Curless, Nicholas Deshais, Thomas Clouse, Eli Francovich, Addy Hatch, Kip Hill, Adriana Janovich, Becky Kramer, Greg Lee, Scott Maben, Joe Palmquist, Mike Prager, Betsy Z. Russell and Jacob Thorpe.