Photo

AUSTIN — The band Fastball is best known for “The Way,” one of its mid-tempo 1998 hits, but this month in Austin, to celebrate the 40th anniversary of the opening of Hole in the Wall, it slammed through several frenzied rock songs from its 1996 debut, “Make Your Mama Proud,” which the group had not played in 15 years. “No wonder we were so skinny back then,” the frontman Miles Zuniga joked.

“I could almost smell the van, playing those songs,” Mr. Zuniga said afterward. “I was like, ‘Oh no! We’ve got to drive 500 miles and we’re each going to make about $5.”

Hole in the Wall, a University of Texas-area rock club, is where Fastball played its first and most formative gigs, as did such artists as Spoon, Black Joe Lewis, Nanci Griffith and Timbuk3. Other fixtures included Doug Sahm, Townes Van Zandt, the Velvet Underground’s Sterling Morrison (who had gone on to get a Ph.D. in medieval studies at U.T.) and Mark McKinnon, the future political consultant.

“Hole in the Wall was the first club I went to when I was visiting from Nashville in 1975,” Mr. McKinnon said. “And I immediately thought, ‘This town is where the music is really happening. And this town is where I want to live.’ ”

That Hole in the Wall is older than the legal drinking age makes it a rarity for Austin. The city proclaimed itself the “live music capital of the world” in 1991 because it had more clubs per capita than any other, but it is also a cemetery for live music venues. The scene’s beloved bars do not usually last. In the 1970s and 1980s, the Armadillo World Headquarters, Vulcan Gas Company and Raul’s closed. In the 1990s, Liberty Lunch shuttered its doors, and most recently, it was the venerable blues club Antone’s, which is supposed to reopen under new owners at what would be its sixth location.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Hole in the Wall is the second-oldest, more or less continuously running venue in the city, after The Broken Spoke, a honky-tonk that opened in 1964. Despite several ownership changes, one closure and a new back bar with a larger stage, little has changed except the food: instead of the $2.50 “Elfagator Melt” (a vegetarian sandwich) that regulars enjoyed in the 1980s, there’s $8 chicken karaage from a celebrated mini-chain, East Side King, at which Paul Qui is an owner.

Originally opened by Doug Cugini, a Buffalo transplant, Hole in the Wall was never meant to be a music venue. But local buskers on The Drag (and later George Ensle and Stephen Doster, both of whom still play in town) talked their way indoors. “We just let the people from the university and the area dictate what it became,” Mr. Cugini said.

The university’s influence remains. The current owner, Will Tanner, a San Antonio native who also operates four bars and restaurants in El Paso, bought the club in 2008; that year, he remembers moving to break up an argument that looked like it might turn into a fight. “They were literally arguing about string theory,” Mr. Tanner said.

Expanded coverage of Texas is produced by The Texas Tribune, a nonprofit news organization. To join the conversation about this article, go to texastribune.org. Cultural coverage for the Texas Report is provided by Texas Monthly. For stories, reviews, news and more, go to texasmonthly.com.

The raising of the state’s drinking age in 1986 made music more important, with the Hole charging a cover for the first time. A longtime bartender, Debbie Rombach, who began booking the club in 1990 (and eventually became its second owner) made the Hole a punk and indie music mecca, while still accommodating country, folk and blues.

When the band Spoon first formed, all that its lead singer, Britt Daniel, wanted was a weekend slot at the bar. “It felt like a high mountain to climb,” he said. “I was convinced that if we played all loud, fast songs, we’d get there sooner, so that’s pretty much all I wrote to start off.”

The club’s front stage, which is cornered up against a showcase window on The Drag, with no sound mixer, and little separation from the audience, remains the club’s real heart as well as its true proving ground. “It is you, 110 volts of electricity and everybody else,” Mr. Tanner said.

“It was a small room that got packed so easily,” Mr. Daniel said. “You felt like a king playing that place.”

In 2000, Spoon shot a music video, “Jealousy,” in the dingy and graffiti-filled men’s room. “I spent a lot of time in that bathroom back then,” Mr. Daniel said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The Hole has survived by remaining as much a neighborhood bar as a rock club. Framed photos and two illustrated murals by Todd Green hang on the walls back by the bathrooms, a Hall of Fame (“or infamy,” Ms. Rombach said) for regulars and employees.

“He’s on the wall,” Paul Minor, 47, the club’s former production manager, said as people streamed into the room last week, when the prodigiously mustachioed Brooks Brannon, 64, a former Hole in the Wall bartender, played 100 songs in 60 minutes. “He’s on the wall,” Mr. Minor — who first played the club when he was 17, and led the no-cover Sunday “Rock and Roll Free For All” house band for seven years — repeated.

Then Mr. Brannon bought the room a round. “I get my Social Security check tomorrow,” he joked. In fact, per Tanner, the drinks were on the house.

“Most places in Austin, if you say, ‘I was here between ’90 and ’95, they’ll say, ‘Oh, that was a million years ago,’ ” said Ryan Deaver, 44, yet another former Hole in the Wall bartender. “Here, they go, ‘Oh, you’re the baby. I don’t know who you are.’ ”