'They were a package deal. If I took one of the kids, I had to take all of them.'

Some time in the mid-1990s, police picked up a man who painted himself blue to hide from people by looking like a Smurf.

Presumably he began to panic as his methamphetamine high wore off at the hospital, and the uncomfortable reality of reintegrating into society as a blue man set in.

Stephanie Bunn as a child remembers her mother, who once worked for the doctor on call, recounting this story. It made an impression on the family of how off track people can get under the influence of the powerful, highly addictive stimulant.

But no one then guessed how meth would complicate future motherhood for Bunn, 25, of Firestone, and for her sister Melissa Bunn, 29, of Fort Lupton.

Auntie steps up

Melissa Bunn has a kiss for her nephew Logan at their Fort Lupton home. For more photos and a video, go to www.timescall.com. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff photographer)

The sisters dispute many facts around why ultimately all four of Stephanie Bunn's children — each from a different father — were removed from her custody by Weld County's child welfare case workers.

But both women recall the same version of what happened that day.

On Aug. 2, 2013, Melissa Bunn cooperated with the county caseworker and the Frederick police to meet her unwitting sister at a Frederick park for the safest, quietest transfer of custody.

The two girls — Emma, then 3, and Ryleigh, then 5 — were already with their maternal grandmother that day to keep routine doctor appointments. The baby had not yet been born, though he tested positive for meth at birth and also went into Melissa Bunn's custody.

Advertisement

Only Alex, then 11 months old, showed up to the park with Stephanie Bunn for the surprise removal of the children who were living with her and her boyfriend in a tent pitched in a Firestone field.

"When I first got there, they wanted me to give my son to the case worker," Stephanie Bunn said. "But I waited for my sister. And when she came she had a car seat already in her car. So, I knew she knew about it. But I also knew my kids were safe going to my sister. That is the only good part of this system if you have a family that is like my family."

Stephanie Bunn has a gift for her daughter, Ryleigh, 8, at the Frederick Fishing Derby on May 2. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff photographer)

In 2014, about half of the 195 children removed from Weld County homes were placed with relatives participating in the kinship care program, and those children stayed for an average 236 days, said Veronica Cavazos, who oversees the program from the Greeley office.

It pains Stephanie Bunn that now, nearly two years after the transfer of her children to her sister, she may not go out solo with any of them, and that she is expected to function better than she has in years despite the trauma of losing them.

"I'm lost," she said. "That's all I know is my kids. They take your whole world away from you, and then they say, 'Put a smile on your face, and don't do drugs.'"

Life goes on

A busy Saturday morning in Fort Lupton: Cody Mcfarlin, Melissa Bunn's husband, feeds Logan Bunn, left, while Austin Mcfarlin waits with his cats, and Alex Bunn wants his stroller, held by Melissa Bunn. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff photographer)

During an early May fishing clinic sponsored by the Town of Frederick at Milavec Lake at Frederick Recreation Area, a K-9 unit officer demonstrated how he handles "Buran," a German Shepherd trained to sniff out meth, cocaine, ecstasy and marijuana.

As the rest of her family stood with adults and kids around the handler and the dog, Stephanie Bunn wandered on the lawn with Alex, now 2, to blow dandelions gone to seed.

"It's hard. It feels like everyone stares at me, like just now with the cops here. They all know who I am," she said.

Meanwhile, life goes on for her children in her sister's four bedroom, 1,100-squarefoot home.

There, Melissa Bunn cares for her son Austin, 6, and three of her sister's four kids: baby Logan, whom she and her husband plan to adopt; and Ryleigh, 8, and Alex, both of whom are now in permanent custody with the couple.

"I went from one kid to four kids overnight," she said, because she initially had Emma, now 4, who lives with her biological father. "... I take the brunt of it with the caregiving. But all of us (in the extended family) contribute. And there is no way any of this would be possible without Cody and his family. It takes a true man to step up like he did."

On the busy Saturday morning of the fishing clinic outing, Cody Mcfarlin — Melissa's husband — spooned baby food into Logan's mouth and dressed Alex, who calls him "Daddy," to help get everybody out the door on time before he attended a class on remodeling homes, his line of work.

Melissa Bunn said that his parents often pick up the tab when they shop at Sam's Club in Westminster for diapers and bulk groceries.

They also bought the couple's 2008 Mercury Mountaineer — a minivan still owned by the bank — to lighten their financial load after a woman at Chuck E. Cheese in Greeley last year donated a 1995 Dodge Caravan with 120,000 miles on the odometer.

"Logan was only five days old, and we were out to eat there when I got to talking with this woman," she said. "... She told me I was a godsend to these kids. A lot of people tell me that. But she wanted to give us a minivan to help. It was really surprising. It's hard to believe that there are really people out there who will do that."

Bridging the gaps

Yet, Melissa Bunn is that person she admires — someone capable of giving in outrageously generous ways.

"They were a package deal. If I took one of the kids, I had to take all of them," Melissa Bunn explained.

Now, she wears a backpack stuffed with diapers, wipes and snacks to feed four kids and one more every other weekend when her sister's other daughter visits.

She set up chore charts and bins for each child.

When she's not feeding the baby his bottle or making meals and snacks, Melissa Bunn scurries about helping the kids feed the cats, dogs and three chicks — Fluffy, Fluffy Junior and Fluffy Senior — living under a heat lamp in the garage.

All this mothering, plus managing Pawsitively Pampered — the pet grooming business she has owned in Frederick since 2006 — keeps Melissa Bunn so busy that she wonders some days if she ever will get to take a shower.

For this care, the unemployed Stephanie Bunn owes her sister more than $4,000 in back child support, an outstanding amount that explains why the state suspended her driver's license, Melissa Bunn said.

None of the fathers have paid child support either, she said.

Instead, to care for her sister's children she gets about $700 per year per child from the Weld County kinship care program; about $400 per month total from the federal and state-funded Temporary Assistance for Needy Families program; some baby formula and other basic food products from the federally funded supplemental nutrition program, Women, Infants, and Children; and Medicaid.

That helps, but not nearly enough to cover expenses, she said.

Yet, Melissa Bunn can't imagine another life.

She is "Mom" and her sister is "Mommy" or "Mama" to Alex because Melissa Bunn is the one on the job, the one always there to care for the kids — much as Stephanie Bunn would love to switch places.

The kids reach for both sisters to get hugs and hold hands. The oldest one, Ryleigh, still watches for Stephanie Bunn to arrive and still cries when she leaves.

But she brings the hairbrush to Melissa Bunn at bedtime when both sisters sit on the same couch.

"I know her routine. I know what needs to be done," Melissa Bunn said.

Until her sister proves to the court that she also knows what needs to be done and can do it, Stephanie Bunn will parent from the sidelines indefinitely.

Mother at the triangle's top

Dawn Rhodes, the mother of these sisters, helps the older daughter by inviting all of the children over for meals and sleepovers.

She helps the younger daughter, too, mostly by paying her cell phone bill — a gesture that allows her to support addiction recovery without being overcome by anxiety, she said.

Stephanie Bunn once stole heirloom jewelry from her for drug money, Rhodes said.

Maintaining the cell phone keeps a line of communication open without Rhodes getting overly invested in factors out of her control — her daughter's recovery progress, romantic partners, work history, etc.

"I needed to learn to let go," Rhodes, 50, said.

Stephanie Bunn still feels the love.

"But a lot of times, I can't go to my mom's house because there's too much of the kids' stuff there," she said. "But I know she's always there for me, and I just hope that all the other families out there who are in the system are as strong as we have been — my mom, my sister, my brother-in-law, and the kids."

The clouds come for Stephanie Bunn when she is alone in the 1988 Chevrolet motorhome she shares in Firestone with her boyfriend, the father of her fourth child.

"Other parents who have been through this, those parents know what I'm talking about. Because I hold everything in, the tiniest thing can make me want to jump up and scream and clench my fists and cry and cry even though I know three of them are together in a safe place with my sister," she said.

So Stephanie Bunn, for now, takes comfort in talking to her kids about what they can share in the heavens while barriers between them still exist here on earth.

"The moon is the one thing me and my kids have. It's the one thing that is the same no matter where you are," she said. "So, I call and sometimes I tell them to go stand outside and look at it. It is why I like to say 'Love you to the moon and back.'"

Pam Mellskog can be reached at p.mellskog@gmail.com or at 303-746-0942.