While it’s certainly true that both President Barack Obama and President Ronald Reagan were able to build wide coalitions and had a personal charisma that distinguished them from other politicians; that is where their similarities end, contra Lucas Ropek’s argument earlier this week.

For one, it is myopic to draw such a parallel based solely on the idea that both administrations presided over periods in which their rhetoric outpaced their legislative accomplishments. By that logic, any and all politicians are Reaganesque. What troubles me about Lucas’s argument, however, is its embrace of conservatives’ assessment of Obama’s foreign policy record on the one hand, and the far-left’s interpretation of his domestic accomplishments on the other. If you insist on criticizing your cake and eating it, too, then of course the Obama presidency has been a failure.

However neither assessment is fair to the President or his handling of the political situation he inherited.

There can be no doubt that Obama’s use of drones is a legitimate human rights concern, an act of American aggression that fuels international resentment and takes innocent human lives, and that must be drastically reformed. However it is simply nothing compared to the violence and havoc wrought by his predecessor. America should never take civilian lives, but the first night of the Iraqi invasion killed more civilians than Obama’s administration has during his entire tenure.

I, too, tire of the guy who’s always defending the lesser-of-two-evils, but the virtue of the Obama Presidency’s foreign policy is simply not about killing fewer people. Obama is the first President to accept the need to curtail, not expand our international military presence, going against a tradition of manifest destiny told as the country.

Lucas also makes light of Obama’s key legislative achievement, the Affordable Care Act. While we all would have liked to see more from his Presidency — more dollars in aid to the poor, more programs to help kids get access to education and social services, and so on — the sad fact of the matter is that each President usually signs one major piece of legislation during their administration. Given the fact that Americans were still dying for being poor, and given that many administrations had tried and failed to address the problem before — the ACA was and is a monumental achievement that has made the lives of nearly 20 million Americans better. Period.

When it comes to the environment, an issue near and dear to many liberals’ hearts, Barack Obama has been a game-changer. Ronald Reagan famously dismantled the solar panels on the White House placed there by Jimmy Carter. Barack Obama created subsidies to give them away to low-income homeowners. And that’s to say nothing of President Obama’s use of the EPA to regulate coal-fired power plants — perhaps the biggest step to curb carbon emissions any president has ever taken.

Lastly, and perhaps most importantly, Barack Obama isn’t a bigot. Reagan was. Obama didn’t allow 500,000 people to die needlessly of AIDS due to his homophobia. He didn’t start the War on Drugs (he’s actually de-escalating it), and he didn’t actively work to expand the military industrial complex. Obama didn’t neglect urban centers during White Flight; just today he announced new HUD rules to push back against housing discrimination. And his administration has worked to curb flagrantly racist drug sentencing codes codes that send black people to jail for twice as long as whites for doing essentially the same thing.

To tie this all together, we should also consider that Reagan’s soaring popularity rendered the Left politically impotent. It took a Southern governor and two decades of corporate friendly Democrats to make the Democratic Party competitive again. Our primary’s frontrunners are now a female champion of family reform and a candidate who doesn’t shy away from the term “socialist.”

Of course, of course, of course we are right to have expected more. And we should never be complacent in the face of injustice in the name of short-term gains. But it is the conservative movement that is politically impotent now. While Obama’s caution may have disappointed us all, we didn’t have to wait long for evidence that it paid off.