Sen. Ron Johnson talks about his ideas on the federal budget at a town hall meeting Friday at City Hall. Credit: Gary Porter

By of the

With a blizzard of statistics about debt and deficits, U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson on Friday took his brand of fiscal conservatism to Milwaukee's City Hall, a building once frequented for decades by Socialists.

Shortly before he began his town hall meeting, Johnson, dressed in suit and tie, greeted arrivals gathering in a third floor hearing room.

"How ya doing, I'm Ron," the Wisconsin Republican said.

In his successful U.S. Senate campaign and throughout his Senate career, Johnson always reminds voters that he is a businessman, an accountant and a man who is at home with numbers. And at public gatherings, his PowerPoint is never far away.

During his 45-minute presentation in advance of taking a handful of questions, Johnson made his case that federal spending as a percentage of gross domestic product had grown rapidly and dangerously.

"The size of federal government is the problem," he said. "The root cause of the problem, both culturally and financially. It's so large we can't pay for it. We are bankrupting the country."

Johnson said that the nation's growing debt is constricting the country's ability to grow the economy.

"It's really harming economic growth," he said.

On a per capita basis, Johnson said, each American has $53,879 in debt. Four years ago, he said, it was about $36,000.

There were more slides to show. The senator spoke about rising college costs ("The government threw money at the problem."); the Social Security Trust Fund ("We are not running surpluses any more."); the growth of out-of-wedlock births ("I want to help people help themselves."); and the war on poverty ("The $16 trillion war on poverty utterly failed. I would argue that it probably exacerbated it.").

When he finished, he looked at his audience and said, "Sorry, I depressed you."

In response to questions or comments from voters, Johnson said he was not optimistic U.S. Sen. Harry Reid (D-Nev.) would allow a Senate vote on his proposed bill that would let people keep their current health care plans under the Affordable Care Act.

Told by a voter he should negotiate in good faith with President Barack Obama, Johnson said he had a proven track record of working with the chief executive.

"I continue to work with the White House, quietly, behind the scenes," Johnson said. "I'm willing to work with anybody who is willing to acknowledge the problem."

Asked afterward if he had convinced voters of the need to act on the nation's fiscal challenges, Johnson said, "Definitely, because so few people really understand this information. They have never seen it before. Totally change hearts and minds? I think I have informed people."

One attendee told Johnson the town hall meeting was too short.

Said Johnson: "I'll be back."