Gov. Rick Snyder (Photo: Associated Press)

Always an unlikely political figure, with high-pitched voice and nerdy persona, Gov. Rick Snyder wraps up an unusual and productive first term this week with Michigan now a right-to-work state, Detroit pushed through a multibillion dollar bankruptcy and the state economy rebounding.

Michigan's no longer the crippled, sorry state Snyder vowed to "reinvent," en route to electoral victory. But from a state of desperation in 2009, Michigan has merely moved to mediocrity. Our state suffers with stubbornly low income levels, and we remain laggards in education, which threatens to devalue the currency that matters most in today's economy — a talented local labor pool.

Snyder, a former accountant, computer industry executive and venture capitalist, knows this. So we can expect to hear a lot about talent, jobs and education in his Jan. 20 State of the State address. His legacy depends on creating more and better jobs, which relies on employers and educators learning how to better match relevant training with the skills needed in today's jobs marketplace.

As governor — pushing an ambitious agenda backed by Republican legislative majorities — Snyder quickly balanced the budget and cut business taxes. Michigan's credit rating improved, job growth resumed and the state's population exodus subsided. And just as Snyder won reelection last month, Detroit's successful exit from Chapter 9 bankruptcy capped a highly productive first term.

Key differences

In recent days, I asked several key members of Snyder's inner circle to reflect on his first term — achievements, surprises and frustrations — and to forecast what he might do for an encore.

One thing on which there is universal agreement: Snyder is a different kind of cat from other recent Michigan political figures, certainly very different than any governor in recent memory, aside from a few traits shared with three-term Gov. William Milliken, who left office 32 years ago.

What's been different about Snyder? Let us count the ways.

Nerdy neophyte: Snyder, in his first-ever run for political office, pitched himself as "one tough nerd." Merriam-Webster defines nerd as "an unstylish, unattractive, or socially inept person." Yet he won big.

Only partly partisan?: When Snyder, a Republican, took over a state in economic shambles, he chose a Democrat, former House Speaker Andy Dillon, to head Michigan's Treasury Department.

Pension tax: In his first budget, Snyder raised taxes on pensions. Did he know that seniors vote?

Courting China: Snyder visited China four times in four years to promote exports and seek investment in Michigan. His predecessor, Gov. Jennifer Granholm, ignored China for all eight years in office, except for slamming her 2006 GOP opponent Dick DeVos for investing in China as head of Amway.

Healthy Michigan: While most Republicans fumed against Obamacare, Snyder backed Medicaid expansion and extended health coverage to more Michigan citizens.

Immigration: While the U.S. Congress remains gridlocked on immigration reform, Snyder has been one of the nation's most outspoken governors in favor of finding pathways for talented immigrants to stay in the U.S. and to start businesses.

Right-to-work: Even former Gov. John Engler, a GOP stalwart and no pal of labor unions, had considered right-to-work too divisive an issue to push. But Snyder went ahead and signed a right-to-work bill after labor failed to enshrine collective bargaining in the Michigan Constitution and block right-to-work with a ballot proposal in 2012.

Build the bridge: A Canadian-backed proposal for the New International Trade Crossing bridge project between Detroit and Windsor had previously failed to win GOP support in the Michigan Legislature. But Snyder's enthusiastic backing gave new life to the project, now tracking toward completion by 2020.

Buy Photo Denis Lebel, Canadian Minister of Transport, Infrastructure and Communities and Michigan Gov. Rick Snyder shake hands after signing the bridge agreement while Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper, U.S. Transportation Secretary Ray LaHood, U.S. Ambassador to Canada David Jacobson and Gov. Snyder's Legal Counsel Michael Gadola watch in the background. (Photo: Jarrad Henderson Detroit Free Press)

Fixing Detroit: For 60 years as people and investment abandoned Michigan's largest city, most of the state's political leaders either blamed each other or just punted the problem down the road. Snyder took action and installed emergency manager Kevyn Orr, who led Detroit through a Chapter 9 bankruptcy that expunged $7 billion of debt, gave the city a fresh start and returned control to Mayor Mike Duggan and the Detroit City Council.

Persistent problem'

Predictably, Snyder and his top advisers say they have accomplished a lot in the first term, balancing budgets, overhauling the tax structure and improving Michigan's fiscal state. They'd have preferred to see the Legislature vote to raise money the fix the state's roads a week ago, but settled for a deal to put a 1% sales tax boost on the ballot in May.

Bill Rustem, who was Snyder's director of strategy before retiring five months ago, told me Michigan is still not where it needs to be in multiple areas — economic growth, income disparity, education, the state of its cities.

"The persistent problem of Detroit, which now has a new life," Rustem said, was for decades a chronic drag on the state's economic performance.

"We, all of us, had abandoned Detroit," said Rustem, a former adviser to Milliken and longtime head of Public Sector Consultants before joining Snyder's staff. "That's where the concentration of poverty is, where the persistent education problems are, that's where you had a city that couldn't make itself work. Politicians didn't even want to talk about Detroit ... Well, he (Snyder) was willing to take that on, in a very, very bold way."

Dennis Muchmore, a longtime Lansing lobbyist and executive recruiter before joining Snyder as chief of staff, hadn't known Snyder at all until meeting him late in the 2010 campaign, via Rustem.

"Rustem said he was really different," Muchmore recalled, "but I'm more of a cynic. I kept thinking to myself all the time, 'I wonder when this guy's going to turn out to be a regular political person I'm working for, when is he going to do something where I say aha? ... and well, it never happened. He's always been something other than a regular political person. It's an odd thing, to be truthful. I'm still not used to it."

Rich Baird, a Snyder adviser, talent scout and longtime friend, said the governor has, for the most part, enjoyed the job and suffered only minor frustrations.

"He was a little taken aback by some of the preschool intramurals in the Legislature," Baird told me, referring to the horse-trading needed to gather enough votes for certain issues. "Instead of a straightforward getting an agenda, they sometimes had to take these circuitous routes."

'Get it done'

And then, of course, bills get passed that the governor didn't want to reach his desk — the most high-profile of which was the 2012 lame-duck passage of a right-to-work law that bans compulsory payment of union dues or fees as a condition of employment.

Snyder did not initially push right-to-work as part of his agenda, but signed the bill after it became clear that pro-RTW forces in the Legislature were prepared to put the issue on a statewide ballot after defeating the labor unions' referendum to head it off.

"That would been the fight for another year and a half, debating this issue," Rustem recalled. "The governor finally just said, 'Let's just get it done.' In the great scheme of things, it's not going to make a huge difference, other than from a perception standpoint. Let's just get it over with, and we can talk about the issues that really matter to Michigan."

Snyder's instinct on right-to-work proved correct. It faded quickly as a hot-button issue and was rarely mentioned during the 2014 gubernatorial election campaign.

"At the end of the day," Rustem said, "it mattered to the organizations but not to the people. It mattered to the (Michigan Chamber of Commerce), it mattered to the unions. To the people, it didn't matter."

'Forward-looking'

Now that the last lame-duck session of Snyder's first term has concluded with the Legislature punting the roads-funding issue to a vote of the people in May, what's next on Snyder's agenda?

"That list is not real long, compared to what it was," Snyder told the Free Press in a recent interview, noting that he faced issues in the first term that were "30- or 40-year problems ... legacy things that we had to clean up."

"In the next term I want to be more forward-looking," he said, focusing on issues related to "keeping our young people here."

Baird put it this way: "We need a stronger coalition and alignment between those who educate and those who employ," he said, indicating that Snyder will offer a range of ideas on programs and public-private partnerships to make Michigan a leader in workforce development and training.

The reason is simple. Radical shifts in the nature of work on manufacturing shop floors, in hospitals and many other jobs sites have put Michigan, once a relatively well-to-do state as recently as the 1990s, in catch-up mode today.

In 1999, according to data compiled by the Michigan Future think tank, Michigan ranked 17th among the 50 states in per capita income earned from working wages and benefits. Now Michigan ranks 42nd. A benchmarking study conducted by Business Leaders for Michigan shows our state ranking 31st in educational attainment, 38th in fourth-grade reading scores and 37th on the readiness of our 11th-graders for college or careers.

The White House?

So, looking ahead to the next four years, Snyder's agenda may have fewer items, but the challenges remain daunting.

Meanwhile, thanks to Michigan's more solid financial footing and hopeful buzz from Detroit's Chapter 9 bankruptcy exit, Snyder's name is popping up — along with those of former Fla. Gov. Jeb Bush, N.J. Gov. Chris Christie and pack of other GOP aspirants — as possible candidates for national office. Perhaps even for the Big Job at the White House.

Neither Snyder nor his inner circle are actively promoting such chatter. But they aren't seeking to quash it, either.

"He's a fixer," Baird says of Snyder. "He likes the job, doing the job. It's the chest-pounding part of politics that he doesn't like. Right now in our country, politically, the situation is eerily similar to five years ago in Michigan."

In other words, people think Washington, D.C., is broken, dysfunctional.

"And that situation in Michigan is what drove him to run for governor. He didn't see candidates that had the qualities to do it," Baird said.

While that may sound like a prelude to a presidential run, it's far more likely at this point that Snyder — now term limited with nothing to lose — is merely leveraging whatever attention he gets as an opportunity to keep telling his Michigan comeback story. He knows he has a bully pulpit now, and as long as speculation about him as a national candidate is out there, it enables him to tell the Michigan story to more people, so he doesn't go out of his way to dismiss it.

That said, who knows what might happen? Nine weeks before before the August primary in 2010, Snyder — the nerd not many voters knew — was third in the polls for the GOP gubernatorial nomination, behind U.S. Rep. Pete Hoekstra and Michigan Attorney General Mike Cox.

Contact Tom Walsh: 313-223-4430 or twalsh@freepress.com, also follow him on Twitter @TomWalsh_freep.

The Snyder behind the nerd

To his chief of staff Dennis Muchmore, Gov. Rick Snyder is "an interesting guy, complex. Very, very smart, as everybody knows."

But there's more to Snyder, also known by his Twitter handle @onetoughnerd.

"He's kind of a sports nut," Muchmore says. "He likes physical sports, he likes to water-ski, he likes to play basketball, he's kind of an outdoors guy and he doesn't seem like it. He's got this tremendous love for conservation, that doesn't fit in with the numbers and the statistical stuff" that go with the image of the nerdy accountant.

"His happiest times, I believe, when he's out and about, are when he goes up to the Upper Peninsula. He likes to go on the water, he likes to explore, to hike," Muchmore added.

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1Bgvqmx