<p>The audience reacts to an act during last year's Rock the World concert at Holiday World. submitted photo</p>

By Abbey Nickel

Christian rocker David Crowder says even he was surprised at where his creativity led him for his first solo album and tour, but for the first time, he's taking all the blame.

"This is my first stab at something that's literally all my fault," Crowder told the Courier & Press. "So I'm trying to practice and get it out as much as I can."

The bearded singer/songwriter is scheduled as one of the main stage performers for Rock the World at Holiday World in Santa Claus on Aug. 22.

He's best known as the frontman in the David Crowder Band, the Dove-Award winning worship band disbanded in 2012 after more than a decade of making music together.

But after taking a year off, Crowder says the songs just kept coming, and he didn't want his musical journey to end there. Crowder then embarked on a solo career using just his last name and some inspiration from his Texas southern roots.

The new musical chapter has boded well for the artist, whose first solo album debuted at No. 1 when it was released in May 2014.

"(The album) takes me back to my childhood. I think it really has a sense of innocence about it, and it helps us come back to what this is all about with our faith," he said. "Lyrically, it's the most personal album that I've written. The music now is more about the interior of what I've wanted to say instead of trying to combine all of these other voices. It's been both terrifying and rewarding."

The second single off the album, "Come As You Are," was Crowder's first career No. 1 hit. The song was nominated for a Grammy this year and was followed by more nominations at the 3rd Annual K-LOVE Fan Awards.

Crowder says it's the most personal ? but also his favorite ? song he's recorded. He also helped pen the song.

"This song invites people into the reality that redemption and grace is big enough to accommodate our biggest depravities," Crowder said. "I am thrilled about the language in that song and what it has meant to listeners. I am affected as deeply by the lyrics as anybody else is."

Crowder's live performances as of late have been known for a unique combination of foot-stomping folk-country arrangements, laser shows and worship. But the root of it all, and the purpose, will always stay the same no matter where his musical path takes him.

"Music is incredible for humans to have, and it forms us as communities. It's tough to fight when you're all singing together," he said with a laugh. "Music is this common thing that gets to the core of who you are as a person. And when you are using music to connect to the creator of music, there's something that goes deeper than the commonalities you share. You are using it for the purpose for what is was created for."

Along those same lines, Crowder said he tries to give his fans the same experience he would want, whether they're listening to the music in their car or in the front row at a music festival.

"There is this deeper level that you reach through worship for who we are as humans that is even more shared when you direct your focus to above," Crowder said. "It's kind of like your feet leave the ground for a second."

He said helping people find their way back to reality is always a focus with his music.

"Music helps us get to the deepest parts of where we are. It's always a powerful thing to see my friends, and strangers, find out who they are through music even outside of the church. Having people connect to God in a way that's authentic and true that helps us get away from what modern culture is trying to tell us can be the release we all need," Crowder said.

As for the future, he said they've been busy wrapping up video shoots and enjoying their time on the road, but fans should be on the lookout for new music sometime soon.

"We're definitely working on a new album, but the release date has yet to be announced. It's a secret for now, but it's going to be awesome," he said.

On a more personal note, Crowder said as he continues touring and meeting fans on his new solo path, there's one inevitable question asked.

"There is always someone at my shows that stops in their tracks and says ?Wow, how long did it take for you to grow that beard?'" And I always tell them that's like asking how long it took to grow my arm. It's a part of me. But if that's the only thing I get questioned about, I guess I'm doing OK."