Krystal Watts, left, and Stephanie Foster, inmates at the Denver Women's Correctional Facility, encourage each other during a Dance 2B Free session. the program is faciliated by Boulder-based Alchemy of Movement. See more photos and a video at dailycamera.com. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

This is what max security looks like.

Through a metal detector into a locked holding area, into an outdoor holding area lined with barbed wire hoops.

Then buzzed into a second outdoor holding area.

Then a locked hallway in another building.

Then yet another holding area, one with a window framing the guards on watch.

When the guards buzz open the final doors, a sparsely landscaped courtyard awaits, scattered with at least a dozen armed guards on post.

Follow the gently winding pathway across the yards and veer left, and you'll land in a full-sized gymnasium.

This is what freedom in prison looks like.

Loud bass tickles the walls. It's a song by Matisyahu: We got to learn to stick together, hate to be here alone, 'cause the world is a place, that will eat you alive in one day.

About 20 women dressed in yellow T-shirts and gray sweat pants are moving in unison. They lift their hands toward the rafters, then thrust their arms downward. Some are laughing, a few are hiding tears.

It looks like a regular group dance class in Colorado, except guards in blue uniforms line the walls, handcuffs dangling from their belts.

It's a Sunday afternoon in the Denver Women's Correctional Facility off Havana in north Denver. This class is a new offering, Dance 2B Free, a volunteer-run nonprofit put together by a group of Boulder dancers. The prison has never seen anything like this, and only four months in, the class already has made a shockingly notable impact on the inmates involved, guards say.

It has changed the lives of the local volunteers, too, they say.

Lucy Wallace, co-owner of Boulder's Alchemy of Movement dance studio, was looking for a way to bring dance to underserved populations when one of her students, Gayle Nosal, suggested she head to the prisons.

The beginning of Dance 2B Free was that simple. When Wallace heard the idea, she says, she immediately knew that was the answer.

Lucy Wallace, co-owner of Boulder-based Alchemy of Dance, leads inmates at the Denver Women s Correctional Facility in a Dance 2B Free class. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

Maybe it was the influence of the TV series "Orange is the New Black," but Wallace says a part of her could imagine life in prison.

"It felt tangible and relatable. I could be that woman," Wallace says. "Just one small thing going in a different direction in my life, and I could be in prison."

But it wasn't as simple as knocking on the gates and walking in with a boom box. It took months of planning, communication with the prison system, incorporation as a nonprofit, fundraising and training before a small group of Boulder dancers first took the stage in the prison gym.

They had no idea what to expect, if anyone would even attend or how they would be received.

'So excited about this class'

Michelle Martin was there on that first day. And she has been in every class since, except one.

She loved to dance as a little girl, she recalls. So she showed up with a few other inmates, and when the beat dropped, she says she was floored.

"It shocked me. She gets down. She gets down," Martin says of Wallace. "I told everyone in my unit, 'We was doing this bird dance and leaping and stuff.' I was trying to show them, I was so excited about this class."

The class incorporates a variety of different dance styles set to different kinds of music, popular stuff, but with a positive or purposeful message. No vulgarities, although you'll hear radio-edit versions of Eminem and Bruno Mars.

Word spread, and the attendance grew to dozens. Martin began checking out the dance DVDs that Dance 2B Free left at the prison, for inmates to practice on the six other days of the week when class isn't offered. Martin memorized them all.

"It made me feel free. I was exhilarated by it," she says.

Today, Martin dances in the front row, a shadow of Wallace, never missing a move. Starting in January, she is enrolling in the next phase of the program: a teacher training. The nonprofit hopes to train five inmates to run the class for other inmates throughout the week. And, perhaps, to run classes for inmates — or the community — when they get out. Those details are unclear.

Jenna Noah, of Alchemy of Movement, helps get a group of inmates moving to the music. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

Martin says she has one year or so left in the Denver Women's Correctional Facility. She doesn't talk about her conviction. No one talks about their past here. Not during dance class.

The volunteers don't ask about the participants' backgrounds, says Nosal, a dancer and board member. On one hand, they were trained to just talk about the dance. On the other, it allows connection without judgment, they say.

"A woman gives me a high-five. I don't know who she is, and I don't have to know who she is," Nosal says. "I could make all kinds of assumptions about why a woman is in prison, but I don't. I think it's wonderful to put that aside and just try to do the same thing: right foot, left foot."

Some of these women are serving out convictions for first-degree murder. Others have life sentences. Others, like Martin, are nearing the end of their sentences. Nosal does not know why Martin is here, and she says she does not want to know.

"I can look at a woman, and I don't need to know about her past. I can just see her," Nosal says. "It's given me more compassion and a chance to be grateful for the choices and resources I've had."

'You don't feel so alone'

Chrystie Hardy's cheeks begin to flush red as the beat picks up. Her long blonde-brown hair is secured in a braid that is wrapped in a crown on the back of her head. She proudly nods to another inmate's braided updo that she did, too.

"I don't feel like I'm in prison for an hour on a Sunday, and I love that. I love the normalcy of that," Hardy says. "You don't feel so alone."

Like Martin, she is one of the program's avid recruiters. She says she even invited a former neighbor as a peace offering. That's whose hair she braided today.

A recent study published by the Royal Society, a fellowship of scientists around the world, found that dancing with others can bring participants closer together — and also raise pain tolerance.

To Hardy, the hour-long class is a reminder of what it feels like to be herself.

"We are actually humanized, treated like we're women. We are encouraged to be women, instead of being a DOC number," Hardy says. "We can dance with our heads up, regardless of whatever reason we are here."

There's a strange sense of innocence in this gym, Wallace says. The women are willing to be vulnerable and playful.

"Prison isn't the place to arch your back and lift your head up and lift out your arms. That's a really exposing thing to do," she says. "Plus, if someone's been traumatized, their body is a really scary place to be, and there's intelligent disassociation; there's a wisdom to not being in our bodies if they're not safe. I can see how they can slowly be back in their bodies."

Wallace teases that sometimes she feels like an undercover therapist. She doesn't call it therapy. But dance can dive right into the primal, nonverbal part of communication, she says.

Wallace has a master's degree in transpersonal psychology and has studied trauma. Many of the inmates are dealing with post-traumatic stress disorder, poverty, abuse, mental illness and high stress, she says.

"When you're dancing to Tupac or Adele, and we're arching or punching or kicking, that's so cathartic and so healing to the nonverbal part of trauma," Wallace says.

Dance 2B Free recently conducted a survey of the participants and found that some, like Martin, had seen their stress drop 80 to 100 percent. Others said they had seen improvements in mood, weight, coordination and relationships.

I understand others more, because this class gives me time to see them in a different light, Martin wrote.

Growth potential

About 1,500 of the 24,000 people imprisoned in Colorado are women, according to Department of Corrections records, including 961 at the Denver facility.

Organizers see the need for a program like Dance 2B Free, so classes are expanding. As many as 50 women have participated in the Denver sessions, and Dance 2B Free recently taught its first class at the La Vista Correctional Facility in Pueblo.

A program like this also promotes healthy social interactions with people outside of prison, says Lt. Gayle Ross, the recreational supervisor for the Denver facility.

Want to help? Alchemy of Movement is donating 10 percent of its proceeds to Dance 2B Free. You can take classes through Alchemy online or in the Boulder studio. The program also is looking for more volunteer dancers. Visit dance2bfree.org or alchemyofmovement.com/.

"Most all are going to leave, and when they do, do I want them institutionalized or with a set of skills to fit into society? That's why volunteers are so important. Otherwise, they just interact with staff and family, in a controlled environment," Ross says.

In the past, the prison has offered Zumba videos but nothing like Dance 2B Free, Ross says. The volunteers change everything, she says.

Luz Cisneros dances in the middle of the group, effortlessly and smoothly, her waist-length black hair flowing. After each song, she offers high-fives to the dancers around her, including the volunteers.

She says it means a lot to her that "normal" people are willing to share their time with people like her.

"A lot of people, they are afraid to cross that fence, and they are not willing or they don't have the time or they are so busy," Cisneros says. "And having these ladies in here giving their time to share with us, to interact with us, that says a lot, because we committed our crimes, but we are still human."

It shows her that people are not afraid of them, she says. That not everyone sees inmates as monsters. And in that, Cisneros says, she feels blessed.

"This hour, it might not be long, but it actually keep me going for the whole week," Cisneros says. "It fills me with positive energy, and it's something that is hard to find in this place. It's very hard."

This is a different side of prison that few people see, Lt. Ross says. The inmates' pasts are why they're here, but today, Ross talks about their future. If they don't succeed when they walk out the doors, Ross says, she has not succeeded at her job.

She says she hopes this program plays a role in rewriting the participants' stories.

Dance is special because it's both athletic and expressive, volunteer Nosal says, and the music is a bridge to the outside world. In the structure of a dance class, the prisoners have the freedom of choice. They dance together, yet all slightly differently.

"Dance allows for a combination of dependency and freedom, autonomy and conformity," Nosal says. "You can have it all in that little moment of the dance."

Aimee Heckel: 303-473-1359, heckela@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/aimeemay