While speaking at the Iowa State Fair on Friday, Sen. Ted Cruz, the Texas Republican running for the GOP presidential nomination, compared the current Obama administration to the Jimmy Carter administration, noting the similarities between the two. Despite being accurate in his assessment, liberals and the so-called "mainstream media" focused on the timing of his comments, which came one day after the former president publicly announced his cancer.

"I think where we are today is very, very much like the late 1970's. I think the parallels between this administration and the Carter administration are uncanny, same failed domestic policy, same misery, stagnation and malaise, same feckless and naive foreign policy," he said. "In fact, the exact same countries, Russia and Iran, openly laughing at and mocking the president of the United States." After pausing, he asked: "Why is it that that analogy gives me so much hope and encouragement?"

According to Bloomberg News, Cruz was not concerned about the timing of his comments. "We can always have a discussion about public policy," he told a reporter from the Des Moines Register.

"The public policy of the late 1970s didn't work," he said. "And the point that I made here that was so important is that in response to the failures of public policy in the late 1970s there was a grassroots movement of millions of men and women that rose up and became the Reagan revolution. And the same thing is happening today."

Predictably, the liberal "outrage machine" went into overdrive, attacking Cruz for making the statements so soon after Carter's announcement. "As we have pointed out, Ted Cruz is not very smart and timing is not necessarily his forte," said an article at Esquire. An article at the Daily Kos also attacked Cruz personally, calling him "the most repellent man in politics."

A post at the far-left Democratic Underground said Cruz "goes around with his wingnutty poppy and proclaims himself the epitome of Christianity on earth." The post also claimed that "the 'weak' Carter brokered the Camp David accords, ending decades of strife between Israel and Egypt. And he got the hostages home from Iran without dropping a single bomb, despite GOP attempts to creit (sic) Reagan for events that occurred before his swearing in."

What the DU poster failed to mention, however, is that the Iran crisis went on for over 440 days. Carter launched a rescue attempt in April 1980, but the effort failed. Eight U.S. servicemen were killed and the operation was called off. The hostages were not released until after Ronald Reagan was sworn into office, despite a December agreement. The embassy in Tehran is now an Islamic cultural center and museum.

Oddly enough, none of the media outlets reporting on the issue questioned the veracity of Cruz's statement. A Google search revealed that all of the reporting was centered on the timing of his comments. In short, Cruz told the truth and the left simply couldn't handle it.