ENLARGE From left: Andrea Silvestrelli, Iain Paterson, Melody Moore and Kristinn Sigmundsson. Lynn Lane

Das Rheingold

Houston Grand Opera

Through April 26

Houston

Richard Wagner's "Ring" is an Olympian task for any opera company. The Houston Grand Opera, which launched its first-ever performance of the cycle with "Das Rheingold" on Friday, upped the ante by importing a high-tech production from Europe. The staging, by La Fura dels Baus, a Barcelona theater company that works in unconventional settings and media, had its premiere in Valencia, Spain, in 2007-09 and was released on DVD in 2010; it is more European high-concept than U.S. representational in style, with lots of eye-catching video and acrobatics rather than built scenery. Director Carlus Padrissa, set designer Roland Olbeter, lighting designer Peter van Praet and video designer Franc Aleu floated an intriguing collection of images and ideas. Figuring out what the concept actually means, however, will have to wait for the subsequent operas, which are scheduled annually for the next three HGO seasons.

One conclusion that could be drawn so far is that the much-pursued gold is actually human capital. The three Rhinemaidens—suspended in individual plexiglass tubs full of water (they occasionally dive headfirst underwater, an impressive feat when one has to surface and then sing)—lay golden eggs, and a gigantic golden fetus appears in the video. Alberich renounces love and steals their egg sacs. In his underworld sweatshop—a monstrous people-making factory where the eggs are cloned (seen on video)—the resulting beings, acrobats hanging upside down on meathooks, are unceremoniously pushed across the back of the stage like so many sides of beef.

ENLARGE Stefan Margita and Iain Paterson. Lynn Lane

In Scene 4, these creatures—Alberich's treasure being handed over to the giants—crawl over one another like Pilobolus dancers to form a pile. Wotan, king of the gods, also trafficks in people, suggesting that neither of the two combatants for world domination has the moral edge: The video image of Valhalla looks like a head and torso formed of chickenwire mesh; in close-up, the material is revealed to be human figures holding hands and feet. Mr. Padrissa saves his most spectacular image for the finale, when 30 acrobats, suspended from the flies, form a cylindrical web that closes around the gods, bringing the video image to life.

Some of Mr. Padrissa's ideas are more problematic. Four of the gods— Wotan, Fricka, Donner and Froh—stand stiffly on cherry-picker platforms at the ends of cranes that are raised, lowered and wheeled around by large men. (Freia, a pawn in Wotan's strategy, does not have her own crane, and runs to the others for protection; Loge, a red-haired demigod, zips around on something like a Segway.) The gods are thus elevated above the stage, suggesting their status, but the device also isolates and physically constrains the singers, making it difficult for them to interact. Coupled with Chu Oroz's unattractively bulky, quasi-Space Age costumes, including some dubious cone headdresses, this restriction on movement and physical expressivity made the long, talky stretches of "Rheingold" seem even longer. For all the talk of love and its renunciation, there wasn't much warmth in the look of the show, especially given the chilly lighting.

Patrick Summers, HGO's artistic and music director, likes to offer singers the invaluable opportunity to try out new roles, and a number of his "Ring" artists were singing their parts for the first time, contributing to a sense that the musical performance was a work in progress. Of this roster of solid singers, only Stefan Margita, who has also sung Loge in San Francisco and New York, made one spring to attention with his bright, flexible tenor, lyricism and excellent diction. (He also had the Segway advantage—his movement was allowed to be as sly and slippery as his character.) As Wotan, bass-baritone Iain Paterson sounded steely and imperious; Jamie Barton displayed a big, resonant mezzo as Fricka. Baritone Christopher Purves brought a strong sense of textual line to Alberich, but not the necessary weight and menace.

As the giants, Kristinn Sigmundsson (a smooth-toned Fasolt) and Andrea Silvestrelli (a raggedy-sounding Fafner) were confined in giant Transformer-like bodies. Rodell Rosel was a light-voiced, appropriately whiny Mime and Melody Moore a shrieky Freia; contralto Meredith Arwady hooted a bit as Erda. Ryan McKinny and Chad Shelton rounded out the Valhalla contingent creditably as Donner and Froh. Andrea Carroll, Catherine Martin and Renée Tatum deserve special credit for brightly singing the Rhinemaidens' music while gamely performing underwater somersaults.

Also a work in progress is the performance of the Houston Grand Opera Orchestra, which sounded thin and textureless under the direction of Mr. Summers. The opening bars—a low-pitched, slow-building groan in the dark—went nowhere, and there were a number of alarming cracked notes from the horns. The pace was slow, the opulence and dramatic tension of Wagner's score rarely in evidence. Most of the dynamic excitement was in the video images—a vertiginous plunge to the center of the earth, a fiery eclipse, a swirling hurricane. It did not find its counterpoint in the music, and we don't go to the opera just for movies and acrobats.

Mr. Waleson writes about opera for the Journal.