Rep. Alan Nunnelee, R-Miss. (Photo: Bruce Newman, AP)

WASHINGTON — Rep. Alan Nunnelee, a Mississippi Republican and part of the historic 2010 GOP wave election that gave the party control of the House, died Friday. He was 56.

"Congressman Alan Nunnelee has gone home to be with Jesus. He was well loved and will be greatly missed," said a statement from his family.

Nunnelee, who was serving his third term, underwent brain surgery last June and had been in and out of hospitals and rehabilitation centers the past year.

He was hospitalized again Dec. 28 in Mississippi and was unable to take the oath of office for the 114th Congress on Jan. 6 with other lawmakers. Nunnelee was sworn in a week later by U.S. District Judge Michael P. Mills at the North Mississippi Medical Center in Tupelo.

President Obama released a statement Friday afternoon calling Nunnelee a "proud son of Tupelo."

"Alan never wavered in his determination to serve the men and women who placed their trust in him, even as he bravely battled the illness that ultimately took his life. As a Sunday School teacher and a deacon at his church, Alan believed deeply in the power of faith and the strength of American families," the president said.

Mississippi Gov. Phil Bryant called Nunnelee "the best man I have ever known."

"Alan Nunnelee has been like a brother to me and was one of my dearest friends and companions," Bryant said. "I will miss him greatly. Deborah and I are praying for Tori and their children."

Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, on Friday asked that flags over the Capitol be flown at half-staff in Nunnelee's honor. Boehner said in a statement that Nunnelee "was the rare calming presence in the cauldron of politics. He never let cancer get the best of him."

Bryant has 60 days to order a special election to fill Nunnelee's seat. By state law, the governor must schedule that election to take place at least 60 days from the date he issues his order.

A former Mississippi state senator, Nunnelee served on the powerful House Appropriations Committee. He was vice chairman of the panel's Subcommittee on Energy and Water Development and Related Agencies.

In 2011, Nunnelee, a fiscal conservative, was one of three GOP freshmen given a coveted seat on the Appropriations Committee.

Nunnelee, who unseated Democratic Rep. Travis Childers in 2010 to win his seat, was "highly respected in the House,'' former Mississippi senator Trent Lott said recently.

A member of the conservative Republican Study Committee, Nunnelee represented the mostly rural 1st District in northern Mississippi. Before that, he served in the state Senate from 1995 to 2011 and was chairman of the state Senate Appropriations Committee from 2008 to 2011.

After first arriving in Congress, Nunnelee drew a decidedly unlucky number in the lottery for House office suites: No. 84 out of 85.

"That's why I stay away from the casinos," he joked at the time. But he said he didn't care where his office was, "as long as the front door says 'Member of Congress.' "

Keeping Rep. Nunnelee's family in my thoughts during this terrible time. No one should lose a husband or father so young. #beatcancer — D Wasserman Schultz (@DWStweets) February 6, 2015

Thoughts and prayers with Alan Nunnelee's family. My 2010 House classmate was a good man, represented his district well. — Tim Scott (@SenatorTimScott) February 6, 2015

Thoughts & prayers go out to the family of @RepAlanNunnelee who passed today. He will be missed by all who had the privilege of knowing him — Rep. Bill Huizenga (@RepHuizenga) February 6, 2015

Nunnelee was known as an amiable congressman who often talked publicly about his faith. He opposed abortion and said he was proud of his work as a state lawmaker to regulate abortions in Mississippi.

As chairman of the state Senate Public Health Committee, he led efforts in 2007 to revamp the state health department. He also was a leader in tort reform efforts in the Mississippi Legislature.

Democratic state Sen. Hob Bryan recalled Nunnelee's sense of fairness and propriety that he said transcended politics and partisanship.

"He cared very much about the process, about making sure everyone was treated with respect and dignity," said Bryan, a good friend of Nunnelee's.

Bryan recalled that when Nunnelee was chairman of the state Appropriations Committee, he approached him about proposed changes to Senate rules and asked his input.

"He was concerned with propriety, that the procedures were fair so that any lawmaker, even if they weren't in the leadership and no matter their party got a fair shot at convincing others,'' Bryan said.

Bryan said he was sad to see Nunnelee leave for Congress. "I told him, you're ruining two perfectly good legislative bodies," Bryan said. "He knew what I meant.''

Heartbroken by the passing of my friend, colleague and brother in Christ @RepAlanNunnelee Comforted knowing he's in heaven today. — Richard Hudson (@RepRichHudson) February 6, 2015

Please join me in saying a prayer for @RepAlanNunnelee's wife (Tori), his children (Reed, Nathan, & Emily), his family, staff, and friends. — Rep. Bradley Byrne (@RepByrne) February 6, 2015

Have just been told that we lost my friend Alan Nunnelee as he has gone home to be with Jesus. Prayers for his strong + faith led family — Rep. Robert Aderholt (@Robert_Aderholt) February 6, 2015

Alan Nunnelee was my close friend and confidant for 33 years. Gayle and I will truly miss him. http://t.co/16SdFcuQK0 — Senator Roger Wicker (@SenatorWicker) February 6, 2015

In Congress, Nunnelee joined other GOP freshmen in pushing Republican leaders for more spending cuts.

"There may have been an attitude in this town at one time that freshmen are to be seen and not heard, but I don't think that's the case with this leadership team and with this Republican Congress," Nunnelee said in 2010 interview with Gannett. "We are the group of people that put the Republicans into the majority and we are a reflection of the concerns of the American people."

A year into his first term, Nunnelee said he felt frustrated with the partisanship in Washington.

A graduate of Clinton High School and Mississippi State University, Nunnelee was in the insurance business in Tupelo for many years. He later won the state Senate seat (representing Lee and Pontotoc counties) that Republican Roger Wicker had held before Wicker won election to the U.S. House in 1994.

Nunnelee joined Wicker, now a senator, on the campaign trail last June for Republican Sen. Thad Cochran.

Sen. Thad Cochran, R-Miss., right, talks with Rep. Alan Nunnelee, left, and his wife Tori, center, while campaigning on May 31, 2014 in Oxford, Miss. (Photo: Rogelio V. Solis, AP)

Nunnelee easily won his last two House elections. In 2012, he defeated Democrat Brad Morris, Childers' former chief of staff.

John Bruce, chair of the political science department at the University of Mississippi, described Nunnelee as a "solid member of Congress,'' whose legislative style was much more understated than other lawmakers.

"He's never been flashy. He's never been at the front of big high-profile issues,'' said Bruce. "He's more of a quiet guy.''

During his congressional career, Nunnelee voted with Republicans on most issues, including the push to repeal the 2010 Affordable Care Act, which he called "a train wreck.''

He also supported legislation to delay increases in federal flood insurance premiums for many homeowners. He voted for a five-year farm bill that ended direct payments to farmers and expanded popular crop insurance programs while cutting federal food assistance. Both bills ultimately became law.

Nunnelee said the farm bill was "far from perfect," but would provide some certainty to the state's agricultural industry.

Last May, Nunnelee sought care at a Washington hospital for nausea and fatigue. His office said then that doctors had found a "small intracranial mass'' on the right side of his brain.

Nunnelee underwent brain surgery in June at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, then went to a rehabilitation center there. That same month, he transferred to Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore, where he received chemotherapy and radiation.

Nunnelee had been receiving speech and mobility therapy in Mississippi and Washington. He returned to his congressional office on Nov. 12, working for several weeks before the chamber left for a holiday break Dec. 12.

During that time, Congress approved measures proposed by Nunnelee, including one to clarify language that will allow trucks with special permits to continue carrying additional weight from Highway 78 to Interstate 22 in Mississippi. That measure became law.

Another of Nunnelee's measures, to transfer 172 acres of the Yellow Creek Port area to the state, also became law last year.

Nunnelee's health declined again over the holidays.

In early January, his office said the congressman was being treated in Tupelo for a hematoma — a swelling of clotted blood caused by a break in a blood vessel —in his left leg that had developed over the holidays.

Earlier in life, Nunnelee began losing his eyesight to a degenerative disease, keratoconus, and he became legally blind while a student at Mississippi State University. His eyesight was restored through corneal transplants in 1980 and 1982.

Nunnelee is survived by his wife, Tori, and three children, Reed, Emily and Nathan.

Geoff Pender reports for the (Jackson, Miss.) Clarion Ledger.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1D5X20A