Investors, entrepreneurs and physicians at HIMSS tried to see the future through a stethoscope.

As more than 40,000 attendees roamed McCormick Place on Tuesday, speakers at the Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society conference discussed the next wave of wearable devices, healthcare investing and the future of telehealth. The conference continues through Thursday.

At a discussion on the next generation of wearables and how they’ll use sensors and human interaction, Striiv cofounder and CEO Dave Wang said new technology is allowing healthcare service and product providers to interact with consumers for better outcomes.

"Two-way communication is really important for wellness," he said. "You're basically engaging members and patients on the wrist."

Wellness can be boosted through programs including Balance Rewards at Walgreens, which sends reminders via buzzes or messages on wearable devices to remind patients to take medication or complete other health-related activities. Customers who monitor blood pressure, weigh in, and track runs or bike rides can receive reward points redeemable at stores.

"You want to have little light interaction with the user," he said.

The theme of data carried over to a panel on healthcare investing, where Pritzker Group Venture Capital partner Adam Koopersmith talked about the changes brought on by the Affordable Care Act and the increasing use of wearables and electronic medical records.

“The ‘quantified self’ movement has created millions and billions of data points around consumer health that just didn’t exist a while ago,“ he said. “I think we’re finding that as consumers are becoming more influential in the healthcare system, a lot of the traditional B2B players in the markets — whether that’s providers or insurance carriers — need to have a much more consumer-facing orientation.”

At a panel called “Telehealth Turnabout,” panelists from Pager, Optimized Care Network, the Mid-Atlantic Telehealth Resource Center and Chicago-based Zest Health talked about new innovations and challenges in the movement.

Kathy Hsu Wibberly, director of the Mid-Atlantic Telehealth Resource Center, said that though patients are collecting large amounts of data, physicians aren’t always equipped to use that data.

“That whole realm of patient-generated health data — people don’t know what to do with it right now,” Wibberly said.

She said large insurance-plan providers are beginning to contract with telehealth providers to better connect data and in-person care.

“I think we’re seeing a big move, but it’s still spotty,” Wibberly said. “It’s huge in one area but barely exists in another area.”

Pager’s chief medical officer, Richard Boxer, said better integration of data may come as younger doctors enter the workforce.

“As doctors over 50 start to retire and the new ones come on, all that will be technologically feasible [and] acceptable,” Boxer said. “It took doctors 18 years to accept the stethoscope. What’s going to happen with telemedicine?”

Meanwhile, Cook Children's Health Care System in Fort Worth, Texas, is having success with self-serve check-in kiosks, said Theresa Meadows, the hospital and clinic system’s senior vice president and CIO, at another session. Users are cutting the time they spend in registration and are paying their fees on the spot, she said.

“Why shouldn’t the hospital be like that? Why shouldn’t you be able to register for your appointment online, show up to your organization, check in, pay your fee, and then go straight to the appointment?” she asked.

She said the kiosks have logged about 100,000 check-ins since they were connected to the system's centralized registration process in 2013. She also said they’ve helped the system increase its upfront co-pay collections.

“People thought they weren’t going to pay a $10,000 co-pay at a kiosk,” Meadows said. “And they do. They swipe their credit cards. People are paying significant dollar amounts at these kiosks on the front end, which is a huge thing on the revenue side. You don’t have to wait 35 days or 40 days to receive your copayment. It makes a big difference.”

Jackson is a freelance writer for Blue Sky.