Buy Photo Want to fix Michigan cities? Here's how (Photo: Detroit Free Press)Buy Photo

What happened in Flint? The city was broke. Gov. Rick Snyder appointed an emergency manager, with the high-minded goal of balancing the city’s books. But with no new cash, the only choices were cuts. And so the EM — with the sign-off of the state’s environmental regulatory agency — left the Detroit water system, thinking Flint would save money.



What happened in Flint, where foul water still flows from taps in people’s homes? There’s a long chain of government responsibility. But trace that chain far enough, and you’ll find Flint’s problems rooted firmly in the spectacular disinvestment Michigan has visited on cities for decades.

Flint’s the worst iteration of Michigan’s failure to care for its cities. City officials should never be looking over their books trying to find ways to save money on clean water. But those are the kinds of choices the state’s strained relationship with its cities demands local governments make.

The trouble in Michigan’s cities has been a slow degradation of state support — which escalated during the gubernatorial terms of John Engler and Jennifer Granholm — combined with tight restrictions on the ways cities can find revenue for themselves.

Census data shows Michigan ranks dead last over the past 10 years in municipal revenue growth and state investment in local government.

The only way to change that is to switch the policy direction, and that has to come from Lansing.

State government, rather than making life harder for cities, needs to focus on ways to help cities deliver the services their citizens need without the constant specter of financial peril.

To date, Gov. Rick Snyder’s administration has over-relied on limited tools like the emergency-manager law to deal with cities’ troubles once they reach the level of catastrophe. But there’s no long-term urban policy vision coming from the governor or anyone around him.

Most Democrats, meanwhile, have been vague and sheepish about consistently articulating a better path.

If Michigan were to embrace a strategy of reinvesting in its cities, giving them the resources they’d need to deliver services and balance their budgets, it would begin with three significant policy changes.

Fix revenue sharing

Here’s how Michigan cities get the funds they use to provide basic services like police and fire protection, parks and, yep, clean, safe water: Property taxes (capped by state law to the rate of inflation, crippled by the 2008 housing crash) and revenue sharing. In other words, there’s a slew of taxes the state collects on behalf of, and then dispenses to, cities, via two formulas. One is a per-capita distribution enshrined in the state constitution. The other is statutory — that means the amount of money dispensed by the state is set each year by the governor and the Legislature.

And when Michigan fell on hard times, as the recession of the early 2000s began, the state made cuts to the services it provides — but it also filched from cities, cutting statutory revenue sharing more deeply each year.

How to fix it?

Stop shortchanging cities.

“The only thing standing in the way of funding revenue sharing is what the governor and legislature prioritize,” said Tony Minghine, associate executive director and chief operating officer at the Michigan Municipal League. “And right now they prioritize state government more than services people use every day. … Over 80% of (gross domestic product) occurs in cities, but we don’t invest in those places to make them attractive.”

But there are some caveats, says Eric Lupher, president of the nonpartisan Citizens Research Council.

“We have gone for so long just giving governments (roughly) whatever they got the year before,” Lupher said. “We need to make sure there’s a rational way of distributing it to governments weighted to need.”

Population density, he said, correlates consistently with the demand on city services — that’s one approach to resetting statutory revenue sharing.

There’s no question that boosting revenue sharing would mean cuts at the state level. But, as Minghine notes, it’s a matter of priorities, and cities have fallen at the bottom of the heap for too long.

Fix retirement benefits

Even Michigan’s most prosperous cities struggle to pay the cost of retiree health care, promises made to workers to provide health care long after they stop working.

Statewide, cities are an estimated $8 billion in the hole on the projected 30-year cost of delivering this benefit.

But because of the way the cost of health care increases — outpacing the rate of inflation — budgeting for retiree health care has daunted Michigan cities. There are two ways to fund retiree health care: setting aside a sum each year sufficient to ensure benefits can be paid over the next 30 years, or paying the required sum each year. Most cities choose the latter. That’s a problem, again, because of the way health-care costs balloon.

“We need to think about it differently,” Minghine said. “Health care has proven to be, and will continue to be, a very expensive benefit no one has real control over. ... Re-thinking how we deliver that benefit and making it applicable statewide is the only way to really change that."

The state, Minghine said, should mandate how cities deliver that benefit, and should explore options like a stipend-based approach that would provide solid health-care benefits, perhaps through the Affordable Care Act’s health care exchanges: "That would go a long way toward making local governments a lot more stable."

Altering future benefits, he said, would be coupled with an influx of state cash to cities currently struggling to fund retiree health care, probably via a bond sale to fund health-care benefits for current retirees.

But, he said, the state also has to change the way cities bargain for health-care benefits: “If they’re still subject to bargaining, all you’re doing is resetting the clock for one day. All the same pressures that caused this benefit to get out of control start all over again.”

Make like a region and work together

Michigan has more than 1,700 units of local government, each with its own services and employees, complicated retirement plans and other administrative costs.

That's not just too many in absolute terms. It’s also detrimental because of history.

Many of our divisions of government, for instance, owe their existence to racial and economic divides that sow current animosities.

And the combination of hyper-local government and federal policies that discouraged investment in urban centers has created the economic chasms that have swallowed up cities like Flint and Detroit, while wealthier suburbs thrived.

Big cities in Michigan would inarguably benefit from a stronger emphasis on regional governance by dealing smaller suburbs into the mix. Solidifying the common destinies of cities and their suburbs in governmental structure reinforces the idea of necessary cooperation.

But entire regions would benefit, too. Think of the possibilities for better transit, for instance, with fewer governmental divisions to deal with.

For some cities, this is likely to become a matter of survival. Think of a place like Wayne, for instance, a small carve-out that’s sandwiched between Westland, Garden City, Romulus and Inkster.

The services it provides to its citizens, historically, were subsidized largely by personal property tax receipts from the two Ford plants that are within its borders.

But the repeal of that tax will leave Wayne, and many cities like it, with less reliable revenue. The rollback starts this year and will continue until 2023, when the tax phases out completely.

Wayne will need help if it is to survive as its own municipality. But what’s the reason for it to be separate, as a government, from the communities around it? Services could be provided to its citizens more cheaply, especially in the long-term, if it were to outright consolidate with another city.

The hurdles to this kind of cooperation are often too high at the local level to produce any meaningful change. If you want to start a fight in Michigan, just suggest that the five Grosse Pointes should be one, or that Royal Oak Township ought to be part of Ferndale, or that Flint and Flushing Township or Grand Blanc Township ought to share a tax base.

That’s where the state has to lead.

Gov. Snyder’s administration has tried by offering small incentives to cities that share services. A more sensible policy would provide bigger carrots for cities that merge altogether, and at least contemplate penalties for places that insist on maintaining hyper-local division.

State policy needs to make it clearer that regional governance is more than just a pipe dream or slogan. It should be what’s encouraged, and even demanded, to keep cities in better financial health.

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1NfRp8c