Delegate holds town hall meeting, without a hall

By Janeal Downs

Capital News Service

RICHMOND – Several legislators representing Southwest Virginia discussed their plans to help the coal industry and fielded complaints about cellphone service and gun laws at a town hall meeting with thousands of people Tuesday. And the lawmakers did it without leaving Del. Terry Kilgore’s office.

They joined Kilgore, a Republican from Gate City, in his annual “telephone town hall.” Kilgore said almost 3,000 constituents called in from 7 p.m. to 8 p.m. as he spoke about his plans for the 2015 General Assembly session and listened to residents’ questions and comments.

Also on the line were Sen. Charles W. Carrico Sr., R-Galax; Sen. A. Benton Chafin Jr., R-Lebanon; Del. Todd E. Pillion, R-Abingdon; and Del. Jeffrey L. Campbell, R-Marion. A staff member of U.S. Rep. Morgan Griffith, who represents Southwest Virginia’s 9th Congressional District, also attended.

A key topic was the coal industry. Republicans say the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency has declared a “war on coal” and imposed costly regulations on the industry.

“We’re all working hard up here to create jobs and keep our coal miners at work,” Kilgore said. “It’s been a battle for us with the state fighting the federal regulations that are going into play.”

Chafin said the EPA wants “to basically shut down our coal industries.” Southwest Virginia lawmakers are countering with legislation to protect coal production.

For example, Kilgore is sponsoring House Bill 1879, which would extend Virginia’s coalfield employment enhancement tax credit program until the year 2022. (The tax credit is set to expire in 2017.)

“It’s very important to us to keep the coal industries until we can see a change in administration in Washington, D.C.,” Chafin said. “And it’s critical that we do it because electricity running depends on it; our employment depends on it; and our livelihood depends on.”

Kilgore said coal is not the only item on his energy agenda. He is among 14 legislators – Republican and Democrats – sponsoring HB 1665, which would provide loans for “clean energy programs.”

Kilgore said he also is looking into natural gas and offshore oil. He called himself “one of those guys that’s ‘all of the above’ ” on energy issues.

“How are we going to make sure that our children have the opportunity to work in coal or in the coal areas or just work in manufacturing?” Kilgore asked. “It’s all important stuff that we think about every day, and we are trying to fight the administration in Washington.”

By telephone, one resident asked about programs to teach manufacturing jobs to high school graduates and unemployed miners. Kilgore responded that his office has been working with schools, such as Mountain Empire Community College, on such training programs.

Pillion added, “That’s definitely something that we’re all focusing on. Even the governor’s focusing on workforce development. We’re all making sure that he keeps that in the budget.”

During the town hall, residents raised a few other concerns: about improving spotty cellphone service in mountainous areas; about raising the speed limits on some roads; and about when Lee County Hospital might be reopened (Kilgore said he hopes in July).

Besides taking comments and questions, Kilgore polled his constituents on a few issues:

One involved Gov. Terry McAuliffe’s proposal to reinstate Virginia’s prohibition against buying more than one handgun per month. More than 80 percent of the town hall participants opposed the limit on gun purchases.

Kilgore also asked about expanding Medicare, the health coverage program for low-income people, as part of the federal Affordable Care Act. Of the respondents, 56 percent opposed expanding Medicare and 44 percent were OK with the idea.

Written by: Editor on January 23, 2015.

Comments

comments