It is 51 years since that fateful day in Dallas when President John F. Kennedy was assassinated, quelling the hopes of a new generation of Americans and changing the direction and future of the country. That horrific murder was just one of a long series of tragedies endured by the Kennedy family, tragedies which seem to never end.

It started in 1944 during World War II when Joseph Kennedy Jr. volunteered for a dangerous bombing mission and was killed when explosives detonated early;Kathleen Kennedy was killed in a plane crash during a storm in 1948;

Rosemary Kennedy was born with intellectual disabilities and was permanently incapacitated after a failed pre-frontal lobotomy at 23;

Robert Kennedy was murdered in Los Angeles in 1968 when running for President and Edward Kennedy drove a car off a bridge and into the channel at Chappaquiddick Island which resulted in the death of Mary Jo Kopechne. Imagine just one of these incidents happening to your family and trying to overcome it. These tragedies left deep emotional and mental scars on the Kennedy family which they continue to deal with on a daily basis.

The result for many of the next generation of Kennedys was drug and alcohol abuse. For Patrick Kennedy, son of Senator Edward Kennedy, it was alcohol abuse coupled with his bipolar disorder that created major mood swings.

In 1995, Patrick was able to manage his issues and was elected into the U.S. Congress where, given his knowledge of mental health, he became the chief sponsor of the Mental Health Parody Act. "There was no-one else lining up to head that up," said a smiling Patrick Kennedy, who spoke recently at the City Club of Chicago to introduce an expert panel on Children and Mental Health. "None of the other congressional representatives wanted the term 'mental health' next to their name."

Patrick has learned well from his father. When he stepped up to the podium that morning to introduce the panel of mental health experts, he brought an energy and dynamic speaking ability that grabbed his audience and held them for every word. Certainly there were people like me there, who couldn’t help but see his father and uncles in his speech – the Kennedy look, mannerisms, inflection. It’s a very inspiring thing to watch.

Patrick wasn't there to gloss over their family tragedies. He used the experience to make his point about mental health. He talked about his father and cousins who were traumatized by those killings and how badly it devastated their lives.

You know from watching the news the result of that devastation.If you watch Robert Kennedy Junior talk, that’s the audio-visual that says he is victim, survivor and fighter. As Patrick points out, take the Kennedy experience and apply to all of those families on the south side of Chicago who are experiencing the same thing with members of their families being shot and killed. It affects the families. It affects the communities they live in.

Patrick is quite forthright in his description of his experience. His father, who Patrick said was obviously greatly affected by the assassinations of his two brothers, took on health care in America. Ted Kennedy served in Congress for 47 years. He worked with Hilary Clinton during President Bill Clinton’s presidency to try and get that health care bill passed. It failed. He worked with President Barack Obama to pass the Affordable Care Act and lived long enough to see it signed into law.

The Lion of the Senate fought brain cancer and died in August of 2009. Although John F. Kennedy was a tremendous speaker, I believe Teddy was the best, most dynamic speaker of the Kennedy boys.

Patrick received some of that great talent from his father and was voted in as the youngest member of Congress, fourth youngest in history, representing Rhode Island’s 1st Congressional District for 16 years beginning in 1995. When his father lost his battle with cancer, Patrick was able to take a step back and look at his own life. He has struggled with alcohol addiction and bipolar disorder. The stress of working in Congress was exacerbating those issues for him. When he stepped away from Congress in 2011, he was able to stop drinking for three-and-a-half years, the longest he has ever gone. He says not being in Congress has also helped him avoid some of the mood swings he is prone to due to his bipolar disorder.

In the tradition of his father's fight for affordable health care, Patrick is using his celebrity and talents to spotlight mental health care in America and the need for a preventative model.

In 2013, he started The Kennedy Forum Illinois on the 50th anniversary of President Kennedy signing the Community Mental Health Act, a landmark law that laid the foundation of contemporary mental health policy. The Kennedy Forum will advance the work that President Kennedy began, striving for new achievements in mental health care.

“We need to develop a preventative strategy for mental health,” said Patrick with great energy and vigor, making a passionate appeal to the medical, government and business audience in front of him. “The brain needs to be part of the medicine and should be covered. Many children suffer from a toxic experience growing up that damages their mental health throughout their lives. We need to move from a sick health care system to well health care system. It reduces costs. There is a strong business case to be made here. It’s sound economics. We have the Milliman reports to prove it. We need to wrap around whole health care to include mental health care which is the value-add for the other diseases like diabetes, hypertension and cardiovascular disease. We need doctors telling kids it’s okay to have a psychiatric problem. Your brain is working differently and we know how to fix it. We have to get past the stigma.”

Patrick's main message is that during well-care visits patients need to get a “check-up from the neck-up.” He and the other advocates for improved mental health care across the nation would like a mental health screening to be part of every well care visit, just like they check each patient for high blood pressure, diabetes and heart issues. He and the many advocates he works with believe this can head off the effects of mental illness before they are allowed to perpetuate. They can practice well care instead of sick care.

For more information, go to www.thekennedyforumillinois.org.