The Doctor Is On: An Exchange

To the Editor:

Eric Topol’s vision of patients remotely transmitting diagnosis- and treatment-enabling data — discussed in Sandeep Jauhar’s review of “The Patient Will See You Now” (Feb. 15) — has long been a necessity in the Australian outback, where the closest hospital is often hundreds of miles from rural homesteads. Even the Royal Flying Doctor Service could take hours to arrive in a case of serious illness or injury.

As a retrieval and clinical coordination physician, I have overseen resuscitation attempts in remote clinics using wide-screen high-quality televideo, supporting inexperienced clinical staff. Ward rounds in small critical-care units include a “walkabout” video robot controlled by an intensive-care physician at the referral hospital. However, cues from touching and examining a patient remain elusive even with the best digital relays from telemedicine facilities, let alone the small flickering screen of a smartphone. For instance, feeling a rapid, thready pulse in a shocked patient would be near impossible to achieve even with the best digital technology. Real-time collection and review of personal, emotional, physiological and diagnostic data could be improved using seamless smartphone integration with medical care. It seems safe, efficient and cost-effective only for outpatient and primary practice care. Using remote telemedicine as a guide, smartphone-enabled care may be of early benefit for critically ill patients who face substantial time and distance obstacles to expert care.

There are arguments that countermand the public health benefits of life-logging. For example, vigilant surveillance risks aggravating those inclined to anxiety or hypochondria. Topol is to be commended for starting the conversation on deploying information technology in the service of improved health care, even if this risks undermining society’s reliance on the medical profession and its long-held prestige.

JOSEPH TING

BRISBANE, AUSTRALIA

The writer is a clinical senior lecturer in the Division of Anesthesiology and Critical Care at the University of Queensland Medical School.

◆

To the Editor:

I support patient empowerment, but I would point out that it is not ordering tests and seeing results, but knowing which tests to order and how to interpret and act upon those results that is the essence of health care. Simply ordering tests is expensive and sometimes risky, and they are often subject to insurance company ­“authorization.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

It is difficult for patients to understand these complexities, even when they are carefully explained. The ability to understand and respond to findings is the underlying goal of medical school, residency, advanced training and the lifelong learning that doctors work constantly to achieve.

STEVEN M. SCHIFF

FOUNTAIN VALLEY, CALIF.

The writer is chairman of the department of medicine and medical director of the cardiac catheterization laboratory at Orange Coast Memorial Medical Center.

◆

To the Editor:

Contrary to what Sandeep Jauhar’s review suggests, patients have always had access to their medical records. The Affordable Care Act now requires doctors and hospitals to have an electronic portal that patients can use to check on labs, schedule appointments and send questions to their physicians.

But patients are not using these applications in the numbers that had been hoped. Even if they do, most patients have no idea what they are looking at or what the labs mean. The latest Cochrane Review, looking at studies of patient engagement and compliance, has not shown that anything works.

One of the biggest obstacles to the adoption of technology is that not everyone has access to a fancy smartphone or knows how to use one. Somehow, I don’t see my 86-year-old mother plugging into her doctor’s office to update her medical data.

Until patients are willing to take responsibility for their health and their health care, there will be no revolution in medicine.

BETH DOLLINGER

ELMIRA, N.Y.

The writer is an orthopedic surgeon.

◆

To the Editor:

Eric Topol’s book, which I have read, and Sandeep Jauhar’s review both fail to mention the role of managed care in the ability of patients and doctors to make clinical care decisions. That 800-pound gorilla has been in the room for the past 40 years, making it difficult to base care decisions on anything other than money.

It’s great for patients to generate digital data and have access to their electronic medical records, but the reality is that the H.M.O. medical director, or the hospital administrator running the accountable care organization, will have more say in clinical decision-making than either the patient or her doctor.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

And the guidelines that the managed care entity uses will all be trade secrets or proprietary — a most unscientific state of affairs not likely to advance “evidence based” clinical decision-making.

When a doctor signs on with a managed care entity, an essential element of the contract is that the entity has the ultimate say over every medical decision. Until Drs. Topol, Jauhar and others figure out a way around this hard fact, all the hand-held technology in the world won’t give patients more autonomy.

BRANT S. MITTLER

SAN ANTONIO

The writer is a practicing attorney and an M.D.