Critical Dyegest Angela Dye's blog is part of our Purple Wisconsin project. Dye loves to ask tough questions and critically examine social-structural systems that impact individual development and individual responsibility. SHARE

By

I remember in my early years of teaching, a group of us gathered in the teacher’s lounge and argued if Christmas was a religious or secular tradition. What made the debate interesting was that we were all teaching at a Catholic school which at the time seemed only reasonable to give Christmas a holy recognition. Regardless if you feel that Christmas is a holy celebration or a secular one, I thought today, in the midst of the holiday season, was a good time to recognize the act and value of gift giving.



Gift Giving

Christian or not, many people know the story of baby Jesus lying in a manager who was visited upon by three wise men bearing gifts. And, of course, it would be hard pressed to find someone who has not heard of the Little Drummer Boy, a song that talks about the meager means of a little boy who played the drums for the Christ child in the absence of having any other gift to bring.

Gift giving is an act of showing love. Gifts can be commercial-- purchased from a store and wrapped in a fancy box. Gifts can be monetary-- placed in an envelope, allowing the recipient to use at his or discretion. Finally, gifts can be an act of service—where we package and offer our time and talents.



Giving Time and Talent for a Cause

Most of us give gifts to people we know. And, of course, we take pleasure in trying to find that perfect gift that is befitting of the person’s needs or interests. So we take the time to figure it out. As a result, it isn’t just the gift that has value but it is also the time and thoughtfulness that went into the process that also has value.

I think the same act of love can be given for a cause, an organization, and a movement. I personally have a long history of giving my time and talent to help out various causes. Of course, particularly when I was younger, I volunteered my time in exchange for an opportunity to network and develop new skills. And, now that I am older and seasoned, I still volunteer. I believe it is the best way to act out my convictions and commit to those things in which I deeply believe.

I recently read an article that talked about the challenges of volunteerism. Some were arguing that volunteers are exploited as free labor and people with coveted skill-sets were encouraged away from sharing their talents without compensation. While I do think that one has to be careful with what s/he freely offers, I also think giving away one’s talents and gifts for a worthy cause is truly an act of love.

There are non-profit organizations that would benefit greatly from grants and donations but it takes resources to access them. As a result, many movements and causes for disadvantaged communities are self-sponsored or operate off of shoe-string budgets. If there is a cause in which you support, find a nonprofit organization that does not yet have all the bells and whistles. Offer your time and talents as a gift knowing that your specific talents and skills may be the love they need to move to the next level.

Conclusion and Considerations

In my work toward student empowerment and community transformation, I have been graced with men and women who have gifted me with their talents. Whether this is your area or not, please find an organization that could benefit from having your active support. Organizations are out there that need your talents as gifts, so please consider it!

If not you, then who? If not now, then when? Be the difference and make a difference! You have so much to offer!

In signing off this week, I pray that all reading these words will have a safe and happy holidays. Be merry and may your gifts be plentiful!



[Note: In the comment section, please share links to any organizations you think could benefit from volunteers offering their time and talent.]



Editor's Note: Purple Wisconsin is a collection of community bloggers with views from across the political spectrum. The Journal Sentinel hosts these blogs as a way to encourage thoughtful debate about the important issues facing Wisconsin and the Milwaukee region. The opinions voiced here are those of the individual bloggers alone; they are responsible for their posts. The Journal Sentinel does not edit or direct the bloggers in any fashion.