AUBURN – There are obvious differences among the four announced Republican candidates for the northeast Indiana seat in the U.S. House.

Two are men, and two are women. They range in age from 35 to 59. Their heights are different.

But the candidates hit on similar right-wing themes Wednesday during brief speeches to a luncheon program sponsored by the GOP 3rd District Finance Committee. They talked about wanting to repeal the Affordable Care Act, reduce federal spending, beef up the military, secure the nation's borders and protect gun-ownership rights.

Taken together, they sounded a lot like the conservative Republican congressman they hope to replace: third-term Rep. Marlin Stutzman, who will run next year for an open seat in the U.S. Senate rather than seek re-election in the 3rd District.

State Sens. Jim Banks of Columbia City and Liz Brown of Fort Wayne, former Wisconsin state senator Pam Galloway of Warsaw and manufacturing supervisor Scott Wise of Columbia City took turns burnishing their conservative credentials in front of more than 70 people gathered at Bridgewater Golf Club. Many in the audience were local, county and state elected officials.

Banks, 35, said that as a military veteran, he is "uniquely prepared and able to represent a constituency of the 3rd Congressional District that unfortunately has not been taken care of by Republicans and Democrats at the national level, that being our veterans and our troops abroad."

Banks, a commercial real estate broker, said the next 3rd District representative will be "intimately involved" in the planned switch from A-10 attack jets to F-16 fighter planes at the Air National Guard's 122nd Fighter Wing in Fort Wayne.

"I want to be a part of that because I believe we can do more to grow the nearly $60 million impact that the 122nd has on northeast Indiana," he said.

Brown, 56, a civil and domestic mediator, pressed for an overhaul of federal education law. She said No Child Left Behind "has been a disaster, and it needs to be changed. It is costing our school systems way too much money and strangling our children with way too many tests."

A former member of the Fort Wayne City Council who said she would not move to Washington if elected to Congress, Brown contended the federal government causes problems "because they don't always listen to us, do they?"

"We have the solutions here" at the local level," she said. "And (federal officials) think they know best. We've seen that in government. We've seen that with the judicial system as well."

Galloway, 59, a retired physician and surgeon, also took off on the judicial branch.

"We've all seen a terrible decision come out of the Supreme Court with regard to homosexual marriage," she said about the recent ruling that legalized same-sex marriage across the nation. "There are those in this party who therefore say that the battle with this issue is over. My friends, for me, the battle for personal and religious liberty is just beginning."

An NRA-certified pistol instructor, Galloway said she was the Senate sponsor of the 2011 law that lets lawmakers and citizens carry concealed weapons at the Wisconsin Capitol.

"So for that reason, defending the Second Amendment is deeply personal to me," she said.

Wise, 47, said he would, if elected, vote against retaining House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, and his leadership team and vote in favor of term limits for members of Congress.

"The problem is that the progressive movement is alive in the Republican Party as well," said Wise, a former member of the Whitley County Council. "Many Republicans in Congress like big government. More government is more power and more money to auction for favors and (campaign) contributions."

Republicans are "still giving away the store," he said. "We're still not prepared to repeal Obamacare, we're still not prepared to defend our border. We're still not willing to shrink the size and the scope of the federal government."

The only candidate for the Democratic nomination in the 3rd District is Tommy Schrader of Fort Wayne.

bfrancisco@jg.net