Obamacare supporters rally outside the Supreme Court in June. A new analysis suggests the federal government is not doing enough to fund the health care law. Bill Clark/CQ Roll Call

Despite concerns over the continued rise in health care spending and questions over what contributions President Barack Obama's health care law will make to the federal deficit, a left-leaning group says what the government actually needs to do is spend more money on Obamacare.

This position was published Tuesday in a paper by the Urban Institute, which said the Affordable Care Act will not work as intended without another $559 billion over the next decade.

The institute pointed to challenges in the law, including the difficulties people have in paying for their health coverage and the struggles states and the federal government will have in maintaining health care exchanges.



[Q&A: Obamacare and the 50th Anniversary of Medicare and Medicaid]

While the authors admit the additional investment needed is significant, they point out it would amount to about 0.24 percent of gross domestic product, and say the cost of enhancements is smaller than savings projected by actuaries from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Actuaries found in health care spending projections that total spending would be $2.5 trillion less than anticipated when it originally scored the bill. Authors of the report, therefore, say additional investing is only a fraction of what the country had expected to pay for the program.

"The expectations for this law are quite substantial, so to talk about an additional 0.2 percent of GDP to make sure the law can meet its objectives is a not substantial relative to what we are expecting this law to do," says Linda Blumberg, one of the authors of the report.



National Health Expenditure Projections ($ billions).

Courtesy Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services

As financing options to pay for proposed changes, the authors recommend increasing cigarette and alcohol taxes, applying the Medicaid drug rebate to Medicare's dual eligibles and increasing the Medicare payroll tax.

Douglas Holtz-Eakin, president of the conservative-leaning American Action Forum and former director of the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office, thinks the proposal will land with a thud.

"I think spending another half trillion is a non-starter," he says, pointing to the fact that the newest projections on health spending shows increases in the growth of health care spending are ahead. "This is at odds with fiscal reality."



Examples of financing options for proposed reforms.

Courtesy Urban Institute

Here are the two main challenges that the Affordable Care Act is facing:

Massive Health Care Costs

Despite the name, the Affordable Care Act, many consumers have found that under the law their health insurance is anything but. In states that have expanded Medicaid, low-income people have been able to access health insurance at little to no cost.



[RELATED: Workers Are Spending More of Their Income on Employer Health Insurance]

Middle-income people who do not have insurance through an employer have the option to enroll in tax-subsidized plans through online exchanges, or marketplaces. The costs of premiums may be low for a majority of those who enroll, but visits to the doctor often reveal high deductibles and out-of-pocket costs.

"For many moderate-income people, particularly those in good health, the high cost-sharing requirements may not seem worth the premiums paid to get them," authors of the paper write. The result, they warn, is that people may drop their health insurance plans, paying the penalty instead and causing costs to rise for those who stay in the plans.

People are paying too high of a percentage of their income on health insurance, the study says, suggesting that costs​ need to be lowered by increasing the amount that the federal government would contribute to help people pay for health insurance.

Holtz-Eakin counters that the best way would be to restructure the payments so people with the highest incomes are paying more while those with the lowest incomes pay less.

Underfunded Administrative Needs

The Affordable Care Act created state and online marketplaces, but the rollout of these marketplaces faced technical glitches that brought about additional criticism of the law. The second year of the program was much smoother, but the Urban Institute in its paper says the federal government did not go far enough in helping with administrative needs, leaving states understaffed. There weren't enough people to help Americans sign up for insurance, they write, nor were there enough devoted to helping the country learn about various plans available – even when it came to enrolling in Medicaid.

Some critics have said more transparency is needed by providing more information about plans on the marketplaces because people do not understand the full costs involved in their health insurance plans when they sign up.



[READ: Americans Protest Obamacare by Refusing Health Insurance Subsidies]

"Many of the websites for marketplaces are not as consumer friendly as they ought to be, and the lack of insurer and provider network transparency means that information necessary to promote effective competition across insurers is still lacking," authors of the report wrote. They added that oversight of plans also is underfunded.

This summer, the Supreme Court affirmed that the federal marketplaces could distribute subsidies, which left some analysts, including Holtz-Eakin, expecting states to forego their own exchanges in favor of the federal site. Substantial investments were made to states initially, but this year states are on their own. Blumberg recommended that an IT assessment be made to see which state exchanges should be dropped and which should receive more investment.

Here is the breakdown of what each of these investments would cost: