In negotiating health care and pay, automakers and union must keep competitive in a global market

Buy Photo UAW president Dennis Williams takes the job at an important time. (Photo: Steve Perez / The Detroit News)Buy Photo

The UAW and Detroit’s Big Three will finish contract talks this month as the automotive industry is more robust than it has been in some time. All three companies have posted record-breaking profits as of this year’s second quarter, following record sales last year.

Two central issues of the negotiations are compensation and health care coverage, bargaining over which must also be viewed through the lens of company investors.

Automakers and the UAW must work together, but with the understanding profits won’t always be so grand, and that the the auto industry is changing — in terms of its products, its workforce, and in how it measures success.

“It’s a shift in focus for the automakers from what it used to be — getting the breakeven point down and improving profitability,” said Michelle Krebs, an auto analyst with AutoTrader.com.

For the companies, the global marketplace is fiercely competitive, and their performance is under still-increased scrutiny following bailouts. While Ford has more of a cushion than GM and FCA US, all three must keep costs in check and continue to increase their profitability to have enough capital to invest in future products – and also to guard against later downturns.

But the car of the future is technologically-advanced, and subject to increasing fuel economy and safety regulations.

“Those things are going to require immense amounts of capital and new ways of coming up with solutions,” said Krebs.

Still, companies need to keep overall costs down while making new, high-quality cars consumers will buy.

With sales increasing over the past five years, the UAW is well-positioned to request higher second-tier wages. President Dennis Williams came into his role last year stating, “it’s time to bridge the gap,” and he’s signaled he won’t walk away from the table without them.

Bridging the gap stands to benefit the companies, which need a stable and educated workforce.

But pushing the second tier might also force jobs south to non-union plants, or to Mexico, where Ford has already announced it will move production of a few models.

Expect growth in the second-tier wage over the next three to five years from about $19 up to $25 or $26 per hour, says Sean McAlinden at the Center for Automotive Research in Ann Arbor.

“I think [the companies] can afford it,” he said. “This is really all about increasing wages and benefits only to the level where companies won’t become non-profitable.”

Increasing employees’ access to profit-sharing is a reasonable way to boost wages as well, but the UAW doesn’t like how this yields different amounts to members at each company because of variability in the Big Three’s profits.

The other outstanding issue on wages and benefits is employee health care.

The so-called Cadillac Tax, an element of Obamacare that taxes premium health care plans beginning in 2018, threatens the luxury healthcare agreements many union members have become accustomed to, as well as health care plans for automakers’ executives.

Williams has suggested combining all employees into a private pool to help negotiate lower costs.

But it’s not entirely clear how it might work, or how it would play politically, given the UAW was a big supporter of Obamacare.

Other options for avoiding Obamacare’s excessive taxes are a carve-out or some other Congressional intervention, an unlikely scenario.

Profitability is key for the companies, while increased wages and maintained health care are key for the UAW in these much-anticipated talks. Finding a way to do both will be the challenge.

Read or Share this story: http://detne.ws/1EJ0lyq