It's 7:30 on a Monday night. The Mattydale Animal Hospital closed more than an hour earlier, but the bell above the door rings as the night cleaning service arrives.

Jovan Collins, owner of Sonic Cleaning Service, starts the sanitizing and tidying routine she has established for six nights out of each week. With the help of her daughter Jayda Collins, 16, the work takes only an hour. But now as caregiver for her disabled husband, the income from the hospital and her residential clients no longer covers the bills.

"I've gotten shutoff notices from National Grid," Jovan said. "The bills I automatically make sure are paid are my mortgage, my truck, and I'll pay for food before I pay for electricity."

At age 37, Jovan supports her husband Ricardo Collins, Jayda and 19-year-old son Jordan, on about $20,000 a year.

One in three American women live in poverty, according to a 2014 Shriver Report. Of those with families, two out of three depend on the mother's income. These women represent two-thirds of minimum-wage workers, who also act as caregivers.

The 2013 federal poverty line for household of four like Jovan's came to $23,550, according to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. For 2014, the amount is $23,850.

Sonic Cleaning Service brought in about $52,000 annually when Jovan and Ricardo started in 2004. After the economic recession in 2008, they took in about $28,000. Then in 2012, Ricardo got in a car accident that damaged his spine and left him unable to work.

Jovan now runs the business alone making whatever she can to support her family.

"We started losing the accounts that he had, so that money that was supposed to be coming in wasn't coming in anymore," she said.

The additional challenge Jovan didn't foresee, though, came when she and her husband tried to navigate the health insurance options to treat Ricardo's injuries.

Going from one income bracket to another for the last 10 years, the Collins tried repeatedly to get health insurance. At the time of the accident they had car insurance, but no health insurance.

"We thought maybe we would get disability or unemployment, but being self-employed we're looked at in a totally different way," Jovan said.

It took four months and the recent changes with the Affordable Care Act for the Collins to get health insurance. By then, Ricardo had severe back and neck pain caused by seven crushed discs in his spine.

A recipient of the Syracuse University's 2013 Martin Luther King Jr. Unsung Hero Award, volunteering in her community has allowed Jovan to cope with the confusion and stress. But, she said fighting to get help supporting her family seems wrong.

The accident

In August 2012, another driver rear-ended Ricardo and Jordan's car on the highway. Each received injuries to their neck and back, but seven crushed discs in Ricardo's back left him disabled.

The $32,000 Sonic Cleaning accrued in annually at the time didn't cover the cost of a health insurance plan.

"I tried for years to get insurance through Medicaid, through Fidelis, through Total Care," Jovan said. "But, I was making too much."

The Collins did pay for car insurance, though, and received some support through State Farm Insurance's No-fault coverage. The Collins didn't go to court with the person who hit their car, so No-fault provided the money needed for accident-related or emergency care.

Ricardo said he followed his State Farm agent's suggestion to go to the hospital about his back pain, but because he didn't enter the emergency room in an emergency situation, they refused his No-fault coverage.

"Until I'm actually considered disabled--which I am at this point--there is nothing they could do," Ricardo said. "Now, I have 14 crushed discs. It's like dominoes: once you have one, the one above and below start to deteriorate."

The Collins discovered that Ricardo's injuries, their lowered annual income and the changes made in the Affordable Care Act, qualified them for either a no-cost Medicaid or a Fidelis Care insurance plan through Onondaga County. In December 2012, Ricardo received the scans that showed his then seven crushed disks.

The insurance has since allowed Ricardo to see a primary care doctor, neurologist, neurosurgeon, and an orthopedic surgeon.

But, he said the outlook shows a future battling arthritic pains in his spine.

"The neurologist told me this doesn't go away, it doesn't heal," Ricardo said. "Maybe if I was in my teens while there is still really good blood supply to my discs. No, I'll always have pain."

Sonic Cleaning Service

Jovan worries. She stresses that her family and husband won't have what they need. So, she keeps up the Sonic Cleaning Service both as a source of income and as a therapeutic release.

She said she tried to work at more commercial businesses, but those she started at only lasted a few months.

"They turn into a nonprofit and get volunteers. We're like the initials cleaners to get them started," Jovan said. "But, I'll tell them what they can have the volunteers do to keep up the maintenance from what we started."

Cleaning jobs like washing outside windows brings in more money. But, Jovan said while her husband could handle them, she can't.

Her daughter, Jayda, helps when she's not in school, and Jovan pays her for the hours.

Jayda said she started cleaning the animal hospital with her mom in the eighth grade. It's harder to work now that she's in high school at the Institute of Technology at Central, but she gets everything done.

"It's fun hanging out with my mom," she said. "I'd rather hang out with my mom than with my friends."





Going from track meets to school to community service events with Jovan, Jayda said she has learned how to push through hard times to do more like her mom.

But, the accident in 2012 changed how she views her family.

"I'm not that close with my dad or brother anymore," Jayda said. "I just pushed them away because I have to focus on other things in my life."

She considers her mom her best friend, though.

Jayda said she has taken on more responsibilities in the house and has to do what her dad can't. She wishes her relationship with him was stronger, but she has to focus on school.

"Each year it's gonna get harder on you and other people, too," she said. "But, you have to push through it and get through it anyway possible."

Jovan said it's also the clients who treat her like family that remind her how grateful she is for community support.

Susan Wadley, an anthropology professor at SU, said Jovan started cleaning her house six years ago. Jovan's kind nature and community involvement inspired Wadley to nominate her for an Unsung Hero award at the Martin Luther King Jr. Celebration.

"She's constantly looking out for people and organizing events," Wadley said. "The key thing is the people that know her and the people she's worked for really have tremendous admiration and a devotion to her."

Wadley said she and Jovan still talk when Jovan cleans her house, and she has asked about Ricardo's health. The answer is always, "He's doing well."

She said she tried to help the Collins find health insurance after the accident and referred them to doctors. But, many providers refused the No-fault coverage due to paperwork.

Still, Jovan remains reliable and resilient.

Wadley said Jovan has given time to serve as a member of the Syracuse School District Parent-Teacher Organization (PTO), has worked with the Girl Scouts, and has taken care of an elderly and blind cleaning service client.

"She's really committed to the kinds of social issues she involved with," Wadley said. "She's not willing to let her family issues interfere with those broader issues."

Different pains

Jovan said she has noticed the tension between Ricardo -- who can't act in his role as a supporter -- and her children -- who have shouldered some burden of the lost income. Her marriage even has moments of anger, but she finds ways to relax.

"I'll spend more time at the grocery store or I'll go out to eat. I'll avoid being home," Jovan said. "He knows that."

As for the money, Jovan has had to ask Jayda and Jordan to pay for their phone bills and clothing costs. She also cuts grocery coupons and shops bargain deals.

One year, she said, they saved more than $3,000 couponing.

Jovan said she wants to overcome poverty, but doesn't dream about having a lot of money. To her, people are equal regardless of wealth.

"We've got to be thankful that we're all here and we're all together," Jovan said. "We are grateful that [Ricky] is here and walking around even though he's in pain."