By Adam Tobias | Wisconsin Reporter

MADISON, Wis. — Wisconsinites are being forced to play a game of “Press Your Luck” with Obamacare, and so far they’ve been hit with a double whammy.

Not only will the average Wisconsin resident who purchases health insurance on the individual market see a nearly 70 percent increase in their premiums, they also can expect the state’s doctor shortage to get even worse.

And those residing in rural areas and small towns will have even higher premiums than their neighbors living in and around cities. That’s because too few insurance companies are participating in places with sparse populations, a cost analysis by the New York Times says.

“Individuals and families that can actually purchase health insurance on the glitch-filled HealthCare.gov website are going to be in for a rude awakening when they find out their premiums will skyrocket,” said Brett Healy, president of Wisconsin’s MacIver Institute. “Rates are expected to double in parts of Wisconsin, which serves as further proof that the Affordable Care Act is anything but affordable.”

Wisconsin will experience the nation’s 10th highest premium rate hike under Obamacare, according to a report released this week by Forbes and the Manhattan Institute for Policy Research.

The only other states that face larger increases are Nevada (179 percent), New Mexico (142 percent), Arkansas (138 percent), North Carolina (136 percent), Vermont (117 percent), Georgia (92 percent), South Dakota (77 percent), Nebraska (74 percent) and Iowa (72 percent).

Wisconsin and Delaware are tied for 10th at 69 percent.

Only eight states are projected to actually benefit from premium decreases, and that’s because a majority of them already had heavily regulated individual insurance markets prior to Obamacare, the study shows.

Most Badger State residents are not going to be that fortunate.

A 27-year-old Wisconsin man will be hit with a premium rate hike of 125 percent, and a woman the same age will pay 78 percent more for health insurance on the individual market, according to the report.

A 40-year-old Wisconsin man will be charged an additional 73 percent and a 40-year-woman will see an increase of 31 percent.

Sixty-four-year-old Wisconsin men and women will encounter rises of 38 and 68 percent, respectively.

The fact that a majority of Wisconsinites will be paying more for health insurance under Obamacare does not surprise Yevgeniy Feyman, a fellow at the Manhattan Institute’s Center for Medical Progress.

Feyman points to the underlying regulations in the Affordable Care Act as one of the main factors in the escalating insurance costs.

Guaranteed issue, for example, requires policies to be offered to any eligible candidate without regard to health status, Feyman said.

But those patients cannot be charged more than someone who doesn’t have a pre-existing condition, which drives up the price for everyone, Feyman added.

Costs are also ascending under Obamacare because the number of required benefits in health plans has grown larger, according to Dave Jensen, editorial director at HCTrends, a health care research organization based in Wisconsin.

“Men, for instance, on an individual policy, like for me, I have to have maternity coverage … They become richer benefits – basically is what it is – and if you have richer benefits, you have to have a richer premium,” Jensen said.

But even though a large number of Wisconsinites will be paying more out of their pockets for health insurance, they might not get the same access to care because of the ACA.

The state has a shortage of more than 105 primary medical care physicians and close to 200 mental health doctors, according to the U.S. Department of Health and Services.

Some are predicting that Obamacare will add to that scarcity.

Dr. Jane Orient, executive director of the Association of American Physicians and Surgeons, said doctor shortages will be exacerbated under the ACA because many of the uninsured are being shoved onto Medicaid.

“Doctors are increasingly unwilling to take Medicaid,” Orient said. “It is a huge expense, a huge hassle, and the payment doesn’t cover the cost of providing the service.”

Some physicians also are considering other options because of Obamacare’s stricter regulations, some of which deal with cumbersome data reporting, Orient said.

“I think if doctors do all that stuff, they won’t have any time to take care of sick people,” Orient said. “It drives a lot of them nuts, so many doctors are just saying, ‘Well, we’re going to quit or we’re going to try to escape into a fully direct pay, cash-based practice.”’

Demand also is expected to go up because the average number of people with health insurance should increase every year for the foreseeable future, Feyman said.

Feyman also anticipates a demographic shift in the next several decades that will result in an older population that is more inclined to need medical assistance on a more regular basis.

Others also are convinced that those who have been uninsured for years and get insurance will seek a significant amount of health care resources right off the bat.

“If it turns out that the people who get insured in the first and second year are less healthy, it’s very possible that they are going to put a heavier strain on the physician workforce,” Feyman said.

An estimated 100 additional new physicians are needed in the state each year to keep up with health care demands, according to a report released in 2011 by the Wisconsin Hospital Association.

If those 100 doctors are not added each year, the state’s economy will be $5 billion less than what it could be by 2030, the study claims.

Projections show that Wisconsin could have a shortfall of more than 2,000 physicians by 2030, WHA officials say.

Contact Adam Tobias at atobias@watchdog.org or follow him on Twitter @Scoop_Tobias