Topics: 2016 Elections, 2016 presidential race, Border Security, Immigration, Immigration Reform, Republican Party, Rick PAC, Rick Perry, Terrorism, Texas, U.S.-Mexico border, Undocumented immigrants, Video, Politics News

Rick Perry is pretty clearly running for president. Not the old, bumbling Rick Perry who amused us endlessly with his serial gaffes and horrifically cold-blooded attitude towards capital punishment, but the new, glasses-wearing Rick Perry who’s on the comeback trail and still has a horrifically cold-blooded attitude towards capital punishment. And when you’re running for president, you release advertisements like the one Rick Perry’s PAC – cleverly called Rick PAC – just put out touting Perry’s stunning success at keeping terrorists from invading our country through Mexico.

“Gang members and terrorists are reportedly using the border crisis as a free pass to set up shop in the United States,” a Fox Business anchor intones with startling gravity before the ad quick-cuts to the various things Rick Perry has done to defend the country from the reported terrorists, like ordering 1,000 National Guard troops to the border and fondling a large gun with Sean Hannity. The first of the National Guard troops arrived at the border only yesterday, so Perry quite sensibly took a victory lap for an operation that is literally less than a day old.

Since Perry is quite obviously running for president, we can take this ad as an indication of how the immigration debate will play out in the Republicans primaries. If this is the starting point – Lock down the border! Terrorists! Criminal gangs! – it’s looking like it’ll be very ugly. Perry’s ad is also the latest indicator of just how far the GOP has backslid on immigration as an issue.

What people recall most about Perry’s awful 2012 campaign is the gaffes – “oops,” the bizarre speech he gave in New Hampshire, the War on Christmas ad. But part of what got Perry in such deep trouble with Republican primary voters was his stance on immigration, which was to the left of the rest of the primary field.