With the 2015 tax filing season slated to begin Tuesday, Jan. 20, the Internal Revenue Service addressed Thursday some of the ways the Affordable Care Act will impact filers preparing their 2014 returns.

The Basics

The ACA requires taxpayers - and each member of their families - either have qualifying health insurance coverage for each month of the year, qualifies for an exemption or makes an individual shared responsibility payment when filing their federal income tax return.

Meanwhile, some moderate-income taxpayers may also qualify for financial assistance to help cover the cost of health insurance purchased through the Health Insurance Marketplace.

Check the box

More than three-quarter of taxpayers will simply check a box on their tax return to indicate that each member of their family had qualifying health coverage for the entire year. No further action is required.

(Qualifying health insurance coverage under most, but not all, types of health care coverage plans. Taxpayers can use the chart on the IRS website to find out if their insurance counts as qualifying coverage.)

Exemptions

Taxpayers may be eligible to claim an exemption from the requirement to have coverage. Eligible taxpayers need to complete the new IRS Form 8965 and attach it to their tax return. Taxpayers must apply for some exemptions through the Health Insurance Marketplace, but most of the exemptions are obtained easily from the IRS when filing a return.

Individual Shared Responsibility Payment

Taxpayers who do not have qualifying coverage or an exemption for each month of the year will need to make an individual shared responsibility payment with their return for choosing not to purchase coverage. Examples and information about figuring the payment are available on the IRS Calculating the Payment page.

Premium Tax Payment

Taxpayers who bought coverage through the Health Insurance Marketplace should receive Form 1095-A from the marketplace by early February. This form should be saved because it has important information needed to complete a tax return.

If Form 1095-A is not received by early February, contact the marketplace where coverage was purchased. Do not contact the IRS because IRS representatives will not have access to this information.

Taxpayers who benefited from advance payments of the premium tax credit must file a federal income tax return. These taxpayers need to reconcile those advance payments with the amount of premium tax credit they're entitled to based on their actual income. As a result, some people may see a smaller or larger tax refund or tax liability than they were expecting. Use IRS Form 8962 to calculate the premium tax credit and reconcile the credit with any advance payments.

Still have questions?

Click here for more information on the Affordable Care Act and its impact on your 2014 tax return.

RELATED: 2015 tax season dos and don'ts