Metro Council's historically weak committee system would get some teeth under rule changes expected to win approval. (Photo: Shelley Mays / The Tennessean.com)

It was a Metro election that seemingly swung Democrat-leaning Metro government further to the political left.

Megan Barry, a star of local liberals, is the new Nashville mayor. David Briley, also a political progressive, took over as vice mayor. And the 40-member Metro Council, which held its first meeting of the term last week, had its conservative faction cut by at least half.

The Metro Council, though technically a nonpartisan legislative body with no party labels, has historically featured far more Democrats than Republicans. Even so, during the past few council terms, a visible coalition of a dozen or so conservatives regularly showed its stripes — taking on government spending, property taxes and various social issues from time to time.

That coalition is now depleted following August's general election and last month's runoff election. As such, Barry is beginning her mayoral tenure with the benefit of a council that — on paper, at least — leans her way, and decidedly so.

"We're down to somewhere to the tune of, what, maybe four or five conservatives now?" said second-term Councilman Steve Glover from the Donelson-Hermitage area, who is a conservative himself. "Maybe six? I don't know everybody there. Obviously, we have a bunch of new members ... But yeah, on the outset, I would say that we definitely have fewer conservative voices than we had in the last term."

In an election that brought massive turnover to the council, 27 of the 40 council members are new to their seats. Most are entering public office for the first time. Therefore, it's a bit early to define the political leanings of some of them.

But for now, the only members with conservative reputations appear to be Glover, new District 4 Councilman Robert Swope, District 27 Councilwoman Davette Blalock and Bellevue-area District 22 Councilwoman Sheri Weiner. Of the council’s other possible conservatives, District 13 Council member Holly Huezo's politics aren't really known. New District 34 Councilwoman Angie Henderson says she’s an independent. Others like Councilman Doug Pardue proved socially conservative in some areas but don’t match the same politics of conservatives who exited the council this year.

Gone from the last council are conservative members Karen Bennett, Charlie Tygard, Robert Duvall, Duane Dominy, Phil Claiborne, Tony Tenpenny and Josh Stites. A few of them are now replaced by new council members from the other side of the political spectrum.

Weiner, who considers herself a fiscal conservative and a moderate on social issues, downplayed partisanship in the council, saying she's "never known a pothole to be liberal or conservative.

"As you look forward over the next four years, time is going to tell," she said of the council's leanings. "I don't want to pigeonhole anyone on the council because issues that come before the council oftentimes really have nothing to do with one's politics but (instead) what one looks to the betterment of the neighborhood."

The decline in council conservatives came during an election cycle headlined by an unusually partisan mayoral race in Democrat-leaning Davidson County. In the runoff election, Barry, supported by Nashville’s Democratic establishment, beat David Fox, who was backed by many conservatives, by a comfortable 10-percentage point margin.

It also came as Metro Charter Amendment 3, a policy that establishes local-hire regulations for Metro-funded construction projects, passed by a 16-point margin in August. The measure, pushed by unions and supported by many Democrats, faces the threat of nullification from state Republicans.

Some council members who identify as conservatives are well aware of the numbers.

"I do believe I add a little balance to some of the hard-left people," Swope, owner of a television production company who was elected in August, told The Tennessean. "And I think that's what council needs is balance. We represent 800,000 people in this county, and 800,000 people don't think exactly the same."

The lack of conservatives could have an immediate impact when the council considers legislation — expected early next year — that would create a new inclusionary zoning housing policy.

Such a plan, which the Metro Planning Department is reviewing, would require developers to price a certain percentage of units in new residential development as affordable. It’s a policy typically supported by progressives and opposed by free-market conservatives.

Meanwhile, it is unclear whether the next council will take up any social issues legislation in the coming year that can often divide the council by partisan leanings. The last time the council took up such an issue — domestic partner benefits for same-sex couples among Metro employees in 2014 — it passed overwhelmingly by a 27-7 vote with three abstentions.

Henderson, who was elected in the Republican-heavy Forest Hills-area, told The Tennessean she’s “an independent, 100 percent” and that she was clear during her campaign that she identifies with neither major political party.

Henderson said she concurs that there seems to be fewer conservatives on the council. “But I really approach this role from a really nonpartisan standpoint," she said. "I just look to see where we have common goals to make our city safer and a better place to live.

“I think those issues are nonpartisan,” Henderson said. “I’m not really looking at my colleagues as liberal or conservative, but rather looking to see where we have common interest and common concerns.”

Glover, who publicly supported Fox in the mayor's race, has a similar line. He said that no one, for example, regardless of political makeup, believes that Metro can continue the same level of city spending that has taken place over the past eight years.

"I don't know if it's going to boil down to conservative versus nonconservative," he said of the council. "I think it's going to boil down to what's right for the city and what's going to be an intelligent move for the city."

Reach Joey Garrison at 615-259-8236 and on Twitter @joeygarrison.

Council conservatives

The council held its first meeting Tuesday. Here’s how a council already in short supply of conservatives lost even more following the August and September elections.

Charlie Tygard, the lone consistent conservative of the five at-large council members from the previous council, exited because of term-limits. None of the conservative at-large candidates won. Among them, district council members Karen Bennett and Robert Duvall — both who have ties to Republican Party politics — lost their at-large runs. Each of the five winners — at-large members John Cooper, Erica Gilmore, Bob Mendes, Jim Shulman and Sharon Hurt — ran on generally left-leaning, pro-growth platforms.

The Madison-area District 8 seat, previously held by term-limited Bennett, went to Nancy VanReece, who lost to Bennett four years ago. VanReece, an online communications specialist, made history by becoming the first openly gay woman in Tennessee elected to a legislative body.

Incumbent District 16 Councilman Tony Tenpenny, one of the previous council's most outspoken conservatives, lost his reelection bid to Mike Freeman.

District 13 Councilman Josh Stites, former Mayor Karl Dean's biggest critic on tax incentives, opted against reelection and was replaced by Holly Huezo, a political unknown to most observers.

Antioch-area conservative council members Duvall and Duane Dominy, both term-limited, were replaced, respectively, by Sam Coleman, a former councilman and past Democratic state House candidate, and Tanaka Vercher, who challenged but lost to Dominy four years ago.

Term-limited Donelson-Hermitage District 15 Councilman Phil Claiborne was replaced by Jeff Syracuse.

Meanwhile, in the open Belle Meade-area District 23 race, Mina Johnson easily beat attorney Jim Roberts, who a year ago run as a Republican candidate for a Chancery Court judgeship.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1RBDGGz