24 Latino and Jewish veterans, 6 from Southern California, awarded Medal of Honor - Southern California Public Radio The veterans will be recognized in a ceremony in Washington DC Tuesday. One of the six veterans from SoCal is Army Staff Sgt. Salvador J. Lara of Riverside, who died in battle during World War II. The Army on its website said Lara had "aggressively led his rifle squad in neutralizing multiple enemy strong points and inflicting large numbers of casualties on the enemy. The next morning, as his company resumed the attack, Lara sustained a severe leg wound, but did not stop to receive first aid." Lara's brother was surprised to receive a personal call from President Obama, notifying him of the recognition.

Latinos become California's largest demographic though political clout lags- The Guardian This month, Latinos are poised to reach 39 percent of the population to become the state's largest racial/ethnic group. Despite this being a harbinger of demographic shifts to come nationwide, some experts say Latinos their political clout has not kept pace with its population growth. Comprehensive immigration reform has eluded Latinos who see it as a priority. “Latinos are punching below their weight,” said Mark Hugo Lopez, director of the Pew Research Center’s Hispanic Trends Project. Although there are millions of Latinos in California, that's not a voting bloc that makes much of a difference in presidential races, because the state is predictably blue.

Thousands Of Young California Immigrants Eligible For Coverage -- Though Often They Don’t Know It - Kaiser Health News Immigrants in the US illegally do not qualify for free or subsidized health insurance provided through the Affordable Care Act. But those same individuals can still receive coverage if they meet certain criteria and live in California. The state is one of just a handful that are providing coverage to immigrants in the "Deferred Action for Recent Arrivals" program, which provides temporary legal status to people brought here illegally as children. However, many of these individuals don't know they qualify for health insurance. The story cited a report by University of California researchers that found "up to 125,000 low-income immigrants statewide could qualify under the state’s Medi-Cal program for the poor.



Key and Peele Encourage 'Making Fun' of All Cultures for a Better Society - TIME The Comedy Central duo of Keegan-Michael Key and Jordan Peele write an essay for the magazine's annual "Ideas Issue" and make a case for killing political correctness. They write that their fans, some of whom come from a multicultural background, are asking for sketches that poke fun at their backgrounds. From the essay: "There was the half-Hispanic, half–Native American man who told Keegan recently just how much gold there was to be mined from his hybrid culture. A young Arab man told us how much he loves Karim and Jahar (a couple of sexually repressed Arab characters we play). “You gotta do more of them!” he begged.