Topics: brian schweitzer, Democratic Party, endorsements, Gun Control, Guns, Montana, NRA, Republican Party, Politics News

Lately, the question has been asked, is the NRA’s true purpose to push for gun rights, or to elect Republicans (or more precisely, to defeat Democrats)? Here’s a fun story that might help you answer that question.

When Brian Schweitzer first ran for office in 2000, he filled out an NRA candidate questionnaire and mailed it in. The NRA uses this item to rate candidates with a letter grade (A+ to F) and to make endorsements.

Schweitzer (for whom I worked for several years) grew up on a ranch and owned guns and hunted his whole life, and based on his responses to the survey, he figured he would get an A or A- rating. While he didn’t expect the NRA to endorse him (his opponent, the GOP incumbent Conrad Burns, was a lifelong A-plus member), Schweitzer’s rating would nonetheless be published in the NRA’s annual voter guide, sent to all NRA members. That would be a very valuable credential in conservative Montana, as a counterweight to his liberal social and economic ideas.

But when the NRA voter guide was published, Schweitzer received an F. He called the NRA to demand an explanation. They claimed they never received his questionnaire. It must have gotten lost in the mail, they told him. Schweitzer faxed them a copy, but they said it was too late. Soon Charlton Heston was visiting Montana, campaigning against Schweitzer, accusing him of being “against gun rights.” The NRA followed up with similar attacks, spending a king’s ransom on TV and radio ads against Schweitzer, for his F rating. He lost by under 4,000 votes.

In 2004 Schweitzer took another shot, this time for governor, trying to become the first Democrat elected in Montana in 23 years.

Once again he mailed in his NRA survey, confident of an A (I believe that at the time, an A-plus rating was only achievable by answering “yes” to the question, “Do you support the right to possess guns in all places, including schools?”).

For insurance, he met with NRA staff in Washington. They assured him that he was likely to receive the endorsement. But then the voter guide arrived, and the NRA had endorsed his opponent.

Again he demanded an explanation. The NRA said they’d decided that Schweitzer’s opponent “should get the benefit of the doubt” because he was an incumbent, whereas Schweitzer had never held office.