If you go What: Alan Culpepper will lead a free fun run and discussion related to "Run Like a Champion," followed by a Q&A. When: 6 p.m. April 22 Where: Boulder Running Co., 2775 Pearl St. More info: 303-786-9255

Sitting around a conference table at the Boulder office of Velo Press last week, a lean-looking Alan Culpepper looked like he could still get out and jump into the Olympic marathon or 10,000 meters.

Culpepper, 42, is retired from racing, but not from running, as he has stayed active as an executive with the Rock 'n' Roll race series and as head of Culpepper Coaching.

Now, he has distilled the principles of his training into a new book, "Run Like a Champion: An Olympian's Approach for Every Runner" (Velo Press), which gives insight into the workings of a world-class athlete coupled with personal stories of iconic names such as University of Colorado coach Mark Wetmore and fellow Olympians Adam Goucher, Pat Porter and Meb Keflezighi.

"I'm very proud of it," Culpepper said of the book. "It took a long time, but it was definitely worth the effort. I consider it my master's thesis, in a way."

"Run Like a Champion" was a team effort, he said, a team that included editors Casey Blaine and Brian Metzler. Both are runners and understood that Culpepper has something important to impart to the rest of us.

Advertisement

Even a hard-bitten journalist like Metzler, editor of Competitor magazine, was "thrilled" to work with Culpepper, saying: "I've known Alan (as a reporter) for 20 years, but I was fascinated to pull back the curtain to really understand the elements that allowed him to run at a high level for such a long time."

You likely have heard some of these elements before: long runs, base training, anaerobic and lactate threshold training. What makes "Run Like a Champion" unique are Culpepper's insights and anecdotes that illustrate the basic principles that any of us can use, no matter what our level of running.

Mike Sandrock, On Running

"I have learned some very important lessons," Culpepper writes. "Those who came before me, and my own experiences, both good and bad, have taught me much, and this for sure: There are no secret training programs, no gimmicks, no magical workouts or catchy mantras that will alone take you to your best performances."

Culpepper caught the running bug as a fourth-grader, when he won a school mile in 6:27. He became a top high school runner in El Paso, Texas, where his coach, Sam Walker, spoke to him of a 10-year plan. Some preps don't see past the next workout or season, but Culpepper always had a long-term vision. One of the main reasons he committed to the University of Colorado was reading about the many post-collegiate runners living and training in Boulder on the back of a promotional brochure.

Culpepper went on to become "one of the great American distance runners," as Olympic marathon silver medalist Keflezighi puts it in the book's foreword, racing internationally until he was 35, making four World Championship teams and winning U.S. track, road and cross country national titles. He met his wife, Shayne, on the CU team, and together they made two Olympic teams and settled down in east Boulder, where they are raising their family.

When he left CU with his degree in sociology and geography, as well as an NCAA 5,000-meter championship, Culpepper worked briefly at the newly opened Boulder Running Co. During breaks, Culpepper would have coffee with Steve Jones, "picking his brain," he recalls. "Later, I would grill (five-time world-record holder) Arturo Barrios, and guys like Mark Plaatjes."

All that questioning, training and racing comes through in "Run Like a Champion," which gives what Culpepper calls "a holistic approach" to training. What comes through in the book is that Culpepper had to work hard and consistently, learning the lessons along the way, just as we need to do.

That is seen in a story Culpepper tells of a long run up on Magnolia Road his senior year at CU. "Mark (Wetmore) had a gift for getting athletes to buy into a training principle," Culpepper writes, and on this day, Culpepper wanted to show the coach that he "owned" the long run.

He certainly did own it, running the hilly 19.6 miles over rolling hills at more than 8,000 feet, at a pace of 5:58 per mile. Writes Culpepper, "By the time I got to the NCAA cross country championships a month later, I was cooked. ... So what is the takeaway? ... Just as I was trying to prove myself to Mark, many runners crank up the intensity during long runs to prove something to a training group, a coach, or themselves."

That is perhaps Culpepper's best advice in the book: Know yourself well enough to understand when to rein in your emotions during training runs, when you don't have anything to prove. That way, you can perform your best during a race, which is the time to "face our fears, be accountable to ourselves, and challenge ourselves."