MAJDAL ANJAR, Lebanon — Along with about 20 other Syrian children, 13-year-old Anas braves rain, mud and cold to attend class in a tent pitched along Lebanon’s border with Syria, the home of a Syrian refugee family that serves as a classroom for four hours each day.

There are no benches and no blackboard. There are no textbooks. Just sheets of paper and some pencils and crayons that two young refugee women use to teach children how to read and write, count and draw, sing songs and recite poems.

“We are giving them the basics, letters and numbers,” said one of the teachers, Hanadi, 23, who asked to be identified by only her first name. “We mostly try to bring some joy into their lives. They’ve seen too much bloodshed.”

Anas might be considered one of the luckier ones in Syria’s long conflict, which reached its third anniversary Saturday. Nearly half of Syria’s school-age children — 2.8 million and counting — cannot get an education because of the devastation and violence, UNICEF recently reported.

“They come every day, these sad parents, begging me to take their children to school,” said Etaf Seif Abdel Samad, principal of a public grade school in Beirut, where Syrian children learn with the Lebanese side by side.

By the end of last year, school-age Syrian children in Lebanon — currently estimated at 400,000 — outnumbered their Lebanese peers by 100,000.

More than 2 million children who should be in school remain in Syria, where classrooms have been bombed, used as shelters or turned into military barracks.

Another 300,000 Syrian children don’t attend school in Lebanon, along with about 93,000 in Jordan, 78,000 in Turkey, 26,000 in Iraq and 4,000 in Egypt, UNICEF officials in Geneva say.

Those numbers likely are higher. UNICEF can’t count the children whose parents didn’t register with the U.N. refugee agency.

Experts say that puts a whole generation of Syrians at risk of coming of age illiterate, lost to a war that has killed about 140,000 people already. UNICEF estimates more than 10,000 children have died in the violence.