In self-insured towns, part-time employees working as few as 20 hours a week are eligible for health insurance benefits if they were grandfathered when the 2010 reforms raised the minimum to 25 hours per week. (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

Starting today and running through the end of New Jersey’s legislative session next month, we will be running regular reminders of how many days the Democratic-controlled Legislature has failed to take any action to reduce property taxes. Prior to this month’s elections, more than half of the state’s lawmakers signed an Asbury Park Press pledge to work to reduce property taxes by more than 10 percent in the current legislative session. Unfortunately, only a handful of Democrats, who comprise the majority in the Statehouse, signed the pledge. Senate President Steve Sweeney and Assembly Speaker Vincent Prieto were not among them. We intend to keep the pressure on them. We urge you to do the same. We hope the daily “inaction” reminders will keep the issue front and center.

When it comes to identifying the chief reasons property taxes in New Jersey are driving people out of state, it’s easy to overlook the impact health benefits of part-time government workers. One reason is the much-ballyhooed reform in 2011 that supposedly eliminated benefits for part timers. But that came with two major loopholes that have yet to be closed.

First, it grandfathered employees who at the time of the reforms already were receiving health care benefits. And second, it exempted public workers in towns that were self-insured and did not participate in any of the state benefits programs. That exemption essentially left it up to the self-insured towns — about 40 percent of the total — to decide whether to continue offering health care insurance to part timers. Needless to say, many government entities — school districts, municipalities and independent authorities — still do so.When it comes to identifying the chief reasons property taxes in New Jersey are driving people out of state, it’s easy to overlook the impact health benefits of part-time government workers. One reason is the much-ballyhooed reform in 2011 that supposedly eliminated benefits for part timers. But that came with two major loopholes that have yet to be closed.

In self-insured towns, part-time employees working as few as 20 hours a week are eligible for health insurance benefits if they were grandfathered when the 2011 reforms raised the minimum to 25 hours per week. While the state Department of the Treasury couldn’t provide any specific breakdown of how many part-time government employees are receiving health care benefits, those eligible include school bus drivers and cafeteria workers, adjuncts at state universities and county colleges and, of course, many elected officials.

While the state Division of Pensions and Benefits was unable to provide a current count of how many towns are self-insured, there have been no legislative changes since the 2011 reforms that would have substantially altered the number.

Whether you work part time or full time for government, the health care costs to the taxpayer are the same. And those costs remain unaffordable. The overwhelming number of government employees in the state benefits programs choose the two most expensive plans. And as the New Jersey Pension and Health Benefit Study Commission wrote in its report earlier this year — a report that has been ignored by the Democratic leadership in Trenton — government employeees in the state health programs tend to opt for the low-deductible, high-cost plans.

Nationally, 17 percent of enrollees in public and private health care plans opt for high-deductible, lower-cost plans. In New Jersey, it is 0.06 percent — 137 of 242,827 enrollees in state health benefits plans. The reason more public employees choose the more expensive plans is because there isn’t enough cost differential to make it worthwhile to opt for the lower-cost option —$44 a month for someone making $60,000 a year.

If employees continue to choose the higher-cost plans, the state will be subject to a “Cadillac tax” stipulated in the Affordable Care Act that will cost taxpayers an additional $284 million by 2020.

If employees continue to opt for those higher-cost plans, the state will be subject to a “Cadillac tax” under Obamacare that will cost taxpayers an additional $284 million by 2020.

The state now has a $57 billion health care cost liability. It spent $2.8 billion in the 2014 fiscal year on premiums for employees enrolled in the state health care program. According to a Pew Charitable Trust Report, only two states had higher per-employee health insurance costs than New Jersey — Alaska and New Hampshire. The only certainty is that things will get worse rather than better in the years ahead thanks to health care cost inflation and growing numbers of retirees eligible for benefits.

Tweaks aren’t going to make things substantially better, including tightening the ground rules for part timers, many of whom are eligible for health care benefits in retirement (along with their dependents). But it would be a step in the right direction.

Democratic leaders seem to be in denial about the potential the state’s unfunded health care and pension liabilities have to devastate New Jerseys’ economy. The warning signs have been there for years. It’s long past time they pay heed to them.

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1jrjvz5