Please enable Javascript to watch this video

If you watch the "The Tonight Show" and see Jay Leno on your TV during Tuesday's (Oct. 6) episode, do not adjust your set. It is not a rerun, but instead a very special surprise appearance by the veteran comedian and longtime show host.

To begin the monologue, Jimmy Fallon comes out as usual. After telling a Bernie Sanders joke, however, Fallon says he "pulled a hammy on that one," and brings in a reliever because the show "has to go on." And, like a true car buff, Leno comes out with his engine revving.

"After that last debate, Marco Rubio is being called the best communicator in the Republican party -- which is kind of like being the smartest Kardashian," begins the 65-year-old comedian, delivering the rest of the monologue while hitting a wide array of topics. "You gotta give Obama credit, he got Osama Bin Laden. Osama Bin Laden lived in that house in Pakistan for six years with seven women and 23 children -- I'm surprised the guy didn't shoot himself in the head."

RELATED: Jay Leno shows how old he is on 'The Tonight Show'

"I like Obamacare. The trouble with Obamacare is there are too many government agencies under the Obamacare umbrella. Like, I got a prostate exam the other day, but it was done by a drone," jokes the former host, causing the crowd to roar in approval.

After the monologue, Fallon asks his predecessor if he'd like to stick around for the rest of the show. "You know, I can't," Leno smiles back. "I'm the lead guest on Colbert."

Over the years, Leno has made no secret about the fact that the monologue was his favorite part of hosting the late-night show. His last episode as host aired in February 2014, as Fallon took over the desk later that month.

Leno, who hosted the show from 1992-2014 (with a small break in-between, but that's a long story), has a new program called "Jay Leno's Garage." The self-professed car-nut will display super-cars and classics, restoration projects and even a futuristic-looking electric car on the show, which premieres Wednesday, Oct. 7 at 10 p.m. ET/PT on CNBC.