CLEVELAND, Ohio -- Ben Carson, the retired neurosurgeon and Republican presidential candidate, used a medical conference here Friday to deliver his latest critique of President Barack Obama's signature health care program.

"The thing I really detested about the Affordable Care Act was you had government saying, 'We don't care what you, the people think. This is what you're going to do. End of story.' And that completely turns it on its head," Carson told more than 100 attendees at Cleveland Clinic Children's Pediatric Innovation Summit.

Carson, whose political identity soared after blasting Obamacare while the president sat nearby at the 2013 National Prayer Breakfast, added that he "very much wants people to have good health care." He also asserted that the U.S. spends "almost twice as much as the next closest nation on health care" -- a claim that the independent fact-checkers at PolitiFact found flaws with earlier this year.

"Is health care a right in this country? I don't believe so," Carson said at the close of his nearly 45-minute keynote speech, delivered at downtown's Global Center for Health Innovation. "But I believe it is a responsibility for a compassionate society. And we are a compassionate society. Physicians need to get involved. Five physicians signed the Declaration of Independence. ... We need to be the ones who drive this if we're going to be successful as a society."

Carson's speech had been relatively light on the politics until that point. For most of his time on stage he leaned comfortably on a lectern and delivered a conversational version of his life story. He grew up in poverty but went on to become a famed pediatric neurosurgeon at Baltimore's Johns Hopkins Hospital, where he was known for leading the first successful operation to separate twins joined at the head.

At times he sprinkled in pointed commentary.

"My mother worked extraordinarily hard, two three jobs at a time, getting up and leaving at 5 in the morning and getting back after midnight," Carson said. "The key thing for her is she never became a victim. She just didn't want to be dependent. She occasionally accepted some aid, but for the most part she stayed off of government aid. She didn't want us to feel like we were victims, either.

"I find it amusing that some people like to criticize me," he continued. "They say, 'Well, Carson grew up very poor, and he must have accepted government aid, so why does he want to withdraw it from people now?' Which is just total lies. I have no desire to withdraw aid from people who actually need it."

The speech was Carson's second public appearance in Cleveland in three months. He headlined the Cuyahoga County Republican Party's Lincoln Day dinner in April.

Carson is likely to return here Aug. 6, for the first GOP presidential debate, which Fox News will broadcast live from The Q. The cable network only will invite candidates who have averaged in the top 10 of recent national polls.

It's a threshold Carson should have little trouble meeting, based on his recent standings in the top third of a crowded field. But he has expressed concern about rules that could exclude Carly Fiorina, the only woman in the race, and others polling in the low single digits. This week, Fox News announced it will televise an afternoon forum for the candidates who don't qualify for the prime time debate.

"I'm happier with it than what they were doing before," Carson told the Northeast Ohio Media Group in an interview after his Friday speech. "I actually do think Carly will get there. I've known Carly for a long time. She's a smart cookie."

Cleveland also will host the 2016 Republican National Convention.