By Dennis Seid

Daily Journal

TUPELO – For 66 years, B&B Concrete has been a household name in north Mississippi, with ready-mix concrete plants dotting the landscape.

And during most of that time, Bill Waters has been an integral part of the company.

“I started when I was 16,” he said.”In 1960, I was still in high school and I worked through college and every summer I drove a truck, did general flunky work, all kinds of things. People ask me how long Ive been with B&B and I tell them that, for the second time, it’s going on 44 years.”

Next month, he’ll be inducted into the third Hall of Fame Class of the Mississippi Concrete Industries Association.

He’ll be joined by friends, family and colleagues at B&B, including company co-founder Henry Brevard Jr., who was inducted in the first Hall of Fame class in 2013.

“Having spent most of my life in the concrete-related business most of my life, and most of it with B&B Concrete, it’s a surprise and honor to be acknowledged by your peers,” he said. “It’s very humbling.”

Getting started

A 1966 civil engineering graduate from Mississippi State University, Waters didn’t go to work for B&B Concrete right away. Instead he got a job for IBM as a computer systems engineer, working closely with banks.

But he did spend a little more time with B&B before going to work for IBM.

“There was a two-week gap between the time I graduated and when I started with IBM, and I was flat broke,” he said. “So as an engineering graduate from Mississippi State, my first job immediately after college was driving a truck for B&B Concrete. Mr. Brevard and David (Henry’s son) love me when I tell that story, because they both went to Ole Miss. We get a good laugh out of it.”

Waters has always been close to the Brevards.

And the feeling is mutual.

“We consider Bill to be a part of our family,” said David Brevard. “We love Bill and his family.”

The elder Brevard took a liking to Waters early on, taking notice of his work ethic and the attention to detail.

“He liked the way I cleaned his car at my uncle’s service station,” Waters said. “I worked there on Saturday, and he’d come in every week. He liked the job I did there and offered me a job at B&B.”

In those early years, Waters worked in the yard, driving the front-end loader, batched concrete and did whatever was necessary.

“It was a great experience,” he said.

At IBM, Waters picked up extensive knowledge of accounting and finance during his work with banks. As an engineer, he wasn’t well-versed in the areas, but the experience proved invaluable, Waters said.

In 1972, B&B came looking for him.

“I really didn’t think I’d be back,” he said. “But during those years with IBM, whenever I was ever back in Tupelo, I’d try to see Mr Brevard at least once or twice a year. Late in 1971, I was visiting him here and he shut the door and asked if I’d ever consider coming back and working for B&B because he had some expansion plans.”

After months of thinking about the new job that was being developed at B&B, and thinking about where to raise and educate his young children, Waters decided to come back to the All-America City.

“I’ve never regretted coming back,” he said. “I was born and raised in Tupelo, and it’s a great place to raise four children. They went to the schools here, and they went on to State, Ole Miss and Millsaps. So we spread it around nicely.”

Today’s success

Today, Waters is the vice president of B&B, where he plays a major role in the company. He’s also the company’s engineer.

“Bill is the only non-family member who is a shareholder, officer, director and executive committee member for our family company,” explained David Brevard. “This status is the strongest, clear reflection of our confidence, trust, respect and gratitude for Bill and his significant contribution to the success of our family company.”

Waters says his success has been driven and influenced by the Brevards.

“I think it’s work ethic I learned from them,” he sad. “And I’m working with ethical, first-class people who believe that a job should be done first-rate in a timely manner. Quality and customer service are a key part of that as well. And they treat me like family.”

David Brevard said Waters has the strong analytical mind of an engineer and can crunch numbers. But he said Waters does more than that.

“He also has the ability to consider and think through the qualitative factors which need to be considered in making a good reasoned decision on many business matters,” Brevard said. “Bill has good, reasoned judgment. In addition he has a lot of wisdom about our business and our industry. He has the respect, goodwill and active support of our employees, our customers, members of the engineering and architectural community and officials with public entities such as the Mississippi Department of Transportation.”

Brevard said Waters is a valued “sounding board” and a go-to confidant as well.

“We have been blessed with many capable, conscientious, hardworking and valuable employees,” he added. “B&B has survived and succeeded for 66 years of business operations as a result of the individual and combined efforts of a great team of employees past and present, and we believe continuing into the future. Accordingly, it is dangerous to single out any individual employee for special recognition, but just like the selection of Bill for the MCIA Hall of Fame, if B&B were to have an employee Hall of Fame, Bill Waters would be included. He is special.”

dennis.seid@journalinc.com