I was never the guy who could hit .300 in baseball (or even .100, for that matter) and the various soccer teams I’ve played on never went undefeated. But there’s one sport where I have a perfect streak: self-loathing voting.

I have yet to check a ballot for a Republican presidential nominee who I was even remotely enthusiastic about.

In fairness, I’m 29 years old, so I missed the conservative groundswell of the 1980s and the right’s post-Clinton zeal for George W. Bush in 2000. But still, it’s remarkable that I’ve voted in two general presidential elections, and not once have I gone into a voting booth sans clothespin over my nose.

It’s not like I’m being unreasonable. I’m a fairly conservative guy, albeit with a sharp libertarian bent, and no Democratic candidate has ever come close to tempting me. I’m also not some rigid ideological purist, dismissing perfectly good office-seekers at the first whiff of apostasy. Politics is a game of pragmatism, and I’m more than willing to pull the lever for someone who’s 85, 80, or even 75 percent in alignment with me, provided he (or she!) seems like a decent sort and doesn’t, you know, taunt Vietnam POWs.

So my standards aren’t that high, yet I still can’t get no satisfaction. Is it me? Is it electoral dysfunction?

In 2008, Sen. John McCain was nominated by the Republican Party as part of an attempt to appear moderate after years of George W. Bush’s disastrously ideological Iraq war. It didn’t go well: the sole enthusiasm McCain seemed to muster was for continuing the Bush foreign policy, whether by speciously claiming that Iraq had been won or singing ditties about how Iran should be next.

In the end, I made an in-the-voting-booth decision to write in Ron Paul—a satisfying choice, but not the official GOP nominee.

In 2012, Mitt Romney took the Republican conn after a bruising primary season that saw surges by unlikely electoral dwarves like Newt Gingrich and Rick Santorum. Amidst an injection of fresh political juice from the tea party and its activism against Obamacare, the best GOP elites could do was the architect of proto-Obamacare who somehow now opposed Obamacare, and seemed to stand for little else other than his own electoral ambitions.

I voted for Romney, but with extreme reluctance, and only because I was then registered in a swing state and not deep-blue Connecticut.

This year was supposed to be different. Finally, the tea party class of 2016 had come of age and was ready to shake up the typically staid GOP nominating process. The roll call of candidates was exhilarating — Paul, Cruz, Christie, Walker — and the freakout over the first two by the same gentry who hear-heared Romney seemed like a promising sign. There was that troubling intervention by Donald Trump to deal with, but he’d also mounted a presidential run four years ago, and had dropped out as soon as Obama placated him by releasing a birth certificate. Surely, Trump would be just as shakeable in 2016.

He wasn’t, he isn’t, and today he’s the presumptive Republican nominee, having vanquished Ted Cruz on the corn-strewn battlefield of Indiana. So my GOP champion this year won’t be a mumbling moderate or a malfunctioning robot — he’ll be a vulgar, bloviating, flappable boor with only the most cursory knowledge about the office he’s seeking and the policies he’ll be implementing.

The Republican gallery of presidential wannabes has come to resemble Odysseus’ visit to Hades, with candidates grunting, torpidly shuffling about, pushing insurmountable electoral boulders up hills, and reaching for victory without ever being able to grasp it. We’ve become the Democrats of the 1980s, flipping through various Mondales and Dukaki, unable to find that spark that inspires the electorate.

Only, while the Democratic selections of that time represented a victory of left-wing activists over party moderates, it’s the elites who are in control of the Republican process. Even Donald Trump is a wheeler and dealer, likely to sell out his waifish patina of principle the moment it’s opportune. There’s a reason many in the Republican old guard prefer him to Cruz and Paul.

Trump is not even eligible for a swallow-hard Mitt Romney vote, in my opinion. And so I’ll be supporting a third party this year or perhaps writing in my second Paul. I understand the GOP doesn’t cater exclusively to me, but I don’t think I’m being an entitled Millennial when I say they ought to do better.