By NATASHA SINGER

The New York Times

One afternoon a few months ago, a 45-year-old sales representative named Mike called “The Dr. Harry Fisch Show,” a weekly men’s health program on the Howard Stern channel on Sirius XM Radio, where no male medical or sexual issue goes unexplored.

“I feel like a 70-year-old man in a 45-year-old body,” Mike, from Vancouver, British Columbia, told Fisch on the live broadcast. “I want to feel good. I don’t want to feel tired all day.”

A regular listener, Mike had heard Fisch, a New York urologist and fertility specialist, talk about a phenomenon called “low testosterone” or “low T.” Fisch likes to say that a man’s testosterone level is “the dipstick” of his health; he regularly appears on programs like “CBS This Morning” to talk about the malaise that may coincide with low testosterone.

He is also the medical expert featured on IsItLowT.com, an informational website sponsored by AbbVie, the drugmaker behind AndroGel, the best-selling prescription testosterone gel.

Like many men who have seen commercials or online quizzes about “low T,” Mike suspected that diminished testosterone was the cause of his lethargy. And he hoped that taking a prescription testosterone drug would make him feel more energetic.

Mike also said he had diabetes and high blood pressure and was 40 pounds overweight. Fisch explained that conditions like obesity might be accompanied by decreased testosterone and energy, and he urged Mike to exercise more and to lose weight. But if Mike had trouble overhauling his diet and exercise habits, Fisch said, taking testosterone might give him the boost he needed to do so.

“If it gives you more energy to exercise,” Fisch said of the testosterone drug, “I’m all for it.”

Recommendations like Fisch’s and the marketing of low T as a common medical condition helped propel U.S. sales of testosterone gels, patches, injections and tablets to about $2 billion last year, according to IMS Health, a health care information company.

In 2002, sales were reported to be a mere $324 million; around that time, Solvay Pharmaceuticals, which was then marketing AndroGel, began using the term “low T,” replacing a previous euphemism for male aging, “andropause.”

Today the low-T trend is global. From 2000 to 2011, there was “a major and progressive increase” in testosterone use in 37 countries, according to a recent study in the Medical Journal of Australia.

This marketing juggernaut is running into mounting opposition from prominent medical researchers and industry experts. They contend that the pharmaceutical industry has vastly expanded the market for testosterone drugs to many men who may not need them and may be exposed to increased health risks by taking them.

Drugmakers spent $107 million in 2012 to advertise the top brand-name testosterone drugs in the United States. That amount doesn’t include marketing known as unbranded campaigns, which raise awareness of low T itself.

The Food and Drug Administration closely regulates advertisements for brand-name prescription drugs but does not generally regulate unbranded campaigns.

That two-track system, says John Mack, an analyst who runs a blog called Pharma Marketing, has enabled companies to position low T as a malady with such amorphous symptoms — listlessness, increased body fat and moodiness — that it can be seen to afflict nearly all men, at least once in a while. Drugmakers also promote low-T screening quizzes directly to consumers, Mack says, to prompt men to seek prescriptions from their doctors.

“You might not have the medical condition as described in the textbook,” Mack explains. “But you may have low T as defined by marketing quizzes, and you go to the doctor and ask for treatment.”

David Freundel, a spokesman for AbbVie, declined requests to interview company executives. In a statement, Freundel wrote: “AndroGel is approved by the FDA to treat adult men with low or no testosterone (hypogonadism) who have been diagnosed by a physician, and has more than 10 years of clinical, safety, published and post-marketing data.”

He added that the company continues to finance research into the long-term effects of testosterone therapy and that its unbranded informational efforts, like the IsItLowT. com site, “follow FDA’s guidance.”

"The big thing is, we just don’t know the long-term risk of testosterone therapy at this time. It’s particularly concerning when you see the dramatic increase happening at such a large scale so quickly." — Jacques G. Baillargeon, an epidemiologist at the University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston

Nevertheless, some public health experts warn that the popularization of testosterone drugs is outpacing research into efficacy and possible harms. The drugs’ labels warn users about the potential for sleep apnea, congestive heart failure and low sperm counts; the topical gels warn that women and children exposed to the substances could develop male characteristics like chest hair. Others have raised concerns about the potential for prostate cancer and heart attacks.

“The big thing is, we just don’t know the long-term risk of testosterone therapy at this time,” says Jacques G. Baillargeon, an epidemiologist at the University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston. “It’s particularly concerning when you see the dramatic increase happening at such a large scale so quickly.”

FOUNTAIN OF YOUTH

In a TV commercial promoting awareness of “low T,” the shadow of a middle-age man sits on a bench watching his friends play basketball.

“Feeling like a shadow of your former self? Don’t have the hops for hoops with your buddies?” says the voice-over

for the spot, paid for by AbbVie. “You might have a treatable condition called low testosterone or low T.” A few seconds later, presumably after the man is treated with testosterone, the shadow evaporates and a man materializes in the flesh, besuited and smiling. Cue the voice-over: “Step out of the shadows.”

The quest to stave off aging by manipulating testosterone is an old one.

Toward the end of the 19th century, the French doctor Charles-Édouard Brown-Séquard began injecting himself with “juice” extracted from crushed dog or guinea-pig testicles, as reported in The Lancet in 1889. Although he contended that the injections were rejuvenating, researchers came to believe that the placebo effect was at work.

In the 1920s and ‘30s, surgeons began transplanting monkey and goat testes into men, says Dr. John E. Morley, the director of endocrinology and geriatrics at the St. Louis University School of Medicine. But that fad ended quickly after one well-known surgeon implanted goat testicles into his patients, and they apparently emitted a noxious odor.

“This is the hilarious history of testosterone,” recounts Morley, who in the past took speaking or consulting fees from drugmakers that marketed testosterone or planned to do so. “It may not have gotten any better. But, gee whiz, it was crazy.”

More than a decade ago, a Dutch pharmaceutical company, Organon BioSciences, asked Morley to devise a screening questionnaire for symptoms common to older men with low testosterone. Morley recalls the drugmaker’s instructions: “They said, 'Don’t make it too long and make it somewhat sexy.' ”

In return, he says, Organon gave $40,000 to his university for research into the effects of testosterone on muscle. Along the way, Morley’s quiz acquired an official name that emphasized its intended audience was older men: the Androgen Deficiency in Aging Males (or ADAM) test.

That test has become standard fare on brand-name drug sites like androgel.com and on informational sites like IsItLowT.com.

The test has also become controversial. Most of the questions invoke symptoms so general that they could apply to many men who are clinically depressed or simply having a bad day — or even to women, says Dr. Adriane J. Fugh-Berman, an associate professor at Georgetown University Medical Center in Washington.

“There are tests that everyone will fail — that is the idea,” says Fugh-Berman, who directs PharmedOut, a Georgetown project to educate doctors about drug marketing. ” 'Do you feel tired after dinner?’ Depends how long after dinner. We all do eventually. It’s called sleep.”

Morley recalls that he drafted the questionnaire in 20 minutes in the bathroom, scribbling the questions on toilet paper and giving them to his secretary to type up. He agrees that it is hardly a perfect screening tool.

“I have no trouble calling it a crappy questionnaire,” he says. “It is not ideal.”

Researchers like Dr. Lisa M. Schwartz and Dr. Steven Woloshin, professors at the Dartmouth Institute for Health Policy & Clinical Practice, say disease promotions and quizzes do more than just worry men into visiting their doctors. The implicit message is that taking testosterone will improve men’s energy and mood, the pair wrote in a recent article in JAMA Internal Medicine.

ALL-STAR MARKETING

This year, Medical Marketing & Media, a trade magazine, named two AbbVie executives as “the all-star large pharma marketing team of the year” for promotions of AndroGel and unbranded efforts to advance low T.

“It didn’t hurt that baby boomers have proven less than shy about availing themselves of any product that they believe will increase their quality of life,” the magazine said. The article lauded AbbVie’s DriveForFive.com, an unbranded site that encourages men to have regular checkups and to ask their doctors about five tests, among them tests for cholesterol and blood pressure — and testosterone.

Freundel of AbbVie described the effort as “a national disease-awareness initiative aimed at encouraging men to take a more proactive approach to their health.”

Critics, however, see it as another tactic to create testosterone takers out of generally healthy men, using the kind of unbranded campaign that federal regulators don’t typically police.

Fugh-Berman of Georgetown refers to this kind of marketing as “disease mongering.”

In contrast, the Endocrine Society recommends against screening the general population. For one thing, men’s testosterone levels fluctuate so wildly — depending on time of day, sleep quality, whether they just ate, whether they are taking care of a newborn and even how their favorite sports team is faring — that a single reading may not indicate a problem. And there is a lack of medical consensus on the extent to which testosterone deficiency “is an important health problem.”

But Fisch — the satellite radio doctor and an occasional paid speaker for AbbVie — says he remains bullish on low T.

“This is a huge industry,” Fisch says, “and I expect it to grow even bigger.”