“I support Obama 100%.”

—Warren Buffett on Fox Business News

Warren Buffett has been a big supporter of President Obama since his first election.

We don't know for sure, but in the quid pro quo corporate cronyism of today’s Wall Street/Washington kleptocracy, it seems very likely that the avuncular Buffett gave his support for the endless stream of Wall Street bailouts and Obamacare in return for his near monopoly on oil transport from Canada to the U.S.A.

In just one example, Buffett had a dinner in 2011 with a ticket price of $35,800 per head to raise money for the President and a Democratic PAC.

Useful Idiots

If you remember, the Keystone XL oil pipeline was rejected by Obama because it might cause harm to the Nebraska aquifer — this despite the fact that Nebraska is currently crisscrossed by pipelines and the inconvenient truth that trucks and trains are far more dangerous.

Obama wants us to believe that it was actress Daryl Hannah's concern over the environment that made him kill 20,000 potential jobs and send oil via the railroad his good buddy owns.

You may remember Daryl was arrested for protesting the Keystone pipeline outside the White House.

Oil Bad and Sticky:

Daryl makes a serious face then flies to New Zealand on a private plane to get arrested again.

The truth is that Ms. Hannah is a useful fool.

Warren Buffett bought Burlington Northern railroad, which is now a subsidy of Berkshire Hathaway (NYSE: BRK.A). His railroad has a near monopoly on the transportation of oil from the Bakken and oil sands, and 52% of oil from the Bakken is transported by railroad.

I recommend you pick up 100 shares of BRK.A at $220,000 a share:

Not really — the sell-off when Warren (84) dies will be epic.

The Best Free Investment You''ll Ever Make Our analysts have traveled the world over, dedicated to finding the best and most profitable investments in the global energy markets. All you have to do to join our Energy and Capital investment community is sign up for the newsletter below. We never spam! View our Privacy Policy You''ll also get our free report, Two Stocks to Play The Coming U.S. Oil Export Surge by our resident expert Keith Kohl.

Pipes are Safer

The problem with transporting oil by train is that trains keep blowing up and destroying small towns or falling into rivers and obliterating ecosystems.

Above is a picture of 14 railcars that crashed and exploded in West Virginia.

Three million gallons of Bakken crude is pouring into the Kanawha River. Thousands of people have been evacuated from their homes.

This is the second oil train crash this week. Another train also carrying Bakken crude derailed in Ontario.

There have been nine such mishaps in the past two years. The most notable was when an oil train took out the small town of Lac-Mégantic, Canada and killed 47 people.

Wonderful, Wild West Virginia

I know that Ms. Hannah probably doesn’t condescend to slum in West Virginia. But I do — it's a fantastic wilderness state.

There is an abundance of pristine outdoor areas to mountain bike, camp, kayak, and fly fish. I take personal offense at the Hollywood elite, coupled with well-connected billionaires and politicians, and their idiotic protests and policies that are destroying my environment.

Pipelines don't fly off the rails and kill 47 people. Obama's own State Department released a report in March of 2013 saying that rails have an “increased statistical likelihood of spills.”

Every piece of the data out there says pipelines are safer than rail. Pipes are also $8 to $9 a barrel cheaper.

So naturally, the smart thing to do would be to get going on building the Keystone pipeline right away. It would be good for the environment, create jobs for those roughnecks that just got fired, save money, and reduce the probability of igniting a rolling bomb of black fiery death.

Congress recently cleared a bill approving the Keystone XL pipeline and sent it to the President.

Obama says he will veto it.

So it goes,

Christian DeHaemer

P.S. This high-tech pipeline company has the solution to ensure oil pipelines don't leak. Click here now.