A free clinic is opening this summer to serve the health care needs of Volusia County’s working poor.

Volusia Volunteers in Medicine, a not-for-profit organization, is operating the clinic, which will be housed in Bethune-Cookman University’s Odessa Chambliss Center for Health Equity.

The clinic will provide screenings, routine lab tests and referrals for specialized care to people ages 19-64 who are at 100 to 200 percent of the poverty line — with income of about $11,770 to $23,540 for individuals or $25,250 to $48,500 for a family of four.

“I think we can make a significant difference in the health and well-being of these folks,” said Dr. Martin Feigenbaum, who practiced internal medicine for more than 40 years locally and is helping to recruit volunteer doctors. “I think it will be a benefit for employers in terms of less time lost from employment. It will be helpful to hospitals in decreasing the need for emergency room visits and intensive-care hospitalization.”

Organizers hope the clinic will treat about 2,500 patients within a year, and its services will eventually grow to include dental care. The clinic is a collaboration between Bethune-Cookman, Florida Hospital, Halifax Health, the Volusia County Health Department and other community health organizations.

“Volusia Volunteers in Medicine has received incredible support from our local community already — including major medical equipment to properly outfit the facility to the significant commitment to staff the facility when it opens,” said Francene Barnes, president of Volusia Volunteers in Medicine.

The clinic’s guidelines are drawn from a national organization called Volunteers in Medicine. Seven similar clinics are operating in Florida, including clinics in Jacksonville and Lakeland.

Daytona Beach’s clinic has been a community effort that has spanned more than five years, said Jim Dixon, who sits on the organization’s board of directors.

Access to health care for working-class residents who fuel the area’s tourist economy was identified as a top need during Daytona Beach’s visioning process several years ago, he said.

“This town employs a ton of minimum-wage employees — folks who don’t have health insurance,” Dixon said. “It’s an unbelievable need.”

Other free clinics in the area serving the poor are at capacity, said Dr. Bill Gilmer, director of the Jesus Clinic in Daytona Beach.

He said he has to turn away patients because of insufficient space.

“I have to pick and choose who looks more needy,” Gilmer said. “What we will start doing is referring to Volunteers in Medicine the patients we cannot handle for whatever reason.”

Organizers are working to finalize operating hours and hire an operations coordinator. Patients will be able to use three private exam rooms. The clinic is on Lockhart Street just off International Speedway Boulevard.

The clinic’s founders say even with the Affordable Care Act, commonly referred to as Obamacare, a need still exists for free clinics.

The Congressional Budget Office estimated 31 million people will remain uninsured even when the law is fully implemented in 2024.

More information about Volusia Volunteers in Medicine is available by visiting volusiavim.org.