Throughout his rumoured transition into a woman, Bruce Jenner has kept his six children and four stepchildren a top priority.

And in a new promotional clip released on Sunday, the former Olympic athlete reaffirmed how his large brood is of the utmost importance to him, telling Diane Sawyer: 'I can't let myself hurt them. They're the only ones I'm concerned with.'

During the two-hour interview - which is scheduled to air on ABC on Friday, April 24 - the 65-year-old star is supported by his four oldest children Burt, 36, Casey, 34, Brandon, 33, and Brody, 31, who all appear in the latest snippet from the show.

Scroll down for video

'I can't let myself hurt them. They're the only ones I'm concerned with': Bruce Jenner stresses the importance of protecting his children in the newly released snippet of his tell-all interview with Diane Sawyer

It is widely reported that Bruce will speak about his rumoured transition into becoming a woman for the first time during the interview.

The new clip for his much-talked about exclusive interview with ABC's Diane sees the former Olympic gold medalist reveal: 'It made me who I am.'

A previous teaser showed Bruce telling the journalist: 'My whole life has been getting ready for this.'

Moral support: The 65-year-old father-of-six appears alongside his four oldest children Burt, 36, Casey, 34, Brandon, 33, and Brody, 31

'It made me who I am': The former Olympian will speak about his rumoured transition into becoming a woman for the first time

Not appearing in the interview: Kim, 34, Khloe, 30, and Kourtney Kardashian, 36, as well as Kendall, 19, and Kylie Jenner, 17, are not scheduled to talk during the interview

The Olympic gold medalist has kept a low profile since being involved in a fatal car accident on February 7.

The new teaser follows another clip, that promises 'the interview, the journey, the decisions, the future.'

ABC previously revealed details of the upcoming show, which is called Bruce Jenner: The Interview: it will be a two-hour programme with Sawyer, and would be 'far-ranging and exclusive'.

Tell-all: Bruce will allegedly open up about a broad range of topics including his fatal crash in Malibu on February 7

'My whole life has been getting me ready for this': Bruce speaks about his transition for the first time in new teasers for Diane Sawyer interview

According to media reports, the former track and field star has told his family that he is transgender, and they are incredibly supportive of him.

Bruce, who won a gold medal in the decathlon at the 1976 Olympics in Montreal, made headlines in February when People magazine reported that he had told his ex-wife, Kris Jenner, and his sons and daughters that he was becoming a woman.

The magazine said the family pledged their support and wanted him to be happy.

Long road: The pair are seen walking around outside as they begin their interview

Laying it on the line: It has been widely reported that Bruce will discuss transitioning into a woman

Media reports at the time said Jenner would come out as transgender during an interview with Sawyer and that he would star in a reality TV show about his transition.

Bruce was seen out at the weekend taking a motorcycle ride, covering up in heavy-duty gear amid rumours that he has recently undergone breast augmentation surgery, as reported by RadarOnline.

'Bruce had silicone breast implants put in a few weeks ago,' Radar quoted an insider. 'He went with a smaller implant because he didn't want to look ridiculous.'

When MailOnline asked his representative about the report, he replied: 'No comment'.

Hints: Keeping Up With The Kardashians has not revealed much with regards to many of the questions surrounding Bruce