Bob Muckle

Website: www.facebook.com/Bob-Muckle-For-Mayor-295786093771124/timeline

Age: 55

Family: Wife, Melanie, and daughters Jessie and Alex

How long have you lived in Louisville? 18 years

Professional background: Physician

Political/community experience: Mayor of Louisville for four years, council member Ward 1 for six years and I was on the Open Space Board.

Education: Fairview High School, Stanford University BS, University of Michigan MD

Name a person you admire and explain why: I admire Tara Schoedinger, the mayor of Jamestown, because at significant personal sacrifice has worked tirelessly to restore her community after it was devastated by the 2013 floods.

What changes do you think need to be made to the South Boulder Road and McCaslin Boulevard small area plans to sustain quality of life while increasing tax revenues?

Advertisement

In the public process on the South Boulder Road plan the residents made clear they wanted better connections between the neighborhoods to the north and downtown and wanted no additional residential density on the corridor. These inputs will be incorporated into the final plan for the area. In the McCaslin area, the blighting effect on the whole area of the mostly empty Sam's Club building is the major issue. Having a retail tenant occupy that building would have a major positive impact on city revenues. We recently created an urban renewal plan for the property to try and help eliminate this blighting effect. Other parts of the McCaslin plan are still in the process of obtaining input from residents and businesses and we'll develop the plan based on those inputs.

What practical steps can Louisville take to balance its continuing growth and small town character?

Our community events are a major part of what makes Louisville unique. I believe these need to be maintained while limiting impact on the surrounding neighborhood as best we can. We need to continue working on open space acquisitions and trail connections to maintain our great access to the outdoors. Fortunately, we have a great group of residents whose outreach to their neighbors and engagement in their community is, in fact, the most important aspect of our small town.

Should the city step in as a host or sponsor for the Louisville Street Faire?

I believe we can work out a public private partnership between the city and the DBA to maintain the Street Faire. These would involve a clear understanding of the sharing of revenues from the Faire and who will be responsible for different aspects of the event.