Franklin Graham, evangelist and CEO of the Billy Graham Evangelistic Association, announced Friday that he has pulled the ministry’s bank accounts out of Wells Fargo in a call to boycott gay-friendly companies.

By Monday afternoon, Mr. Graham’s Facebook post calling for Christians to “stop doing business with those who promote sin and stand against Almighty God’s laws and His standards” had more than 93,000 likes and more than 41,000 shares.

His remarks were an apparent reference to a Wells Fargo ad that featured a lesbian couple making plans to adopt a deaf girl, a local CBS affiliate reported.

SEE ALSO: Franklin Graham moves bank accounts to BB&T, sponsor of Miami gay pride parade

The “Will You?” campaign launched by Tiffany’s in January, featured seven different couples, including a gay couple, who have just gotten engaged, the station said.

In the post, Mr. Graham lamented “the tide of moral decay that is being crammed down our throats by big business, the media, and the gay & lesbian community.”

“Tiffany’s started advertising wedding rings for gay couples. Wells Fargo bank is using a same-sex couple in their advertising. And there are more,” he wrote. “But it has dawned on me that we don’t have to do business with them. At the Billy Graham Evangelistic Association, we are moving our accounts from Wells Fargo to another bank. And guess what—we don’t have to shop at Tiffany & Co., there are plenty of other jewelry stores.

“This is one way we as Christians can speak out—we have the power of choice. Let’s just stop doing business with those who promote sin and stand against Almighty God’s laws and His standards. Maybe if enough of us do this, it will get their attention,” Mr. Graham wrote.

Wells Fargo said the bank values the diversity of its customers and employees and has proudly supported the LGBT community for a long time, The Charlotte Observer reported.

“At Wells Fargo, serving every customer is core to our vision and values,” spokeswoman Christina Kolbjornsen said Monday. “Diversity and inclusion are foundational to who we are as a company. Our advertising content reflects our company’s values and represents the diversity of the communities we serve.”

Mr. Graham’s Facebook post didn’t say to which bank he was moving his money.