Sarah Palin manages to create controversy no matter what she does. She could post a photo online of a blank sheet of paper and that would be controversial.

On New Year’s Day, she created a new controversy when she posted on Facebook a series of photos of her youngest child, Trig, standing on the back of what is apparently his trained service dog, a Labrador Retriever. The child was standing on the dog to reach the kitchen sink and help his mother with the dishes.

The left immediately went bat guano crazy. Liberals immediately trolled Mrs. Palin’s Facebook page. It did not take long for the professional left to get into the act as well.

The laughing stock of far left-wing animal groups, PETA, denounced Mrs. Palin. They called her “hard hearted” and “brazenly callous.”

Of course, this is coming from a group that calls for the complete “liberation” of animals. That means no meat. No animal by-products like leather. That means no other products like milk, honey or eggs. That means no pets and that even means no service dogs. This is coming from a group that the U.S. Department of Agriculture has labeled as a “terrorist group.”

Just out of curiosity, is PETA “brazenly callous” when it raises millions of dollars yet slaughters thousands of animals put into its custody by the public?

But as groups like PETA scream there are a few things worth remembering. First, it is a 6-year-old child. Second, Trig has Down Syndrome. Third, the dog is a service dog. It is trained to help bear weight for the person it helps. Finally, it is a dog. If the child’s weight had caused the dog pain, the dog would have moved.

PETA is a radical left-wing group that has supported radical eco-terrorists. For PETA, that means if it didn’t have double standards it would have no standards at all.

In July, Ellen DeGeneres posted a photo of a child standing on the back of a Labrador Retriever to reach a sink. But if a liberal does something, it’s OK. If a conservative does something, it is bad and if Sarah Palin does it, it is outrageous.

What is really outrageous is the double standards of PETA. PETA loves to demonize or terrorize children. PETA loves to bypass parents and contact some children as young as 6 years old. It gives children comic books showing graphic images of animals being slaughtered and sends messages to children with wonderful titles like “Your Mommy kills animals.”

Dogs are wonderful companions. They also are great working helpers for humans. They help the disabled. They work to protect law enforcement and soldiers. They can even help protect against disease.

The radicals complaining about Sarah Palin are the same radicals who do not believe that real Americans should have the joy of a pet dog or cat. They do not believe we should have nutritious food or the animal by-products that help us in everyday life.

Real Americans love animals. Real Americans have no use for the eco-terrorist supporting radicals of PETA.