SHREVEPORT, La. (AP) - ART the Dalmatian lights up the day with a white glow, the night with color - just as art shines in many hues in many places.

At 19.5 feet of solid white fiberglass, ART is larger than life and spectacular on his foundation outside Shreveport Regional Arts Council Central ARTSTATION headquarters.

“We hope he will become a landmark, and encourage people to have their pictures made with him,” said Brandon Oldenburg, who, with Bill Joyce and Moonbot Studios artists, designed the dog.

The sculpture will be formally unveiled Nov. 6. The event is part of the Shreveport Common POP UP! week planned by Downtown Development Authority.

ART is the sculptural brain child of the Academy Award winning Joyce and Oldenburg, said SRAC executive director Pam Atchison.

The two presented the design as a commemorative housewarming gift to SRAC, the artists who inhabit the former Central Fire Station and populate Shreveport Common and fans who share the experience. The image was fabricated by JunoWorks, of Denver, through a grant from the Educational Foundation of America.

“He is designed as a tribute to the Dalmatian that has become iconic to firefighters,” said SRAC executive director Pam Atchison.

The solid white sculpture is covered in iconic dots that each light up when the dot donor’s name is selected from a key board.

“ART will have a programmable light show each evening, with seasonal colors for holidays,” explained Atchison.

“The sculpture is transformed as the evening comes at sunset. He is illuminated and the spots’ design is a round form,” said Oldenburg.

“As the newest friend of the SRAC, ART guards the renovated and repurposed fire station from his post on Crockett Sreett, outside the Engine Room,” said Atchison.

“He is the guard dog,” said Oldenburg.

Much care and attention went into the process of designing what we feel is a beautiful design, said Oldenburg.

For the deisgners, ART is playful and elegant.

First Joyce, Oldenburg and the Moonbot team studied Dalmatians for several months before deciding on a pose.

“The ‘Eureka’ moment came when Joyce realized that the Dalmatian featured in the old RCA Victrola photograph titled, ‘His Master’s Voice,’ captured the combination of the historic restoration of Central Fire Station and the essence of a Dalmatian that listens to the forces of artists at work,” said Atchison.

The model for ART was based on a photo session with Bill McFadden’s dog, Jonathan.

“We went to artspace and they had him jump on a wall, sit, stand,” said McFadden about Jonathan.

ART is adorable and interactive.

“And, playful,” commented Oldenburg.

“He will serve as a beacon for all the arts in the community.”

He still needs your dots and spot to light up his corner of the world.

___

Information from: The Times, http://www.shreveporttimes.com