“There’s been a lot of research and advancement going on since the Iraqi-Afghanistan conflict,'' said Gary Reinhold

Joel Gerber was 17 and looking forward to his senior year of high school when he lost his right hand in a machine at his dad’s upholstery shop in Lemoyne.

A crudely carved piece of wood served as his missing hand back in 1952, forcing him to learn to do most everything with just one hand. Today, he wears a realistic-looking myoelectric prosthesis with moveable fingers and thumb, but he still does many things with one hand.

“I just got used to compensating,” said Gerber, now 78 and a pro at buttoning his shirt, doing household chores and typing with one hand. “I didn’t get fitted for a prosthesis for six months after my accident and my first prosthesis was an ugly thing made of wood.”

Prostheses have come a long way in the past 50 years. Technology is opening doors to advancements never dreamed possible in the days when Gerber had his accident.

Not only are prostheses more realistic-looking than ever before; they are also much more functional, said Brock Heller, certified prosthetist and orthotist with Hangar Prosthetics and Orthotics, which has several offices in central Pennsylvania.

“They’re constantly working on new prostheses that have better range of motion and are much lighter than they used to be,” agreed Georgia Foltz, vice president of the Amputee Support Team of Central Pennsylvania, who lost her leg six inches below the knee after a blood clot in 2003.

Advances in artificial limbs allow greater function

The Artificial Limb Program, overseen by the National Academy of Sciences, was established in 1945 to enhance progress in the development of artificial limbs to address the injuries of World War II veterans. Advances in design, materials and surgical methods have increased significantly in the decades since.

“There’s been a lot of research and advancement going on since the Iraqi-Afghanistan conflict because of all the soldiers coming home with amputations,” said Gary Reinhold, also a certified prosthetist with Hangar.

More than 1,200 U.S. military veterans lost an arm or leg in Afghanistan and Iraq, according to the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. A recent study released by the department reported that the majority of the amputees – 91 percent of lower limb and 80 percent of upper limb amputees – reported that “life is full.”

The Department of Veterans Affairs has a center specifically aimed at improving quality of life for veteran amputees. The Rehabilitation Research and Development Center of Excellence for Limb Loss Prevention and Prosthetic Engineering bring together a team that includes orthopedic surgeons, engineers, rehabilitation psychologists and prosthetists. The center’s prosthetic engineering research team compares existing prosthetic technologies and develops innovative new approaches.

Gerber cringes when he thinks of the shoulder straps he wore for years with uncomfortable cables that went under his armpits. By pulling the left arm down, he could pull the cables that would open the prosthesis on his left hand.

In the mid-1980s, Gerber began reading about lightweight, battery-powered options called myoelectric prosthetics that work by placing muscle sensors against the skin. The electric signals generated by the muscle allow the prosthesis to move. Gerber was anxious to try it.

“First, we had to see if I had enough muscle power in my arm to be able to use it. Thankfully, I did,” he said. “To open the hand, I have to push my muscles up and to close it, I have to push my muscles down. I had to learn how to do that, but now I just do it naturally.”

Limb loss not uncommon

More than 500 amputations are performed daily in America, adding up to more than 180,000 amputations each year, according to the Amputee Coalition. Nationwide, some 2 million Americans are amputees.

Diabetes is the leading cause of amputation, followed by traumatic injury and cancer, according to the Amputee Coalition.

Cosmetically speaking, improvements to prostheses have made them hardly noticeable at a glance. Silicone covers can be made that are identical to the amputee’s real leg or arm -- freckles, hair and all.

Prostheses have also gotten much lighter and easier to control, Heller said. Carbon-coated prosthetics store energy as weight is put on them and then return the energy to make moving faster and easier for the amputee.

Computer technology is also allowing prostheses to “think” in a way.

For example, a microprocessor knee, known as a C-leg, Leg is programmed by the prosthetist using a laptop as the patient walks to fine-tune gait and stride. Sensors then recognize which walking phase the user is in and the C-leg automatically adjusts itself.

Bionic knees, run by gears that flex and extend, can actually allow an amputee to walk up steps normally, step over step.

The i-Limb, a bionic hand, has fin¬ger “joints” that flex and bend like natural fingers. Each finger has an individual motor powering it, en¬hancing dexterity and allowing pa¬tients to grasp round objects and shake hands.

With the higher technology, however, comes a higher price for the prosthetics, which can cost upwards of $50,000, Heller said. The Affordable Care Act will cover prostheses as an essential health benefit; however specifics are still being nailed down.

Determination, positive attitude necessary for success

As great as the technology is, it takes practice to learn to use the prosthesis, Heller said.

“You don’t just put it on and go. It’s our job to fit you properly and make you as comfortable as possible, but you should figure on doing physical therapy and occupational therapy to learn to use your prosthesis properly,” he said. “For instance, it takes a lot of practice to learn to open and close the hand at the right grip and strength for what you want to do.”

Gerber knows the difficulties well. The first time he tried to change the battery in his hearing aid, he smashed the earpiece to bits because he couldn’t get the grip to relax. Today, he laughs as he tells the story.

One necessary ingredient for success hasn’t changed through all the years of advancements – attitude.

“I remember telling my mother, ‘Mom, I know this is serious, but I know it is not going to ruin my life,’” said Gerber, who worked in his family’s upholstery business for 12 years, enjoyed 30 years of success in the insurance business and now sells furniture at the Bon-Ton in Camp Hill.

“I see the cup as half full, not half empty. I don’t think I’m anything extra special, but I knew immediately that I wasn’t going to sit in the corner sucking my thumb about it.”

Still, Gerber doesn’t mean to make light of the hard work it took to accommodate his life to his limb loss.

In the summer afternoons before school began in the fall of ’52, Gerber spent hours working with his former first-grade teacher, learning to grasp a pencil with his left hand and coax out legible letters, words and sentences.

After high school graduation, he went to business college, where he requested a typing book like the returning veteran amputees were using that would teach him one-handed typing.

When he felt discouraged, he reminded himself that people had worse things to deal with than he did. He knew he would rather have lost a hand than a leg or his eyesight – or even his life.

“A lot of my contemporaries were going in the Korean War, but I couldn’t go. Maybe I would’ve gone and been killed,” Gerber said. “Maybe this thing actually saved my life.’’