× Expand Photo by Pete DeMola Rep. Elise Stefanik (R-NY21-Willsboro) is running for re-election. “As 2016 begins, I’ve been humbled and energized by the tremendous support our campaign received from hundreds of donors from all across the 21st District this past year,” said the rep. She’s pictured here in Willsboro last summer with her pup.

GLENS FALLS — She’s in.

Rep. Elise Stefanik (R-NY21-Willsboro) formally announced her campaign for re-election last week.

The first-term representative said she made the decision after consulting with numerous community, business and political leaders after a “successful results-oriented year in office.”

Stefanik said key accomplishments of her year-long tenure include the introduction of year-round Pell legislation, leading the effort to successfully suspend the medical device tax and leading the state congressional delegation’s efforts to stave off cuts at Fort Drum.

The rep also cited the repeal of the auto-enrollment provision of the Affordable Care Act as a highlight, as well as a bipartisan approach to governance and transparency with her constituents.

“My top priority has been keeping my promises to bring a new generation of leadership to Congress, and to demonstrate a new approach with a focus on accountability and transparency, accessibility through hundreds of community events to hear directly from constituents, and by prioritizing legislation that helps people raise a family or make a living in the North Country, not make it harder,” Stefanik said in a news release.

Stefanik, 31, spent last weekend in the district, meeting with medical professionals in Lake Placid and skiing at Whiteface Mountain.

She begins the cycle with nearly $1 million on hand.

In an interview earlier this month, she batted away questions about the race.

“I’m focused on doing my job,” said Stefanik, citing the positive feedback she has received across the political spectrum.

Last week, Stefanik met with the Essex County Republican Committee before they endorsed her.

Chairman Shaun Gillilland said Stefanik has accomplished more for the district than any member of Congress in living memory.

“She has quickly become a rising leader in Congress, she has sponsored numerous successful bills in Congress, she has successfully protected Fort Drum, she has kept her promise to legislate in a bipartisan basis and work across the aisle,” Gillilland said in an email.

Gillilland also cited the rep’s dedication to constituent services across one of the largest districts east of the Mississippi.

“She represents the future of our country, she represents the all the people of the North Country and she arduously works for and fights for the interests of all of us.”

CHALLENGERS STEP OUT

The Willsboro rep was elected in November 2014, beating Democrat Aaron Woolf by 21 percentage points. A third candidate, Matt Funiciello, garnered about 10.5 percent.

This year, Mike Derrick, a retired army colonel from Peru, is seeking the Democratic Party’s nod.

“I’m sure she will try to ignore me as long as possible — and I don’t blame her!” Derrick told the Sun.

Derrick, who entered the race last summer, said he has spent the past 7 months traveling the district and meeting with stakeholders.

“I’m looking forward to a closely contested campaign between two different candidates,” Derrick said.

The candidate cited his military bonafides and took a shot at Stefanik, who sits on the House Armed Services Committee:

“It’s a wasted opportunity to put someone with very thin experience in those areas in such a position,” Derrick said.

Derrick said he’s running, in part, because American performance at the federal level pales when compared to more productive policies at the state and local levels.

“It should be very, very closely synchronized and that is not happening right now,” Derrick said.

The last legislative session was one of the most unproductive in US history, the candidate noted.

“I’ve lived a life of leadership,” Derrick said. “It’s something I’ve lived, and have delivered results.”

Derrick said he is a candidate “of and for the North Country versus someone from Washington.”

While just red and blue for now, voters can expect a splash of green this spring.

Funiciello said he plans on making an announcement in March.

“I have every full intention of running,” Funiciello told the Sun. “It is soon going to be a three-way race.”

The Glens Falls-based baker said the 2014 election helped galvanize independent voters in the district, which number some 40 percent of the electorate.

The Green Party also aims to run candidates for state assembly and senate, he said.

Funiciello said he looked forward to debating the issues with Stefanik now that she has a voting record.

Stefanik, said Funiciello, voted for the now-defunct Keystone Pipeline and against Environmental Protection Agency carbon limits for power plants.

“She needs to be held accountable for that,” Funiciello said. “It’s time to talk about these issues with someone who has voted on the wrong side of them.”

Funiciello said he has met Derrick and likes him.

“Mike is a principled person who I think is running for sincere reasons,” Funiciello said.

Funiciello said he hoped he could discuss the issues without being marginalized by the two-party system.

Derrick said Funiciello “clearly struck a chord” with the electorate in the district.

At one point, Funiciello called for Woolf to drop out and endorse him.

“Matt Funiciello doesn’t stand a chance of getting elected and I certainly do,” said Derrick.

“That is too bad, but we’ll leave that for the voters to decide,” Funiciello shot back.

Neither of the two parties will ever represent the working class, said Funiciello.

“If the voters wish to see real change, I will give them that choice this November.”

FINANCES

Stefanik announced that the campaign had raised $236,000 in the fourth quarter, bringing in over $1.3 million in 2015 — the highest off-year fundraising total in the history of the district, the campaign noted. Stefanik begins the year with $928,000 cash on hand.

The Derrick campaign reported raising $209,352 in 2015, with $72,999 raised from 316 individuals within the district and $136,353 from 302 individuals from outside the district, with $135,000 cash on hand.

Funiciello reported having zero on hand because he hasn’t started fundraising yet.

“I don’t intend to until I announce officially in March,” he said.

STEFANIK CAMPAIGN RESPONDS

Stefanik campaign spokesman Lenny Alcivar sounded off on Derrick’s comments.

“Mike Derrick’s stated belief that having the 21st District represented on the vital House Arms Service Committee is ‘wasted’ is an insult to the men and women serving at Fort Drum and around the world,” Alcivar said in an email.

“Congresswoman Stefanik is the only candidate running with the proven experience and record of getting things done on behalf of her district — especially when it comes to protecting and defending Fort Drum and the military community in her district,” Alcivar continued.

Alcivar said Stefanik has a “proven record” as a leading voice on the House Armed Services Committee leading the successful effort to unite the state’s congressional delegation to “protect and strengthen” Fort Drum, which was at risk of significant cuts last year.

Stefanik, he said, has been an outspoken critic of defense cuts and has consistently fought against sequestration, which was successfully suspended.

“Stefanik has built a reputation as one of the most effective Members on the Committee, especially as it relates to Army Readiness issues. Stefanik also single handedly ensured that the planning and design for an East Coast Missile Defense site was included in final appropriations package,” Alcivar said.

On Funiciello’s comments:

“Like her predecessor Bill Owens, Congresswoman Elise Stefanik voted for the bipartisan Keystone Pipeline which helps bring needed energy independence and security and creates American jobs. Congresswoman Stefanik is one of the original co-sponsors of Chris Gibson’s bill to combat climate change while protecting American jobs. Stefanik believes that we must address climate change but instead of increasing federal regulations, we need to solve this issue using free market principles.”