Extra anchor thanks Obama for Obamacare in soft-hitting interview

It’s a rare occasion for President Barack Obama to give a friendly interview about health care reform. It’s rarer still for a sitdown in the Rose Garden. And rarer still, with an interviewer who thanks the president for Obamacare.

But that’s what happened when Jerry Penacoli, an actor and correspondent for the entertainment news program “Extra,” recounted his battle with cancer and how the Affordable Care Act “pretty much saved my finances and my life” in a recent interview on the White House grounds, which he called “my chance to thank the president.”

Story Continued Below

Obama has been on a push to promote the Affordable Care Act as the Supreme Court prepares to announce a high-stakes decision in the King v. Burwell case that could decide whether the federal exchange can allow for subsidies in states that do not have their own exchanges.

One of Obama’s lines from their chat: “One of the things I try to remind people of—what we do here, what the Supreme Court does, what Congress does — these aren’t just abstractions,” Obama said. “These are things that really matter in people’s lives.”

Penacoli also lobbed softballs about life in the White House and his daughters, as well as who Obama wants to prevail in the Stanley Cup Finals between his hometown Blackhawks and the Tampa Bay Lightning. The answer was obvious. (Penacoli is apparently a Tampa Bay area native.) Obama still wouldn’t pick a winner in the equally tightly contested NBA Finals between the Cleveland Cavaliers and the Golden State Warriors.

He also gave Obama an opportunity to address his haters. Apparently the president answers letters that call him “an idiot,” following up on another question posed by Penacoli.

Obama occasionally gives interviews to local television stations to push policy initiatives, as was the case last week when he spoke with local TV anchors to push the Trans-Pacific Partnership. (It didn’t turn out quite as planned, as POLITICO reported.)

But he’s granted interviews to big national outlets much less frequently throughout his presidency, to the consternation of many journalists.

The president’s last interview with The New York Times came with op-ed columnist Thomas Friedman in April, where Obama defended ongoing negotiations with Iran on its nuclear deal. He last spoke with CNN in late January with Fareed Zakaria in New Delhi, where the two discussed pressing global affairs ranging from Ukraine to Saudi Arabia.

Obama last gave an exclusive interview to Fox News on the occasion of Super Bowl XLVIII in February 2014, when Fox aired the big game. (Each year since 2009, the president has done interviews with the network airing the NFL championship as part of the pregame show.)

Obama’s also granted soft-hitting interviews of one form or another to Vox.com, Buzzfeed, Jimmy Kimmel, David Letterman, Jon Stewart, Stephen Colbert, and Zach Galifianakis.

Dan Pfeiffer, Obama’s former senior communications adviser, explained earlier this year that the White House has “tried a spaghetti strategy — throw a lot of things against the wall and see what sticks, and to be very willing to take on risk that under traditional political rules you wouldn’t.”

Pfeiffer disagreed with criticism that the administration is doing all it can to avoid traditional media outlets.

“That’s not actually our strategy,” he added in the interview published on Medium. “This is not an either/or strategy: it’s an and/both.”

Authors: