Narrow provider networks, considered the scourge of managed care in the 1990s, are making a roaring comeback.

The Affordable Care Act has been a catalyst for the creation of narrow provider networks, said Mike Taylor, senior vice president at consultant Aon Hewitt, at the Dallas-Fort Worth Business Group on Health annual conference in December. He said national and regional insurance carriers are developing smaller networks to compete on public and private exchanges.

About 70 percent of new plans on the public health insurance exchanges offer narrower networks compared with many current employer plans, according to a recent McKinsey & Co. report. “Narrow” was defined as having at least 30 percent of the 20 largest hospitals in a geographic area not participating in the exchange’s silver plan. The consulting firm studied 20 U.S. metropolitan areas, including Dallas.

The health maintenance organizations of the 1990s were instrumental in holding down costs. Consumers ultimately rejected them because of restrictions on what doctors or facilities’ customers could use. However, price has become the paramount consideration for consumers and employers, insurers say.

According to a PwC survey, 91 percent of insurers participating in the public exchanges believe consumers will care most about premiums, with concerns about out-of-pocket costs coming in a distant second. A separate consumer survey found that a majority of respondents preferred “less expensive plans with a limited network of doctors and hospitals” to “more expensive plans with a broader network of doctors and hospitals.”

Smaller networks are attractive to smaller businesses as well. A majority of small employers would choose a smaller provider network if it resulted in lower premiums, and that rose to 82 percent if the smaller network produced 20 percent lower premiums.

A typical narrow network includes providers who agree to lower prices with the expectation that patient volume will grow. Insurers pass some of the savings on to consumers.

Narrow networks have implications for providers regardless of whether they are included. Out-of-network providers are likely to see a decrease in market share while those in-network will have to absorb a decrease in commercial payer rates.

Taylor pointed out that the savings of narrower networks are not significant. He said a 40 percent decrease in network size only produces a 5 percent savings, and a 75 percent increase translates to a 25 percent savings.

Beth Wexler, vice president and senior credit officer at Moody’s Investors Service, told Becker’s Hospital Review narrow networks will not catch on as quickly in markets with several commercial payers.

“It will depend on how dominant one payer is in the market,” she said. “Where there’s a good diversity of payers, it might be a little slower to come in terms of one payer taking the leap of faith that they’re going to be the payer of choice.”

About 70 percent of U.S. metropolitan areas lack sufficient competition among insurers, according to a report by The American Medical Association. The Dallas and Fort Worth metropolitan areas are not among them, so narrow networks may develop more slowly locally.

About 1 out of 4 companies are steering patients to high-quality providers, according to a 2013 Aon Hewitt employer survey, but more than 4 out of 5 plan to do so in 3-5 years. According to consultant Deloitte, narrow-network commercial PPO products could comprise 50 percent of the national employer business by 2015. Those plans typically offer the choices between a standard network and a second, more limited option of higher quality, or lower cost, providers.

In January 2013, Baylor Health Care System signed a contract with Imagine Health, a company based in Cottonwood Heights, Utah, that developed a provider network for two large, self-funded employers in the Dallas market. Aetna is the third-party administrator for the narrow network plan, which offers lower copays if employees and their dependents go to providers in the network.

Allison Robbins, Imagine Health chief executive officer, said she anticipates the company’s DFW network will be its largest U.S. market in terms of employees by 2015. Her company selects providers in the top quartile of quality measures and selects the provider based on negotiated rates, she said, and it augmented the DFW network with 100s of physicians and ancillary providers.

Imagine Health is in seven U.S. markets and expects to be in at least 10 by 2015. Robbins said the goal is to be in the 40 largest U.S. metropolitan areas within four years.

“We look at quality first, and the byproduct for selection is that volume moves and the provider wins,” when selecting providers for a local network, Robbins said. “We ask the provider for an appropriate rate for that.”

Bruce Sammis, chief executive officer of Lockton Dunning Benefits in Dallas, said he believes the DFW market is in transition to the point where employers and providers are beginning to embrace narrow networks.

“In DFW, three systems—Baylor, Texas Health Resources, and HCA—control 70 percent of the hospital market,” he said. “Going forward, a new [narrow] network would not include all three and maybe not even two. Providers say they are willing to give better prices for incremental volume. They say they can save 15-20 percent if the network is sufficiently narrow and that they can impact care delivery and they don’t have employees drifting all over town.”

Dallas-based Mercer consultant Eric Bassett said employers have embraced higher-quality narrow networks as quality data has become more available.

According to Mercer’s 2013 national survey of employer-sponsored health plans, 16 percent of Dallas firms of at least 500 employees are using high-performance networks, compared with 24 percent in Texas and 15 percent in the U.S.

Steve Jacob is founding editor of D Healthcare Daily and author of the book Health Care in 2020: Where Uncertain Reform, Bad Habits, Too Few Doctors and Skyrocketing Costs Are Taking Us. He can be reached at [email protected]