WASHINGTON — Candidates for the vacant 18th Congressional District seat sounded many similar themes at their second debate in two nights, at times nearly word for word.

But state Sen. Darin LaHood, R-Peoria, and Democrat Rob Mellon of Quincy did find time during an hour-long debate at Five Points Washington on Thursday to focus on matters where they hadn’t previously clashed, including the Affordable Care Act and campaign finance reform.

On the first, LaHood criticized the health care reforms as having not produced what voters were told they would.

“All the promises that were made when this was put into place have not come to fruition,” he said, citing a lack of lower costs. “… The government doesn’t run big things well.”

Mellon agreed that the system had flaws, but challenged the notion that it amounted to government seizing control.

“Anyone who argues the ACA is a government takeover of health care is … significantly stretching the truth,” he said at the forum sponsored by WEEK-TV, Channel 25 and the League of Women Voters of Greater Peoria.

The pair also sparred over the future of Social Security, with Mellon saying that raising the retirement age should be off the table.

“What’s it like for a coal miner to work to 70 years old?” he asked. “That’s not acceptable.”

He did say he supported making tweaks on some caps, though.

LaHood, by contrast, said he supported looking at a gradual phase-in of a higher retirement age and that he also supported means testing.

Mellon also repeatedly slammed LaHood for his fundraising during the campaign, which has brought the GOP candidate more than $1.5 million in donations.

“All of those come with attachments, with strings attached,” Mellon said, implying that LaHood would be beholden to donor interests.

The lawmaker strongly disagreed, saying that most of the funds raised came from small donors within the sprawling, 19-county district that stretches from Quincy on the Mississippi River all the way to Cropsey northeast of Bloomington.

LaHood’s solution? “I think more transparency, I think you ought to be able to Google and find where campaign donations come from,” he said.

Confronted with a question on the rising student loan debt that bedevils college students across the country, Mellon suggested that he would favor expanding recent, post-9/11 GI Bill benefits to other veterans.

LaHood said he thought it was important to ensure that federal monies spent on higher education were being spent on students and student-related programs rather than on expanding other less academically related endeavors.

The two candidates did agree, at least generally, on the need to normalize trade relations with Cuba, though LaHood approached it in terms of benefitting the agricultural industry across the district while Mellon suggested that opening trade would hasten the end of the Castro regime that — under first Fidel Castro and then brother Raul Castro — has ruled the island since 1959.

The duo will face voters on Sept. 10, though early voting is taking place now through Sept. 9.

Chris Kaergard can be reached at 686-3255 and ckaergard@pjstar.com. Follow him on Twitter @ChrisKaergard.