Thanks to rising rents, complexes throwing off so much cash investors can't get enough

Service supervisor Adam Gillespie mops the floor of the lobby at Roosevelt Park Apartments, 600 Longs Peak Ave., in Longmont. ( Lewis Geyer / Staff Photographer )

Apartment buildings in the Boulder Valley are in such demand that large investment companies are lining up to buy them, pushing prices to record highs, a level realtors describe as 'ocean view pricing.'

An influx of workers, a dearth of new construction and millennials content to remain tenants instead of buying homes has also pushed up rents, creating a frenzied multi-family market, local realtors say.

In fact, the Boulder Valley was home to three of Colorado's priciest deals this year.

Leading the list was the $48.8 million sale of The Province at Boulder, 950 28th St., in September, for a per-unit price of $554,545. Resource America's $65.25 million buy of Canterwood Apartments just this week came in No. 3, at $302,802 per unit. The October deal for The Retreat at Flatirons in Broomfield also cracked the top 10: the $94.5 million transaction landed at No. 8 with a $252,647 per unit price tag.

(Stephanie Swartz)

"There's a lot of money going into real estate" right now, said Jeff Hawks, vice chairman of ARA Newmark, the firm that represented sellers in both the Ironhorse and Retreat deals. "And when you look at real estate, multi-family is the chosen one."

Front Range becoming 'destination market'

That's because the incredibly high demand for rental properties make investments in apartment complexes almost a sure thing — rising rents equal higher profits, and low vacancy rates mean you can count on an income stream.

"It's not like in the commercial property where you have a handful of tenants," said Cotton Burden, president of Niwot-based real estate company Burden Inc., which operates the Roosevelt Park apartments in Longmont. "If you lose a handful (of tenants), you're still making a lot of money. In commercial spaces, like offices, if you lose a handful, you may not be able to afford the mortgage."

The returns on investment also tend to be higher with multi-family, Burden said, and growing rents are pushing those margins up.

In fact, all 10 of the priciest apartment deals were in the Denver metro area in 2015, a region that also has some of the highest rents and fastest growing rents in the nation, according to reports by Apartment List.

The area is fast becoming a "destination market" for the highly mobile millennial generation, said Hawks

"In the '70s, people moved here because that's where the jobs were. Today, it's completely reversed with the exact same results. Millenials are choosing where they want to live, and employers are following them and saying, 'Let's open an office or location there.'"

Rent relief on the horizon

Because millennials are much more likely to rent than buy, investors see a growing opportunity as workers continue to flood into the state. And while the influx of residents has begun to spur some construction, the rate of new building has been slow and far outpaced by rising demand.

About 12,700 new units were added this year in the metro area — representing 5.6 percent of the total stock, according to Paul Fiorilla, associate director of research for Yardi.

"That's well above the national average" of 3 percent, Fiorilla said, noting that Denver led the country in completions relative to percentage of stock, tied with the Charlotte-Raleigh Durham region in North Carolina.

Fiorilla said Yardi expects somewhere between 12,000 and 16,000 units to be completed each year starting in 2017, and at that point the pressure on purchase prices and rents will likely begin to decline.

"The supply will (eventually) be more than demand, but we're not expecting that to happen in 2016," he said.

Judi Atwood, a designer and administrator, checks her email in her apartment at Roosevelt Park Apartments, 600 Longs Peak Ave., Longmont, Tuesday. Atwood said she has lived at Roosevelt Park since 2013. (Lewis Geyer / Staff Photographer)

'Ocean view pricing'

Those numbers may well be higher in Boulder and Broomfield, both of which already top lists for highest rents and fastest growth. Boulder County in particular is susceptible to sharp increases due to the dearth of new construction.

"Boulder's may be the best place in Colorado to invest" in apartment complexes, Hawks said — "if there's something for sale. The real problem is there often is nothing for sale."

When something is on the market, it goes quickly, added Hawks' colleague Shane Ozment, who worked on the Ironhorse and Canterwood deals.

"It's very difficult, it's very expensive to build in Boulder, so when you see a multi-family property hit the market" the action is frenzied, Ozment said. The Canterwood property, for instance, received more than 20 offers from "very aggressive buyers" and sold for record per-unit prices.

"It's an interesting market," he added. "It's the only city in the metro Denver area that has ocean view pricing."

In Longmont, a city with relatively affordable rents but the second-highest rate of rent growth in the state, new complexes are selling almost before the construction dust clears.

The first new, 100-unit plus apartment complexes in a decade (Roosevelt Park and Ironhorse at Mill Village) started receiving offers almost as soon as signs popped up.

Ironhorse sold seven months after construction was complete on the final units, for $50 million — nearly 50 percent more than it cost to build.

The owners of Roosevelt Park Apartments said they received similar interest in the Longs Peak Avenue property, but insist they aren't selling.

"It's a hot commodity," said Cotton Burden, president of Niwot-based Burden Incorporated. "There's just this pent-up demand in this county for housing, and there doesn't seem to be any end in sight."

When interested buyers do call — which happens about once a week, Burden said, "We always say no, and we are going to keep saying no. We love our property.

"We're a family company and we believe very much in Longmont's future. So why get rid of it?"

Shay Castle: 303-473-1626, castles@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/shayshinecastle, @shayshinecastle