Boehner faces conservative ire over plan to delay immigration fight - Fox News House Speaker John Boehner reportedly plans to "call a vote on a bill this week opposing and trying to block Obama's immigration orders -- though it would likely die in the Senate. Then, the House would vote next week on a bill funding the government through the full fiscal year, and funding immigration-related agencies through early next year." But some conservatives want to take it further, and "use the current spending fight as leverage to defund the president's plan now."

Dreamers Divided: Obama's Executive Actions Leave Some Young Immigrants Out - Huffington Post President Obama's new immigration plan extends Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals to a larger group of immigrants who arrived in the United States as minors, people who arrived as children before the start of 2010 regardless of their age now. But many young immigrants still don't qualify, among those who arrived after January 2010 or were slightly too old when they got here.

Does Obamacare give businesses a $3,000 incentive to hire illegal immigrants? - PolitiFact From the piece: "The claim isn’t so much inaccurate as it is speculative...We found that some businesses could, in theory, save $3,000 per employee for hiring an illegal immigrant over an American citizen. However -- and this is a big however -- this would only work for a small subset of businesses, and these businesses would have to have a particular setup that experts told us is impractical and unlikely."

Texas expected to sue over Obama immigration order - Associated Press From the story: "Gov.-elect Greg Abbott appears poised to keep his promise and sue the Obama administration over executive actions on immigration - the 31st time he's filed suit against the federal government since 2009...Abbott vowed 'swift action' after President Barack Obama announced his order Nov. 21, then suggested last week that a lawsuit was coming soon."

McConnell: ‘Bust up’ immigration bill - The Hill Incoming Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, a Republican from Kentucky, reportedly wants for the Senate to break down the massive bill put together last year by the so-called "Gang of Eight" so that Congress can vote on it piecemeal next year, starting with border security legislation.

Fact check: Tom Cotton's porous border story - USA Today From the piece: "Rep. Tom Cotton distorted the facts of a 2011 failed terrorist plot to make his case that the U.S. border with Mexico is 'open' and "defenseless.' ...The only connection to Mexico: The naturalized U.S. citizen sentenced in the case traveled to Mexico to hire a hit man who turned out to be an informant for the Drug Enforcement Administration."