When Rebecca Howard came to The Times about six months ago to run its newsroom video-production operation, one of her first moves was to discontinue something called TimesCast. The setup – a couple of journalists sitting around talking – just didn’t measure up to what she had in mind, she said.

Ms. Howard was hired from the AOL Huffington Post Media Group to ramp up video’s importance at The Times. The department’s staff has grown, doubling to 55 from last year. She has hired 17 people since starting in March, with another four to come before the end of the year.

The Times is now producing 250 “pieces of content” a month, she told me in an interview last week. I spoke to Ms. Howard as part of my Sunday column on innovation at The Times and the way it is challenging traditional boundaries; this post contains the outtakes from that interview.

Her role may be the most obvious change in the old forms because, as general manager of video production, she reports both to the news and the business sides of The Times – representing, in one person, the way some of the old lines are being blurred. It’s an unusual arrangement, one that has caused plenty of buzz, both inside The Times’s newsroom and beyond.

“We want to create more inventory because there is advertising demand, but we still need to differentiate,” she said.

In other words, she said, The Times needs to meet its reader (or viewer) expectations for high quality, “their brand expectation.” But, without enough video to offer advertisers, advertiser money is being left on the table – something no media organization wants to do in an era in which print advertising has declined sharply.

“We have to keep our journalism at the same level of excellence as the rest of The Times,” she said. Also working toward that end, and also reporting to Ms. Abramson, is a senior editor, Richard L. Berke, the director of video content.

Toward that end, she said, video staff members have started working closely with the various newsroom desks – national, foreign, business and the like. “That closeness ensures the editorial fit that we want,” she said.

Video production, which used to be something of a “one-man band” approach, with the same person shooting and editing, now goes through a post-production process staffed by about six people.

Not every Times video has advertising attached to it, at this point, because “we don’t feel it’s necessarily the best experience for the user.” But she and her staff members intend to experiment soon with placing an ad on every video and “we will test it very closely.”

“We don’t want people to feel inundated” by advertising, she said.

There’s no doubt that video is growing fast. Most recently, The Times began a series of videos on science topics. The popular Modern Love feature now has animated video accompanying it. And a documentary on the mayoral candidate Christine C. Quinn, “Hers to Lose,” appeared on Thursday.

What does the future hold for video at The Times? A year from now, Ms. Howard said, she hopes that The Times will be offering “a network of channels” on topics like technology and business, including as many as five original series apiece. She is also working to get Times video on portal sites like Yahoo, and is fielding interest from television networks on using Times documentaries. On Nov. 1, something called “New York Minute” will begin on The Times’s site – 60 seconds on “three things you should be paying attention to.” The project is “very digital first,” she said, something that will work especially well on mobile devices.

I’ve written about some readers’ concerns that too many resources are being put into creating multimedia extravaganzas on topics that aren’t the most worthwhile ones from a strictly journalist perspective.

Ms. Howard is aware of that issue and said that the quality of The Times’s video, and the choices that are being made, should begin to answer readers’ questions.

“It’s fair to say that there’s a tension,” she said, between what will generate viewer traffic and what is valid on newsworthiness alone. “How do you use the data to make journalistic decisions?” Ms. Howard readily agrees that it’s not always appropriate to do so.

Has the presence of a business-side boss in the newsroom caused some unease among her journalistic colleagues, I asked.

“I know people are thinking it,” even if they don’t say much, she said, adding that she has joked about being seen as “the alien from another planet.”

But, she added: “I think it’s working really well. You have to be strategic when you’re deciding how to devote resources.”