Donald Trump is talking politics once again. Two of his favorite political topics are President Barack Obama and a presidential bid for The Celebrity Apprentice host himself. He shared an assessment of the last presidential election.

“I would have won the race against Obama.”

In an interview with the Des Moines Register, Trump said frontrunners Jeb Bush and Mitt Romney will lose.

Trump said he regrets his decision not to run in 2012.

“I was leading in every poll… I regret that I didn’t stay in. I would’ve won the race against [President Barack] Obama. He would’ve been easy. Hillary [Clinton] is tougher to beat than Obama, but Hillary is very beatable.”

He was frank in sharing thoughts on Romney, and told a crowd of Midwest realtors and farmers.

“He choked. It’s like a golfer who can’t seek the three foot put on the last hole.”

Trump added that Romney should be disqualified from running, and the “47 percent” comment was a “bad comment that’s not going away.”

He didn’t go any easier on Florida Gov. Jeb Bush.

“Frankly, we’ve had enough of the Bushes. We’re bushed out.”

Bush is trying to raise $15 million before he runs, but Trump has the solution.

“If I do it, I’ll be self-funding so that solves the problem, which is nice.”

Trump said he likes New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, but acknowledged as a candidate, Christie has some challenges.

“He’s got some difficulties. I like him… but we’ve going to have to see whether or not he runs.”

Donald Trump said he’ll make a decision on whether he should run in 2016 soon.

“It’s too early for me to say. I may make a decision to run before June. But I’m strongly inclined to do so.”

This is not the first time Trump has talked about a bid for the White House, but he’s never become a candidate. He considered running as an Independent in 2000. He also alluded to running in 2008 and 2012.

Two reasons he gave for not running last time were development projects and his reality TV show, The Celebrity Apprentice. But he said the 2011 contract ends after this season, and he hasn’t and won’t renew it.

Trump is one of the many Republicans who participated in the Iowa Freedom Summit, organized by Iowa Rep. Steve King. He allowed an interviewer to pull his famous hair.

“It is my hair. If it wasn’t, it wouldn’t be on right.”

Trump explained the desire to run for president to a crowd of over 500.

“I basically want to see America be great again.”

[Image: Inquisitr]