Democratic National Committee Chairwoman Debbie Wasserman Schultz has been known to shill for President Barack Obama even in the toughest of times. And Wasserman Schultz didn’t let the commander in chief down despite being grilled by CNN’s Don Lemon regarding the recent scandal surrounding New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie (R).

Following revelations that state employees had created lane closures across the George Washington Bridge to cause traffic in the town of Fort Lee, the DNC wasted no time in accusing Christie of engaging in political retribution. But CNN’s Lemon decided to challenge party Chairwoman Wasserman Schultz on the difference between President Obama’s stance as having no knowledge on the array of scandals plaguing his second term and Christie’s similar rebuttal.

“So congresswoman, here’s what Republicans are saying today. They’re saying President Obama faced a few controversies over the past year. Each time, the president has claimed that he didn’t know. He didn’t know about the NSA spying on aliens, he didn’t know about the Obamacare website, he didn’t know that you wouldn’t be able to keep your doctor, so what’s the different between Christie not knowing and the president not knowing?” Lemon asked.

Wasserman Schultz quickly dismissed Lemon’s comparison.

“The difference is the issues that President Obama said he didn’t now about were policy issues,” she said. “This is a scandal, a scandal that leads right to his office in which his staff and possibly him exacted political retribution in retaliation for a Democratic mayor in Fort Lee refusing to endorse him and his re-election.”

Lemon continued to press the DNC chair, asking her why they couldn’t all be considered scandals, from the lane closures in New Jersey to the NSA’s surveillance programs. Wasserman Schultz, though, scoffed at the idea.

“Oh come on,” she replied. “How could you compare a governor and his staff potentially, deliberately shutting down three lanes of highway in retaliation, which these emails that came out today show that it was … How could you compare that to healthcare policy, intelligence policy and foreign policy. None of those three things were scandals. They’re not comparable.”

The Florida Democrat then went on to blame Christie for the scandal, saying she “created a culture in his office” that allowed such an abuse of power to happen.

Following the news Wednesday that Christie’s deputy chief of staff conspired with a New Jersey Port Authority aide to close down lanes onto the George Washington bridge, Christie vowed to take action. The New Jersey governor then fired both participants and addressed the issue in a news conference Thursday morning.

Watch Wasserman Schultz defend Obama’s scandals below.

h/t Mediaite