By M.D. Kittle | Wisconsin Watchdog

MADISON, Wis. — U.S. Senate candidate Russ Feingold and his progressive political action committee may have skimped on giving to liberal candidates, but the PAC didn’t mind spreading the wealth via travel expenditures for its founder and his staff, according to Federal Election Commission documents obtained by Wisconsin Watchdog.

At least while Feingold was with the group.

The documents show Progressives United spent more than $40,000 on travel costs between February 2011 and June 2013, while Feingold served as an adviser to the liberal organization.

Wisconsin Watchdog’s review of the PAC’s organization follows on the heels of revelations that Progressives United has given a miniscule 5 percent of its income to federal candidates and political parties.

Feingold, the godfather of campaign finance reform, has made political spending an issue once again as the Democrat campaigns to take back the Wisconsin U.S. Senate seat he lost to Republican Ron Johnson in 2010. Democrats nationally see Johnson as among the more vulnerable incumbents in their drive to take back the Senate in 2016.

The FEC documents obtained by Wisconsin Watchdog show Progressives United spending lavishly on airline tickets, rooms at posh hotels and some of the nation’s finest restaurants for its small staff.

Feingold founded the PAC in February 2011 to “combat the corrupting influence of corporate money in our elections and government,” according to Progressives United’s website. He took a leave of absence from the PAC in July 2013 when he joined the U.S. State Department as President Obama’s envoy to the Great Lakes region of Africa.

Before he did, Progressives United racked up $40,388 on travel-related expenses, FEC documents show. Feingold spent much of 2012 traveling and promoting his book, “While America Sleeps.”

The PAC spent $16,421 on hotels alone while Feingold served as an adviser over the two-year-plus period.

Among the choice accommodations:

Le Parker Meridien, a luxurious hotel in midtown Manhattan. Progressives United appears to have paid $1,744 for four rooms on April 10, 2012.

Omni Mandalay Hotel, an “elegant Asian-themed convention hotel,” with a lakeside pool and spa in Irving, Texas, on Oct. 10, 2012. Progressives United spent $1,435 on lodging there.

Hollywood Roosevelt Hotel, a West Hollywood, California, “boutique hotel located along the Walk of Fame, across from the Dolby Theatre. The PAC paid $897 on April 10, 2012, to stay at this “hip, upscale hotel.”

Intercontinental Hotel Boston, a “landmark of luxury overlooking Boston’s historic waterfront.” The hotel has been named one of the ‘Best Hotels in the World’ by Condé Nast Traveler magazine. Progressives United dropped over $1,100 at this establishment during four stays in 2012.

There were nights at some Red Roof Inns and Best Westerns, too, but plenty of stays at four-star hotels along the way.

Progressives United staff enjoyed some good meals, too.

The PAC paid $585 for eats at 112 Eatery in Minneapolis on Aug. 9, 2011, just as the organization was expanding its footprint as an advocacy nonprofit.

A meal at West Hollywood’s Chateau Marmont, featuring an “idyllic garden terrace,” cost the PAC $261 on April 10, 2012. That same day, Progressives United picked up the tab for dinner at Nobu, a famed Japanese restaurant in West Hollywood.

But the expensive restaurants and luxury hotels seemed to dry up after Feingold took his leave of absence from Progressives United.

The PAC spent just $3,097 on travel-related costs from July 2013 to December 2014, according to the FEC documents. Feingold was working for the State Department during that time.

“For a politician who built a career on championing campaign finance reform, Senator Feingold has a long and hypocritical record of manipulating his own PAC for personal gain,” said Joe Fadness, executive director of the Republican Party of Wisconsin. “These lavish expenditures are further proof that Progressives United was nothing more than a slush fund that Feingold used to exploit unsuspecting donors to fund his celebrity lifestyle.”

The state GOP earlier this week blasted Feingold after the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel reported nearly half of the $7.1 million the PAC has spent since 2011 has funded fundraising campaigns for Progressives United, with a significant share marked for salaries or consulting fees for Feingold, his top aide and eight former staffers.

Feingold’s camp told the newspaper the PAC raised much more money for the Democrat candidates it endorsed through a fundraising portal, but that still means Feingold’s PAC spent more than $3.50 for every $1 it gave, directly or indirectly, to each candidate it supported.

The campaign did not immediately return a request for comment.

Progressives United in May announced it would suspend activities to avoid any possible appearance of conflict, according to WisPolitics.com.

Wisconsin Watchdog contacted the number listed for Progressives for Wisconsin. Someone there answered, “Russ for Wisconsin.”