The U.S. economy is expected to be surpassed by China over the course of the next decade and a half, according to a new report from the Centre for Economics and Business Research. Ben Margot/AP

The U.S. just barely dodged an economic contraction in the first three months of 2015, as growth in the country’s gross domestic product clocked in at an underwhelming 0.2 percent.

Most analysts were expecting at least 1 percent GDP growth in a first quarter in which a West Coast dock worker trade dispute, strong dollar, inclement weather and weak international performance all dragged on the U.S. economy. The 0.2 percent growth rate is the country’s slowest since the first quarter of last year, during which America dipped into negative territory.

“I think the monthly data that has come in has made it fairly clear that the number’s been affected both by the severe weather and the slow down at the ports on the West Coast,” says Luke Tilley, chief economist at Wilmington Trust, referencing a months-long trade dispute at West Coast ports that created a transport vessel traffic jam along the coast as loading and unloading activities slowed and at times were ground to a halt. “I think it’s important to recognize, of course, it’s not just the port slow down that’s been weighing on activity. We also had the weather. But then we also had the impact of the appreciating dollar.”

[READ: Service Sector Surges, Manufacturers Learn to Do More With Less]

The U.S. dollar reached a 12-year high against the euro last month. But currency strength can be a weakness when it comes to exchange rates and international trade. America’s comparatively strong dollar means domestic manufacturers are not as competitive with those in other countries.

But the strong dollar worked in the favor of businesses who import products, as real imports of goods and services ticked up 1.8 percent, though this is lower than the 10.8 percent import pickup seen in the fourth quarter.

Imports are a subtraction from GDP, and with real exports falling 7.2 percent in the first quarter, the country’s trade gap widened and ultimately dragged down first quarter growth.

“Financial markets have become well acquainted with the impact of the ‘special factors’ (bad weather, port strike, the strong dollar, and oil patch capital spending cuts) noted above, and as a result, should be well braced for a well-below trend Q1 2015 report,” John Canally, vice president and economist at LPL Financial, wrote in a research note, saying that, although the overall growth number came in lower than anticipated, it wasn’t expected to be particularly strong this quarter anyway.

[MORE: Home Price Gains Outpace Wage Growth]

Perhaps in anticipation of an underwhelming first quarter, consumer confidence in April ticked down to a four-month low Tuesday as March’s underwhelming employment report bled into consumer perception. Those who described jobs as “plentiful” in the consumer confidence survey ticked down to 19.1 percent from 21 percent the month before, while those who described jobs as “hard to get” rose to 26.4 percent from 25.5 percent.

“Consumer confidence, which had rebounded in March, gave back all of the gain and more in April,” Lynn Franco, director of economic indicators at The Conference Board, said in a statement accompanying the report, attributing the drop in part to “recent lackluster performance of the labor market.

“Coupled with waning expectations, there is little to suggest that economic momentum will pick up in the months ahead,” she wrote.

Tilley disagrees, noting that the first quarter of last year was also hampered by inclement weather. The country’s economy contracted 2.1 percent in the first quarter of last year before growing 4.6 percent, 5 percent and 2.2 percent in the following quarters.

[READ: New Graduate Hiring Expected to Pick Up]

Though Tilley says the weather was not nearly as bad this year and that a handful of other factors were weighing the country’s economy down, he expects a similar turnaround in the coming quarters.

“First quarter GDP last year was in negative territory, and then we had the stronger bounce back. We’re expecting a similar dynamic, but not to the same magnitude,” he says. “I think it’s also important to point out that this is the first release for quarter 1 GDP that’s coming out on Wednesday, and it’ll have two revisions afterwards.”

But GDP was originally reported to have ticked up only 0.1 percent in the first quarter of last year before subsequent revisions dragged the number into negative territory. So the country isn’t out of the woods yet in terms of avoiding a downturn that could further hamper consumer spending.

Spending cooled in the first quarter, as gross domestic purchases, or purchases of goods and services by U.S. residents , increased only 1.5 percent, down from 3.2 percent in the fourth quarter.

But disposable personal income jumped 4.1 percent in the first quarter, up from a 3.2 percent increase in the fourth. So while Americans are spending less, on average they have more money in savings than they did at the end of 2014. Personal savings increased by $124.4 billion, or nearly 21 percent.