The Rockies did some bullpen shuffling before Saturday’s doubleheader against the Giants at Coors Field.

Hard-throwing right-hander Brooks Brown returned from the 15-day disabled list, saying his shoulder feels strong again. To make room on the 25-man roster, the Rockies placed lefty reliever Ken Roberts on the DL with left elbow inflammation. The club doesn’t think it’s a serious injury, but they are watching it carefully.

The Rockies and Giants can both expand their rosters to 26 players for the second game of the doubleheader, and in the Rockies’ case, the 26th man will be starting pitcher David Hale, who will make his Rockies debut.

Third baseman Nolan Arenado, who experienced back spasms during Friday night’s rain-delayed 11-8 loss to the Giants, said he’s fine and expects to be in the lineup for both games.

“I’m good,” Arenado said. “I tweaked it a little and it tightened up during the long (rain) delay, but I feel good, ready to go.”

Brown said he’d been dealing with a shoulder issue for most of the spring.

“I had a little bit of an issue with my shoulder during spring training, but I was still able to get loose then,” said Brown, who is 0-1 with a 4.50 ERA in 12 appearances. “But over the last week or 10 days, I had trouble staying loose, especially when I had to sit back down after throwing.

“But the three rehab starts were good, and then in the last one I threw really well and was able to stay loose.”

Manager Walt Weiss said he will continue to use Brown the same way he did before Brown went on the DL.

“He will be in the same role,” Weiss said. “Sometimes one inning, sometimes one-plus. He’s a nice piece to have because you don’t have to match up with ‘Brownie.’ He gets lefties and get gets righties. It makes it a lot smoother late in the game when you go to the ‘pen.”

Roberts, who gave up three runs on four hits while facing just seven batters Friday night, said he Friday night was the first time the elbow pain flared up during a game.

“I would usually feel it the day after,” he said. “Hopefully it’s just some inflammation and I tweaked something in there.”

Weiss said the club would be cautious.

“There is always concern when we are talking about sore elbows and inflammation in the elbow,” Weiss said. “But we are not overly concerned. We will see how Kenny progresses with treatment. But there are not any major concerns right now.”