Sarah Fay Campbell / The Newnan Times-Herald Chatting before the start of the debate are Republican Congressional candidates Samuel Anders, Mike Crane, Drew Ferguson, Chip Flanegan, Richard Mix, Jim Pace and Arnall "Rod" Thomas.

The seven Republican candidates for Georgia’s Third District seat in the U.S. House of Representatives shared many similar opinions at Wednesday night’s candidate forum, held at the Wadsworth Auditorium.



Participating in the forum were Sam Anders, Mike Crane, Drew Ferguson, Chip Flanegan, Richard Mix, Jim Pace and Arnall “Rod” Thomas. They are vying to replace Lynn Westmoreland, R-Ga., who announced his retirement after this term.

Each candidate gave opening and closing statements, and the candidates were able to answer a few questions. Because there were so many candidates, there was only time for four questions.

Anders called himself a “regular average guy.” After 16 years in the U.S. Air Force, he joined the Air Force Reserve as a master sergeant.

“I always want to make sure I serve my country in every way possible … this is just another step,” Anders said. National security is a big priority for him.

“If you haven’t noticed, freedom is under assault,” said Crane, who currently serves as state senator from the 28th District. “Government is in our homes, government is in our businesses, now the government wants to get involved in the thing we hold most dear, our faith. To tell us what we can and can’t believe. We have a government that is out of control and going out of its constitutional boundaries.”

Ferguson, who served as the mayor of West Point until he qualified to run for the congressional seat, said he learned early on that service is a cornerstone of his faith. Ferguson said that he watched bad policies in Washington D.C. “almost destroy my town of West Point for almost 20 years.” Hope faded, businesses closed, schools failed, and there was generational poverty. “I decided to stay and fight the good fight. We united a community and we rebuilt a city. We did it by coming together and getting government out of our way.”

Ferguson helped bring the KIA plant to West Point and now the town is “an economic engine full of prosperity and success,” he said. “I truly believe I can lead the Third District down that same path. I need your help.”

The U.S. has $19.5 trillion in debt, and each American’s share of that is about $58,000, said Chip Flanegan, who challenged retiring U.S. Rep. Lynn Westmoreland multiple times over the past several years. “In my business life, in my person life, I’m debt free.”

Americans are facing economic chaos “caused by the Washington cartel that have bought and paid for our politicians. They’re not listening to us. Washington is broken,” Flanegan said. “If we’re going to save Social Security and keep from going over the fiscal cliff we’re going to have to send people to Washington that know how to get us out of debt … it is not that hard but it takes fiscal responsibility. You have to be willing not to take the lobby money. I will not take the lobby money.”

Richard Mix said he is a small business owner, not a politician. “I had no visions of sitting here in front of you three months ago” until hearing about Westmoreland’s retirement. “I know that everyone in this country is working harder and harder for less and less.” Though the country is heading in the wrong direction, “I’m still extremely optimistic about this country.”

Pace said he’s often asked why he wants to run for office. “I don’t want to do this. It’s no different that the guys that boarded the Army buses after Pearl Harbor. They went because it was their duty. I’m willing to go to Washington.”

Pace said he wants to be able to “look my grandkids in the eye and say ‘I did everything I could to keep you safe.’”

A congressman needs to be a hard worker with education and leadership, said Thomas. He’s a Vietnam veteran, holds seven degrees, and was named president of his class at Georgia Southern University. Thomas said he will only accept $48,000 of the $174,000 annual salary for congressmen. He’ll donate the rest to local food programs.

The candidates were asked their thoughts about Obamacare/the Affordable Care Act and on the state of the U.S. economy.

Anders grew up in the United Kingdom, where his father, also in the Air Force, was stationed. He sees Obamacare leading to socialized medicine. “I grew up with socialized medicine. While I’m for every single American having access to health care, the Affordable Care Act is not that.” The ACA needs to be repealed, Anders said.

When it comes to discussing the economy, we need common sense – and that’s lacking in our government, Anders said.

“People say we need to get government out. Of course. But what can we do with the system we’ve got in place? We still have to work, somewhat, with that we’ve got now,” Anders said. The U.S. budget and economy is kind of like Common Core math, Anders said.

“When we look at budgets at work or at my house, it’s about what’s coming in and going out,” Anders said. We need to stop spending money overseas, and look at the budget line by line. “Until we start doing that we won’t see where we truly need to make the cuts.”

Crane said Obamacare has been an unmitigated disaster – as expected. Healthcare officials are “fighting valiantly to provide quality care but it’s a difficult road.”

The state of Georgia spends $500,000 a year to provide documents to prove the state is compliant with the mandates of the ACA, Crane said. “That is not affordable. It’s not effective and it does nothing to promote care at all.”

Under the ACA, quality is diminished, access is more difficult and the costs are through the roof. Crane would like to see the ACA replaced and the healthcare system opened up to the free market.

To address the current economic malaise, we need to address the federal government’s intrusion into “every single aspect of our lives,” Crane said. There are special interest tax cuts and favors. Americans need to send people to D.C. who “have a proven track record of saying no to exactly that.”He wants to see Congress “reclaim its authority” through the appropriations process.

Obamacare has been a failure on all fronts, said Ferguson, a dentist. “The patient does not receive better quality care, it does not improve access to quality care.” Access to insurance is “not the barrier it is described to be,” Ferguson said.

The current system needs to be replaced with a free market system. People should get to set up health savings accounts that match their deductibles and can roll over. He’s worried Obamacare will morph into a single-payer system. The free market gives better results.

The economy is sluggish and the past four years, in particular, have been hard on many Americans, Ferguson said. Washington continues to strangle business. The federal tax rate needs to be lowered on individuals and corporations. Regulations add costs every day, as well, he said.

The ACA is not affordable and is not providing care, said Flanegan. “Why does government get into healthcare? Why is government providing you insurance?” Flanegan said. In the ‘40s, the federal government implemented price and wage controls, and that’s when companies began offering health insurance. The government doesn’t get involved in our car insurance or homeowners insurance, Flanegan said.

The economy is improving and so is unemployment, Flanegan said. But government taxation “is like a leech on the economy. Deficit spending also takes money away from businesses.

Pace said that working on wellness is a way to improve healthcare. But the only people working on wellness programs are insurance companies.

The economy is quite anemic, and the government will say the problem is business needs to be taxed more. Fifty-one percent of Americans are “on welfare or some government subsidies,” Pace said.

The ACA has brought healthcare issues front and center, said Mix. “I won’t tell you I have all the answers but I have spoken with a number of insurance providers, underwriters. Nobody seems to be happy.” Insurance companies, consumers, and doctors aren’t happy.

“Nobody is going to argue that we don’t want affordable healthcare,” Mix said, but the ACA is “basically a big Ponzi scheme.” He’s seen a great program called Hope for Healthcare that helps with catastrophic care.

The economy is starting to improve, said Mix. He’s opened four small businesses and thinks less taxes and regulation would help. Education is the critical piece, though.

The ACA “just doesn’t work,” Thomas said. But fixing the system has to start somewhere. “You can’t just throw it out unless you’ve got a new one.”

The government needs to live within its means, Thomas said. But it’s got to start from the bottom up.