Timothy Sandefur has fought Obamacare, a California law regulating pest control and a Kentucky statute limiting who could start a moving company.

What binds all of those things is the fact the democratically elected legislatures enacted them. And that, Sandefur told a group of Mobile lawyers Tuesday, is where conservatives have gone awry in accepting a key tenant of the progressive movement - "judicial restraint."

That concept holds that courts should defer to the elected branches of government on matters of public policy. But Sandefur argued to the Mobile chapter of the conservative Federalist Society that the result has been a dramatic curtailing of liberty.

RELATED: Many Alabama workers need "permission slips" to work

"Today, unfortunately, you have to ask permission for a tremendous swath of what you do," said Sandefur, an attorney with the Sacramento-based Pacific Legal Foundation. "How is it that we've come to this?"

Sandefur blamed the progressive era of the late 19th and early 20th centuries. He said it has led to a society where homeowners need to seek permission from the government to build an addition to their homes and apply to a licensing board for permission to engage in all sorts of professions.

His address Tuesday was part history lesson, part legal seminar. He quoted Thomas Jefferson, John Milton, Thomas Paine and John Lennon.

"Under the British monarchy, you needed permission form the government to do just about anything," he said. "Freedom essentially means not having to ask permission."

For a country founded by men who rejected the notion that rights come from the government, Sandefur said, the United States today has scores of laws regulating all aspects of human activity - from the jobs people work to what they can do with their property to whether they can carry guns.

Sandefur, author of the book "Conscience of the Constitution," said the Magna Carta and similar compacts loosened the monarchy's grip on the people. But they did not fundamentally alter the government's relationship to the people, he said.

"These were nothing more than revocable charters," he said, adding that America's Founding Fathers believed in concepts like religious liberty rather than the British model of toleration. "Government has no more right to give you freedom of religion than to withhold it."

Or as Jefferson explained in arguing that the proper role of government was to prevent acts that injure others. He wrote that it did him no harm if his neighbor believed in 20 gods or none: "It neither picks my pocket nor breaks my leg."

Sandefur has taken his liberty crusade to courtrooms across the country. He won a big victory last year on behalf of a Lexington, Ky., woman who wanted to start a moving company. Marty Vaughn found her bid thwarted by her inability to persuade a government board to grant her the required Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity. Under that process, moving companies already operating in the city had to be notified and given a chance to object.

They did, as often was the case when would-be newcomers came along. Sandefur said the objections mostly were not based on qualifications or matters of public safety. In more than 100 cases, he said, companies objected on grounds that allowing new entrants into the market would over-saturate the market. Essentially, he said, they did not want the competition.

A federal judge ultimately struck that statute down.

The Pacific Legal Foundation challenged similar laws in Missouri and Oregon, where lawmakers changed the law. Another challenge in Nevada is pending.

In the California pest control case, a court ruled in favor of Sandefur's client, who challenged a requirement that peopled engaged in pest control obtain a license. The Ninth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals agreed that he should be exempt because he does not use pesticides but instead controls skunks, rats and other animals with spikes, screens and other mechanical devices.

Sandefur has met with less success in his challenge to Obamacare. He has argued in court that the Affordable Care Act should be struck down because that tax increases that pay for the health care program improperly originated in the U.S. Senate - not the House of Representatives, where tax bills are supposed to start.