U.S. Rep. Andy Harris, R-1st-Md. U.S. Rep. Andy Harris, R-1st-Md., voted against two trade measures before the House on Friday. U.S. Rep. Andy Harris, R-1st District, has criticized a division of Pfizer. AP Rep. Andy Harris held a town hall meeting this month with an overflow crowd who booed when an audience member asked him to support a path to citizenship for immigrants in the U.S. illegally. AP file photo FILE - In this June 28, 2012 file photo Rep. Andy Harris, R-Md., speaks at a news conference outside the US Capitol in Washington. As immigration advocates swarm the country trying to persuade House Republicans to pass a comprehensive immigration overhaul, Harris held a town hall meeting this August northeast of Baltimore, Md., with an overflow crowd who booed loudly when an audience member asked him to support a path to citizenship for immigrants in the U.S. illegally. Harris shot the idea down calling it a "nonstarter" that's "not going anywhere fast" in the House. (AP Photo/Cliff Owen) (Photo: Cliff Owen, AP)

Three Republican challengers will try to unseat U.S. Rep. Andy Harris for his First Congressional District seat in Tuesday’s Maryland Primary Election, but the three-term congressman says he is taking it in stride.

“I don’t begrudge anyone,” he said of his opponents. “The more the merrier.”

Harris has more Republican opponents this year than he had in his two previous Primaries as an incumbent. Only one other Republican ran against him in 2014 and there were none in 2012.

Jonathan Goff and Sean Jackson, both of Harford County, and Michael Smigiel of Cecil County are all hoping to get the GOP nomination this year in the district which covers all nine Eastern Shore counties, plus parts of Harford, Baltimore and Carroll counties.

On the Democratic ballot are Jim Ireton, the former mayor of Salisbury, and Joe Werner, an attorney from Harford County.

Harris said his main concerns are a stagnant economy and citizens’ concerns about safety and terrorism. He also would like to see changes to government regulations that are “strangling” the local poultry industry and other businesses.

“My solution is to get the economy moving again by fostering an innovative environment where businesses can grow and start to create jobs again,” he said. “I plan to root out regulations that inhibit job growth and treat businesses as partners, not ATMs.”

On his website, Harris also lists reducing the budget deficit, protecting the Chesapeake Bay and the environment, veterans as issues important to him.

Harris would like to see the repeal of Obamacare, which he said has only made matters worse.

“Real reforms are necessary to make quality health care coverage more affordable and accessible,” he said.

Some of Harris’ opponents have criticized him because he voted for a the Consolidated Appropriations Act that included funding for Obamacare as well as for a range of other federal programs and agencies including the Department of Homeland Security.

“I voted to keep the government running,” he said. “I’m not in favor of Obamacare.”

Two years ago, Harris, a medical doctor, faced criticism for his efforts to block marijuana decriminalization in the District of Columbia, but he defends that stance. Science is still unclear on the effects of marijuana, which he believes is a gateway drug for other drugs such as heroin.

“When people elected me to Congress, they elected me to oversee he District of Columbia,” he said.

Here is who else is running:

Republicans

Jonathan Marvin Goff Jr., a small business owner from Harford County, would like the U.S. to stop policing the world, and instead bring troops home to police the borders, according to information posted on his website. He, too, would like to see the repeal of Obamacare, which he said is killing jobs and causing people to lose their doctors and insurance rates. His solution to the deficit is to get rid of discretionary spending, make other countries pay back their debts to the U.S. and to top rebuilding other countries. Goff did not reply to an email request for more information.

Sean M. Jackson, a Motor Vehicle Division commander for the Support Services Bureau/Logistics Command of Maryland State Police, said he is running because “83 percent of Maryland voters are dissatisfied with Congress (including me). Mr. Harris lacks passion and is not outspoken when addressing national issues (prevention of Syrian refugees from coming to America and veteran health care).” On his website, Jackson also lists protection for gun owners, support for farms and small businesses, and the repeal of Obamacare as important issues.

Michael D. Smigiel, a lawyer from Cecil County and a former member of the Maryland House of Delegates, said he decided to challenge Harris because “I feel betrayed.” If elected to Congress, Smigiel said he wants to get rid of Common Core, close the borders to illegal immigration, reintroduce free markets through capitalism, protect the autonomy of the states, to institute a flat tax, build and fund the military, care for our Veterans, and protect every single one of our Constitutional rights. “I am tired of politicians promising to do all the right things then doing all the wrong things,” he said.

Democrats

Jim Ireton, a former mayor of Salisbury and a current City Council member, said his focus would be on better constituent services if elected to Congress. Issues important to him include tackling the current heroin addiction epidemic, reducing nitrogen in the Chesapeake Bay and access to quality educations for all residents of the First District. He also is in favor of keeping Obamacare intact. “There are 63,000 people who now have health insurance who didn’t before,” he said. Ireton has been critical of Harris’ decision to vote against an aid package for victims of Hurricane Sandy, many of whom are his constituents.

Joe Werner, at attorney from Harford County, said climate change and the Chesapeake Bay are issues that should be taken seriously, particularly the cleanup of the Susquehanna River and the Conowingo Dam. “Who knows what’s in that sludge,” he said. Werner also favors more free and fair trade, and an increase in the minimum wage. He called the current rate of $7.25 “just ridiculous,” and said it should be raised to $15. “If people make more money, they’ll spend more,” he said.

The Primary Election in Maryland is on Tuesday, April 26. Polls are open from 7 a.m. until 8 p.m.

Read or Share this story: http://www.delmarvanow.com/story/news/2016/04/25/andy-harris-not-worried-gop-challenges-primary/83390400/