SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Whoopi Goldberg slammed critics of Planned Parenthood Monday, telling her fellow co-hosts on The View that defunding the controversial abortion provider would do little to stop women from obtaining abortions.

“If you think this is going to stop women from doing it, it’s not,” Goldberg said during Monday’s episode, according to the Wrap. “People who are desperate enough to go and get an abortion, there’s a reason they need it.”

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

The host then asked that politicians stay away from her reproductive system: “Get out of my vagina!”

The comments came during a particularly politically-charged episode of The View, during which Goldberg and her fellow co-hosts also took aim at Republican presidential contender Dr. Ben Carson for an interview last weekend in which the retired neurosurgeon suggested a Muslim should not become President of the United States.

“Keep in mind Ben Carson, that’s what they used to say about black candidates,” Goldberg chided. “That’s what they said about Shirley Chisholm. She was a woman and she was black, so you know they went to town on her. So I think the person who’s running is how you have to look at them.”

Co-host Michelle Collins, who has dealt with headaches this week related to an entirely separate incident on The View in which she mocked the nursing profession, added of Carson: “For an educated guy who is a minority to come out and say that, it’s so shocking to me.”

In an interview with Fox News Channel’s “Your World” in August, Carson suggested that Planned Parenthood clinics operate in predominantly black neighborhoods as a way to “control” the African-American population.

“Well, maybe I’m not objective when it comes to Planned Parenthood,” Carson said. “But you know, I know who [Planned Parenthood founder] Margaret Sanger is, and I know that she believed in eugenics, and that she was not particularly enamored with black people. And one of the reasons that you find most of their clinics in black neighborhoods is so that you can find a way to control that population.”

The View lost five major sponsors this week after Joy Behar and Collins took turns mocking a nurse who participated in the Miss America contest. Johnson & Johnson, Eggland’s Best, Party City, Snuggle, and McCormick all cut ties with the ABC talk show over the incident.