Pin this on Pinterest Email this story

MadameNoire doesn’t know much about Dr. Heavenly Kimes other than she’s a leading Atlanta dentist and founder of Heavenly Dental Associates, Inc., oh, and a fiesty new cast member on Bravo’s “Married To Medicine” who’s shaking things up in more ways than one.

Already having to defend her stance that a dentist is also a doctor to her fellow cast mates, Dr. Kimes is now explaining her comments about submitting to her husband, who’s also a doctor. As you can imagine, the declaration from such a high-powered woman that she submits to her husband didn’t go over too well with audiences during a previous episode of the show, but wpeaking with Sister 2 Sister, Dr. Kimes didn’t back down from her beliefs, telling the magazine:

“I submit to my husband. I make my husband’s food. I take care of the household. I understand my role as a wife and a mother. “Black women need to see a woman who takes care of a household, who’s married with children and that’s not seen a whole lot,” she said, adding that regarding the show as a whole, “It should be applauded that all of us are educated. We talk about business, money and relationships. I think that’s a part of the whole scope of life.”

Let’s get back to that whole household thing though, shall we? Dr. Kimes’ position certainly isn’t new and, for many, is a biblical mandate, but we’re going to guess what most female viewers took issue with more than her cooking dinner for her husband was calling him “daddy.” Explaining her vernacular, she said:

“I thought that was cute. When my son was born, I would say ‘Damon’ and both of them would answer.”

Guess the nickname just stuck after, huh?

I don’t know about you but I feel a side-eye coming on. True, we don’t see many brown women who are happily married with children on TV, but are we lacking a submissive role model to show us how to take care of house and home? I’m not sure about that. What do you think about Dr. Heavenly Kimes and her stance on submission?