A Roma boy looking after the banners used at the remembrance walk in Budapest at the 70th anniversary of the Romani Phorraimos during the WWII The Wall Street Journal

Central Europe this weekend commemorated the 70th anniversary of a World War II attempt to exterminate all European Roma, a German Nazi initiative that cost the lives of 500,000 Roma and Sinti.

Unlike the extermination of Jews, the systematic killing of the Romani people is much less known and isn’t part of the curriculum in many Central European countries.

Gyula Horvath, one of the Roma participants of the Budapest remembrance walk, was wearing a brown triangle, a sign the Roma had had to wear just like Jews were forced to display yellow stars.

“My great-grandfather told us the story of some family members who were taken away and never returned,” Mr. Horvath said.

“My father’s father was taken away for forced labor almost at the end of the war; they could already hear the Soviet tanks shooting,” said Agnes Daroczi, writer, ethnologist and Roma musician. Soviet troops freed Hungary from Nazi rule at the end of the war.

One of the least known atrocities of World War II took place on Aug. 2, 1944, at the German Nazi death camp Auschwitz-Birkenau when nearly 3,000 Roma people were killed overnight.

Commemorations and conferences took place this week in Krakow, Poland, and at the former Auschwitz-Birkenau camp nearby with participants from 20 European countries. Besides many Roma groups, delegates of the United Nations, the European Commission, the European Parliament and government officials took part in the events, saying Europe’s youth needs to be more aware of the Roma genocide.

“The collective amnesia and apathy regarding the Roma Genocide during World War II is an apt demonstration of Europe’s current treatment of its 12-million-strong Roma community,” Zeljko Jovanovic, director of Open Society Foundations’ Roma Initiatives Office told The Wall Street Journal.

The Roma are in many ways underprivileged especially in the Eastern part of the European Union. Poverty and petty crime is relatively high among the gypsy population and so is their number in prosecution compared to the majority society. Access to education, especially higher education, is lower and the ratio of Roma professionals is below the countries’ average.

Hungary’s major opposition parties, except for far-right Jobbik, also participated in the events in Budapest, their representatives also stressing the responsibility of the current government in raising the acceptance of the Roma in the society.

“We must say no to violence, we must reject it, no-one can give the go-ahead to violence, there’s no acceptable explanation,” Hungary’s ministry responsible for social issues said in a statement.