***THE ENTRY FORM IS AT THE BOTTOM OF THIS PAGE***

The Florida Lottery & WZVN “$10 Million Fortune” Watch-to-Win Rules

1.) No purchase necessary.

2.) The watch-to-win promotion will take place Monday, March 21 – Friday, March 25, 2016, (“promotional period”). The promotion will be structured to prompt viewers to tune into the WZVN-WBBH newscast at 6:00am to 7:00am to find the “Word of the Day” displayed on the screen. Viewers will then visit the station’s website where they can enter into the daily drawing by entering the correct “Word of the Day.” WZVN-WBBH will conduct a drawing to randomly select one (1) winner each day from all correct entries received by 11:00pm each night. Each of the daily winners will win a daily prize pack consisting of: one (1) book of $2 Florida Lottery scratch-off tickets and one (1) $50 Home Depot gift card. There will also be one (1) grand prize drawing on Monday, March 28, 2016, in which one (1) grand prize winner will be randomly selected by WZVN-WBBH from all correct entries received during the promotional period. The grand prize winner will win a grand prize pack consisting of one (1) 55” LED HDTV.

3.) Drawings for the daily prize will take place at 9:00am the day following each daily entry period for the Monday – Thursday daily winners; these winners will be notified via e-mail within 24 hours of each drawing. On Monday, March 28, Friday’s daily winner will be randomly drawn at 9:00am (from Friday’s entries) and the grand prize winner will be randomly drawn at 9:10am (from all entries received); these winners will be notified via e-mail by 5:00pm that day.

4.) The station will be responsible for contacting the winners directly via e-mail or telephone on the first business day following each drawing. The winners will be given 48 hours to claim their prize.

5.) Winners must provide their correct name, address, and phone number to the station at the time of notification. Winners present Government-issued photo identification to claim prizes. The Lottery will be provided with a photocopy of each winner’s proof-of-age.

6.) Winners must be 18 years of age or older.

7.) Employees of the Florida Lottery, WZVN-WBBH, their immediate families, participating sponsors and all others prohibited by law from participating in the Lottery are not eligible to participate.

8.) Any or all federal, state and/or local taxes are the responsibility of the winner(s).

9.) Acceptance of a prize constitutes permission to use the winner’s name, likeness and/or photograph for promotional purposes of WZVN-WBBH without any further compensation.

10.) Entry into a contest releases WZVN-WBBH, The Florida Lottery, participating sponsors, corporate officers, subsidiaries, employees and agencies from any and all liability for injuries or damages that may be sustained in connection with the prize.

11.) WZVN-WBBH retains the right to determine all decisions regarding the contest, and all decisions made by WZVN-WBBH are final. WZVN-WBBH will not change the contest without consulting the Florida Lottery.

12.) Contest is void where prohibited by law.

13.) A list of winners will be made available for 30 days after the contest closing date to anyone who supplies a self-addressed, stamped envelope for the aforementioned list to:

WZVN-WBBH

3719 Central Avenue

Fort Myers, FL 33901

Winners:

Monday, 3/21 - Jennifer Sparks

Tuesday, 3/22 - Katina Lowery

Wednesday, 3/23 - Lorraine Lucre

Thursday, 3/24 - Tania Clasen

Friday, 3/25 - Jake Howell

Grand Prize Winner:

Michael Seehafer

14.) Due to the nature of a scratch-off lottery ticket, WZVN-WBBH makes no claims as to the value of the tickets or guarantees that the contestant will win any prize.

15.) Winners must present themselves at the Florida Lottery offices in Fort Myers during regular business hours within 48 hours of winning in order to collect their prize. Prizes not claimed within 48 hours will be forfeited and an alternate will be selected or the prize packs will be returned to the Florida Lottery along with the winner’s log.