House Speaker John Boehner and the Republican majority of the 114th Congress have had mixed success thus far. J. Scott Applewhite/AP

The first full month of the 114th Congress is nearly complete, and after a few stumbles, expanded debate and just one bill sent to the president’s desk, the agendas and priorities of the parties are beginning to solidify.

[READ: Is the Senate Back to Work?]

Since the new session gaveled in on Jan. 6, both chambers have held a flurry of votes on a number of high-visibility issues. While the Senate focused almost exclusively on the Keystone XL pipeline, the House tackled such controversial topics as abortion, immigration and border security.

The session began positively, as both the House and Senate quickly passed a renewal of the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act, first enacted shortly after the Sept. 11 attacks. President Barack Obama signed the extension of the act, which had expired at the end of December, into law on Jan. 12. While Congress has yet to send him any more legislation, on Tuesday the Senate approved a House-passed measure aimed at reducing the number of veteran suicides.



This graph does not include 86 bills that fall under the category "Congress," mostly from Republicans, which include resolutions authorizing committee expenditures, ceremonial uses of congressional space, and proposals for a constitutional amendment to term-limit members. Gabrielle Levy for USN&WR; Source: Congress.gov

On less universally supported policies, success has been elusive. Republicans, who are in charge of both chambers for the first time in six years, have found their agenda undermined by both Democrats and by members of their own party.

GOP leaders in the House put immigration and abortion at the top of their priority list and fielded accusations from both Democrats and some moderate Republicans that they were caving to conservatives in their party.

An attempt to block Obama’s immigration actions squeaked by in the House, but failed to overcome Democratic opposition in the Senate on Tuesday. A push to limit abortions to before the 20th week of pregnancy, which was pulled from the floor after Republican women complained it went too far, was seen as a major embarrassment.



Gabrielle Levy for USN&WR; Source: Congress.gov

And last week, leadership blamed a blizzard that was predicted to hit Washington for canceling a vote on a border security bill. But conservatives opposed the legislation, complaining it did not do enough to address illegal immigration, and a vote has not been rescheduled.

“We wanted to get off to a fast start this year, and as a result taking bills that have passed in the past and put other bills together,” House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, acknowledged last week. “So yeah, there have been a couple of stumbles, all in our effort to show the American people that we're here to listen to their priorities.”

An analysis of the bills introduced so far this session, and those that have received consideration in committee or on the floor, illuminates the parties’ legislative priorities. Of the 79 Republican-sponsored bills to receive some consideration, either in committee or on the floor, 11 have focused on immigration, the most on any one policy issue.



Gabrielle Levy for USN&WR; Source: Congress.gov

Those measures focus on enforcement of immigration laws and border security, deal with visas and quotas for legal immigration, attempt to protect American workers’ jobs from immigrants and repeal Obama’s deportation-relief executive actions.

While most of the introduced bills have yet to be considered, 14 separate Republican measures attempt to roll back abortion, including three that have already passed in the House. Still more attempt to use the tax code to chip away at the Affordable Care Act.

[ALSO: National Debt a Crisis, but Congress Divided on Fix]

Meanwhile, Democrats’ top legislative priorities have echoed much of what Obama highlighted in his State of the Union speech and budget request.

In advance of a major renewed effort coming this month on gun issues, Democrats introduced 28 separate bills on law enforcement and crime, including proposals to address racial disparities on enforcement of drug crimes and prison sentencing.

Almost two dozen bills focused on the tax code align with Democratic rhetoric on evening the playing field by offering tax credits for working families and for child and elder care, as well as by stopping businesses from evading taxes through the practice of moving profits overseas.

Most of those bills have been ignored by the Republican leadership, and Obama has vowed to veto most of the Republican-backed measures that make it to his desk. But both sides say they are looking for common ground in the tax code.

On Sunday, House Ways and Means Chairman Paul Ryan, R-Wis., extended a tentative offer to the White House.

“We want to work with this administration to see if we can find common ground on certain aspects of tax reform,” he said on NBC’s “Meet the Press.” “We want to exhaust that possibility; if and when that possibility is exhausted, then we will put out what we think ought to be done.”

[READ: Obama Budget's Slate of Democratic Priorities Divides Republicans]

Sen. Sherrod Brown, D-Ohio, is leading the legislative push to expand the Earned Income Tax Credit, as outlined in Obama’s budget, as one potential bipartisan solution. And House Minority Whip Steny Hoyer, D-Md., suggested tax credits to businesses for research and development – so long as they are paid for elsewhere – would appeal to Republicans’ preference for lower taxes while getting Democratic backing for government-supported research.

“There are a number of things that we could do with the tax code that could make it simpler, fairer, more effective,” Hoyer said Tuesday. “But if the Republican position simply is, ‘We’re going to cut revenues, keep spending relatively stable.’ ... They’re going to undermine our economy and our national security and just let the deficit rise.”