Financial toxicity is now recognized as a common effect of cancer treatment, which makes The Samfund essential now that more than 630,000 young adults in the United States have some cancer history. Past News Releases RSS Technology, Obesity Treatment...

Measurement’s Meaning in Diabetes...

Diabetes Care and Performance...

For young adults with cancer, battling the disease can be just the beginning. Medical bills, ruined credit, and trouble finding housing can set cancer survivors back and impede their physical and emotional recovery.

Officers of The Samfund, created to help young adult cancer survivors regain their financial footing, discuss the group’s mission in the current issue of Evidence-Based Oncology, a publication of The American Journal of Managed Care. The commentary by Samantha Watson, MBA, founder and CEO, and Michelle S. Landwehr, MPH, and COO, can be found here.

“Financial toxicity” is now recognized as a common effect of cancer treatment, which makes The Samfund essential now that more than 630,000 young adults in the United States have some cancer history. The Samfund has distributed more than $1.4 million since 2004, according to Watson and Landwehr, who explore the common financial burdens that may not only prevent cancer survivors from moving on with their lives, but may also prevent them from maintaining insurance coverage essential for follow-up care.

While the Affordable Care Act has helped many young cancer survivors, they write, there is still confusion about how it works. To help survivors navigate the ACA, The Samfund has joined with Triage Cancer to present Finances 101: A Toolkit for Young Adults with Cancer. For more information, please visit the website at http://www.thesamfund.org.

Press contact: Michele Bennett for The Samfund

Phone: 203-246-7859

email: michele(at)1LCommunications(dot)com

Other questions may be sent to info(at)thesamfund(dot)org.

About the Journals and AJMC.com

The American Journal of Managed Care celebrates its 20th year in 2015 as the leading peer-reviewed journal dedicated to issues in managed care. AJMC.com distributes healthcare news to leading stakeholders across a variety of platforms. Other titles in the franchise include The American Journal of Pharmacy Benefits, which provides pharmacy and formulary decision-makers with information to improve the efficiency and health outcomes in managing pharmaceutical care, and The American Journal of Accountable Care, which publishes research and commentary on innovative healthcare delivery models facilitated by the 2010 Affordable Care Act. AJMC’s Evidence-Based series brings together stakeholder views from payers, providers, policymakers and pharmaceutical leaders in oncology and diabetes management. To order reprints of articles appearing in AJMC publications, please call (609) 716-7777, x 131.

CONTACT:

Nicole Beagin (609) 716-7777 x 131

nbeagin(at)ajmc(dot)com

http://www.ajmc.com