A steady stream of senior citizens flowed into the Charles C. Parker Center at Etowah Park on Wednesday to get free tax-filing help from AARP volunteers.

Program coordinator Gordon Leiter said most of the clients are senior citizens but the free service is available to anyone.

“We don’t turn anyone away, whatever their age, whatever their income,” Leiter said.

What: Free AARP tax-filing service

When: Mondays from 1 to 4 p.m. and Saturdays from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. at the Rome-Floyd County Library, 205 Riverside Parkway; Wednesdays from 1 to 4 p.m. at the Charles C. Parker Center, Etowah Park.

Leiter said the 10 volunteers who prepare the tax returns get a week of training in January each year. Leiter said much of the training involved the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act because it caused a lot of trouble last year.

“The IRS sent several people and said ‘have another look at this, you may have gotten overcharged,”’ Leiter said.

There are some returns the volunteers cannot work on. The AARP volunteers cannot help anyone with rental income because of the depreciation.

“We did it for years so that’s kind of frustrating,” Leiter said.

Jack Summerbell, a retired teacher at Darling­ton School, has been a volunteer with the program for several years.

“I love to do it. You meet interesting people and, of course, you’re really helping them out,” Summerbell said.

Barbara Broadway Henderson, retired from Berry College, said she has been taking advantage of the free AARP service for the last five or six years.

“I know how to do lots of things but I don’t know how to do accounting,” Henderson said. “It’s just my Social Security and Berry College retirement, so I let them do it every year. They are very good and I’ve never had an error made.”

The system used by the AARP volunteers is designed to minimize the chance of errors. After the taxpayer fills out some basic paperwork, they are paired with an aide who does the return. Once it is completed, it is double-checked by another aide before it is submitted to the government.

Leiter also said his crew can only handle state returns for Georgia, Alabama and South Carolina.

Last year, 10 AARP volunteers in Rome helped more than 1,200 taxpayers file state and federal returns.

Most of them were filed electronically, Leiter said.

Taxpayers who have their refunds directly deposited into a bank account often get their money back in as little as a week, Leiter said.

The service is available Mondays from 1 to 4 p.m. at the Rome-Floyd County Library, 205 Riverside Parkway; Wednesdays from 1 to 4 p.m. at the Charles C. Parker Center; and Saturdays back at the library from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m.