WASHINGTON -- The Association of American Medical Colleges (AAMC) released new projections for physician supply and demand, and requested a heavy lift from Congress to help curb the physician shortage -- though some critics questioned the new estimates.

A report prepared for the AAMC forecast a shortage of between 46,000 to 90,000 physicians across the country by 2025 -- lower figures than its 2010 report, which estimated the nation would be short more than 130,000 physicians.

The difference was attributed to several factors: the U.S. Census Bureau's own downward revision of population projections, soaring numbers of nonphysician providers such as nurse practitioners, and the implementation of the Affordable Care Act.

The new report was written by the economic modeling and forecasting company IHS.

"We really feel that this is a public policy issue that puts the nation's health at risk and that the onus is on Congress to lift the artificial cap [on graduate medical education] that has been in place since the late '90s and do its share of contributing to the training," said Darrell Kirch, MD, the AAMC's president and CEO, during a teleconference Wednesday morning.

Because of cuts to reimbursement in the last few years, Kirch said, "hospitals have really hit the point where their margins are razor thin, and they have no wherewithal to invest in residency training."

Students are hard-pressed to make up these costs and are already leaving medical school with an average debt of $180,000 a year, he added.

Seeing no better alternative, the association is asking Congress for $10 billion over a 10-year period to support education and training of 3,000 more graduate medical students each year for the next 5 years, beginning in 2015.

The cost of training a resident is about $152,000, an email from a press representative explained. Of that amount, Medicare reimburses only a portion of the directs costs, about $40,000. In addition to supporting individual students, the association is also asking for support to finance indirect medical education payments to teaching hospitals.

Congress currently supports 27,000 to 29,000 students through direct graduate medical education payments, Kirch said.

Last year, three different bills were circulated in an attempt to increase these figures, again to the tune of about 3,000 students, Kirch said. "Unfortunately, none of them moved forward."

The Forecast

While the supply of physicians across the country is actually expected to increase slightly over the next decade, demand will outpace growth, said Janis Orlowski, MD, chief healthcare officer at the AAMC.

"Demographics are the primary reason for the shortage," she said.

According to the report, the national population is poised to jump by 10% from 2013 to 2025, adding more than 30 million people.

Orlowski anticipates an even larger increase -- 17% -- in the overall demand for physician services by 2025, citing the growth of an "older, sicker population" and to more people living longer with chronic diseases. The over-65 population is estimated to grow 46% by 2025, she noted. "The shortage will be particularly serious for the kind of medical care that our aging population is going to need," said Orlowski.

Orlowski also attributed a fraction of the growth in demand, about 2 percentage points, to the the Affordable Care Act -- based on an assumption that the ACA's Medicaid expansion will reach all 50 states.

The report used "demand scenarios" that incorporated new payment and delivery models, such as bundled payments, patient-centered medical homes, affordable care organizations, and even retail clinics.

"We specifically looked at the increased integration of advanced practice nurses. We looked at physician retirement and physicians' work hours for the new generation, and that is how we came up with the different scenarios," Orlowski said.

In a press release, Kirch noted "the physician shortage will grow over the next 10 years under every likely scenario."

The resulting predicted shortfalls are as follows:

Primary care: 12,500 to 31,100

Nonprimary care: 28,200 to 63,700

Among nonprimary care specialties, the breakdown is as follows:

Surgical specialties: 23,100 to 31,600

Medical specialties: 5,100 to 12,300

Other specialties: 2,400 to 20,200

The category "other specialties" includes anesthesiology, emergency medicine, neurology, pathology, and psychiatry.

Current estimates for primary care shortages are much lower than the 65,800 estimate touted in 2010. And in terms of percentages, the IHS report found that surgeons had the greatest shortfall, with the exception of those working in obstetrics and gynecology.

"The lower ranges of the projected shortfalls reflect the rapid growth in supply of advanced practice clinicians and the increased role these clinicians are playing in patient care delivery," noted the report.

The Critique

The primary care shortage has been bandied about at Senate hearings and Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (MedPAC) meetings for years. These figures have sparked concern, debate, and a quest for new solutions, including a primary care bonus, but many experts feel the gloomy estimates are misinformed or at least exaggerated.

A 2014 Institute of Medicine report on graduate medical education said it found no "credible evidence" for an impending shortage of physicians, particularly in primary care specialty areas.

Gail Wilensky, PhD, a senior fellow at Project Hope, co-chair of the IOM study as well as former head of Medicare and of MedPAC, told MedPage Today, "The magnitude of estimates about physician shortage has been pretty useless in the past, because they don't take account of different ways of providing healthcare services." (Wilensky recently penned an op-ed on the subject for the Milbank Quarterly.)

New models of payment such as bundling and new delivery models such as patient-centered medical homes are integral to this discussion, Wilensky said.

"We are more aggressively trying to change how care is provided, and all of that influences the number and types of healthcare professionals that will be needed in the future," she said. In addition, new technology such as wearable devices, which monitor care thereby reducing the need for follow-up visits to the doctor, as well as advances in telemedicine and electronic health records could hugely impact these estimates, she added.

Those focused on the "doc shortage" often neglect what some leaders in the industry view as the real problem: an uneven distribution of providers, both geographically and by specialty.

"There is absolutely no indication that increasing the numbers will address either of those [problems]," Wilensky said.

Wilensky predicts a fourth proposal to Congress on this matter will fail. Given the stress of the current fiscal environment, she doesn't understand how "in good conscience" the AAMC can request more funding. "It's not clear what the problem is you're trying to solve, or that there is a problem that needs solving."

Rather than increasing the volume of physicians, Wilensky said these problems need to be met head on by changes to reimbursement, selective loan forgiveness programs, or selected targeted grant distributions. "We know just increasing the numbers is not going to do it," she said.

In the last decade, we've witnessed a 28% jump in the number of medical students enrollments, "and that certainly hasn't helped this issue."

Prior to the IOM report, research from other health policy leaders also suggested that forecasts weren't as dire as predicted and could be resolved with a bit of restructuring.

A report in the January 2013 issue of Health Affairs found that if independent physicians joined up with two or three other doctors, transferred 20% of their patients to a nonphysician provider, and implemented electronic health records, the predicted shortage would mostly disappear.

"Given the trend toward larger physician practices, growth in patient-centered medical homes, team-based care, and adoption of electronic health record systems encouraged by federal incentives, these operational enhancements seem entirely plausible, if not conservative," Linda Green, PhD, of the Columbia Business School in New York City, and colleagues wrote.