"We are happy to report the Mangrove ACA solution is in place and available to our current HCM-payroll clients," says Richard Cangemi, CEO of Mangrove Software.

Mangrove Software, a leading cloud provider in enterprise Human Capital Management (HCM) solutions, announces the release of their Affordable Care Act (ACA) Healthcare Reform Manager for its current HCM-Payroll clients on September 1, 2015.

“With the deadline of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) looming, companies with 50+ full time equivalent employees will be faced with the challenge of providing the IRS a detailed accounting of employee hours worked and the affordability of their current healthcare plan. That is why having an agile partner like Mangrove is extremely beneficial,” says Richard Cangemi, CEO of Mangrove Software. "We are happy to report the Mangrove ACA solution is in place and available to our current HCM-payroll clients FREE for 30 days.”

With Mangrove’s ACA Healthcare Reform Manager, companies can potentially avoid IRS penalties in the secure environment in which they are accustomed to, performing all of their daily HR and payroll tasks. The new ACA Healthcare Reform Manager includes detailed information including:

Applicable Large Employer Test



Measures FTE’s to determine firm size

Includes variable hours as applicable

Controlled Group reporting

Employee Eligibility Testing



ACA Full-time employee test for current employees, new hires, and rehires allowing for multiple reporting periods

Handles variable hour employees

Tracks ACA eligibility status and required coverage dates by employee

Affordability Testing – Safe Harbor



Employee lowest cost monthly premium will be identified

Safe Harbor calculation will determine if plan is “affordable” according to ACA

If a plan is determined unaffordable the potential penalty will be noted

Alerts & Notifications



When an employee is about to cross into a different profile (part-time to full-time)

Coverage beginning and ending dates

Dependents reaching maximum age

The Mangrove ACA Healthcare Reform Manager is designed to follow a company’s “ACA Plan Design” (a customized plan created by the company’s expert – often a broker, CPA, benefits administrator, or other ACA experts, which addresses the company’s strategic approach to compliance). Once the ACA Plan Design is finalized, the implementation and reporting process can begin. Mangrove also offers clients year-end generation and electronic filing of pre-filled 1094-C and 1095-C IRS forms.

"The true benefit to our clients goes beyond meeting the ACA compliance and reporting standards; the peace of mind knowing it is as part of their current payroll system is invaluable," adds Cangemi.

About Mangrove Software

Mangrove designs, markets, implements and supports HR, payroll, and talent management solutions for mid-market and enterprise companies. Mangrove is an Internet-based solution delivered via cloud, and designed to improve the relationship between employer and employee through the use of technology. Mangrove’s solutions deliver the flexibility and functionality businesses need to manage their employees, including recruitment and onboarding, HR management and compliance, benefits management and online enrollment, payroll, performance management, reporting and analytical decision-making tools, time and attendance, and a self-service Web portal for executives, managers, administrators, recruiters, and employees. For more information on Mangrove and its solutions, please visit http://www.mangrovesoftware.com.