By Denis D. Gray

The last time I encountered escargots they were served up sizzling in garlic butter by a French waiter.



Now, one is slithering up the bridge of my nose while five others are being stuck onto other parts of my face by a Thai beautician, all secreting snail slime, hopefully to smooth out some wrinkles and otherwise give me a younger look.

That this latest addition to the global beauty and wellness craze — snail facials — should surface in the hills of northern Thailand is only natural.

This Southeast Asian country ranks among the world’s top spa destinations, with massage treatments of every description offered around just about every corner. Other members of the animal kingdom are also enlisted, including fish at some 4,000 pedicure spas.

Merely another marketing ploy or an effective way to plump up skin in need of repair or rejuvenation? Expert opinions differ. The two young Thai women reclining next to me at Chiang Mai’s Snail Spa sang the praises of helix aspera muller glycoconjugates, snail mucus for short.

When I returned home, my wife described my face as “different,” but declined to go into detail.

The spa was started last year by two Frenchmen who had imported 100 snails from home. The colony now boasts more than 30,000, munching on chemically free carrots, cabbage and aloe.

A chosen few get plucked for duty at the spa, where I opted for the 45-minute Snail Spa Celebrity Course. For $30, it’s a bargain compared to the $200 customers must shell out at Tokyo’s Ci:z.Labo, a beauty salon where snail massage made its debut in 2013. Spas have also opened in China and London, and the French duo are expanding to Bangkok next month.

While the facials are new, concoctions made from snail mucus are said to date back to ancient Greece, when the great physician Hippocrates reportedly crushed snails and sour milk as a cure for skin inflammations. In recent times, the French have turned this essence of escargot into assorted creams and lotions.

The fluid, exuded by snails when under stress, is known to contain beneficial nutrients and antioxidants, but Bangkok-based Dr. Dissapong Panithaporn and other dermatologists say that there has been no significant scientific research on how these actually work when applied to the skin.

I sensed a balmy coolness as the snails slid over my cheeks, furrowed through my eyebrows and tickled my lips .

The snail’s 14,000 microscopic teeth produced a slight, not unpleasant scratching as it slid toward my nostrils.

So, truth be told, I sort of missed my harmless, sensuous sextet when they were dislodged, clinging to my skin with a gentle suction.

Maybe I won’t eat another escargot.