BRIDGETON -- They came with a message for city officials: Stop locking up your residents over petty crimes and reduce your incarceration rate.

Decarcerate the Garden State -- a North Jersey-based group that advocates for vastly reducing incarceration rates in New Jersey and U.S. prisons -- visited the city on Saturday to inform people about "mass incarceration" -- an issue the group says primarily targets and punishes impoverished minorities.

The event was held at the Church of the Resurrection on East Commerce Street.

It had a sparse turnout -- less than 20 people showed up -- and the keynote speaker canceled at the last minute.

But the group's co-founder, Bob Witanek, took the lead and spoke fervently on mass incarceration throughout the state and country -- citing that the U.S. holds 25 percent of the world's prisoners, despite only making up just five percent of the world's population.

"The only way for (solutions) is to educate ourselves," Witanek said at the top of the event.

He asked attendees to sign a petition that identifies five key issues the group says the city must address and has the power to address. Witanek is calling on the city's leadership to "change its thinking" as to how it polices its residents.

"The Cumberland County Prosecutor's Office is locking up people over tiny (offenses)," Witanek said. "They are going draconian ... They are trying to get people on little charges."

The group's petition calls for:

1. A dismissal of those with pending charges who were arrested for "low-level offenses."

2. An immediate moratorium on low-level marijuana arrests.

3. An ordinance for the decriminalization of marijuana (similar to what Philadelphia has done in decriminalizing the possession of small amounts of marijuana for personal use).

4. A new direction for police: putting an end to stop-and-frisk and broken window-type law enforcement.

5. A resolution to urge the state Assembly, Senate and governor to introduce and pass the N.J. Decarceration Act, which calls on state leadership to reduce New Jersey's incarceration rate by 20 percent in the first two years and 50 percent over four years.

Witanek believes the bill should grant the release of those in prison for nonviolent, simple drug possession and small-scale economic offenses.

Furthermore, he believes city Mayor Albert Kelly's heart is in the right place and trusts that the mayor will help facilitate some type of concrete action in the near future.

"As mayor, he can tell the prosecutor and the police department what offenses should be priority," said Witanek in a telephone interview earlier this week.

D'Andre Lewis, 23, of Bridgeton, showed up to the event on Saturday after seeing a flyer near the church.

Lewis, standing next to 20-year-old Bridgeton resident Drew Medolla, said they were in favor of the petition.

"Everyone deserves a second chance," Lewis said.

Lewis also expressed frustration about what he considers an overly strict enforcement of jaywalking in the city, which he believes is merely a way for police to stop people they deem suspicious.

"I've gotten two tickets for jaywalking," he said, frustrated.

"I got a ticket for not having a horn on my bicycle," Medolla added.

"It's ridiculous," said Lewis. "They just want to have a reason to stop you."

Renee Felton, member of the Southwoods Family United Organization, spoke at the event and talked about her son, Kwadir Felton, who was permanently blinded when he was 18 years old, after a police officer shot him in the head in January 2010. Kwadir is currently serving a 16-year prison sentence at South Woods State Prison.

Felton believes families with kin inside prison walls need to stand together for support.

She also talked about her difficult commute from her home in Jersey City to South Woods in order to see her son.

Witanek said unifying families with loved ones serving time in prison is also an important way to find out "what's really going on" behind the prison walls.

"There is stuff going on inside these facilities that needs to see the light of day," said Witanek, explaining that communication among family members of inmates would help bring any potential brutality or improper treatment by corrections officers to the surface.

---

Spencer Kent may be reached at skent@southjerseymedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @SpencerMKent. Find the South Jersey Times on Facebook.