This March 1, 2014 file photo shows part of the website for HealthCare.gov Associated Press

Voters who think the federal health law is a bad idea still significantly outnumber those who think it’s a good idea heading into November midterms, the new NBC News/Wall Street Journal poll shows.

Among all registered voters captured in the September poll, 34% are in favor of the 2010 Affordable Care Act, and 48% are against it.

Most respondents who have an opinion say they feel strongly about it, and there are also clear party divisions in position: 82% of Republicans feel the law is bad, and 63% of Democrats say it’s good. Independents are more divided, with 26% saying it’s good, 51% saying it’s bad, and the rest saying they don’t know.

Most respondents say that what they’ve seen, read or heard over the last few weeks about the law has made no difference to their opinion of it. (There’s been mixed news over the past few weeks. The Department of Health and Human Services disclosed that a hacker had breached the HealthCare.gov site in July and uploaded malicious software, and has been chasing around 310,000 people to send in additional paperwork confirming they’re legally in the U.S. or see their coverage cut off Sept. 30. At the same time, Pennsylvania’s Republican governor made his state the 27th to expand Medicaid under the law, and fresh reports that premiums for 2015 have largely stayed in check has buoyed supporters.)

Click to see more poll charts and data.

Sentiment is about the same as it was among registered voters ahead of 2012 and 2010 elections. In 2012, 40% of registered voters in the NBC/Journal poll thought the law was a good idea and 44% thought it was bad. In 2010, 36% of registered voters thought it was good and 46% thought it was bad.

For 2014, Latino voters are the only electoral group identified in the NBC/Journal poll where supporters of the law outnumber opponents. Among suburban women, voters over 65, undecided and independent voters and white women more dislike it than back it.

The poll also shows the Democratic party maintaining an edge over Republicans in voters’ perceptions of who’s best at dealing with health care. Some 39% of voters think Democrats have an advantage, compared with 31% who favor the GOP. But Democrats’ 8-point lead is well below the big double-digit margins the party enjoyed in the years before the overhaul was debated and passed.

A new monthly tracking poll also released Tuesday by the non-partisan Kaiser Family Foundation has almost identical findings.

That survey shows a similar split in support for the law, with 47% of respondents saying they had an unfavorable view of the law and 35% saying they liked it. There were also similar divisions along party lines, though the poll found that health-care took a back seat to the economy in importance for voters of all stripes.

The NBC/Journal poll was carried out Sept. 3 to 7 with 1,000 registered voters and has a margin of error of 3.1 percentage points. The Kaiser poll was conducted August 25 to Sept. 2 with a sample of 1,505 adults, giving the poll a margin of error of 3 percentage points.

More from the September poll: