Saturday night advocates for mental health in Colorado honored the Climb Out of the Darkness Expedition, a group of young mountaineers who summited all 54 of Colorado’s Fourteeners in 10 weeks this summer to raise awareness and reduce the stigma of mental illness.

“At Mental Health America of Colorado, we say yes – we can do better,” Andrew Romanoff, the former Colorado House speaker who has been president and CEO of MHAC since April. “We have to do better. We won’t be content until all Coloradans can access and afford high-quality mental health care – not just in response to a crisis, but before the crisis hits. Or, as we like to say, before stage 4.”

The Climb Out of Darkness Expedition Team is made up of Anthony Reinert, Aaron McDowell, Seth Pooler, Matthew Cranston and Daniel Frauenhoff.

The group has attracted wide media attention to their efforts and mental illness advocacy and awareness, said MHAC. The groups sponsors include Mountainsmith, Osprey, Backcountry Banter, Durango Outdoor Exchange, Chinook Medical Gear, Tailwind Nutrition, Postpartum Progress, Smartwood, Mountain Chalet, Goddess Garden Organics and Confluence.

Colorado Insurance Commissioner Marguerite Salazar was an honoree, along with Colorado College, at last year’s Tribute Gala. She introduced the Climb Out of Darkness Expedition team at Saturday night’s gala at the Sheraton Denver Downtown Hotel.

Mental Health Awareness

“Mental health has many facets, and encompasses a large number of specific illnesses, conditions and diseases. This expedition has chosen this area of concern because in some way we are all touched by mental illness in its many forms. Most will never know what it means to struggle with these unseen illnesses that affects so many others. This is a very personal situation for the team members and is a relatable cause that this expedition can firmly rally around. It is the hope of the team to be able to use the media that comes with an endeavor such as this to be able to bring to light information about these diseases and work to educate and inform. Also through our partnerships, we hope to connect individuals with the organizations that are making a difference in the areas of mental health awareness and treatment.”

— Climb Out of Darkness Expedition Team

According to MHAC, “With more than one million Coloradans experiencing a mental health or substance use disorder each year, MHAC seeks to promote universal screening and early intervention, expand access to affordable treatment and services, and eradicate stigma and discrimination.”