Topics: Documentaries, Drugs, Editor's Picks, Mexican Cartels, Mexican Drug War, Mexico, Movies, Narco Cultura, narcocorridos, Our Picks, Our Picks: Movies, Sinaloa Cartel, War on Drugs, Media News, Life News, Entertainment News

Just outside the city of Culiacán, near the northwestern coast of Mexico, sits an impressive new development, a boomtown where construction never stops. It’s a monument to the neoliberal reshaping of our southern neighbor’s economy, and to the social and cultural interpenetration between America and Mexico in a paradoxical era of supposed closed borders and supposed free trade. This burgeoning new city bristles with all the incoherent architectural detail of an upscale suburb outside Houston or Phoenix – Tudor meets Gothic meets Mission meets ranch – but is eerily, deadly quiet. That’s because none of its residents are actually alive.

This is the Culiacán cemetery, crowded with hundreds of young men who got rich and died young in Mexico’s drug wars, to be interred behind bulletproof glass in McMansion-style crypts, alongside their customized Silverado pickups, their kitsch-heroic color portraits, their stuffed animals and religious icons, their AK-47s. Every army honors its fallen in its own way, and as we see in Shaul Schwarz’s arresting documentary “Narco Cultura,” this place is hallowed ground for warriors of the Sinaloa Cartel, which is probably the dominant criminal organization in Mexico, North America and the world. If you’ve purchased marijuana or cocaine or crystal meth or almost any other illegal drug during the past decade or so, then you helped pay for this place, and helped put people in it too.

I know that’s harsh. I’m not actually saying that ordinary Americans’ desire to get high is the fundamental problem behind the nihilistic cycle of Mexico’s drug wars, only that this is one of those situations where there’s more than enough blame to go around. America’s demented drug policy and its voracious appetite for drugs have fueled the violence, as has the unresolved social and political crisis in Mexico, a nation corrupted and distorted from top to bottom by drug money. One could argue that the real villain is neither Mexican nor American, but a global free-trade ideology that pretends to be neutral and apolitical. Schwarz’s film is about how the drug trade and the drug war have transformed Mexican culture on both sides of the border, but what we see in that Culiacán graveyard is that the values of the drug war, and indeed the values of organized crime more generally, are just the values of capitalism pushed to a grotesque extreme.

More than 60,000 people have been killed in Mexico since 2006, when then-President Felipe Calderón, a pro-American free-marketeer with a Harvard MBA, launched a military-style campaign against the nation’s drug cartels, which were already locked in internecine warfare against each other. (He also allowed the DEA to cross the border and operate openly within Mexico for the first time.) Those are just the government’s murder statistics; many observers believe the real harvest of death is more like 100,000. As a melancholy crime-scene investigator in Ciudad Juárez named Richi Soto tells Schwarz, his notorious border city – a major hub for narcotics transport into the United States – had more than 3,000 reported murders in 2010 alone. Across the river in El Paso, Texas, there were five murders that year. (While the murder rate in Juárez has decreased since then, it remains extremely high by world standards, and the overall rate of drug-related crime in Mexico has not fallen much, if at all.)

The history of violence that produced that shocking disparity, and that horrifying and ludicrous city of the dead in Culiacán, is full of what-ifs, but here’s the biggest one: What if America had not succumbed to the anti-drug hysteria of the Reagan years, and had pursued a drug policy that was sane and rational rather than contradictory and self-destructive? Mexico’s troubled love-hate relationship with the United States has long been a matter of unacknowledged codependence, in which they send us people or commodities (often people as commodities) that our economy relies upon but we’d rather not talk about: Farmworkers and chicken-gutters; maids, nannies and gardeners (papers not required); cheap fruit in the middle of winter; lots and lots of drugs.

Successive Democratic and Republican administrations have poured countless billions into prisons and police departments in a fruitless campaign to stop the drug trade, but America’s demand for drugs never slackened, and the Mexican cartels only grew in power and paramilitary might. There are any number of good arguments for legalizing marijuana and decriminalizing almost all other forms of street drugs, and I suspect we’ll get there eventually, much more slowly than we should have. You can call it compassion or shame or sheer self-interest, but the same war that has killed thousands in Mexico (including many innocent bystanders) has also fueled the growth of the prison-industrial complex in the United States, and driven the widespread incarceration of brown and black people. However many border fences we build and however much we demonize each other, our two nations have a shared destiny, and any cancer that poisons one will also poison the other.

In “Narco Cultura,” we hear Edgar Quintero, a Mexican-American singer of narcocorridos — a hugely popular genre of Mexican pop song in praise of the drug lords, and sometimes commissioned by them – sum it all up: “As long as the gringos keep smoking it, we’ll keep making it.” That song is about crystal meth, which Quintero doesn’t personally make, use or sell. (Did you know that you can find meth-smoking instruction on the Internet? I did not know that.) He’s a cheerful, upbeat guy who smokes a little weed from time to time but avoids the harder stuff, a loving father who hopes to build a future for his family on the narcocorrido craze. Quintero has spent his entire life in L.A. and is more comfortable speaking English than Spanish; as he complains to a friend, there are Mexican idioms he doesn’t quite get. His band is called Buknas de Culiacán, in tribute to a place he’d never been. There’s really no other way to say it: He’s a fanboy, both of established narcocorrido stars like El Komander and drug kingpins like Sinaloa Cartel head Joaquín “El Chapo” Guzmán, currently ranked by Forbes as the 67th most important person in the world. (He’s just below House Speaker John Boehner and just above New York Times editor Jill Abramson.)