Oregon health plans received approximately $169 million of the $7.9 billion in 2014 federal reinsurance (RI) dollars. This means that the state utilized 2.1 percent of the reinsurance pool with a population accounting for roughly 1.2 percent of the nation. More than 65% of the state’s RI dollars went to Moda Health Plan which received $110 million from the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS).

The federal reinsurance program is a temporary safeguard enacted by the Affordable Care Act (ACA) to protect health plans from high individual claims. The budget neutral program draws contributions from all issuers. Plans with individual claims over $45K are reimbursed 80 percent of claims between this amount and the $250K cap set by HHS.

Thirteen of Oregon’s health plans were eligible for RI payments ranging from $317 to $110 million.

All but two of these plans also received risk adjustment (RA) transfers from other carriers. The risk adjustment program is a permanent protection which draws on a state funding pool, transferring money from plans with more low-cost enrollees to plans with more higher-cost enrollees.

Interestingly, almost all RA transfers in the state came out of Moda’s pocket. Moda paid more than $31 million to other carriers due to the HHS’s determination that it had a larger pool of low-cost enrollees. Trillium Community Health Plan, the only other carrier to make an RA payment, paid $2,613.

Plans which have high RI payments to account for costly individual claims but also pay large RA amounts demonstrate more acute than chronic cases in their member pool. The documentation of chronic and complex conditions is essential for calculating RA amounts. For example, a patient with unmanaged diabetes may be inappropriately considered a low-cost enrollee if the specifics of the condition are not coded.

The RI payout threshold for 2015 will move to $70K with a 50 percent reimbursement rate by HHS.

View State of Reform’s RA RI data for Oregon health plans and the HHS summary report.