Aetna’s Mark Bertolini: A New Definition Of Success For Health Care by [email protected]

Mark Bertolini sounds more like a patient activist than the CEO of a major health insurer, Aetna. He believes it is “criminal” that some Americans do not have health care coverage. Bertolini also wants to see changes to a system that cures diseases but does not care about the individual after treatment. In 2015, he famously raised the minimum base pay of Aetna employees to $16 per hour because he believed anything less was unfair.

Before Bertolini was hired as CEO, he told Aetna board members that one of his goals was to reestablish the credibility of corporate leaders in the eyes of the public. Only if the board agreed with him would he take the job. In his sixth year as CEO, Bertolini has presided over a quadrupling of Aetna’s stock price to an all-time high.

In an interview with [email protected] at the World Business Forum in New York, Bertolini shared his thoughts on improving the U.S. health care system and reveals what Hinduism taught him about leadership.

What follows is an edited version of that conversation and the first of two parts.

[email protected] : I am here with Mark Bertolini, the CEO of Aetna, which is now poised to become the biggest health care insurance company in the U.S.

So you’ve been called many things including “Health care’s Mr. Fix-it.” How do wear that mantle given that you’ve been in this health care economy for a while now? You’ve seen it from your perspective in the trauma care center when you were working there and now you’re a CEO. How is it evolving?

Mark Bertolini: Through all of my experiences, in a Level I Trauma Center as an EMT, Emergency Department Coordinator and, working in the hospital industry, working in the early days of managed care back in the 1980’s and then my own personal experiences with my son and myself in the health care system — I realized that it wasn’t getting any better.

“The system wanted to fix the medical issue but wasn’t at all concerned about the individual they put back into society.”

I think the issue is that we define health the wrong way, and it became incredibly apparently to me when my son battled with cancer for quite some time and when I had my ski injury where I broke my neck — the system wanted to fix the medical issue but wasn’t at all concerned about the individual they put back into society. And so for me it was my pain and my limitations, my physical limitations trying to get my life back which you never really do. For my son, it was his whole journey for a year-and-a-half, two years with cancer and then, I gave him a kidney in 2007. It was just this whole journey where they just wanted to get rid of the cancer and once the cancer was gone they were done with him.

I came to this conclusion that there were a whole lot of things wrong with that but probably the most important thing was — what do we define as success? And success is really healthy individuals who are productive; productive individuals are economically, culturally, socially and spiritually viable; and viable people are happy. And if we can do that individual by individual and community by community, we’d have a much better world. So, how do we a design a system around that is really the point, right?

[email protected] : How does that change how you think of Aetna’s products and services?

Bertolini: When I put my son into hospice [care] in … July of 2002 … I had to admit he was going to die in six months and he couldn’t get curative services anymore.

Today, he’s 30 and a productive human being in society. [When] I was working with [former Aetna CEO] Jack Rowe. I said to Jack: “You know, we should change the way our end-of-life care program works. And let’s waive the requirement that you have to admit you’re going to die and let’s allow people to get curative services while they’re in hospice.”

When we did that … what we found was that instead of 25% of the people dying at home, 75% of the people died at home and we saw an 89% reduction in inpatient bed days and we saw 75% reduction in costs. And the families and the feedback we got on the program was, “This is incredible.”

And it worked. So today, every Aetna customer gets that product.

[email protected] : Have you seen a difference in the type of people who want to work for you given the changes you’re putting into place?

Bertolini: Definitely. When I joined Aetna in 2003 I worked for a sleepy insurance company that was struggling to figure out whether or not it was going to survive. When I took over as chairman in 2010, we were a $30 billion dollar company and in July of next year we’ll be a $125 billion dollar company. Part of that has been our ability to be a thought leader and go out into the community and talk about what could be better…. Health care is one of the biggest budget busting problems in the world in every country and people want to fix that.?Twitter And when you look at millennials, they want to be involved in a big, hairy problem that they can actually have an impact on.

We have people lined up to come to work. I just hired Gary Loveman, the CEO of Caesars. He came to work for me because he wants to be involved in the consumer part of the health care revolution. All of a sudden, all of these really big folks, and great folks, and smart people want to come to work with us because we’re about solving a big problem and everybody wants to be a part of that.

“Success is really healthy individuals who are productive; productive individuals are economically, culturally, socially and spiritually viable; and viable people are happy.”

[email protected] : A key thing about health care is the interconnectedness of various institutional players. Have there been partnerships that you feel have helped or others you like to see in play? What’s going to be the next big shift?

Bertolini: So solution number one — when you step back from the problem itself and you admit that your value chain is on fire, which is what the Affordable Care Act did, you have to say, “Okay, if I’ve got an opportunity to grab one or two things out of my burning house, what do I do?” And I grabbed those things and I let the rest of the house burn and then I take those important things over to the new value chain.

You can do two things when there’s a disrupted economy or industry. One, is you can put your thumb in your mouth, get in a fetal position in the corner, cut your costs and hope you’re the last person standing. That’s what U.S. Steel did, that’s what the auto companies did. … Or what you can do is you can say, “Okay, there’s a new value chain. What is it? And what is it that I do in the

Republished with permission from Knowledge , the online research and business analysis journal of the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania.”