Dear Dr. Don,

Continue Reading Below

I just read your advice to a 48-year-old with just $6,000 in retirement savings and thought I'd ask your opinion about my situation. My wife and I are 60 and 58 years old, respectively. We have $1,050,000 in Roth individual retirement accounts, traditional IRAs and 401(k) plans. Neither of us has a pension. We also own three properties free and clear, one of which is a rental bringing in $950 a month. The three properties are valued at about $500,000 in today's market.

My wife is retiring in August. I will work up to four additional years. I plan to take Social Security at age 62 and she will get my spousal benefit. At 67, we will switch to her Social Security and I will take her benefits. Are we on the right track with all of this?

Thank you,

Jerry Justright

Dear Jerry,

Continue Reading Below ADVERTISEMENT

While I haven't reviewed your portfolio specifics, a million dollars in retirement accounts and a half-million dollars of real estate without debt sure sounds like you're in good financial shape overall.

As you make the transition from making contributions to taking distributions, make sure your portfolio meets retirement income needs for both of your lifetimes. From my follow-up, I understand you would like to have up to $4,500 monthly in retirement income.

I also understand after retirement and before Medicare, you'll buy health insurance policies under the Affordable Care Act. I'm concerned that you don't have long-term care policies. You don't want to put your financial standing at risk without having long-term care coverage.

Simply put, what you told me doesn't add up on the Social Security timing. Please do a little more homework to ensure you have the right timetables in mind. A little professional advice on that issue alone could be worth the peace of mind. My sense is you can afford to pay for it.

Get more news, money-saving tips and expert advice by signing up for a free Bankrate newsletter.

Ask the adviser

To ask a question of Dr. Don, go to the "Ask the Experts" page and select one of these topics: "Financing a home," "Saving and Investing" or "Money." Read more Dr. Don columns for additional personal finance advice.

Bankrate's content, including the guidance of its advice-and-expert columns and this website, is intended only to assist you with financial decisions. The content is broad in scope and does not consider your personal financial situation. Bankrate recommends that you seek the advice of advisers who are fully aware of your individual circumstances before making any final decisions or implementing any financial strategy. Please remember that your use of this website is governed by Bankrate's Terms of Use.

Copyright 2014, Bankrate Inc.