See who's been arrested, accused, convicted or released in Southern Arizona this month. An arrest is not a presumption of guilt.

See who's been arrested, accused, convicted or released in Southern Arizona this month. An arrest is not a presumption of guilt.

See who's been arrested, accused, convicted or released in Southern Arizona this month. An arrest is not a presumption of guilt.

See who's been arrested, accused, convicted or released in Southern Arizona this month. An arrest is not a presumption of guilt.

A young girl saw her mother die Saturday night after a driver ran over the woman while the two were walking along the road, according to the Tucson Police Department.

Emergency crews were sent around 11:40 p.m. to South Nogales Highway near East Elvira Road, where the two pedestrians were found, according to a TPD media release.

The woman, 38-year-old Marisa Robles, was pronounced dead at the scene. Her 11-year-old daughter was rushed to the hospital with non-life-threatening injuries.

Lisa Clevenger, who lives nearby, said she walked out of her home when she heard the screams of the daughter. Clevenger said she couldn't believe what she saw.

“I was in shock," she said. "I’m still a little freaked out by what happened last night."

Clevenger said she stayed up all night watching detectives work through the night.

Evidence at the scene sent investigators four miles south, to the 10100 block of South Nogales Highway, where they located a 1992 Oldsmobile Cutlass Ciera with significant damage consistent with a crash.

With the help of K9 and air units, officers arrested 22-year-old Joshua Ochoa without a struggle, according to the media release.

Investigators believe speed and alcohol are factors in the crash. Ochoa was booked into the Pima County Jail and is charged with multiple crimes, including:

Second degree murder

Aggravated assault

Hit-and-run involving death/injury

Possession of marijuana

Possession of drug paraphernalia

Neighbors like Clevenger, and Carmen Romero, said they won't walk near the road anymore because of this crash. Romero said the intersection needs better lighting and a more prominent speed limit sign for southbound traffic. She said the road was recently paved and drivers speed past her neighborhood all the time.

“I don’t walk around here," said Romero. "I lived around here, but I don’t walk.”

Copyright 2015 Tucson News Now. All rights reserved.