By Heidi Zemach for SCN-

The Seward Community Health Center has finally hired two permanent physicians, and they’ve been on the job for a few weeks seeing patients. With a statewide, and nationwide shortage of primary care physicians, and tens of thousands of openings, Providence Seward Medical & Care Center SCHC executive director Patrick Linton feels “very blessed” to have found two very capable, experienced doctors, each with diverse training and backgrounds. After a year of recruiting, Linton said he’s confident that they will be a good fit for Seward.

In addition to seeing clinic patients, Dr. Rosecoe Van Camp will serve as the Seward Community Health Center’s Medical Director. Van Camp has served 20 years in Alaska, much of that time in Interior Alaska, where winter temperatures can be 50 below zero. He has never lived on the coast and is looking forward to spending time on the water kayaking or diving. His wife, who is Outside visiting with their grandchildren, will join him in Seward in May. Athletic and extremely fit, Van Camp doesn’t own a car by choice—only a bicycle, which he will use to get to work and about town, and also to explore the area’s many mountain trails.

Van Camp recently finished his active duty as a colonel in the United States Air Force at Joint Base Elmendorf-Richardson (JBER), where he served as Chief of Aerospace Medicine. He’s logged thousands of flight hours as a civilian and as part of his military duties, and his specialization is in assuring that pilots are physically equipped to handle the unique, stressful, and G-force conditions of flight. Part of his aerospace medicine training included treating decompression sickness, or “the bends”, which can also be a boon to divers. Van Camp is also diver-certified.

Naturally, Van Camp is also board-certified in family medicine and preventative medicine. He’s also a certified FAA medical examiner, and is certified to do commercial drivers’ license (CDL) medical exams. He practiced family medicine at Cross Road Medical Center in Glennallen, Alaska, serving a community similar to Seward in size, and that becomes more active in the summer season with thousands of visitors and seasonal workers. As medical director at JBER, he’s been responsible for all of the public health needs on base, including investigating contagious illnesses, food-borne diseases, testing water and administering immunizations.

But what really matters to Seward clients during their first visit, he said, is assurance that their new physician will stick around, due to high turnover rates typical of here, and other highly transient communities.

“About the first thing (new patients) they say is, ‘Oh well how long are you going to be here?,’” Van Camp said, but we’re planning on staying for a while, so you won’t be seeing a new face every time you come in. There’s going to be some consistency. It’s just taken some time to get to that.”

Asked to describe his own approach to family medicine, or bedside manner, Van Camp said: “Every doctor has a little different take on things. Every patient does too. So there’s a lot of working together. My style is to work with people and not to dictate to people what I think is the best medicine or approach to their specific illness. It may not be what they want, and so I’ll give them my recommendations and then work with them–within reason.”

He said he’s less likely to negotiate with patients asking him to prescribe long-term narcotic medications, or certain other highly addictive drugs. But if patients are taking, or interested in trying out naturopathic treatments, Van Camp is willing to work with them and advise them on what may or may not be a good idea, and help monitor their condition to see whether they’re working.

Van Camp said he spends a good deal of time trying to keep current on scientific literature on medical studies and common naturopathic treatments.

“I think people have got to choose their own way, and I’m here to help. And if they would rather do a naturopathic medicine, that’s fine,” he said. “And truthfully, if you believe in something, that’s almost half the battle right there. There’s a large effect of just having confidence in something.”

Advertisement

Dr. Lance Allen, a family man with six children, has moved to Seward from Utah with his wife Lori and their four remaining school-age children. The couple has two other grown children, 19 and 21. Allen was raised in a community in Utah even smaller than Seward. Lori was raised in Wasilla and is related to the Egans, a the prominent Alaska family. Allen will work for the health center full-time during the week, while covering shifts in the emergency room for Providence Seward Medical Center on weekends through a joint employment agreement with both entities.

Allen completed his residency in family medicine in 2011, in Warren, Ohio, with a secondary emphasis in emergency medicine. He trained in Osteopathic Medicine at Touro University College in Henderson, Nevada. He also completed undergraduate work in pre-medicine and environmental engineering at Utah State and Southern Utah University. He has always preferred working and living in small, rural communities. In fact, their four youngest boys are aptly named Hunter, 16, Trapper, 14, Fisher, 11 and Rider, 8.

“We’re big outdoor people. We hunt, fish, hike hills, kayak, he said. “I’m very excited about that. I don’t think that’s going to get old here.”

Allen has also been an engineer, a farmer, a blue-collar laborer, and when asked to describe his approach with patients, Dr. Allen said he thinks he brings the common touch, using less technical explanations that most people can understand.

“My second kid was delivered was when I was still in med school, so everything we’ve done from that point, I was an outsider looking in, rather than an insider looking out, so that’s kind of the way I like to approach it.” “And I come from a rural area too. I came from a place where it took five hours to get to the specialist, and I know what that does to a family. But I also know when it doesn’t matter, and it needs to be done.”

As a physician with the responsibility of helping people handle chronic issues affecting their health, including obesity, diabetes, heart disease, or emphysema caused by years of smoking, Allen realizes how difficult it can be to advise others to change and develop healthier habits.

“Nothing’s less fun than a skinny guy telling a fat guy to lose weight, or somebody with no kids telling a parent if you just do this thing, everything will be perfect, because if you’ve had kids you know it’s harder than what’s written in a book,” he said.

Unfortunately, Lori Hamilton, the CHC’s new physician’s assistant, who began working there in October recently left the position within her 90-day trial period, having been compelled to leave due to a change in her family situation. The CHC is now recruiting another full time PA, or advanced nurse practitioner to fill out the team, said Patrick Linton. Family medicine practitioners are difficult to recruit, he said, but the CHC interviewed five interested candidates before finding Allen and Van Camp. Physicians reaching retirement age, more CHCs, and the Affordable Care Act (Medicaid Expansion, and insurance companies’ now covering preexisting illnesses) has created a shortage of providers as more clients are visiting the doctor, rather than the ER.

The Seward CHC saw 1,072 different people in its first 10 months, from March 10th 2014 through the end of the calendar year, said Linton. That averages to 12 visits per day per provider, although there was only one provider working for much of that time. Those numbers will naturally increase in 2015, Linton said, and he’s expecting a busy summer.

To accommodate the new physicians, five employees, including Linton, have moved into a prefabricated mobile office trailer, across the parking lot.

Residents are invited to meet the physicians and welcome them to Seward, and honor those already working at Seward Providence Medical & Care Center. The reception is at AVTEC student lounge on Fourth Avenue, Monday March 30th from 5:00-7:00 p.m. Refreshments will be provided.