KNOXVILLE (WATE/CNN) – Thinking of ignoring the Obamacare mandate to get health insurance? It could cost you.

To try to ensure that people sign up for coverage, the Affordable Care Act carries penalties for those who remain uninsured.

Previous story: How the Affordable Care Act affects how you file income taxes

Here’s how the penalties will work:

Uninsured adults will either pay a flat fee for themselves and their children or pay a share of their income, whichever is greater. The penalty is pro-rated if people have coverage for part of the year and they won’t be liable if they lack coverage for lass than a three-month period during the year.

The penalties start relatively small, but ramp up within a few years.

There is a limit, penalties cannot exceed the national average premium for bronze coverage, the cheapest plan tier in the state based exchanges.

For 2014, the flat fee is 95 dollars per adult and 47.50 dollars per child, up to 285 dollars per family. Or the penalty could be one percent of family income, if that results in a larger fine.

So a person making 50,000 dollars would be subject to a four hundred dollar penalty, while a couple earning that amount would each pay three hundred dollars.

By 2015, the flat fee grows to 695 dollars per adult and 347.50 dollars per child or 2.5 percent of family income, whichever is greater.

Not every uninsured person will be subject to the penalty. Among those exempt include undocumented immigrants, native Americans and those who earn too little to file tax returns. Also, people who would have to pay more than eight percent of their for health insurance and poor adults who live in states that are not expanding Medicaid also aren’t subject to the penalty. The uninsured can also file for hardship exemptions.

Cherokee Health Systems will be providing assistance with the signup process on six Saturdays in March and April.

For assistance, you can go to their office at 2018 Western Avenue in Knoxville on March 21 & 28. Times are also set up for every Saturday in April from 11 a.m. – 3 p.m.