Officials: Animals preparing for hibernation, eating as much as they can find

This photo posted to the Daily Record's Facebook page shows a bear that was spotted last week in the Dawson Ranch area. Local wildlife officers say there are a few bears living near Dawson Ranch. (MT Hedahl / Courtesy Photo)

Tips from Colorado Parks and Wildlife Here are a list of tips from the Colorado Parks and Wildlife on simple precautions people can take to avoid conflicts with bears, as listed in a press release from CPW. — Keep garbage in a well-secured location; and only put out garbage on the morning of pickup. Use a bear-resistant trash can. Clean garbage cans regularly to keep them odor free. If you don't have secure storage, put items that might become smelly into the freezer until trash day. If you use a dumpster, make sure that it can't be opened by a bear. — Don't leave pet food outside. — Bird feeders should be brought in at this time of year — birds don't need to be fed during the summer. If you have bird feeders: clean up beneath them daily, bring them in at night, and hang them high so that they're completely inaccessible to bears. — Secure compost piles. Bears are attracted to the scent of rotting food, and they'll eat anything. — Allow grills to run for a couple of minutes after cooking to burn off grease and to eliminate odors. Clean the grill after each use. — Clean-up thoroughly after picnics in the yard or on the deck. Don't allow food odors to linger. — If you have fruit trees, pick fruit before it gets too ripe. Don't allow fruit to rot on the ground. Electric fences provide good protections for small orchards. Advertisement — Keep garage doors closed. — Keep the bottom floor windows of your house closed when you're not at home, and at night. — Keep doors locked, especially if your home has door handles that bears can push down easily. — If you see a bear in your neighborhood make it feel unwelcome by making noise or throwing things at it. But stay at a safe distance and never approach the animal. — Do not keep food in your vehicle; lock vehicle doors. — Talk to your neighbors and kids about being bear aware.

Don't feed the bears.

Colorado Parks and Wildlife warns that residents might see more bears this time of year. The animals know fall is approaching, and they're preparing for their upcoming extended winter nap.

The bears are entering a stage called hyperphagia when they need to eat up to 20,000 calories per day to get ready for hibernation, a press release said.

"It's a feeding the frenzy they go into," local district wildlife manager Zach Holder said. "As a result of that, they'll take advantage of every food source they can find."

"They're thinking with their stomachs," said fellow game warden Bob Carochi, who works with Holder as the two Fremont County officials. "They're kind of eating machines right now."

The best thing for residents to do is not take the trash outside, instead leave it in a garage or shed until the day of trash removal. If that's not possible, Carochi said, put a ratchet strap over the top to keep bears from easily gaining access.

"If it's a really good food source," Carochi said, "they'll continue to come back, just like any animal."

This year has been relatively quiet for Carochi and Holder in terms of phone calls reporting bear sightings. In past years, they've received as many as 10-15 per day, but this year, they've only averaged between two and three per week.

They do keep track of where the bears are roaming, though, so if residents are having bear problems, they're encourage to call Carochi at 276-8844 or Holder at 269-0656. They won't trap a bear just because it knocked over a trash can, Carochi said, but they do like to educate residents on the animals' behaviors.

This year, they know of bears near First Street and the Arkansas River, one near Prospectors RV Resort off U.S. 50 and Colo. 9, and a few in the Dawson Ranch area.

Most of the calls they receive are about bears getting into trash cans, but Carochi said the culprit isn't always a bear. He said sometimes it's dogs.

According to the CPW's press release, "In the last few weeks, there have been numerous reports of bear conflicts all over the state. In Aspen, a woman was injured by a bear that had been in an alley dumpster. In Crawford, a sow and her two cubs were rummaging in garbage in mid July, but a week later, the sow disappeared and the two cubs had to be captured and taken to a Colorado Parks and Wildlife rehabilitation facility.

"Bears have broken into numerous vehicles and cabins in the northeast part of the state, and they've taken aim at chicken pens in areas around Nucla, Naturita, Delta and Montrose. Bears are also making regular visits to residential areas in the Grand Junction area."

Bear sightings are more likely to occur in the early morning or late evening when temperatures aren't as high. Holder recommends that early morning runners keep their heads on a swivel, but that "bears are the least of your worries."

In the event that a bear does become aggressive, people should make themselves appear as big as possible and remember not to run away from the bear, Carochi said. He said if the bear does attack, then fight back.

"With that being said ... if a bear stands up on his hind legs, it's not a sign of aggression," Carochi said. "He's trying to get a better view."