County officials are starting to feel the pain of Obamacare.

The Board of Commissioners has learned the various fees levied on large employers by the Affordable Care Act will cost the county nearly $1.5 million for 2014.

In a memo to the commissioners, county Risk and Insurance Manager John Anderson said the fees are based on the county’s nearly 3,000 full-time employees who receive health care benefits.

The largest cost, by far, is a 2.5 percent fee tacked onto health insurance premiums to help pay for the ACA’s online insurance exchanges and overall implementation costs. The first year price tag: more than $680,000.

Advertisement

A second charge, the so-called transitional re-insurance fee, is designed to stabilize premiums in the individual insurance policy market as people with pre-existing conditions attain coverage. The cost to the county is $63 per employee. About $98,000 is due the federal government by Jan. 15. This is a 3-year fee that drops in price annually.

A third fee assessed on large employers will go toward a new federal trust fund that will finance research into the relative effectiveness of various medical treatments. Medicare may consider this government research institute’s findings in determining what sorts of therapies it will cover.

The cost to employers is $2 per worker receiving insurance benefits. For the county, these fees will equate to about $6,000.

Anderson said Macomb’s total cost should fall by about $360,000 next year. The research fee and the re-insurance charge will be phased out by 2019. The 2.5 percent fee on premiums is permanent.

“From the political perspective, with Republicans taking over the majority in Congress, I don’t think any of these fees will (go up),” he said.

Still, Republican commissioners were not happy with the news.

Commissioner Don Brown, a Washington Township Republican, suggested the county consider gradually reducing some employees below the ACA definition of a full-time employee – meaning less than 30 hours per week. Some companies are moving in that direction.

According to the county Human Resources Department, labor contracts negotiated with unionized workers now allow the county to fill nearly any vacant, full-time position with two part-time employees.

“It’s going to be the natural inclination to avoid paying these taxes. And those (employment) changes can’t be good for the economy,” Brown said.

GOP Commissioner Jim Carabelli of Shelby Township said the fees will also hit the private sector with some force. Large employers provide health coverage to 59 percent of private sector workers. Estimates of the cost of Obamacare for large employers over the next decade range from $151 billion to $186 billion.

“The cost of doing business just went up,” Carabelli said, shaking his head.

Experts say some private firms might continue providing coverage to most of their workforce but nudge their sickest, costliest employees onto the Obamacare exchanges by making the company insurance plan unattractive to them.

Under this scenario, a company could shrink its network of doctors, raise co-payments or deductibles, or even offer a chronically ill employee a raise to opt out of the employer plan.

Commissioner Fred Miller, a Mount Clemens Democrat, reminded his colleagues the ACA so far has provided coverage to 482,000 previously uninsured Michigan residents –- some 36,000 in Macomb County –- which allows them to gain access to doctors and hospitals.

“For those people, those families,” Miller said, “that is a transformative event.”