Topics: dog racing, dogs, existentialism, Florida, greyhound, racetrack, The Classical, Life News, Entertainment News

This originally appeared on The Classical

“C’mon, Yellow Dog!”

“You can’t be poking the dog!”

The bartender pretty transparently hated the idea I had after not quite a whole day of watching dogs race each other in various saddish Floridian racetracks. That idea was perching crows—creatures whose intelligence and hollow bones place them in the top tier of potential fauna-jockeys—on the slim haunches of the greyhounds we had been watching; this was for the express purpose of rectifying this strange sport’s most glaring weakness, which is that dog-racing looks and feels and is an awful lot like watching dogs chase each other around, unsupervised.

Since nobody, or nobody with greater cognitive juice than a dog, is calling the shots, it seems that whichever dog has the most advantageous break will finish first. Having placed itself at the forefront of the pack early, and with no strategic mind elucidating counter-strategies to its opponents—and we’re talking basics, here, like, say, cutting inside on the rail and pushing the fucker wide, a move which routinely causes the outside hound to lose contact and come down as if on hardwood, whip-like legs flagellating for bite, flailing track medium everywhere, fishtailing wildly before finding the curve—the dog in the front tends to stay in the front.

Which, while making the exception all the more exciting, is anathema to those who settled in, as we had, for a day of staring at televisions showing simulcast race cards and betting on greyhounds running these so-similar races in Palm Beach and Sanford in Orlando.

The clear answer, it seemed, was to attach corvid jockeys to these rollicking little spines, which jockeys would then (gently) press their beaks into the beast’s rear legs to effectively steer them where to go. Whether our bartender’s objections were of the bleeding heart variety, or perhaps of a more practical concern—my observed sample size was admittedly small; perhaps the pups normally had more give and take, thereby making the no-doubt arduous process of training a murder of jockeys economically unfeasible—I thought it best to listen. So I shut up.

Our reverence for her had been earned. My associate Mack and I had never bet on dogs before, and, one dented bucket of Miller Lites after we sat down, the bartender had taken us under her wing. She had a light bronzing to her skin, and the sun-bleached blonde hair of a longtime Floridian; she seemed a slightly faded star, gregarious and intelligent but surely dulling from her environs. She dutifully sketched in the bare framework of what we needed to do to more effectively waste our time and money.

Behind the bar were two televisions, piping in that hot racing action from Sanford and Palm Beach. She gestured past the television sets to a long row of counters running along the back, the OTB’s spinal cord. Using a racing form, Mack and I would pick which dog we wanted for each race at each site—no fancy bets here, only: pick a dog and pray she comes in first—and place the bets on the back row. Then watch the races, drink more beers, place more bets ibid, watch more races, and so on and so forth until either the program or the money ran out.

We quickly settled on a system; whichever name struck our fancy was our choice. Explaining our methods to the young man taking the bets, he told us it was as good as any. “It’s the guys thinking too much who tend to lose,” he assured us. I, for one, was confident in the Matronymic Method. “We can’t overthink this,” I explained, “because we literally know nothing.”

To know dog racing, as I came to know it, is to know the OTB. At the time of this visit, Tropical Storm Andrea had been having her way with the Tampa Bay area for the better part of a week. The usual near-daily afternoon rain had been replaced by ominous rows of haze-gray clouds falling like funeral veils across the sky; every day big battleship flanks would come knifing in above our heads, letting loose with briefly furious exchanges more than adequate enough to cramp a Florida vacation.

There was no such problem in the Tampa Greyhound Track; in here, the sky was black as a graveyard shift worker’s bedroom curtains. It was an artificial sky blocking off the wall of windows which had looked down upon the race track when the pups still ran here, the local environs and reality traded for floating clusters of televisions, broadcasting thoroughbreds and harness racing and the weird wicker sickles of jai alai. The bar sat atop a massive ziggurat of seating, plush green carpet the color of old money faded to olive drab from many jubilant climbs and broken descents. There is rarified but thin air at the top, and not enough luck or oxygen for any one man to stay long.