The Democratic Party is currently faced with a fork in the road. The party will take one of two paths: The status quo where incrementalism will continue to reign, or a political revolution where the middle-class rises up and asserts its worth.

Most reading this likely agree that the middle class has been in decline for the past 40 years are so. Most also know that much of the perceived middle-class prosperity in the 1990s was built on the quicksand of personal debt and speculation, as opposed to growing wages and wealth.

When Ronald Reagan cut taxes he was not incremental. When insurance companies raise prices they are not being incremental. When a barrel of oil increases in price, the pump shock that immediately follows is not incremental. Incrementalism in the Affordable Care Act means that insurance companies continue to be a wealth transfer engine—from the taxpayer and the masses to executives and a wealthy few.

America is rarely incremental when using its military might to attain a desired outcome. Ultimately, it’s always successful in one form or another. The military industrial complex remains fed and sometimes the military action ensures a region is left ripe for capitalism to effect its ultimate goals. Why should the middle class continue to accept a suicidal incrementalism?

It is clear that a Republican takeover in 2016 will have no problem dissing incrementalism. They are telegraphing their Randian policies. Of course they are great marketers who are able to sell many on a false and destructive unattainable self-sufficiency, even as their policies feed the greed of the plutocracy with the excess labor and the pilfered capital of the masses.

The Democratic Party created a huge vacuum in order to ensure an entitled candidate would win. Most of that vacuum was filled with an unlikely progressive candidate whose policies are much more appealing to the middle-class. That candidate was deemed unlikely to realistically compete because he is a democratic socialist. Unfortunately for the democratic establishment, not understanding the plight of the middle class is shaking up the entire democratic primary. Insularity is dangerous for any party.

So what are Democrats to do? I can’t tell you what to do, but I know what I’m going to do. I will be writing, talking, preaching, engaging, enlightening, and educating every single person I encounter to encourage them to assert their worth as citizens. I will ask them how successful our incrementalism in policies has been for their financial and medical well-being, and the well-being of their families. I will tell them there was a time when incrementalism was the only pragmatic answer. I will tell them that reality proves it has outlived its usefulness. I will ultimately urge them to follow the path that proposes the policies they want.

Most importantly, I will remind them that electing those who represent the policies they want is only the beginning: Totally fearless engagement and demands must follow. Lastly, I will urge them to educate others. Only then will we ensure that a critical mass which creates a sustainable chain reaction is maintained, and brings about a political revolution.