More Video...

Hesston city leaders held a press conference Saturday responding to Thursday's deadly shooting at Excel Industries.

Hesston's mayor, city administrators and the schools superintendent shared how the community will move forward from the tragedy.

City leaders started by sending their condolences to the victim's families and also mentioned how proud they are of all the heroes that came out of Thursday's massacre. Not only police, but also EMS and fire crews that are volunteer based. City administrator Gary Emry said three high school students in training with EMS helped inside Excel Industries. Hesston Schools Superintendent Ben Proctor said all three are doing fine.

Proctor added that class went on as usual on Friday and will do the same on Monday.

Emry said grief counselors are available for Excel employees as well as community members.

"Let's take advantage of the services that are available to help us move forward," he said. "Come together as a community, it's not just leadership that's going to take us forward it's going to be everyone."

There will be a town hall meeting at Hesston High School commons on Sunday at 1:30 p.m. Residents are asked to come with their questions about how the town is responding to the tragedy. There will also be a church service at the high school Sunday night at 6 p.m.

KAKE News searched for more answers about the latest on the mass shooting investigation. We were not given any details from authorities on Saturday, but saw FBI, KBI and several other agencies at the Excel Industries plant throughout the day.

KBI and FBI agents asked all second-shift employees to come to the middle school Saturday to provide witness testimonies.

"Just basically if you knew the shooter, who he was, where he worked, I just started last week so I had no clue who the person was or if he had any complications," said Excel employee James McKay.

We are making the transition from emergency response to healing the community. We have no new information to release regarding the investigation.

We are resilient. We will come together as a community and move forward stronger. We encourage people to follow Hesston Strong Facebook page and visit HesstonStrong.com for announcements and stories about our recovery.

Also follow the City of Hesston Facebook page for news and announcements.

The City will host a town hall meeting at 1:30 pm at Hesston High School commons for residents to learn and ask questions. Child care will be available.

Hesston Ministerial Alliance has planned a service for community at 6 pm Sunday night at Hesston High gymnasium, in partnership with Excel Industries.

Financial contributions are being accepted by the Central Kansas Community Foundation at centralkansascf.org/donate to help first responders and community agencies who responded.

For those in need of counseling, there are a number of options available:

• Any Excel Industries employee needing grief counseling should contact EMPAC at 800-234-0630.

• If someone would like to make an appointment to see a grief counselor during regular business hours, they should call 800-992-6292.

• Everyone should check the 211 line, their local church and local websites to find information about vigils and opportunities to grieve together.

• If someone is experiencing a mental health crisis, they should call 800-362-0180 for immediate assistance.

The Excel employees who were directly affected are strongly encouraged to attend a trauma group meeting hosted by EMPAC. Two sessions are planned – Monday at 10 a.m. and 1 p.m. at Whitestone Mennonite Church.

Some have expressed concern for our first responders – please know we do have critical incident stress management ongoing for them, and we are taking care of our people.