The Broncos whistled their way to a 6-0 record in 1997. But no one mistook it for foreshadowing. Criticism came at them like a rushing linebacker, despite a perfect mark going into a bye week.

It came less than a year after a shocking playoff loss in Denver? Oy. Only two victories over teams with winning records? Pshaw.

Sound familiar?

The ’97 Broncos were an imperfect bunch. But they scrapped their way to an upset Super Bowl victory over the Green Bay Packers — their first as a franchise — by overcoming deficiencies.

A gaggle of Broncos from the ’97 championship team reunited in the south end zone Sunday at Sports Authority Field to help celebrate owner Pat Bowlen’s induction into the team’s Ring of Fame — and to, perhaps, troll the Packers 18 years after their title-game loss.

“Each game we went into, we felt like we’d win,” said Steve Atwater, the Broncos’ starting free safety in ’97 who wore his blue No. 27 jersey Sunday.

“But after each loss, we had to go back and say, ‘Man, what did we do wrong? What did we mess up?’ Each guy had to look at themselves and point the finger at themselves and say, ‘What can I do better?'”

This 2015 Broncos team has issues, sure. Peyton Manning leads the NFL in interceptions. And their 102 points scored entering Sunday night were the fewest by a division-leader.

But the ’97 team faced its share of problems too. It finished 12-4, with each of its losses on the road. And it couldn’t keep pace with AFC West rival Kansas City, which won the division.

That forced the Broncos into a wild card playoff spot — and two of three playoff games on the road.

“We went back to the drawing board to do it,” Atwater said. “We definitely felt like we had the talent to beat anyone. But unless you put it together on the field, it really means nothing.”

The Broncos in ’97 led the league across the board in offense — first in points scored (29.5 per game) and yards gained (367).

But their defense led them through the playoffs.

After splitting with the Chiefs during the regular season, including a two-point loss at Kansas City in mid-November, the Broncos ground out a defense-dominant 14-10 victory in the divisional round. In the AFC championship game at Pittsburgh, Denver’s defense held the Steelers to seven points in the second half to win, 24-21.

This year’s Broncos defense, though, has Atwater’s attention.

“They’re extremely explosive up front,” he said. “And I’d put the two corners against anybody in the league. All around, they have the No. 1 defense — the best I’ve seen in awhile.”

Nick Groke: @nickgroke or ngroke@denverpost.com