A Massachusetts woman is being accused of taking a cab driver for a ride -- by refusing to pay a $980 cab fare.

On Wednesday, Denise Rebelato, 31, returned from Brazil and grabbed the cab at JFK International Airport. She had the driver, Adnan Chaudhry drive her to Framingham, Mass., about 15 miles west of Boston.

Chaudhry estimated the ride would cost between $850 and $1,000, and she agreed, Boston.com reported.

When the cab finally arrived at Rebelato's home, the fare was $980 and Rebelato allegedly told the Chaudhry the money was in her house.

She came back 10 minutes later and told the driver she didn't have enough money and her credit card was no good, the Metro West Daily News reported.

Chaudhry gave her another ride -- to the Framingham Police station. She told authorities she wanted to pay but said, "I have so many problems. I just came from Brazil," according to the paper.

Police then charged Rebelato with larceny over $250, the Associated Press reported.

Police arrested her at 8:45 p.m. and charged her with larceny over $250.

This is her first offense.

Rebelato was released Thursday after striking a deal with Judge Robert Greco to pay back Chaudhry within 60 days.

Still, the amount of the cab fare bewildered the judge.

"From New York? From New York, you said? That's how much it costs?" Greco said, according to the Metro West Daily News. "They have buses."

The incident is a first for Framingham Police spokesman Lt. Frank DiVitorio.

“I've been here 30 years and this is the first time I've seen someone taking a cab from that distance and try not to pay,” DiVitorio told the New York Daily News. “If you were the cabbie, would you take $1,000 fare without getting any money up front?”

Also on HuffPost: Dumb Criminals: Mugshot Gallery Dumb Criminals: Mugshot Gallery

1 of 105 Quanta'e Powell Powell is accused of running naked around a Florida apartment complex in February, 2012. A police report on Powell's arrest notes that, ""Statements from the defendant were not possible as he would only state he loved cocaine and needed more cocaine." Share this slide:

Crestview Police Department