A businessman said to be a Brad Pitt lookalike is running for Congress this year.

Republican Stewart Mills, a Second Amendment supporter and Obamacare foe, hopes to unseat Democrat Rick Nolan in Minnesota’s rural 8th Congressional district in the fall. In particular, Mills declared that the “disaster” of Obamacare has caused some medical insurance premium costs to surge by 30 percent in his area.

People seem to think that Mills, 42, resembles the A-List actor in his long-hair, World War Z phase, according to Politico, although politically the two men probably aren’t a match:

“Mills, with his jaw-length blond locks and muscular physique, has been compared to the heartthrob movie star by everyone from a national party official to adoring teenage girls. And if it seems a little trivial and objectifying — he is, after all, running in one of the more closely watched, competitive House races in the country — Mills doesn’t mind… Mills is courting conservative working-class Democrats and rallying the base by campaigning as socially conservative — he opposes abortion rights and staunchly favors gun rights — and pro-jobs. And he’s trying to capitalize on frustration with Obamacare by fashioning himself as a health care expert, pointing to his experience overseeing the health care plans at his company.”

Mills is also an advocate for domestic violence victims.

The first-time and somewhat unconventional candidate says he was inspired to run for federal office because of the so-called hunting camp doctrine:

The first time I went hunting with my dad, I complained about the food. He took me aside. He said, ‘Let me tell you how this works. If you complain about the food, you get the job to be the cook.’ So that’s the hunting camp doctrine. If you complain about something, you get the job to fix it. And I’ve been complaining about our abnormally high unemployment in our part of Minnesota and also what Obamacare is doing … we are paying more and getting less…”

Mills is campaigning for Congress on a platform of job creation and real healthcare reform among other issues.

Another Brad Pitt lookalike, Doug Pitt (the actor’s younger brother) created some buzz last year by appearing in a series of commercials for Virgin Mobile Australia.

Do you see a physical resemblance between movie star Brad Pitt and U.S. House of Representatives hopeful Stewart Mills?