Christopher Burns MINDEN — Christopher R. Burns, 35, of Kearney died Sunday, May 22, 2016, as the result of an automobile accident in Kearney County.

Shanon Geisler KEARNEY — Shanon M. Geisler, 26, of Kearney died Saturday, May 21, 2016, at CHI Health Good Samaritan.

Jose Vargas KEARNEY — Jose Francisco Vargas, 19, of Gibbon died Thursday, May 19, 2016, at CHI Health Good Samaritan in Kearney.

Michael Ross GIBBON — Michael J. “Mick” Ross, 69, of Gibbon died Saturday, May 21, 2016, at his home.

Verna Kiburz KEARNEY — Verna Mae Kiburz, 85, of Kearney died Sunday, May 22, 2016, at her home.

Klit Brewer KEARNEY — Klit A. Brewer, 66, of Kearney died Friday, May 20, 2016, at CHI Health Good Samaritan.

Jean Benjamin COZAD — Jean M. Benjamin, 80, of Lexington died Sunday, May 22, 2016, at Cozad Community Health System.

Edna Wiley LEXINGTON — Edna Grayce Wiley, 99, of Lexington died Sunday, May 22, 2016, at Plum Creek Healthcare Community in Lexington.

Deal harshly with doping They were nicknamed East Germany’s Wundermadchen, a juggernaut that scooped up 10 of 12 gold medals in women’s swimming for the Soviet satellite at the 1976 Summer Olympics in Montreal. They were also pawns: Some were as young as 11 when East Germany’s state-run sports machine fed them stero… Russia, Athletes, Doping, Olympics

Sarah Zeller Catlin FORT COLLINS, Colo. — Sarah Elizabeth (Zeller) Catlin, 34, of Fort Collins, formerly of Ravenna and Kearney, Neb., died of cancer Wednesday, May 11, 2016, at Columbine Skilled Nursing Facility in Fort Collins.

Saddle Maker or Artist? KEARNEY - Lyle Henderson sits in front of a small window in his workshop. Hunched over a homemade wooden workbench, a tiny bead of sweat forms on his forehead.

This is how societies make poor choices It’s long been a tenet of this country that Americans believe in fair play. But millions are ready to elect a president who believes the rules do not apply to him. And millions more are willing to be convinced that if this man is elected, somehow he will change from a self-centered oligarch … Donald Trump, Hillary Clinton, Presidential Election

Organic farming gains appeal In a planting season in which some farmers are trying to decide which crop would lose the least money, a new agricultural opportunity is gaining luster in Nebraska, particularly for small and beginning farmers. Organic, Farming, Food Sales

2002 Archived Story: Sluti testifies about long trip full of fear, pain (orig. published 06-12-02) OMAHA - Kidnap victim Anne Sluti of Kearney ran into his arms after she was released, Deputy Lance Ewers of the Lake County Sheriff's Department in Polson, Mont., testified this morning.

New seal The Buffalo County Board of Supervisors adopted a seal drawn by Joyce Linn of Riverdale at a meeting June 24. A 3- to 4-foot diameter version will hang in the renovated Buffalo County Courthouse. The seal also will be used on county letterhead and in other county buildings.