Bethany Lerch (Photo: File. )

Editor’s note: Students in Oshkosh-native Bethany Lerch’s class, “Anglo-American World in Global Context”at the University of Leipzig, Germany, wrote these responses to Garth Seiler’s July 15 letter “Democrats use immigration as a diversion tactic.” Lerch says students in the class are generally between the ages of 20 and 22.

Dear Mr. Seiler,

The day your letter appeared is the day my classes would be covering immigration. I actually used it to open the discussion. Not all of what you wrote was on the topic of immigration, but what you did write about it thoroughly shook my students. Some brave souls wanted to respond publicly. – Bethany Lerch

“I for one am sick and tired of hearing people deliberately use language of fear to perpetuate their political agenda. Mingling the issue of immigration with the fear of terrorism – to me – is reminiscent of the use of this fear for political means 11 years ago. I hope now people will make their own judgment based on facts and not your deceitful narrative.” – Cynthia Schmitt

“It is unfortunate that you have such a negative opinion on the current administration and its focus on healthcare and immigration. You argue that the Affordable Care Act and immigration reform are an attempt to distract the public from the really important issues. But what could be more important than reforming a healthcare system that is undeniably unfair? What could be more important than establishing rules for millions of illegal immigrants who are at present in the United States whether you like it or not? I invite you to reconsider your harsh view on immigrants and social reforms in general. Of course, they provide an easy scapegoat, but if you are aggravated enough about such a topic you fail to judge rationally.” – Albrecht Peikert

“The form and the arguments are highly offensive and cannot be left without a response. I am able to understand where your concerns are coming from, but I believe your thoughts are limited to a very stereotypical image and radical unawareness of the facts. In your comment, you demonstrate a very superficial point of view without addressing the real issue.

Everyone is allowed to express their opinion. I respect this right, but the form in which you deliver your message is highly disrespectful to me, a reader. I for one am an immigrant.

People who decide to immigrate expect more and deserve more and are trying their best to assimilate and contribute to the culture. Exactly people like you are hindering the development of a better system to ease immigration. I suggest reading more about the topic and reflecting on the issue before submitting another letter.” – Maria Cebula

“To compare children crossing the border to terrorists is not just racist, but ignorant as well. The amount of desperation parents need to have to send their child unsupervised into an uncertain future is unimaginable. The system to process these applications simply takes too much time, time a lot of these people don’t have.

To say that these people don’t deserve anything when they contribute to the economy by taking jobs Americans won’t do is outrageous. The economy of border states like Texas and New Mexico depend on immigrant labor. Deportation would have catastrophic effects. Moreover, we have a moral obligation to address this crisis and help, simply because we are able to.

Lastly, a certain amount of respect towards to office of Presidency is necessary in a functioning democracy. After all, he was elected by a majority, even if you disagree with his policies.” – Jenny Hoang

Mr. Seiler, if my life began in a Central American community wracked with violence, I would break the law to be part of that place if it was safe. Laws immigrants break are not criminal offenses and in no way do they comprise a threat to public safety. What’s more, I would be compelled to cross illegally, too. One, I would probably be desperate and nearing hopelessness and, two, I wouldn’t have time to submit paperwork about my plight—especially not to a government organization drowning in 4.6 million other applications. And when I arrive, Mr. Seiler, I’d work. I’d complement this economy as a hard worker, a gracious worker, the kind who would smile at you despite our differences.

The United States immigration system is shattered. It needs fixing. Fixing requires political will. Let us set an example for policymakers by talking to each other about this issue. Let us start with mutual respect. For more information on the facts and numbers behind immigration reform, please visit the American Immigration Council online. – Bethany Lerch

Read or Share this story: http://oshko.sh/1nlCGVF