10 Ways Bernie Sanders and Donald Trump Are Actually Similar

First and foremost, considering they are Presidential candidates, are the poll numbers. Both candidates are leading the latest polls in Iowa, according to polling done by CNN. Trump has opened an 11-point lead over his closest challenger, Texas Sen. Ted Cruz, while Sanders as an eight-point margin over Hillary Clinton in the Democratic caucus.

What’s more, a few weeks before the primary voting begins, both candidates are leading the way in New Hampshire. As our friends at Graphiq demonstrate below, both candidates have opened up double-digit leads over the rest of the field in the Granite State. According to polls from Real Clear Politics, Sanders holds a 12 point lead over Clinton, while Trump leads Gov. John Kaisich by a whopping 19 points.

But it isn’t just poll results that these two share. Sen. Cruz, Trump's chief rival in Iowa, told Fox News’ Sean Hannity that Trump and Sanders “have basically the same healthcare plan," and pointed out even more similarities between Trump and Democrats.

"Donald Trump enthusiastically supported the TARP bailout of big banks. I opposed it. He enthusiastically supported Barack Obama's stimulus plan. He thought it should have been bigger. I think it was a disaster and a waste of money. Actually, Donald not only supported both of those, but he argued that Obamacare should be expanded to make it socialized medicine for everyone,” Cruz told Hannity

John Horvick, Vice President and Political Director of DHM Research, a Portland-based political research and polling firm told GoLocal he sees plenty of similarities in the two candidates.

“They are both certainly doing something right," Horvick said. “They both represent frustrations with the status quo, that outsider label of someone that’s very critical of the establishment applies to both of them.“They both have been making people feel good about being on the outside. I think Sanders has actually made Democrats feel good about being democrats…and Trump has made people feel good about being frustrated with government.”

Trump and Sanders are also both receiving huge amounts of small money donors. This shows a firm base of support among working and middle income American voters. Take a closer look thanks to Graphiq below.

GoLocal has rounded up even more similarities between the two candidates. Take a look at all of them below.

SLIDES BELOW: 10 Ways Bernie Sanders and Trump Are Actually Similar

Related Slideshow: 10 Ways Bernie Sanders and Donald Trump Are Actually Similar

Related Articles

Enjoy this post? Share it with others.