Is the next recession going to be rooted in health care?

Five years ago, Flower Mound’s stretch of FM 2499 – Long Prairie Road – lived up to its name, with farm houses and fields. Then the health care industry arrived. Texas Health Resources opened a hospital in 2010. Other emergency medicine centers opened to the south, east and directly across the street from Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital.

Nearby are imaging centers, orthopedic surgery practices, urgent care, a women’s clinic, physician practice groups – a plethora of health care providers in every direction. You can see the same thing in Plano, Frisco and many other suburbs across Texas and across the country.

Den Bishop, president of Holmes Murphy health consultants in Dallas, says FM 2499 is the epitome of irrational exuberance in health care. He sees shopping malls of medicine where a Blockbuster video store or a Wolf Camera once stood.

“I’ve said it since 2010, but I fear for hospitals,” Bishop said. “If we don’t get something to let some air out of the balloon, we may be in for a health care recession. It’s irrational exuberance again. It happened with subprime mortgages, it toppled in the dot.com boom. I think the hospital side of it is the irrational exuberance in our economy today.”

Hospital administrators say they’re building because North Texas is booming with newcomers. But health care has long been associated with the irrational economic theory of the baseball nostalgia movie Field of Dreams: “If you build it, they will come.”

New hospitals have a way of finding patients and filling beds. An aging population is going to play its part as baby boomers go into the time of their lives when hospital and other health care needs rise to the fore.

The 2010 Affordable Care Act is playing a role as well. Most states (though not Texas) took the federal financial aid in the law and expanded Medicaid to include millions more low-income Americans. Others of the uninsured gained health coverage through the law’s tax subsidies for anyone making up to four times the federal poverty level.

People given access to health care after years without it tend to use it. That’s what BlueCross BlueShield of Texas says left it with a $400 million loss last year in its individual health care plans.

Bishop says the Affordable Care Act played a hand in the health care boom – but not the main role.

The law, and subsequent congressional budget stringency, put a cap on Medicare spending. The federal government has since seen five years of the lowest rate of increase in Medicare expenditures since the program began 50 years ago.

Health care spending by the private sector has meanwhile shot up, Bishop says. In 1997, hospital spending per patient by private payers equaled 113 percent of what Medicare spent. By 2012, private payers were spending 187 percent of what Medicare was paying for hospital care.

The health care industry calls this cost-shifting.

Well before the law known as Obamacare, however, Bishop saw air filling the health care balloon.

In 1993, according to the federal Bureau of Labor Statistics, New York was the only state where the largest source of employment was health care and social assistance. In 2003, there were 10 states in that category. In 2013, health care was the biggest employer in 34 states – including Texas.

Bishop doesn’t blame the hospital chains. His culprits are private employers who meekly paid yearly insurance cost increases far above the rate of inflation.

“I tell them, ‘Shame on you for being willing to pay this,’” Bishop said. “‘You haven’t cared that you’ve had 8 percent inflation [in health care]. You just absorbed some of it, and passed the rest to your employees.’”

Follow Jim Landers on Twitter at @landersjim.

The Great American Healthcare Recession: FM 2499 in Flower Mound