And so it begins.

With the clock winding down on the 2015 Colorado General Assembly calendar, the prophesy foretold by wary sportsmen alarmed by an increasingly radicalized contingent of elected officials in the West has entered the rudimentary stages of reality. To the fear and dismay of many who value the wide-open spaces intrinsic to Colorado — not to mention their tax dollars — the widely unpopular yet enduring attempt by this faction of officials to wrest control of federally managed public lands will move one step closer Monday.

If passed into law, Senate Bill 232 would create a 15-member “Federal Land Management Commission” with the two-year purpose of studying the transfer of public lands in Colorado from the federal government to the state. The bill sponsored by Republican Sens. Randy Baumgardner and Jerry Sonnenberg along with Republican Rep. Donald Coram in the House, passed out of the Senate Committee on Agriculture, Natural Resources and Energy with a 5-4 party-line vote last Thursday (Sens. John Cooke, Ellen Roberts and Ray Scott joined Baumgardner and Sonnenberg in approving the measure). It is scheduled for discussion on the Senate floor Monday.

SB 232 is far from original thinking. Others in the West have been hoodwinked into similar legislative proposals by the special interest-funded front group from Utah known as the American Lands Council. The group advocates for legislation promoting the loosely defined “transfer” of the nation’s 640 million acres of public lands to the states in which they are located. That includes U.S. Forest Service, Bureau of Land Management and other public land currently owned by all Americans and managed by the federal government.

The sales pitch makes claims that such public land will remain in public hands under state ownership, although history makes a case to the contrary. And studies already conducted in Utah and elsewhere show such transfers to be fiscally untenable without selling off large swaths to private interests.

Anyone who has ever hiked, camped, fished, hunted or otherwise enjoyed access to the Colorado outdoors should recognize this as a bad idea. Further study is not required. The writing is on the wall.

Of the 4.5 million acres of trust lands Colorado was originally granted by the federal government at statehood, only 2.5 million are retained today. More alarming, only 18 percent of Colorado’s state trust lands are open for public use. The remainder is managed to maximize income through leases, thereby minimizing public access.

Given the exorbitant cost of managing an additional 24 million acres of currently federally managed public land, there’s no reason to expect a different outcome this time around. With a price tag of $1.7 billion to fight wildfires on the nation’s public lands in 2013, fire suppression alone would overwhelm the state budget. A “fire sale” would ensue posthaste.

The resulting lockout of sportsmen — both locals and visitors — that make up just a portion of Colorado’s outdoor recreation market would serve as a negative economic multiplier. Hunters and anglers are credited for a $1.3 billion annual economic impact in Colorado, helping support more than 18,000 jobs, often in rural communities reliant upon that seasonal economic injection.

It’s a symbiotic relationship, as recent surveys indicate that some 72 percent of sportsmen in the West rely on public land to hunt and fish. Additionally, the 2014 state of the Rockies poll conducted by Colorado College saw 84 percent of Coloradans citing proximity and access to public lands for recreation as one of the primary reasons they choose to live here.

Frustrations with the federal government are nothing new, and there is certainly room for improvement in the workings of agencies like the USFS and BLM. But the shortsighted proposal of laying claim to lands that belong to all Americans is the wrong way to go about it, and bills like SB 232 simply make matters worse. The time and money would be better spent working with those agencies on ways to improve existing management so we can all make the most of our public lands.

And so, hopefully, it shall end.

Scott Willoughby: swilloughby@denverpost.com or twitter.com/swilloughby