In January, The Oregonian's Allan Brettman tracked John McAfee down in a downtown Portland hotel. He reported the software entrepreneur had arrived in Portland to collaborate on a graphic novel about his time in Belize:

One of high-tech's most flamboyant and controversial luminaries had arrived in Portland, free of the Belize authorities he said were trying to kill him and focused on a variety of media projects he believed would help tell his life story.

But the man who made his fortune and his name with his eponymous anti-virus software said the one thing he was not here for is the vibrant, high-tech community.

That was another life. A life before guns, a tropical island, women and a life on the lam.

1. May -- McAfee gives USA Today "first extensive interview."

The paper reports: "People ask me, 'How did it feel to kill a man?' And I can honestly tell them I wouldn't know, because I never have," he says, gazing through piercing green eyes. McAfee is wearing a black hoodie, jeans and flip flops.

2. June -- McAfee releases a video on how to uninstall his anti-virus software, featuring Portland strippers and widely labeled NSFW:

@chad_essley @ToddMecklem I truly love @PDXBIZJournal, they answered my question about the #PDX @officialmcafee vid http://t.co/0wK4SkLAua — Lisa Loving (@LisaLoving) June 20, 2013

3. September -- The San Jose Mercury News reports McAfee plans to launch a new company to make the Internet hack-free but prefers Portland to Silicon Valley:

While McAfee plans to launch his new company in or around Silicon Valley, he clearly prefers the relative quiet of Portland over Silicon Valley. "The motto of the city is 'Keep Portland weird,' " McAfee said. "Well that fits right in with me. I'm not going to be living down here. It has changed a lot since last I worked here (26 years ago). It has grown. The traffic is nightmarish. It's just too busy for me.

-- The Portland Business Journal reports McAfee says he passed on helping fix the Obamacare website. He told USA Today: "They considered my solution political suicide."

Keeping Portland Weird: John McAfee says he passed on fixing Obamacare site http://t.co/ZxPgpObnef via @PDXBizJournal — Wendy Culverwell (@PDXBIZWendy) October 25, 2013

5. Nov. 25 -- McAfee is evicted from his luxury apartment, hit with a protective order by the landlord. Despite his comments to the Mercury News, he tells The Oregonian he moved to Montreal and left Portland months ago.

John McAfee: I didn't threaten building manager but yes, I employ armed bikers: “I prefer people who are streetwise.” http://t.co/IV5aTq2YzF — Mike Rogoway (@rogoway) November 26, 2013

-- The Oregonian