All of Tompkins County is in the 23rd Congressional District and is presently represented by Republican Tom Reed. Reed recently sent out a “Official U.S. Government Survey” to a select group of his constituents. “Your household has been selected to represent your neighborhood, and your responses are necessary to help guide federal policy.”

Democracy, you think, is swell. That is, until you read the survey.

The most obvious example of a completely stilted question is about the Affordable Care Act (although it is never referred to as such in the survey). “Should Congress repeal, reform, or replace Obamacare as it is now?” In addition, to those three choices you may also check “Unsure.” If you need a box labelled “No,” you will have to add it yourself.

Until 2012 Ithacans were part of the 22nd Congressional District, an embarrassingly gerrymandered creation that began in the Hudson Valley and included Ulster and a bit of Orange County. It then found the Delaware River by including Sullivan County and proceeded to hug the New York/Pennsylvania border, making its way one town at a time over to Nichols. It then took a right angle turn at Barton and went directly north through Spencer and Danby to capture the town and city of Ithaca. This district went looking for every Democrat it could find and succeeded. It was represented by liberal Democrat Maurice Hinchey of Hurley (Ulster County) for 20 years. From 1993 to 2002 it took the form of the similarly drawn 26th Congressional District, which managed to include several other Tompkins County towns.

When districts were redrawn in 2012 by a committee of three federal judges (two of them appointed by Bushes), Ithacans found themselves in a very normal looking district that extends from Endicott to Lake Erie. New York State lost two congressional districts due to loss of population, as documented in the 2010 U.S. Census. Reed had been elected to the 29th Congressional District in 2009, finishing out the term of disgraced Democrat Eric Massa. He won re-election in the new 23rd district in 2012.

Now Ithaca has a representative in Congress that sends us surveys that include questions like “Do you believe able-bodied adults with no dependents should have to work or perform community service before receiving federal welfare assistance?” Why is this a bizarre question? Because it strongly implies that an able-bodied adult with no dependents can receive federal welfare assistance right now. In fact, no such program exists. Our Congressman is using an official U.S. government survey document to suggest to his constituents that there are layabouts receiving “welfare” who should be made to work or do community service to get it. No such people exist, except in the febrile imagination of Tom Reed and his staff.

Another question informs the reader that the federal government is projected to run a $500 billion deficit in 2015. It, of course, does not mention that in 2001, when Democrat Bill Clinton handed over the presidency to Republican George Bush, the federal government was running a surplus. Nor does it mention that Republicans have controlled the House of Representatives for 16 of the last 20 years (and the Senate for 10 of the last 20 years), which is where the budget is made.

“In order to bring our federal budget into balance, which of the following are you most likely to support?” Among the choices are reforming welfare, Medicare and Medicaid, and Social Security, and eliminating bureaucratic positions in the federal government. On the other side of the coin we are invited to cut defense spending and to keep federal spending level and increase taxes. As this is question 18 on the survey (and you’ve definitely got the flavor of it by now), you’re not at all surprised that “Increase federal revenue by taxing the rich more heavily” is not among the choices.

The last real question (before the demographic ones) is “Do you believe questionnaires like this, which ask for your input on important issues, help Congress do a better job representing you.” Nearly all Democrats (which is to say, nearly all Ithacans) will probably:

break the pencil point as they angrily check ‘No’;

crumple the survey and hurl it across the room, perhaps retrieving it in order to burn it; or

begin weighing the pros and cons of moving to the 25th Congressional District, where they can be represented by Louise Slaughter, a liberal Democrat who doesn’t send out surveys filled with ridiculous leading questions.

Finally, question 30: What one issue or policy do you associate with Tom Reed? That’s a tough one, because Reed follows the Republican party line so slavishly it’s hard to find any issue where he takes an individual stand (or initiates legislation that would change anything). Around here Reed is best known for his puerile attacks on Martha Robertson in last year’s Congressional race—as if addressing the issues in a coherent, rational way was the last thing he wanted to do. Instead, he seems to think he won that race by slinging silly insults about Robertson’s being too Ithacan. And maybe he did: the national Republican party pumped millions into his campaign against Robertson.

He also made it clear he can win the 23rd district while ignoring the large group of Democrats plopped right in the middle of it. And by insulting the intelligence of everyone living outside Ithaca, as well. But you don’t have to be a college professor to know a survey that doesn’t give you options is no survey at all. •

An earlier version of this editorial, which also appeared in print, was in error with regard to who drew the current districts. It was a three judge panel, not a Republican controlled committee. The districts drawn up by the committee were rejected.