WILLIAM REICHENSTEIN: In the latest Journal Report on retirement, Barry Kaplan argues that retirees should invest their nest egg using the total return approach. In this approach, investors maintain a broadly-diversified portfolio that should generate interest, dividends, and, through time, capital gains. Such portfolios contain domestic and international stocks and bonds. These portfolios contain large-cap through small-cap stocks as well as value and growth stocks.

In contrast, Charles Ferrell recommends that retirees concentrate their portfolios in income-producing assets including bonds and higher dividend-paying stocks (so-called value stocks), but avoid investing in non-dividend paying stocks (i.e., growth stocks).

I agree with Mr. Kaplan – and, I believe, so does most of the investment profession.

Diversification requires splitting your eggs broadly across all stocks, but not just value stocks to the exclusion of growth stocks. Similarly, it requires investing your assets globally; don’t put all your eggs in one basket, even if it is the U.S. During the last half of the 1990s, growth stocks including technology stocks soared before the bubble burst. Not surprisingly, growth stocks outperformed value stocks from 1995 through 1999, while value stocks outperformed growth stocks from 2000 through 2006. Unless you think you can predict whether growth stocks or value stocks will outperform, then you should split your eggs across both groups. Similarly, unless you think you can predict whether large-cap or small-cap stocks will outperform or whether domestic or international stock will outperform, then you should split your eggs across all sizes and globally. It is OK to have a value tilt in your portfolio, but an income approach to investing requires more than a minor tilt toward value stocks.

This opinion is shared by most of the profession. Consider the 2015 target-retirement-date funds offered by Vanguard, Fidelity, and T Rowe Price – the three largest players in this arena. These 2015 funds are designed to provide a prudent portfolio for typical investors retiring in 2015. (A typical retiree will obtain funds from Social Security and the financial portfolio, while a nontypical retiree may have other sources of retirement funds such as defined-benefit plan.) These target-date funds are globally diversified. In fact, there is substantial agreement concerning what a portfolio should contain for typical new retirees.

These fund families recommend similar allocations to stocks (Vanguard 51%, Fidelity 57%, and T Rowe Price 55%). They each recommended that international stocks contain both developed-market and emerging-market stocks, and international stocks represent 29% to 31% of the stock portion of these funds. Similarly, they each recommended that the fixed-income portion contain short- to long-term bonds including domestic and international bonds. Furthermore, none recommends more than 1% exposure to commodities and none recommends exposure to hedge funds.

I agree with Mr. Kaplan and the investment professionals at these (and others not listed) fund families that retirees should invest their portfolios widely using a total-return approach. Concentrating a portfolio in value stocks with, at best, limited growth stocks limits diversification and thus exposes investors to unnecessary risks.

William Reichenstein is Powers Professor at Baylor University and head of research atwww.socialsecuritysolutions.com.

Read the latest Encore Report.