There have been far too many “can’t find” stories showing up in the media. “College graduates can’t find jobs.” … “Companies can’t find skilled workers to fill many jobs.” … And the latest: “Hamburger-flippers can’t find happiness without $15-an-hour pay.” Sure, the economy is sluggish. But it is clear our schools aren’t turning out enough graduates who are prepared for the today’s real world.

Try these statistics compiled by the feds: One-fourth of the potential workers in the 25-to-34 age bracket are unemployed today. And between 2006 and 2013, median earnings for college grads increased only 6 percent. For the workforce at large, the jump was 15 percent.

Why?

We could ponder that at length. But let’s get right to some good news: There are two public high schools in the metro area that are answering the challenges of the 21st century, Warren Tech — which has two campuses, in Lakewood and Arvada — and Pickens Technical College in Aurora.

While somewhat different in their approach, they are preparing kids for jobs. Perhaps the motto at Pickens sums it up: “Education that works.”

Joe Shaw, who is starting his 11th year as principal at Warren Tech, says changes at the school during that time have been “incredible.”

“If we don’t change with the times, we’d be out of business,” he emphasizes.

Some 1,500 Jefferson County high school students attend classes at one of the two Warren campuses for three hours each day — either in morning or afternoon sessions. The rest of the day is spent at their regular “home” high school. Warren offers more than two dozen career-related courses of study in such areas as health care and medical sciences, computer science, food services, computer security and digital audio production.

“Our three Rs are rigor, relevance and relationships,” Shaw says. “We feel we have the best facilities, the best staff and the best students.” Yet, he explains that the student body is not “cherry-picked” for their academic skills. “We have everything from special education kids to class valedictorians.

“They are here because this is what they want to do.”

Warren serves students from throughout Jefferson County as well as some from the Gilpin, Clear Creek and the Platte Canyon districts, so some travel as long as two hours just to get to the school and back. School buses do not serve Warren.

Despite expanding with a second campus at Arvada West High five years ago, Warren still has a waiting list for admission.

However, Shaw admits the school still has an “image problem,” both among youths and their parents. To many, it still retains the image of a traditional “trade school,” which Warren pretty much was in its earlier years. “Some think we’re just a school where the dumb kids go,” he says. “My main job is marketing what we really are and what we offer.”

Actually, it may be where the smart kids go. Here are some things that clearly set Warren apart:

• Integration of academics and technical and vocational training. All of the courses offer regular academic credit in at least one subject. For instance, students in the machine shop study trig; those in health sciences get versed in anatomy; and those studying hydraulics learn chemistry and physics at the same time. Briefly put, they use what they learn. There is no wondering, “Why am I taking this? I’ll never use it.”

• Flexibility. The school can change course offerings and subject matter based on demands of the workplace. For instance, courses in masonry have been dropped but offerings in cyber-security and emergency response have been added.

• College credits. Warren offers nine programs in conjunction with Red Rocks Community College. Some grads get diplomas from both schools at the same time. Shaw estimates that his students received $750,000 worth of college credits last year — without paying college tuition. How’s that for a way to combat the high cost of a college education?

• Faculty. Teachers are full-time employees of the school but they must have at least five years of work experience in their area of expertise. Warren teachers can earn higher pay than their counterparts at other schools. “In recruiting our teachers, we have to compete with the workplace,” Shaw explains.

• Industry partnerships. Each course of study has a citizen advisory committee comprised of members of the trade, craft or industry. There is an awareness that technology changes, and rapidly. In addition, manufacturers and other companies have donated hundreds of thousands of dollars worth of equipment to the school. And there are other close relationships between the school and employers, including NASA and St. Anthony Hospital.

Although many Warren students have to travel a long way to get to class, the attendance rate is 93 percent. “We treat them like college students,” Shaw explains. “They are not wandering around the halls. They are here for a purpose. We had only three disciplinary issues last year.”

The graduation rate for Warren students is 85 percent, the same figure as the district average. Sixty-seven percent of graduates go on to college. Many of those who don’t can readily find well-paying jobs.

Pickens, which is operated jointly by the Aurora Schools and the state community college system, serves both high school students (who take career-based elective classes) and older post-grads, who work for community college certification and pay a modest tuition.

The 1,300 students are divided almost equally between the two. The high-schoolers get their required core academic classes at other traditional schools. Pickens also accepts students from 11 other school districts.

Almost 50 technical and vocational courses are offered, some in night classes. They range from construction technology to computer sciences to human services, such as barbering.

The success of the two schools and the key role they play beg the question: Why aren’t there more schools like Warren and Pickens?

There should be. But they are more expensive to operate than traditional high schools, and even mid-sized school districts likely don’t have the resources or the school population base to make them practical. The obvious answer would be two or more districts combining to create a Warren or Pickens at a central location. You’d think more school boards would examine those possibilities.

The success of these schools does not mean that a large number of youngsters should not follow the traditional path of aiming for a four-year education at a university.

The clear message today, however, is that a diploma doesn’t guarantee a well-paying job. More than ever, before spending the big bucks kids and parents need a career plan and a goal for what the college degree will lead to after graduation day. Good luck with that bachelor’s in Tibetan Culture.

Getting an early start on a career path is also important in many cases. If your toddler says, “I want to be a fireman when I grow up,” perhaps you should encourage him or her and start checking which schools offer fire science.

What Shaw calls a “head start” is part of the normal process at Warren. It is key to selecting the right courses at the school, as well as later at a community college or university.

There is an important flip side to that, too. Some kids come to Warren and find in the first year that what they are studying isn’t what they wanted after all. But changing direction early prevents a waste of time and tuition money down the road.

The message in Pickens Tech’s recruiting video cuts right through the political baloney of our day. Says the narration: “Many experts will tell you how to stimulate the economy. … They will tell you about their complicated plans.”

Then, a cross-section of Pickens students, dressed in welders’ gear and medical aide uniforms, look into the camera and say, “I am America’s stimulus plan.”

In reality, they are.

Dick Hilker (dhilker529@aol.com) of Arvada is a retired suburban Denver newspaper editor and columnist.