Now that Donald Trump is the Dear Leader of the Republican Party, it may only be a matter of time before he becomes the Dear Leader of the United States, too. In the time-honored tradition of presumptive nominees, Trump has already laid out a plan for his first 100 days as president, because he is a winner who likes to win, and seems constitutionally (perhaps pathologically) incapable of imagining a future in which he could lose.

In several interviews with The New York Times, Trump laid out exactly what he hopes to accomplish within the first four months of his presidency. They include the obvious Trump things such as implementing his proposed ban on all Muslims into the U.S., building a gargantuan border wall with Mexico, repealing Obamacare, and getting someone on the Supreme Court, etc.

But his plans also include several things that only Trump could hope to pull off, like wooing Paul Ryan and Mitch McConnell to work with him on legislation, with the Times reporting that they might “schmooze at Mar-a-Lago over golf and two-pound lobsters.” He also plans to give military leaders more power than foreign-policy specialists, turn the Oval Office “into a high-powered board room,” and, presumably, will continue to call his foreign counterparts things like weak and sad and desperate. (Though he has promised to tweet less.)

In addition, Trump told the Times he plans on appointing “strong-willed” outsiders—business leaders and generals—to cabinet positions, and will strong-arm corporate executives into keeping jobs in America or face a 35 percent tariff. “I know everyone won’t like everything I do, but I’m not running to be everyone’s favorite president,” he said.

Thankfully, Trump has no desire to undergo any “ambitious renovation plans,” meaning that the Washington Monument will not be covered in gold leaf and branded with Trump’s name (though he certainly would like to have another tower in Washington).

Presidential historian Robert Dallek told the Times that Trump would likely be unable to do very much, given precedent and constitutional limitations. “Even in trade and immigration, where Trump says he will make revolutionary changes, Congress has a say on those things. A lot of people have a say. The president is not king.” At least, not yet.