Ted Cruz had more than 1,000 people rally around him at Rocketown on Friday morning. // HOME PAGE MEDIA GROUP EMILY R. WEST

Franklin resident Daniel Barham reached around in a throng of Ted Cruz supporters to shake the presidential contender's hand.

Not seeing him during his stop in Franklin back in August, Barham said this made the first time he had been able to see the Texas senator in person.

Originally from Cruz's home state, Barham said he felt a connection with the Republican competitor.

"I was pleased he decided to run," he said. "I thought he did a fantastic job here, and I have been following him closely. He went to Washington to do what he said, and I think he has been unfairly criticized. He's not there to make friends."

After a CNN Republican debate Thursday night, Cruz made another campaign stop in Nashville, drawing interested Williamson County voters to downtown.

In a more relaxed setting in Rocketown, Cruz sat down with Fox News' Sean Hannity in the middle of the floor with an excited audience waving signs.

"Our country is in crisis," he said, on a live taping for Sean Hannity's Fox News show. "I don't want to look my daughters in the eyes why we stood idle by and did nothing. Tuesday is fundamental choice. We don't need a deal maker. We need a principal constitutional conservative. We are going to repeal Obamacare and abolish the IRS."

Hannity and Cruz bantered back and forth, primarily more about frontrunner Donald Trump and his inability to run the country. Cruz also warned if he weren't the nominee, Democratic frontrunner Hillary Clinton would win the presidency.

"Donald's positions are identical," Cruz said. "The risk is too high if we nominate Donald. Donald Trump, like Hillary Clinton, is a rich New York liberal. His actions demonstrate he only cares about putting money in his pocket."

Hannity asked Cruz why he believed Trump appeals to voters.

"People are furious," he said. "We keep having politicians that make promises with us. They cut deals with Democrats. None of this is complicated. I get voting for Trump is like telling Washington to go jump in a lake."

During the one-hour show, Hannity asked Cruz a variety of questions ranging from the Islamic State to job rates. Cruz believed the number of Americans with jobs and immigration policies were linked, noting he wanted to tighten down on restrictions.

"The Washington cartel likes amnesty," he said. "They want cheap labor."

Looking forward to next week, Cruz said Tuesday would be the most important moment in the race as Tennessee and nearly a dozen other states go to the polls.

"If we don't want to see Trump as the nominee, we need to unite," he said. Super Tuesday is going to be the most important day of this election."

Emily West covers Franklin for Home Page Media Group. Contact her at emily@franklinhomepage.com. Follow her on Twitter via @emwest22.