A majority of New Jersey residents oppose tiered health insurance plans offered by the state's largest insurer, according to the results of a new poll commissioned by hospitals suing the insurance giant.

Of 800 registered voters polled between April 5 and 11, 71 percent said they oppose Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield New Jersey's OMNIA plans after being read a description of the plan, Anzalone Liszt Grove Research said Thursday.

In September, Horizon rolled out the new plans that created two tiers of providers. Hospitals classified as Tier 1 facilities offer lower out-of-pocket expenses for patients, while some patients see higher co-pays and out-of-pocket expenses if they use hospitals in the Tier 2 network.

The latest poll was commissioned by a group of hospitals not included in the Tier 1 plan that are suing Horizon.

"Horizon claims that this structure will lower costs throughout the healthcare system," the poll read. "Based on what you know, do you support or oppose the creation of hospital tiers that have different co-pays and deductibles designed to encourage patients to only use Tier 1 facilities in New Jersey?"

Jeff Liszt, a partner at the polling firm, said a majority of people were not previously aware of the OMNIA plan before the survey. He also added that many of those polled did not have negative views toward the insurer as a whole.

Twenty percent of voters said they support the plan, while 59 percent said they support freezing enrollment into the program.

A Horizon spokesman, however, called the poll "obviously biased and worded to get the results they wanted," citing a survey the insurer did in the fall. Washington, D.C.-based TargetSmart found that 43 percent of those polled supported the tiered plans, while 16 percent were in opposition. The remaining percentage of those polled were unsure.

"This is just another part of the hospitals' expensive and failed campaign that has deployed an army of lobbyists, PR firms, lawyers, and now pollsters, to distort the truth and protect the financial interests of the hospitals," Horizon spokesman Tom Vincz said.

In March, Horizon said 234,500 people had signed up for the new plan. Of that number, 189,200 purchased the policies themselves or through the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare.