In a rivalry for the ages, this is the championship of the aged.

Peyton Manning and Tom Brady XVII: The Last Hurrah.

As if each could be portrayed as Father Time in the 17th-century Simon Vouet oil painting, seeking love, hope and a title, and to suspend time.

Combined, old-timer Tom and elder states Manning have 78 years, 115 days of life experience, 33 seasons of professional football experience and 28 years of playoff experience. Brady has played in 30 of these postseason things (and won 22), and Manning 25 (12-13).

One of them definitely will play in Super Bowl 50, meaning that the two will have started in 10-of-15 Super Bowls since 2002.

Early Sunday afternoon Manning, 39, and Brady, 38½, will become the oldest quarterbacks ever to vie in a postseason game.

Friends and foes.

Don King should be the promoter for this magnormous event of pompestuity. “The Rumble By The Rockies,” perhaps, or the “The Antediluvian Duel In Denver.”

Not since Sherlock Holmes and Professor Moriarty, Bobby Fischer and Boris Spassky, Galileo and Pope Urban VIII, Thomas Edison and Nikola Tesla, Alexander Hamilton and Aaron Burr, Steve Jobs and Bill Gates, Wile E. Coyote and the Roadrunner.

It will be a time, in all likelihood the final time, to behold and enjoy the two eminent, intrepid quarterbacks together again.

Manning vs. Brady belongs in bold type. There never has been a comparable, long-standing quarterback rivalry as intense and as important as theirs and probably won’t ever be again. Bradshaw-Staubach? Well, for a couple of celebrated Super Bowls. Elway-Favre? Like Camelot, one bright, shining moment. Kelly-Marino was special in the division, but not in the long run. Otto Graham and Bobby Layne played in three consecutive NFL championships, but that competition was before television, talk shows and Twitter. Newton-Luck? Check back in 2032.

Also, consider that the Manning vs. Brady saga also involves the other Manning. Tom Terrific has lost two AFC championships to Peyton, two Super Bowls to Eli. But, then, Brady has been to six Super Bowls and won four, and Peyton has started in three and lost two.

Even though Peyton hasn’t announced, and perhaps hasn’t decided, that the game Sunday will be his last in Denver and in the NFL, don’t expect him to come back. He knows the end is near.

Time has eroded his skill set, but not his mind-set.

As Pittsburgh Steelers linebacker James Harrison said appropriately last Sunday, Manning prevailed because of his performance “above the neck.” Will his mind matter over Brady’s arm? Can he squeeze out two more victories in an illustrious career?

Peyton was the game changer at quarterback; now he is described as a game manager. For a while this season “Omaha” turned into “Omigod.” Manning the magnificent has become merely mortal.

In the past two games, if the new Manning hasn’t discovered the fountain of youth, he certainly has rediscovered the will and the way to win. Peyton has been more relaxed and reflective in the past week, almost as if the pressure has evaporated with his latest comeback and he wants to relish, and revel in, the final drive before the sunset.

Yet, to the world at large, Peyton is depicted as a tragic Shakespearian character who is to be pitied and no longer praised.

Former NFL quarterback Danny Kanell proclaimed on his podcast that he doesn’t want Peyton in the Super Bowl. “It’s awful to watch him play football this year.”

I know awful. I saw Kanell start, and lose, two games for the Broncos in 2003.

Although Brady is sensational and intends to play until he is Methuselah-like, he still has to prove he can win in Denver against a quarterback not named Tim Tebow or, alas, Danny Kanell.

Whichever quarterback wins Sunday deserves to be in the Super Bowl. Both will remembered forever for their achievements and their rivalry.

The Broncos will beat the Patriots in overtime 23-20, in a game for the ages and the ageless.

Woody Paige: woody@woodypaige.com or @woodypaige