By Barry Meier and Danielle Ivory

In a small brick building across the street from a Taco Bell in Marrero, Louisiana, patients enter a clear plastic capsule and breathe pure oxygen.

The procedure, known as hyperbaric oxygen therapy, uses a pressurized chamber to help scuba divers overcome the bends and to aid people sickened by toxic gases. But Paul G. Harch, who operates the clinic there on the outskirts of New Orleans, offers it as a concussion treatment.

One patient, Rashada Parks, said that she had struggled with neck pain, mood swings and concentration problems ever since she fell and hit her head more than three years ago. Narcotic painkillers hadn’t helped her, nor had antidepressants. But after 40 hour-long treatments, or dives, in a hyperbaric chamber, her symptoms have subsided.

“I have hope now,” Parks said. “It’s amazing.”

Three studies run at a taxpayer cost of about $70 million have all come to a far different conclusion. They found that the benefits of hyperbaric oxygen reported by patients like Parks may have resulted from a placebo-like effect, not the therapy’s supposed ability to repair and regenerate brain cells.

But undeterred, advocates of the treatment recently persuaded lawmakers to spend even more public money investigating whether the three studies were flawed.

A money magnet

A growing industry has developed around concussions, with entrepreneurs, academic institutions and doctors scrambling to find ways to prevent, detect and treat head injuries. An estimated 1.7 million Americans are treated every year after suffering concussions from falls, car accidents, sports injuries and other causes.

While the vast majority quickly recover with rest, a small percentage of patients experience lingering effects a year or longer afterward. Along with memory issues, symptoms can include headaches, dizziness and vision and balance problems.

Over the past decade, the Defense Department has spent more than $800 million on brain injury research, with organizations and companies like the National Football League and General Electric spending tens of millions more. And as people become more aware of the debilitating long-term consequences of repeated concussions, businesses have been chasing salable solutions.

The search for ways to prevent and treat concussions has spawned screening tools, helmet sensors, electronic mouthpieces, diagnostic blood tests and brain imaging devices. Startups are marketing their products to the military, schools, hospitals, sports teams and parents, and controversial therapies like hyperbaric oxygen are being promoted to patients.

But as the industry booms, medical experts are raising concerns that it is a business where much of the science is sketchy, belief frequently outruns fact, and claims of technological breakthroughs evaporate soon after they are made.

Michael Singer, chief executive of BrainScope, a company that makes a hand-held brain-wave measuring device cleared by the Food and Drug Administration to help assess injuries, says that while some companies are studying their products before selling them, others are selling untested products or marketing them without seeking regulatory approval.

“It is a Wild West out there,” he said.

A research boom

Not long ago, the field of brain injury research was small. Numerous attempts to develop drugs to treat patients with significant head injuries failed as researchers struggled to understand the brain’s complexity. Little attention was paid to concussion, which is also called mild traumatic brain injury.

“The number of neurologists interested in traumatic brain injury could have held a convention in a phone booth,” said Ramon Diaz-Arrastia, an expert at the Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences in Bethesda, Maryland. That changed a decade ago after reports showed that hundreds of thousands of service members were returning from Iraq and Afghanistan impaired by concussions caused by battlefield blasts and accidents. In 2007, Congress, facing criticism that the military had ignored the psychological and physical toll of the conflicts, allocated $600 million for research and treatment, splitting the funds between traumatic brain injury and post-traumatic stress disorder, or PTSD.

The Defense Department went on a spending spree. It funded dozens of studies to find a concussion treatment. Some studies examined supplements, others looked at drugs like Lipitor, the cholesterol medication, and still more trials tested medical devices. Research was also underwritten to develop blood tests to better identify soldiers with concussions and to create improved imaging tools to map a concussion’s impact on the brain.

David X. Cifu, a professor at Virginia Commonwealth University in Richmond who also works for the Veterans Affairs Department, said that the hundreds of millions of dollars in government funds spawned a research feeding frenzy that led to dubious claims.

“It was a small field that got amazingly large because a lot of people were making stuff up and claiming things,” Cifu said.

Some specialists said they believed the military’s approach to concussions suffered from a basic problem. While agreement exists on the symptoms that define a concussion at the time when one occurs, a similar definition did not — and still does not — exist to describe what happens after a concussion, including how the injury’s symptoms change over time.

In addition, many soldiers who are diagnosed with a mild brain injury also have PTSD, a defined condition with symptoms similar to those associated with a concussion. Some critics within the military argued it was overestimating the concussion problem and channeling patients into the wrong type of treatment.

“They would get the message they had a serious brain injury,” said one of these critics, Charles Hoge, a psychiatrist at Walter Reed Army Institute of Research.

Whatever the case, the inability to separate PTSD from concussion turned the government’s research program into a scientific hodgepodge. A 2013 Veterans Affairs review of studies of mild traumatic brain injury, or MTBI, in soldiers and veterans found that the studies’ overall quality was poor and that it was impossible to separate longterm impacts unique to concussion from those attributable to PTSD.

Col. Dallas Hack, a doctor who oversees the Army’s research program, said officials realized several years ago that the military’s efforts had gone off course and that a lot of money had been spent on studies that produced little in the way of tangible results. Since then, the Defense Department has refocused its efforts on basic questions, such as developing a better definition of concussion.

“We were naive” at the start, Hack said.

The oxygen lobby

Harch, the New Orleans-area physician, is a true believer in the benefits of hyperbaric oxygen. In his book, “The Oxygen Revolution,” he claims the treatment helps treat not only post-concussion syndrome but also autism and Alzheimer’s disease.

One major professional medical group, the Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society, has said there is no evidence showing the technique is effective in resolving concussion symptoms.

“I don’t offer this treatment in my facility for mild traumatic brain injury because I’m not convinced it works,” said Enoch T. Huang, an official at the society and a specialist at the Adventist Medical Center in Portland, Oregon.

Harch acknowledges that he is in the minority. “My generation of doctors thinks this is a fraudulent theory,” he said.

Many years ago, he and other advocates formed a competing professional group, the International Hyperbaric Medical Association, which has lobbied to get coverage for the treatment.

The military has also been skeptical and for a time refused to fund hyperbaric oxygen research. But facing intense lobbying from lawmakers and veterans groups, the military agreed to start several trials. Those trials found that patients who had a real treatment or a sham treatment reported similar benefits, pointing to a placebo effect. But if Defense Department officials hoped the results would end the debate, they were wrong.

Lawmakers put language in the most recent congressional budget bill requiring the Government Accountability Office to review whether the military trials had been run properly. Many of those lawmakers were the same ones who had lobbied the military to run the trials in the first place.

Rep. Walter B. Jones Jr., R-N.C., said he supported the accountability office review. He has introduced a bill that would require Veterans Affairs to pay for the treatment if prescribed by a doctor and said he believed that hyperbaric oxygen, even if it just made patients feel better, should be used instead of dangerous psychotropic drugs that veterans are often given.

“No one has committed suicide from being treated with oxygen,” Jones said.