'It's just a gift to the community'

The annual Gift of Home, Longmont's Christmas Home Tour, will run the first weekend of December, as it has for the past 50 years, and the organizers promise that this year the event is bigger than ever.

"It's the biggest one that we've ever had," organizer Cindy Piller said. "More houses, more businesses, more assistance from the agencies who are receiving funds. They're working at the homes as well. I'd say it has taken us about 49 years to figure out how to do the 50th.

" How do you keep stuff from being tracked into the houses? We've upgraded the booties this year. There are more volunteers this year too — usually there are about 400 and this year it's about 600. That's a lot of people. They're hoping for bigger crowds this year. There's a coloring book, which the Times-Call printed, and the illustrator did a phenomenal job of telling the story of the tour."

The tour, which can begin at any of the homes, takes in places on the east side of town, and then there is a home on the old part of town. "To the far west, there's Hover Home which is a mansion even though the Hovers didn't like it when people called it a mansion," Piller said.

"We give the homeowners the option to move out and we also board their pets if that's an issue. The first planning meeting was in February. Then you've got to find the homes, and you've got to make sure that the traffic flow is safe and that cars aren't going to be disrupting the movement around that particular thing."

The goal this year is to raise $30,000 for A Woman's Work, Boulder Shelter for the Homeless, CASA for Children, HOPE, the Inn Between, Longmont Meals on Wheels, OUR Center, Safe Shelter of St. Vrain Valley, and Soft Voices Drop-In Center.

Advertisement

"The money goes to the agencies and it all has to do with homelessness," Piller said. "It used to be that a lot of agencies got little bits of money. This concentrates the effort. Really, it's just a gift to the community — to go in, see beautiful places, and get great ideas."

"Fifty years is a long time for any community activity to last, but this one has taken on new life," said Dede Alspaugh, a Home Tour committee member. "...United Church of Christ Longmont has sponsored this event since 1965, and we're proud to have thousands of people enjoy this much-loved tradition each year. What a way to start the holiday season."

There will be a special VIP night on Thursday, which includes a meal at a local restaurant and a first glimpse at the homes. Tickets are $35 per person and the VIP hours are 5-9 p.m. Regular tickets for the weekend cost $15 per person. Visit TheGiftofHome.org or call 303-808-5825 for more information.

Brett Callwood: 303-684-5274, callwoodb@timescall.com