House Speaker Paul Ryan, R-Wis., deservedly is receiving widespread praise for hosting and leading a discussion with six GOP presidential candidates on poverty. It is symptomatic of the media's fixation on treating politics like sports to call Ryan the "winner" in a serious discussion of a critical issue, but that is what one can expect these days from dumbed-down political coverage.

In addition to the thoughtful discussion and even-keeled tone Ryan displayed at the event, he did what politicians virtually never do: He said he was wrong. On the day after the debate on "Face the Nation," Ryan had this exchange:

JOHN DICKERSON: "Let me ask you about the — the phrase, takers. You once referred to those who — receive benefits as takers and you later apologized."

RYAN: "Yes, I was wrong."

"I was wrong." He didn't say, "I misspoke." (Who in real life says "misspoke"?) He didn't say, "I'm, sorry if you were offended," the typical non-apology, sometimes phrased as "I'm sorry if you misunderstood." Although he said he regretted not campaigning in poor areas in 2012 (the Romney campaign infamously nixed his request to do so), he did not blame his running mate for the tone he adopted in 2012. And he did not concoct some mumbo-jumbo like, "I evolved on the issue."

Why is this important?

With good reason, a large percentage of voters consider pols to be liars and phonies. One reason is the language they use to obfuscate error and hide from responsibility. Rather than accept blame and take their lumps, pols would rather play word games that only fuel media harping. (How could he have misspoke? When did the evolution take place?)

Moreover, Ryan is trying to make the case that Republicans and Democrats alike have gotten the poverty argument wrong. Republicans have argued a "rising tide" is all that is needed while Democrats, as he says, defend a centralized bureaucracy in which inputs (how much money, how many programs, etc.) are the measure of compassion rather than the results (how many lifted out of poverty). "[W]hat the left ends up doing is they speak to people as if they're stuck in their current station in life and government's here to help them cope with it," he argues. "We should reject that. We want to help people get out of the fix they're in and get on to a better life so that they can meet the potential and flourish. There will be differences in people's lives, but that's OK. That's what — that's what a free society has."

If he is going to get both sides to set aside old nostrums, demonstrating some humility himself is a good way to begin.

Washington Post

Jennifer Rubin writes the Right Turn blog for The Washington Post, offering reported opinion from a conservative perspective.