Cindy Christman, the owner of Infinitely Yours Flowers in Bensalem, knows that every young girl dreams about the dress she’s going to wear on her wedding day.

But through her work with brides at the flower shop, she learned many women couldn’t afford that special dress.

So she expanded her business, opening Angelina’s Bridal Boutique next door. It’s an upscale consignment store offering designer dresses at discounted prices.

The shop, which opened in February, offers hundreds of gowns at lower-than-retail prices. Many still have price tags on them.

The bridal boutique boasts a collection of dresses designed by the likes of Maggie Sottero, Alfred Angelo, Justin Alexander, James Clifford, La Sposa and Anjolique. Prices for these finds range from $200 to $2,800, Christman said.

“Our mission is to provide upscale formal wear at affordable prices, providing a means for past brides to receive a return on their investment and paying it forward for future brides to love that once-worn treasure on her special day,” she said.

Brides who bring in their once-worn dress must get it dry-cleaned first, and it’s only added to the store’s collection if it’s in “perfect condition,” Christman said.

“Then, she gets 50 percent of the sale and we receive 50 percent.”

The store also accepts and resells other wedding-themed items, including flower girl dresses, shoes, gloves, jewelry, veils, purses and mother-of-the-bride gowns. It’s also a destination for the prom — those dresses run from $90 to $280.

Like some of the wedding dresses, several of the prom dresses have never been worn. In fact, some come from collections at area formal-wear shops.

Gina Jones of Bensalem was trying on a dress that still had the retail shop tags on it. Once $1,285, the dress was selling for $600 at Angelina’s.

With a wide grin, Jones spun around in the beaded gown, saying, “I love the simple but elegant nature of the dress.”

Jones said she is a strong believer in reusing and re-purposing everything.

“This,” she said, “is a great alternative, especially in today’s economy.”