By Richard Locker

NASHVILLE — More former and retired Tennessee legislators are covered by state health insurance than are current members of the General Assembly — including some who have moved on to other public offices, others who haven’t served in more than 30 years and some who were convicted of crimes, records show.

State law allows anyone elected to the state legislature, regardless of how little time they served in office, to remain on the taxpayer-subsidized state employee health plan for life as long as they pay the required premiums — 20, 30 or 40 percent of the total cost of the insurance depending on length of service.

And 148 former and retired lawmakers are currently enrolled, compared to 116 current members who are enrolled, according to the state benefits administration office.

Health insurance coverage for current and former lawmakers emerged as an issue in the General Assembly’s brief debate this year of Gov. Bill Haslam’s plan to extend health insurance to low-income, working Tennesseans under provisions of the federal Affordable Care Act. The plan was killed twice in Senate committees and failed to reach the floor of either the House or the Senate for full votes.

Current lawmakers pay 20 percent of the total cost of their health insurance and the state pays 80 percent, the same level as full-time state employees.

But to continue their state health coverage after leaving or retiring from the state — a benefit more generous than many private-sector employees receive — regular state employees must have at least 10 years of service at the state or other covered government entities.

Former legislators could, technically, be eligible to maintain the subsidized health benefit after serving for one day as long as they won election to the legislature for one two-year House term, one four-year Senate term or for the remainder of an unexpired term. Longtime Memphis politician Sidney Chism is still enrolled in the state health plan although he served in the state Senate only 14 weeks and was never publicly elected. He was appointed by the County Commission to fill a Senate vacancy on Feb. 15, 2005, and held the seat until a special election was held May 24 of that year.

The 14-week service was insufficient to qualify Chism for a state pension, but it was sufficient to allow him to remain enrolled in the state health plan for life as long as he pays a premium equal to 40 percent of the cost. The following year, lawmakers approved a bill sponsored by then-state Sen. Steve Cohen, D-Memphis, requiring a member to be publicly elected rather than appointed to qualify for the lifetime health insurance benefit.

Cohen won election to Congress in 2006 — but remains enrolled in the state health plan, according to records obtained by The News-Sentinel and The Commercial Appeal under a public records act request.

Cohen served in the state Senate for 24 years, and dozens of the 148 former legislators still enrolled in the state health plan also served for decades. But others were lawmakers for as little as one two-year House term. Several sent on to become lobbyists. And others, like Cohen, moved to other publicly elected offices.

Knox County Mayor Tim Burchett remains enrolled, as does former state Sen. Stacey Campfield of Knoxville, who voters turned out of office last November.

Former state Sen. Edgar Gillock of Memphis is enrolled; he left the legislature in 1982 after being convicted of taking $130,000 for his influence in awarding government contracts.

Former lawmakers who opt to remain covered pay premiums based on their length of service. Those with less than 20 years pay 40 percent of the cost of the insurance to the state, with the state paying the remainder. For 20 to 30 years of service, it’s 30 percent. Those who served 30 or more years pay 20 percent.

As with state employees, the actual monthly premium for former lawmakers varies with the type of plan they select and whether they opt cover their spouse and dependents.

Neither the state benefits administration office nor the office of legislative administration responded to questions about how much total premiums are paid by former lawmakers and how much the state pays to cover them. Last week, state officials told The Tennessean, in response to its public records request, that providing coverage to current lawmakers has cost the state nearly $5.8 million since 2008 while the legislators themselves paid $1.4 million.

Because the state has a self-funded group health insurance plan, taxpayers ultimately pick up the tab for the state’s share of premiums, plus any health care costs that exceed the amounts paid in premiums and the plan’s investment earnings.

Senate Speaker Ron Ramsey, R-Blountville, defended the state health coverage for sitting lawmakers Wednesday. “I do think the basic concept that we are state employees and therefore we get insurance while we’re here, there’s nothing wrong with that. That’s an apples and oranges comparison with Insure Tennessee.”

But Ramsey said he doesn’t know details of coverage for ex-legislators and how it compares to benefits available to regular state employees and to legislators in other states.

“That’s something I’ll have to check into and get back with you,” he said.

The 148

According to state records obtained by The Commercial Appeal, here are the former state lawmakers covered by state insurance:

Ray Albright, Robert Arnold, John Arriola, Ben Atchley, Eddie Bass, Donald Bird, Harley Bittle, Steve Bivens, Sam Bone, James Boyer;

Robert Briley, Henri Brooks, Tommie Brown, Frank Buck, Tim Burchett, Charlotte Burks, Robert Burleson, Harold Byrd, Dan Byrd, Marvin Caldwell;

Clinton Callicott, Scotty Campbell, Stacey Campfield, Joe Carr, Sidney Chism, Carol Chumney, Bill Clabough, Joseph Christopher Clem, James Cobb, Curtis Cobb;

Stephen Cobb, David Coffey, Stephen Cohen, William Coleman, Jerry Cooper, David Copeland, Floyd Crain, Christopher Crider, Jerry Cross, Ward Crutchfield;

R. Lane Curlee, Charles Curtiss, Riley Darnell, Stanley Darnell, Eugene Davidson, Jimmy Davis, Cecil Davis, Roscoe Dixon, James Dubois, Benjamin Duncan;

Foster Elsea, Joshua Evans, Dennis Ferguson, Henry Fincher, Raymond Finney, Richard Finney, Richard Fisher, Ophelia Ford, David Fowler, Joe Fowlkes;

Thomas Garland, Timothy Garrett, Edgar Gillock, Ken Givens, Joann Graves, James Hackworth, Steven Hall, Jere Hargrove, Bill Harmon, Tommy Haun;

Joe Haynes, Douglas Henry, Ivory Hillis, Alan Hubbard, Bruce Hurley, L Ivy, Douglas Jackson, Max Johnson, Rabon Johnson, Gloria Johnson;

Rufus Jones, Keith Jordan, Michael Kernell, Matthew Kisber, Peggy Steed Knight, Rosalind Kurita, Edith Langster, Lynn Lawson, Doyle Lewis, Mike Liles;

John Litz, Sally Love, Mark Maddox, Debra Maggart, Beverly Marrero, Billy McAfee, Michael McDonald, Joe Nip Mcknight, Howard Mcleary, Jeff Miller

Don Miller, Ruth Montgomery, Carl Moore, Dana Moore, Jimmy Naifeh, W Nance, J Napier, Richard Nuber, Gary Odom, Charles Patten;

Robert Patton, Phillip Pinion, Billy Rigsby, Randall Rinks, Wayne Ritchie, Dennis Roach, Ruth Robinson, Robert Rochelle, Bobby Sands, Larry Scroggs;

Charles Severance, Anthony Shipley, David Shirley, Martin Sir, Janice Springer, Paul Stanley, James Sullivan, John Tidwell, Harry Tindell, Edna Tullos;

Brenda Turner, David Ussery, Richard Venable, James Vincent, Michael Walker, Raymond Walker, John Wallace, Thomas Watson, Ben West, John White;

Micheal Williams, Waymon Williams, Leslie Winningham, Robbie Wolfe, Bobby Wood, Jamie Woodson, Donald Wright, Charles Yokley

Follow more politics and policy coverage from the InforMemphis team on Twitter and Facebook.