Photo

WASHINGTON — The Obama administration’s top health care official said Wednesday that if the Supreme Court stopped the payment of health insurance subsidies to millions of Americans, it would be up to Congress and state officials to devise a solution.

“The critical decisions will sit with Congress and states and governors,” Sylvia Mathews Burwell, the secretary of health and human services, said at a hearing of the House Ways and Means Committee.

Ms. Burwell and the White House have said that they have no contingency plans to deal with the chaos that could result if the court strikes down subsidies in the pending case, King v. Burwell.

The plaintiffs in that case, four Virginia residents, contend that federal law allows subsidies only in states that have established their own insurance marketplaces, not in states that rely on the federal exchange.

Republicans in Congress are drafting legislation to respond if the court blocks subsidies in more than 30 states where people buy insurance through the federal marketplace, HealthCare.gov.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

But Ms. Burwell on Wednesday denounced a leading Republican proposal, set forth in a bill introduced by Senator Ron Johnson of Wisconsin.

The bill, supported by at least 31 other Republican senators, would continue tax credits on premiums through August 2017 for consumers who might otherwise lose them as a result of a Supreme Court decision.

The Republican bill would also repeal provisions of the Affordable Care Act that mandate most Americans have health insurance and require larger employers to provide it.

“This bill in its current form is repeal,” Ms. Burwell said of Mr. Johnson’s legislation. “And the president has said he will not sign something that repeals the act.”

The hearing got off to a fast start. The chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, Representative Paul D. Ryan, Republican of Wisconsin, skipped the usual pleasantries and jumped right into criticism of the health care law and the way it had been carried out by President Obama.

“Obamacare is just flat busted,” Mr. Ryan said. “It just doesn’t work, and no fix can change that fact. Its central principle is government control. That means higher prices, fewer choices and lower quality. The answer isn’t just to tighten a few screws. The answer is to repeal and replace this law with patient-centered reforms.”

After listening to Ms. Burwell for two hours on Wednesday, Mr. Ryan expressed frustration. Administration officials, he said, “refuse to entertain the notion that the health care law might be struck down,” and they have not developed a backup plan.

The senior Democrat on the committee, Representative Sander M. Levin of Michigan, defended the law, telling Republicans: “What’s busted is not the Affordable Care Act, but your attacks on it, endless attacks. You never come up with single comprehensive alternative.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Republicans complain about “government control,” Mr. Levin said, but the fact is that “more and more people are getting insurance through the private sector.”

Mr. Ryan said the administration was acting illegally in providing some types of financial assistance to reduce medical costs for low-income people.

“Congress wields the power of the purse,” Mr. Ryan said. “More and more, the administration is acting like a purse snatcher.”

Under the Affordable Care Act, insurance companies must reduce co-payments, deductibles and other out-of-pocket costs for some people in health plans purchased through the new public insurance exchanges. The federal government reimburses insurers for the “cost-sharing reductions.”

House Republicans say the Obama administration never received an appropriation to make these payments to insurance companies.

Mr. Ryan and other Republicans assert that the spending violates the Constitution, which says, “No money shall be drawn from the Treasury, but in consequence of appropriations made by law.”

Mr. Obama requested the money as part of the budget he sent to Congress in April 2013, but Congress did not act on the request. Seeing the issue as an urgent priority, the administration began making the payments in early 2014, using money from a separate account established for tax refunds and tax credits.

Ms. Burwell said that the spending was legal. Republicans challenged the spending in a lawsuit filed against the administration in November.

That lawsuit, House of Representatives v. Burwell, is pending in Federal District Court here and is separate from the Supreme Court case.