Does it really make sense that $800 worth of American steel rolled in Canada may cost the Colorado taxpayer an additional $20,000?

The town of Morrison is currently experiencing difficulties for inadvertently including American steel processed in Canada in the South Park Street Bridge project, which was partially funded by a federal grant issued by the Federal Highway Administration. Buy America provisions included in the grant required all steel and iron products used in the project be sourced and manufactured in America. The bridge may now need to be deconstructed, and the “Canadian” steel removed.

While the intent of Buy America policies may sound reasonable, they do not always provide the best results for the public taxpayers. The South Park Street Bridge project perfectly illustrates the unintended consequence these types of policies have on a local level by disrupting supply chains, impeding customers from taking advantage of cross-border trade between our two countries and increasing costs to projects.

While the Buy America restriction impacting the Morrison bridge was federally mandated, similar attempts to introduce Buy America legislation have happened in Colorado’s state legislature. Such local content requirements increase costs because there is less competition from which to source products and more money has to be spent to administer and review such requirements.

Canada has long been concerned about Buy America restrictions and the negative impact they have on Canada-U.S. economic integration. We believe, and the facts clearly demonstrate, that open trade based on a level playing field between our nations has helped spur economic growth and prosperity for both our countries. Canada is by far the largest market for U.S. exports and Colorado’s top export market. In fact, Colorado exports more to Canada than it does to Mexico, China and Japan combined. In 2013, Colorado exported more steel, iron and products thereof than the state imported from Canada to a surplus of approximately $26 million. Overall, our highly integrated trade relationship totals more than $6 billion in goods alone and supports more than 102,000 local jobs.

The strength of our trade could be compromised as Buy America restrictions in the United States have increased pressure from Canadian industry for Canada to implement its own procurement restrictions, on a reciprocal basis. If Canada were to adopt similar local content requirements, it would have a harmful impact on U.S. manufacturers who supply the Canadian market, including those based in Colorado.

As Colorado ramps up for the next legislative session, the South Park Street Bridge project should serve as a reminder of the importance of creating policy that expands trade and strengthens — rather than restricts — the close, integrated relationship between Canada and Colorado.

Marcy Grossman is Canada’s consul general based in Denver.