Photo: Thinkstock

BOSTON (SHNS) – While detailing ways in which the behavioral health care is segmented for those afflicted with alcoholism, schizophrenia, depression and other disorders, health sector officials and policymakers speaking at a Tuesday panel shared the view that behavioral health in Massachusetts should be integrated into the broader health field.

Underlining the cost implications of the people with mental health and substance abuse problems, the Health Policy Commission presented data showing people with both behavioral health conditions cost more for treatment than others receiving medical care.

Officials from the office of Attorney General Martha Coakley said there is no common definition for behavioral health, and other organizations often assist health insurance companies in managing behavioral health, creating another level of complexity.

“The patients are integrated already. It’s only us that’s fragmented,” Dr. Paul Summergrad, the psychiatrist in chief at Tufts Medical Center, said at a panel Tuesday convened by the HPC and the AG’s office.

Fielding a question from HPC board member Paul Hattis, Summergrad expressed worry for the future of the behavioral health system.

“It’s very vulnerable, and I think it’s actually at a substantial risk, and if we’re not very careful it could actually become substantially more dysfunctional,” said Summergrad, noting that MassHealth is the largest single payer for behavioral health and the funding that keeps that field functional. He said, “MassHealth is very, very vulnerable. The reimbursements are low.”

HPC determined that people with behavioral health issues and one or more chronic medical conditions cost thousands more than the baseline of an average person. A person older than 65 with mental health, substance abuse disorders and chronic medical conditions costs about $22,000 more than the baseline of people that age with chronic conditions but no behavioral health issues. The long-term care and home health of a Medicare patient with behavioral health conditions is nearly three times higher than long-term care or home health for a person without behavioral health conditions, according to HPC.

The behavioral health marketplace differs from traditional health care with the presence of groups such as Optum, Beacon Health Strategies and the Massachusetts Behavioral Health Partnership, which manage behavioral health for some of the largest health insurance companies and MassHealth.

“In this complex and siloed system, it must be navigated by our sickest and most vulnerable consumers of health care,” said Margret Cooke, acting division chief of the AG’s Health Care Division.

Courtney Aladro, an assistant attorney general and senior advisor in the AG’s Health Care Division, said, “No one defines behavioral health in quite the same way,” and said the behavioral health providers are often in different systems adding “layers of complexity for our most vulnerable patients to navigate.”

Managing physical ailments is itself a challenge for people with mental health or substance abuse, as their behavioral disorders can interfere with necessary medical care, Aladro said. Noting the findings are preliminary, Aladro said, “We’re only beginning to shine a light on the behavioral health reimbursement landscape.”

Senate President Therese Murray called for putting mental health and substance abuse treatment on the same footing as traditional medical care.

“It’s time to stop treating substance abuse and mental health as secondary to physical health,” Murray told the crowd gathered at Suffolk University Law School. She said, “We must achieve true integration of care. We continue to get closer, but there’s still work to do.”

Summergrad told the News Service businesses that manage behavioral health coverage for insurers came about in the 1970s and 1980s as mental health costs grew and health maintenance organizations felt ill-equipped to manage that field. Describing those businesses as “incumbents” that could hinder the goal of reducing total medical expenses, Summergrad said Beacon Health Strategies is merging with ValueOptions, which owns MBHP, a consolidation that would not be regulated by HPC and would constitute 80 percent of the market for MassHealth behavioral health care. Airing concerns that the merger would put more of a squeeze on behavioral health providers that would negotiate with those companies, Summergrad said, “We don’t let anyone else own 80 percent of the market for anything.”

“Our programs seamlessly integrate with our clients’ existing medical and disease management programs and have been proven to lower the total cost of care while measurably improving patient outcomes,” Beacon says on its website.

Asked by Hattis if policymakers should be worried about the merger, First Assistant Attorney General Chris Barry-Smith said, “We should think about it and we might worry about it.”

Lynn Community Health Center was touted by some as an example of a facility that integrated behavioral and physical health care. Lynn Health Executive Director Lori Berry said her organization is “woefully underfunded” as is the Department of Mental Health, and she said colleagues were discouraged from following a similar track because it is confusing.

“If you really want us all to do this you’ve got to provide some way of making it possible,” Berry said.

Berry said Lynn had managed the technicalities of having a nurse on hand to check the vital signs of a person who showed up for behavioral health reasons, and to have behavioral health providers available if someone receiving a medical checkup shows signs of depression.

“What we haven’t been able to be as successful with is the financing,” said Berry, who said the Affordable Care Act had provided some funding.

Commonwealth Care Alliance CEO Bob Master, whose organization enrolls Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, said, “We feel like the first insects on this new planet,” and said there are missing pieces to lower the costs of behavioral health, including lower-cost respite beds, costing around $300 per day, which is much cheaper than the $1,200 to $1,400 Commonwealth Care pays for patients to board overnight in an emergency room.