Ted Cruz is still ready to use any means necessary to repeal Obamacare.

But even his fellow conservatives aren’t all jumping on board – a sign that the Republican repeal or bust movement is struggling while Obamacare continues to enroll millions of people with health insurance.

Story Continued Below

While Cruz wants to use a draconian budget measure to repeal Obamacare with just 51 votes in the Senate, he looks to be increasingly out on a limb. Utah Republican Mike Lee, a leader in the conservative movement, isn’t sold on the so-called budget reconciliation procedure to gut the law. Rand Paul says he’s for repeal but is hedging on exactly how to do it.

Mitch McConnell, who may enjoy a 54 vote Senate Republican majority by January, won’t commit to using the simple majority vote to kill Obamacare. And none of the Republican 2016 presidential candidates are pushing hard for the more radical Senate procedures to repeal the health care law.

Interviews with a wide range of key figures in the Senate and within the conservative movement show that while the party may be united rhetorically on repealing Obamacare, Republicans are surprisingly squishy on exactly how to do it.

The most popular response is to say, “yes, I’m for repeal,” but without saying how. Paul spokesman Brian Darling says the Kentucky senator “is committed one hundred percent to a full repeal,” but added that “using regular order or reconciliation or both is an inside the beltway fight.” And Steve Daines, the newly elected senator from Montana, said through a spokesman only that he “supports fully repealing Obamacare” and “will closely examine how to most effectively achieve that goal.”

And that doesn’t even address the moderates like Maine Republican Susan Collins, or politically vulnerable blue state Republicans who are up for re-election in 2016. Collins just got re-elected, and now her spokesman, Kevin Kelley, says Collins “doesn’t think it’s feasible to outright repeal the entire law” and that Congress should spend its time just trying to fix its worst flaws.

The only sure thing for Republicans at this point is that there will be a vote on a standalone repeal bill, probably early in the year. And even though virtually all Republicans will vote for it, the bill will fall short of a filibuster-proof 60 in the Senate.

The real question is what happens after that. If the Republicans decide to declare all-out war, as Cruz wants, they could set up a simple majority vote on repeal under the budget reconciliation rules. The upside of this move is that it would get to Obama’s desk — and he would veto it, which is exactly what many conservative activists want. The downside, however, is significant: Such a move would quickly dominate the Senate, divide Republicans and become a PR disaster.

The other option is just to focus on the most unpopular pieces of the law, like knocking out the individual mandate, the medical device tax, the definition of full-time work as 30-hours a week, and possibly a “risk corridors” provision that gives extra payments to health insurers that attract too many sick patients.

That’s the approach McConnell and other Senate GOP leaders have talked about the most, and Republican aides say that strategy would have the advantage of attracting Democratic votes.

But Cruz is the most vocal member of a small group that believes any serious repeal attempt must use every possible legislative tool to put a bill on Obama’s desk — not just the 60-vote strategy that they know will fail. Cruz, the architect of last year’s government shutdown over Obamacare, told Fox News on election night that “I think we should start by using [budget] reconciliation to pass complete and total repeal.”

Marco Rubio, another potential 2016 presidential candidate, is one of the few leaving the door open to the budget reconciliation approach. He told a Denver talk show host last month that “I think we need to do it any way we can to get it done.”

Heritage Action’s Dan Holler said the use of reconciliation “signals a seriousness” that the GOP would wipe the law off the books if they win the White House in 2016. At least one of the new GOP senators, Mike Rounds of South Dakota, is on board with that plan, at least in a rhetorical way. Rob Skjonsberg, who managed his campaign and is now the director of his transition team, says Rounds wants to “repeal and replace as much of Obamacare as possible through the budget process.”

But the skeptics seem to outnumber the Cruz camp at this point. Lee, a tea party favorite, wants to have “as many bites at the apple as possible,” according to an aide — but he also wants more information on how much of the health care law the Senate could actually repeal through budget rules. The process can only be used for legislation that has some impact on spending and revenues — which includes most of the biggest pieces of Obamacare, like the individual mandate and subsidies for health insurance, but not all of it.