National Council for Prescription Drug Programs

NCPDP, the not-for-profit pharmacy standards development organization, announced today the deadline to submit a proposal for the NCPDP 2015 Annual Technology & Business Conference is September 1st. The national conference draws more than 700 attendees from across the healthcare industry, including technical, business and executive representatives from health plans, pharmacy benefit managers, retail and independent pharmacies, long-term care providers, healthcare consultants, technology vendors, manufacturers, wholesale drug distributors, database management organizations and others.

Industry thought leaders and innovators are invited to submit proposals for the NCPDP Annual Conference, which will be held May 3-6, 2015, at the Westin Kierland Resort & Spa in Scottsdale, Arizona. NCPDP encourages the submission of proposals covering a broad range of educational, informative healthcare and pharmacy topics, such as:



Accountable Care Organizations (ACO)

Affordable Care Act (ACA) 2015

Compounding Pharmacy Regulation

Expansion of prescriptive authority and impact of payment integration

Expanded role of pharmacist as provider; roles and responsibilities of pharmacist, pharmacy technicians, and other staff behind the counter

Federal and state controlled substance registries to understand the processes and how they will interact with Medicare, Health Information Exchange (HIE), Prescription Drug Monitoring Program (PDMP) – patient privacy

Health Information Technology (HIT) Implementation

Hospice pharmacies (i.e. Medicare Part D payment & beneficiaries)

ICD-10

Meaningful Use 3 (MU3)

National Drug Code (NDC) future

Patient Safety

Pharma perspective (i.e. biosimilars update)

Physician and pharmacy collaboration and cooperation through improved technology

Pharmacy Quality Measures

Specialty Pharmacy

Telehealth

For more information or to submit a proposal, visit: http://ncpdp.org/ac/call-for-proposals-info.aspx.

About NCPDP

Founded in 1977, NCPDP is a not-for-profit, ANSI-accredited, Standards Development Organization with over 1,600 members representing virtually every sector of the pharmacy services industry. Our diverse membership provides leadership and healthcare business solutions through education and standards, created using the consensus building process. NCPDP has been named in federal legislation, including HIPAA, MMA, and HITECH. NCPDP members have created standards such as the Telecommunication Standard and Batch Standard, the SCRIPT Standard for ePrescribing, the Manufacturers Rebate Standard and more to improve communication within the pharmacy industry. Our data products include dataQ®, a robust database of information on more than 76,000 pharmacies, and HCIdea®, an innovative prescriber database that provides continually updated information on more than two million prescribers. NCPDP's RxReconn® is a legislative tracking product for real-time monitoring of pharmacy-related state and national legislative and regulatory activity. For more information about NCPDP Standards, Data Services, Products, Educational Programs and Work Group meetings, go online at http://www.ncpdp.org or call (480) 477-1000.

###