Hector Calderon is charged with murder. (Photo: Ocean County Prosecutor’s Office)

A Freehold man was arrested in the shooting death of a man whose body was discovered Thursday inside a defunct restaurant in Jackson.

Hector Calderon, 47, was charged with murdering 34-year-old Peyman Sanandaji during an altercation between the two men. Sanandaji was shot multiple times, police said.

MORE: Jackson man found dead in Casanova Ristorante

Authorities found Sanandaji’s body in the shuttered Casanova Ristorante, in Romeo’s Plaza on New Prospect Road, around 11 p.m. Thursday after receiving a report about an injured employee.

Ocean County Prosecutor’s Office spokesman Al Della Fave said Calderon and Sanandaji were acquaintances and went to the restaurant for “some type of meeting.”

“What they were meeting about, I don’t know,” Della Fave said.

Calderon was arrested at his South Street home in Freehold just before noon on Friday, authorities said.

He was charged with murder, possession of a weapon and possession of a weapon for an unlawful purpose. Calderon was being held at Ocean County Jail on $1 million bail.

The shooting, which has been ruled a homicide, shook up some nearby merchants in the township, which before Thursday had not seen a murder since 2010, according to police records. Prior to that, the last murder was in 2004.

“We don’t want it, it’s too close to home,” said Joe Napolitano, who runs the deli in the Italian market two doors down from where Sanandaji’s body was found.

Jackson Police Chief Matthew D. Kunz said there are no signs of danger to the community.

“I believe this is an isolated incident involving these acquaintances,” Kunz said. “And it certainly is not indicative of any criminal trend in the area that would suggest that the area is any less safe.”

Officials said Casanova Ristorante was once a popular eatery for local families but has sat idle since it closed a few years ago.

It is unclear if Calderon or Sanandaji had any connection with the restaurant.

Jackson Mayor Michael Reina said he was “saddened” to learn of the passing of a township resident.

“This is something that doesn’t happen in Jackson,” Reina said. “And it kind of took everybody by surprise.”

Authorities on Saturday declined to release any further details on the murder, saying it was an active investigation.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1yllWKt