Cinderford 32 Tynedale 28

CINDERFORD secured their first win of the season against previously unbeaten Tynedale thanks to three tries in 10 minutes midway through the second half, writes Chris Wilson.

They secured the win despite having three players sin-binned in a game punctuated from start to finish by the referee’s whistle.

In the relative calm of the first half, Cinderford had the first chance of a try when the visitors were warned for persistent offside after nine minutes.

They took the opportunity well, Lance Randall being driven over from the penalty lineout.

Tynedale’s Brett Connon had missed a long range penalty in the opening minute but made no mistake from 10 metres out after 13 minutes to put the visitors on the board.

But they then lost Will Miller to the sin-bin as both sides continued giving away cheap penalties which made for a staccato rhythm of play.

Tynedale took the lead with another Connon penalty given when Roger Birkin entered on the wrong side and the Cinderford flanker was the second man to see yellow.

Charlie Norman slotted a penalty to restore Cinderford’s lead but immediately they were reduced to 13 men with Sam Hanks in the bin for offside. Tynedale scored immediately afterwards with Sep Visser acrobatically touching down in the corner but Norman levelled the scores with another penalty shot just before the break.

The second period exploded into life with four tries in 12 minutes around the hour mark as Cinderford transformed a 14-11 deficit into what turned out to be a match-winning 32-21 lead.

Connon slotted his third penalty for that three-point advantage but Cinderford responded immediately with some powerful surges to the line and Sam Baker found a huge hole in the league’s second best defence to score a try improved by Norman.

Cinderford were in the ascendant and, with the bit between their teeth, the pack got in on the act and, after battering the visitors’ line, won a penalty try converted by Norman.

This was much more like it from Cinderford and they scored their bonus-point try five minutes later, punching holes in the defence for George Mills to rampage through and send Chris McNeill over. Norman added the goal.

However, the job wasn’t done and Cinderford lost concentration at the restart and Jack Harrison finished a sharp move under the posts with a try converted by Connon.

Things calmed down a little after that though Norman sat out the final few minutes after being penalised following a superb try-saving tackle on Matt Outson.

In those frenetic minutes, Tynedale were awarded a penalty try converted by Connon and Cinderford made their supporters sweat for every last second as they chased and harried to keep their lead intact until the referee finally blew time.

CINDERFORD: S Hawley; S Baker, S Hanks, J Adams, C Norman; M Wilcox, D Pointon; J Smart, L Cole, E Booley; L Randall, M Lane; R Birkin, C McNeil; G Mills. Reps: S Wilkes, A Gordas, R Luckwell, M Davies, A Uren.

TYNEDALE: M Outson; W Miller, J Harrison, P Weightman, S Visser; B Connon, D Taylor; S White, D Nelson, M Irving; G Dunn, J Cousin; J Mills, M Charters; S Powell. Reps: J Anderson, A Westgarth, R Dunn, S Ridley, N Cairns .

Referee: James Sullivan (RFU appointment)