UnitedHealth steps up pullout of Obamacare exchanges

Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

MINNEAPOLIS — UnitedHealth Group will operate in only a “handful” of new health insurance exchanges in 2017, the company's chief executive said Tuesday, down from more than 30 states this year.

In November, the nation's largest health insurer, based in suburban Minneapolis, said it was reviewing the new exchange business because of financial losses on policies sold through the marketplaces launched under the federal health law.

UnitedHealth Group competes on exchanges in 34 states, but has confirmed exits for 2017 in only a handful of them.

“The smaller overall market size and shorter-term, higher-risk profile within this market segment continue to suggest we cannot broadly serve it on an effective and sustained basis,” chief executive Stephen Hemsley said in a conference call with investors.

“Next year, we will remain in only a handful of states, and we will not carry financial exposure from exchanges into 2017,” Hemsley said.

A UnitedHealth spokeswoman said the company will not offer plans on the individual exchange in Pennsylvania in 2017.

The exchanges were begun for 2014 under the federal Affordable Care Act, which requires almost all Americans to have health insurance. Individuals and families can purchase non-group coverage through exchanges, in many cases with federal tax credits.

UnitedHealth Group has been a small player in the individual market, with about 795,000 enrollees this year in policies sold through exchanges. But competition among health insurers on the exchanges is key to controlling costs.

“This quarter, with the majority of our 2016 exchange members new to us, we have been appropriately cautious in our reserve estimates, reflecting an additional $125 million in full-year 2016 exchange losses,” David Wichmann, the company's chief financial officer, said during Tuesday's conference call. “These were fully absorbed in this quarter and fully considered for the year in our guidance range, and we do not anticipate financial exposure from exchanges in 2017.”

UnitedHealth raised its financial guidance for 2016 after reporting first-quarter earnings Tuesday that beat analyst expectations.

The company posted $1.61 billion in net earnings on $44.5 billion in revenue. During the same period last year, UnitedHealth Group reported net earnings of $1.41 billion on $35.8 billion in revenue.

Adjusted earnings came in at $1.81 a share, better than the $1.72 result that was the average forecast of analysts surveyed by Thomson Reuters.

Membership in the company's U.S. health insurance plans grew to 43.6 million people at the end of March from 42.3 million people at the end of 2015.

Based on the results and trends, UnitedHealth Group said it expects 2016 revenue of approximately $182 billion and adjusted net earnings in a range of $7.75 to $7.95 a share. The increase of 15 cents in the outlook for adjusted net earnings per share stems from changes in the expected income tax rate and intangible amortization.