Photo

Good Friday morning from Washington. We end a historic week by talking to the lone Jewish Republican to win a seat in the new Congress, and we round up some of the best concession speech lines. But we start by anticipating the day’s biggest story: President Obama having lunch with congressional leaders even as the post-election truce appears to have already broken down.

Mr. Obama has invited congressional leaders to a long lunch at the White House on Friday, but not the relaxing kind of meal that people typically sneak out of the office for.

Fresh off their midterm triumph, Republican leaders from the Senate and the House are to join their defeated Democratic counterparts, the president and top White House aides for an hour or so of free-flowing discussion, followed by briefings by Pentagon and other administration officials on a variety of issues in advance of the lame-duck session.

It promises to be a little tense. Both parties seem to be having trouble getting out of campaign mode and have taken serious swipes at each other since the election three days ago.

Speaker John A. Boehner pointedly warned Mr. Obama on Thursday that he would be killing any chance for an immigration overhaul if he acted on his own. Democrats hit Mr. Boehner and Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the prospective majority leader, for persisting in their drive to repeal the new health care law despite promises of trying to work with Democrats.

House Democrats used a news release to blister 16 new House Republicans for their records and past comments. Reince Priebus, the chairman of the Republican National Committee, told CNN he didn’t believe a word the president said.

It felt more like a few days before the election than a few days after.

The White House luncheon — and the post-election congressional session — will be the first test of whether the two parties and leaders, who have spent two years bludgeoning one another, can bridge deep distrust and outright animosity to agree on legislation after a vote that exposed a deep public frustration with Washington.

— Carl Hulse

Jewish Republicans have long been a rarity in Congress. But they grew really rare – as in, nonexistent — in August, when Eric Cantor, the former House majority leader, retired after a blistering primary defeat, leaving the House and Senate without a single Jewish Republican for the first time in more than a half-century.

But Tuesday’s election has saved the Jewish people – and Washington – from a Capitol devoid of Republican members of the tribe.

In a race that drew the attention of Jewish donors alarmed at the paucity of Republican Jews, State Senator Lee M. Zeldin of New York, a 34-year-old father of twin girls and former Army prosecutor who served in Iraq, handily defeated the Democratic incumbent, Timothy H. Bishop. Mr. Zeldin, of Long Island, was one of several Jewish Republicans seeking House seats this year, but the only one who won.

In an interview on Thursday, the congressman-elect pledged to be a strong defender of Israel and said he hoped to become a bridge between Jews of both parties.

“I’ve had the experience where I would go into a temple, and I may know the secret handshake, I may have been bar mitzvahed down the street,” he said, “but there would be people who didn’t care about a single word coming out of my mouth because I was a registered Republican.”

But while Mr. Zeldin lamented a “partisan divide at the voting booth” among Jews, there is evidence that is changing. A preliminary analysis released this week by the Pew Center found that Republicans drew 33 percent of the Jewish vote on Tuesday, up from 12 percent in 2006.

— Sheryl Gay Stolberg

President Obama is holding a morning cabinet meeting before a lunch with congressional leaders at 12:40 p.m. in the Old Family Dining Room at the White House.

Secretary of State John Kerry is in Beijing for the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation ministerial meeting.

Robert A. McDonald, the Veterans Affairs secretary, will discuss his efforts to rehabilitate the agency in a 1 p.m. speech at the National Press Club.

Mitt Romney is sharing his thoughts on the midterm elections at the Israeli-American Council conference at 7 p.m.

The Labor Department releases the October non-farm payrolls report at 8:30 a.m.

Concession speeches can be tricky. They can be magnanimous, bitter, resigned, delusional. Here are five approaches from this year’s Senate candidates that caught our eye:

Thank the Dead: In his parting message, Larry Pressler, the idiosyncratic independent in South Dakota, singled out an “emotionally significant” message of support. It was “the deathbed endorsement of my lifetime friend the late Gerald One Feather of Pine Ridge, which was announced by his widow, Ingrid One Feather, who invited me to speak at his funeral.”

Stick to the Script: “I feel lucky to live in this great state and call it home,” Scott P. Brown said after losing to the Democratic incumbent, Senator Jeanne Shaheen. He’s been using this line since moving to New Hampshire last year. Trouble is, he was saying the same things two years ago just across the state line in Massachusetts after losing to Senator Elizabeth Warren.

Pull Out the Rose-Colored Glasses: “I’ve got to tell you this is not a bad day for Bruce Braley,” said Representative Bruce Braley, the Iowa Democrat. “A bad day is when you’re 23 years old and you lose your father.”

Ignore the Winner: Not only did Alison Lundergan Grimes, the Democrat in Kentucky, neglect to congratulate Senator Mitch McConnell, she didn’t mention him at all. That was in stark contrast to Mr. McConnell’s victory speech, in which he said Ms. Grimes had “a lot of guts” for taking on the race and had earned his respect.

Talk About Dad: “You may remember, some of you, that he lost an election and he said, ‘The voters have spoken, the blankety-blanks,’ ” said Senator Mark Udall. Mr. Udall’s father, Morris, was actually a bit more graphic. And he was quoting Dick Tuck, who famously said when he lost a primary race for California State Senate in 1966: “The people have spoken… the bastards!”

Correction: An earlier version of this post reported Bruce Braley as saying “A bad day is when you’re 23 years old and lose your phone.” He said “father,” not phone.

— Alan Rappeport and Elena Schneider

Jonathan Alter asks, Is President Obama the “lamest duck ever?”

The Republicans will have trouble in 2016 if Speaker John A. Boehner can’t tame the Tea Party faction in the House, Alex Isenstadt writes in Politico Magazine.

Some House Democrats are fed up with Nancy Pelosi, according to Roll Call. The Hill says she tried to calm the troops on Thursday.

The New Republic says the midterm results hurt Rand Paul’s chances of capturing the White House.

Texas Monthly lists five reasons why Texas won’t be turning blue anytime soon.

The Miami Herald analyzes Gov. Rick Scott’s path to victory in Florida.