Is Connecticut business-friendly?

With the effects of the recession lingering and polls showing that jobs are the top issue on voters' minds, Gov. Dannel P. Malloy and challenger Tom Foley are each trying to claim the pro-business mantle in the governor's race.

Malloy, a Democrat, points to increases in private sector jobs during his tenure and claims his economic incentives have helped turn around the historically bad economy.

Republican Foley, on the other hand, says the Connecticut is unfriendly to business, and that state government is an impediment to the turnaround.

So is Connecticut friendly to business or not?

Five recent national studies tackle that question, but depending on the publication's perspective and criteria, the state can rank high, low or in the middle as a place to do business. Thus, the rankings provide something for Democrats, Republicans and unaffiliated voters alike to latch onto as the statewide political debate closes in on Election Day, November 4.

The latest survey, from Business Insider, a financial, media and tech website, last week ranked Connecticut in the top 10 -- seventh out of 50 states

"Average annual wages of Connecticut workers increased by 0.2 percent in the past year," Business Insider said, noting the state had the second-highest average annual wage at $62,283.

However, CNBC's recent survey has Connecticut 46th overall and 24th for "business friendliness," among 10 rated categories.

"The Constitution State offers world-class education, and strong access to capital," the ranking noted. "It is one of the most expensive states in the U.S., and this has hampered the economy."

The arguments over business-friendly policies, from regulatory hurdles to taxes, are as big a part of the 2014 gubernatorial race as gun control. But the electorate's main concern, as it has been in every election cycle since the Great Recession of 2007-2009, is jobs.

"The key thing that voters seems to care about most, though, is not so much the policy environment, but jobs created," said Robert Litan, a nonresident senior fellow at the Washington-based Brookings Institution, one of the nation's oldest think tanks.

Jobs, jobs, jobs

Foley, a Greenwich businessman, has positioned himself as a "problem solver" who promises to create a better atmosphere for business, job growth and a return of statewide pride.

"There's an overzealous regulatory environment in Connecticut and the governor's anti-business rhetoric isn't helpful," Foley said in a telephone interview. "A governor has to care about it. You have to listen and respond and let them know that you understand about their needs."

Malloy, the former mayor of Stamford, boasts of his initiatives supporting small business and job training, as well as mega deals attracting NBC Sports to Stamford, keeping ESPN in Bristol and retaining aerospace giant United Technologies Corp., along with its Sikorsky Aircraft Division in Stratford.

"Business friendly, for me, means investing in and alongside 1,500 firms in three-and-a-half years as opposed to 118 firms in the nine years prior to my becoming governor," Malloy said after a campaign stop in Bridgeport last week. "That's business friendly. Business friendly is doing away with 1,000 pages of regulations and reviewing every regulation that was older than three years old, so that we could strip needless regulations, duplicative or expense-driving regulations, out of the code."

The state's current unemployment rate of 6.6 percent is down sharply from its peak of 9.5 percent in November, 2010, around the time of Malloy's election when 181,300 state residents were unemployed. While 122,900 were unemployed this past July, the state is still more than 30,000 jobs short of pre-recession employment levels.

Chief Executive magazine, whose target audience is business leaders with six- and seven-figure salaries, places the state at 44 among the 50 states, giving out only three stars of its five-star rating for "workforce quality" and "living environment," and only a star-and-a-half for taxes and regulations.

It's 33rd in the Forbes magazine "Best Places for Careers and Business," with wider criteria including Business Costs (47th), Regulatory Environment (39th) and Quality of Life (2nd) put together for an aggregate.

The Missouri-based Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation, in a national survey of more than 12,000 small businesses, gives Connecticut a grade of "D," down from D-plus in 2013. The assessment includes a "B" for training and networking, but an "F" for zoning regulations that are largely local and out of the purview of state lawmakers.

Perception and reality

Peter Gioia, chief economist for the Connecticut Business & Industry Association, said that Connecticut governors regularly court business interests, the General Assembly, which has been controlled by Democrats since 1997, can scare them away.

"If you take a look over the last 25 years, every year there's 100 or more bad-business bills proposed and we have to fight them all, one-by-one," Gioia said. "The Legislature are the ones who recommend and raise these business-unfriendly bills that whether they pass or not have effect on the psyches of business."

An often-cited example is the 2011 paid-sick-days legislation, passed by the General Assembly and signed into law by Malloy. It allows workers in businesses with 50, or more employees to accumulate up to five days a year. There are exemptions for factories, nonprofit organizations and temporary workers paid, and the law covers about 15 percent of the state's 1.7 million workforce.

The association warned it would raise the cost of doing business.

Overall, Gioia said, Connecticut is perceived as not business friendly.

"Whether the perception is worse than the reality is a debatable question," he said.

Then there are agency bureaucrats and procedures that can bog down business, although one of the historic stumbling blocks, the state Department of Energy and Environmental Protection, has gotten easier to deal with during Malloy's tenure, Gioia said.

State competition

"Permitting times, particularly in the DEEP, were atrocious," he said. "They are getting much better."

Nationwide, competition for business makes the fight state-eat-state.

"It's a multifaceted and complex thing," Gioia said, noting Connecticut executives routinely get offers of trips to other states where they are greeted with red carpets and wooed. He said smaller companies of under-40 employees, so-called S Corporations were hit hard by the hikes in the income tax back in 2010.

"Paid sick leave, more health care mandates, tax increases, additional regulations, it all piles up," Gioia said.

Douglas Wade, co-owner of Bridgeport-based Wade's Dairy, is a small business owner who supports the state's effort to raise the minimum wage to $10.10 by January 2017. He supports paid sick days for his 48 employees and offers bonuses to overweight employees who lose pounds.

But Connecticut as business-friendly? He's not so sure.

He wants a nationwide increase in the minimum wage instituted so Connecticut businesses could compete better with other states.

"I just want a level playing field," Wade said.

Craig Holman, government affairs lobbyists for the Washington-based Public Citizen, said last week that corporate wishes sometimes carry too much weight.

"Business interests have major impact and the deeper we get into this hole, the more likely lawmakers are going to reflect business-friendly policies," Holman said. "Many of these business-friendly policies are not shared by the rest of the public. It's the interests of America, versus the interests of U.S. business."

Malloy includes raising the minimum wage and the successful rollout of the state's health exchange for the federal Affordable Care Act among accomplishments that help Connecticut maintain a good labor force.

Foley, who spent $11 million of his own money on his unsuccessful 2010 campaign, said supporting business and the creation of new jobs "is partly messaging and partly telling them you appreciate them and understand their needs."

The $250 annual business entity tax is a nominal amount, he said, but it sends a negative message.

"The government is not supporting small business when it puts a tax on existing companies," Foley said, noting he has proposed reducing the state sales tax. "I want to make sure we are not driving individuals and businesses out of state."

kdixon@ctpost.com; 860-549-4670; twitter.com/KenDixonCT; facebook.com/kendixonct.hearst; blog.ctnews.com/Dixon