Montanans who need specialty prescription drugs to battle cancer, multiple sclerosis, hepatitis, and other diseases will see changes in the way the four largest insurance companies cover those medications.

State Insurance Commissioner Monica Lindeen negotiated the change for the companies that offer insurance in Montana under the federal Affordable Care Act.

Traditionally, health insurance companies classify prescription drugs into tiers, with so called specialty drugs at the most expensive level.

Lindeen says what that means for many patients is that their insurance company requires them to meet their deductible before they can take advantage of the drug co-pay.

"Let’s face it most people cannot pay that kind of money upfront the first month or two," Lindeen says. "You’re talking upwards of three, four, five, six thousand dollars, because the deductible is as high as $6,250. So what we have done is sit down with all four of the insurance companies that are going to be offering coverage in the 2015 plan year and we’ve talked to them about the fact we feel this is discriminatory."

That’s because other tiers of drugs don’t have that same requirement.

Lindeen says while Blue Cross-Blue Shield, the Montana Health Co-op, PacificSource and Assurant didn’t admit discrimination, they did agree it was a large burden on patients. So they agreed to comply with the order by the state Office of the Commissioner of Securities and Insurance to cover all prescription drugs equally beginning next year.

Consumers will be able to see the changes for specialty drugs when they enroll or re-enroll in Obamacare for 2015.

Lindeen warns, however, patients shouldn’t expect a price cut as a result of this change.

"While it makes it more affordable to purchase your expensive drugs upfront, that doesn’t necessarily mean its going to be less expensive."

This change in the way specialty drugs are handled only applies to the health insurance plans sold through the Marketplace under ObamaCare.

Enrollment or re-enrollment begins November 15th through February 15th for the 2015 plan year.