“The Nordic Body: Choreographers From the Land of the Midnight Sun” was one of the 92nd Street Y’s more unusual evenings and not merely because of the free cocktails provided by the Consulate General of Sweden. On Saturday, as part of the Y’s Dig Dance series, Helena Franzen, Iréne Hultman, My Lindblad and SU-EN Butoh Company gathered for a 10 p.m. performance — not exactly midnight, but close enough — celebrating Swedish culture.

Leading off was Ms. Hultman, a veteran of the Trisha Brown Dance Company, in “Untitled 3: Indulgent Dance 1,” in which she paid homage to Ms. Brown and to her own devotion to dance. (The previous two “Untitled” solos were created in 1988 and the late ’90s.) Sweeping across the stage, Ms. Hultman, at once loose and taut as she dropped into soft pliés with rounded arms only to snap her spine straight into a composed fourth position, brought spellbinding contrasts to the foreground. Both vigorous and detailed, embellishing her silky torso with ornate hands and fingers, she performed to Scarlatti and Kurt Elling’s “Nature Boy” and spoke, explaining that she wanted to “dance like you sing in the shower.”

The next offerings were just as intimate and full of precise dancing, of which the most elegantly embroidered was Ms. Lindblad’s “Where the Magic Happens,” a duet for herself — six months pregnant — and Stuart Shugg, another Trisha Brown dancer. Starting in near darkness, the light grew increasingly radiant as the performers, using their natural momentum in an array of seamless undulations of tilts and dips, mirrored each other and drew apart. It was spine-tingling: understated, yet grippingly full of sensation.

“ZOWA ZOWA,” by the Swedish choreographer and Butoh artist SU-EN, is named after a Japanese onomatopoeic expression that refers to shuddering or trembling. Wearing a red dress while making gurgling and fluttering sounds with her mouth, SU-EN took on the mannerisms of a bird with quivering legs and hands held in loose fists. Intermittently compelling and rambling, this improvised solo fought for its shape, just as Ms. Franzen’s overlong “Tremolo,” set to a score by Jukka Rintamaki, also struggled to sustain itself.

Ms. Franzen, hovering close to the floor, demonstrated her strength and tenacity while balancing on the balls of her feet, knees bent, as her articulate spine guided her into an ongoing chain of precarious shapes. Vaguely alien with translucent skin blending into her pale hair, Ms. Franzen was, hauntingly, the human visualization of a tremolo: wavering, unsteady, yet never falling off course.