Topics: Neurosis, Scientific American, Life News

This article was originally published by Scientific American

Are you a nice, well-rounded person, yet can’t seem to hit it off with the opposite sex? Maybe you need to embrace your dark side, according to a new study that shows people with certain extreme pathological personality traits fare well in the game of love.

In the study researchers focused on nearly 1,000 heterosexual men and women with a variety of pathological personality traits whose disorders ranged in severity from none to diagnosable. Participants were referred to the study by general practitioners or other medical professionals, says Fernando Gutiérrez at the Hospital Clinic of Barcelona, who led the research. Gutiérrez and his team inquired about participants’ lifetime numbers of mates and children, along with job level, income and other sociodemographic factors using a combination of self-reporting surveys and interviews.

Their results show that people with some pathological personality types, such as those considered neurotic and impulsive, had more mates and even more children than average, suggesting that such traits are not being weeded out by natural selection and actually may confer an evolutionary advantage.

The conclusions of the findings, published online in the October 23 Evolution & Human Behavior, are speculative due to study limits. For example, Corinna E. Löckenhoff, a human developmental psychologist at Cornell University who was not involved with the study, points to the possibility that there may be some biases in participants’ self-reports of relationship. “Respondents could have inflated the number of partners in an effort to depict themselves as more desirable. This may be especially true for individuals whose personality characteristics make them prone to dishonesty and for male respondents since cultural norms tend to view promiscuity [as] more favorable in men than in women,” she says. Additionally, it’s important “to make it clear that there is no ideal personality type and that variation in personality traits reflects a common phenomenon in the evolution of a wide range of anatomical, physiological and behavioral phenotypes,” adds says Alfonso Troisi, a research psychiatrist at the University of Rome Tor Vergata, also not involved with the study.

The study results show both males and females who were pathologically reckless and impetuous attracted more short-term partners than participants with average personalities. And obsessive-compulsive males—but not females—were successful at securing long-lasting mates, an outcome strongly associated with this group’s high income (obsessive-compulsives made nearly twice as much as the less obsessive study participants), Gutiérrez says.

The study results also revealed that neurotic females were more likely to be in lasting relationships. The most neurotic female participants had 34 percent more long-term mates and 73 percent more children than average despite exhibiting a trait typically associated with instability, anxiousness and insecurity, he explains.

According to Gutiérrez their results provide the first solid evidence that some personality disorders, rather than illnesses, could be sexually selected evolutionary strategies. “These strategies are supposed to be ancestral,” he says. “Some of them, such as impulsivity-boldness, probably predate humanity itself.”

But why would anyone marry and have children with people whose behaviors are outside the norm?

Gutiérrez says he once asked a patient why he married a neurotic woman. The man responded: “Me gusta por que es muy mujer” (I like her because she is “very woman”), an answer that may reveal a link between gender differences and stereotypes, says Löckenhoff. “The literature on gender differences suggests that, on average, women are slightly higher in neuroticism than men. Thus, some men could interpret high levels of negative emotionality in a mate as a sign of femininity,” she says. Further research, however, is needed to examine this possibility, she notes.

As for the impulsive and risk-takers—who were shown to have multiple short-term mates, Gutiérrez speculates that a number of people are attracted to those types because they are considered captivating. “While they are selfish, rule-breaking, imprudent and rebellious, they are also brave, temerarious, independent and self-reliant—and they live frantic, galvanizing lives,” he says. “This captivates many people. This desirability could also have an evolutionary basis,” Gutiérrez says, as this behavior could function as a fitness indicator, “…a signal that the subject has such good genetic quality and condition as to live dangerously without suffering harm,” he adds.