Topics: American Imperialism, Ancient Rome, Editor's Picks, emperor, GOP, Tea Party, Ted Cruz, The Right, Politics News

In the wake of President Barack Obama’s State of the Union address, Sen. Ted Cruz now insists that Americans are living under an “imperial presidency” because of the way that the Affordable Care Act has been implemented. Cruz seems to like the way that “imperial presidency” sounds when it comes out of his mouth — and the fear of an “emperor” in the White House is a motif that may resound with the Tea Party Republicans who might have a large say in deciding the Republican nominee for the presidency.

However, much like the wildly inaccurate “socialist” epithet that Tea Party elites attempted to attach to Obama during his first term, the idea of the president as an emperor is equally problematic. We would do well to remember that if anyone knew a thing or two about imperialism, it was the ancient Romans and those who lived under their dominion. When the Roman Empire approached its zenith in the middle of the second century A.D., the Greek orator Aelius Aristides authored words that should resound in contemporary discourses about American “imperialism.” In a remarkably prescient analysis, Aristides in his oration ‘To Rome” observed that the regularity of wars, compounded with their distance from Rome and the cultural and ethnic otherness of enemies, made wars into “myths” that “no longer seem real.” Amazingly, this was written at a time when Rome was awash in the apparent rewards of empire: widespread peace, security and the smug sense of superiority that comes with imagining your state and culture as the world’s patron.

Romans seem to have been proud of their empire. This patriotism, when combined with a missional sense of obligation to impose order on a chaotic world and the military capacity to carry it out, left little room for probing critiques. Even Aristides meant for his comments to be complimentary. Ironically, Cruz’s crass demagoguery of the Affordable Care Act does imply a question for Americans that, although unintended, may be far more useful: If we do indeed have an “emperor” in the White House, then surely he presides over an “empire”? Of course, while Obama has done little to halt a decades-long foreign policy of drone warfare, devastating sanctions, questionable military interventions and sustained increases in military spending, the American Empire was in excellent health when it was handed to him by Cruz’s former boss, President George W. Bush.

A historical appreciation of imperialism is especially relevant to Cruz and possibly many of his followers as well. Ignorance of what “imperialism” was – and still is – is a sure path toward a dangerous hypocrisy. The “imperial” vocabulary that Cruz tosses around is rooted in the Roman concept of “imperium”: the prerogative to command obedience and to expediently exercise naked power. Certainly once ancient Rome converted to a political empire, imperium became associated with the office of emperor, but imperium originally belonged to the magistrates and the military officers who carried out the practicalities of empire itself centuries before Rome was ruled by purple-clad emperors.