Republicans are outraged today after Sen. Ted Cruz withdrew his support for his own plan to shutdown the government unless Obamacare is defunded. One Republican said Wendy Davis has more balls than Cruz.

Cruz spent the entire summer paired up with former senator and current head of the Heritage Foundation, Jim DeMint pushing this plan to tie funding the government to defunding Obamacare. They ran negative ads against Senate Republicans around the country urging them to get behind the defund Obamacare movement. They pressured House Republicans, and Cruz’s campaign worked. At least 40 House Republicans refused to fund the government unless Obamacare was defunded. Boehner caved, and the House will vote on and pass what Cruz wanted tomorrow.

After Speaker Boehner announced that the House will be voting on a continuing resolution that will defund Obamacare, Sen. Cruz put out a statement where he refused to fight for his own plan, “Today’s announcement that the House will vote to defund Obamacare is terrific news. Just a few weeks ago, this was deemed impossible. We commend House leadership and House Republicans for listening to the people and for taking decisive action to stop Obamacare, the biggest job-killer in America. Harry Reid will no doubt try to strip the defund language from the continuing resolution, and right now he likely has the votes to do so. At that point, House Republicans must stand firm, hold their ground, and continue to listen to the American people. President Obama has already granted Obamacare exemptions to big corporations and Members of Congress; he should not threaten to shut down the government just to deny those same exemptions to hard-working American families.”

Cruz is now telling House Republicans that the Senate isn’t going to do anything, so the House needs to stand firm and listen to the American people. In other words, Cruz isn’t going to fight for his own plan in the Senate. House Republicans are on their own.

Sen. Cruz stabbed them in the back, and Republicans aren’t pleased.

One anonymous Republican legislative aide told CNN, “It is disappointing to see that Wendy Davis has more balls than Ted Cruz.” Another senior House Republican leadership aide said, “They said nothing is impossible if you fight hard enough, and the minute the House announces the vote, they give up the fight? It’s crazy. They should walk the walk.”

It seems that the Republican Party is finally catching on to the truth about Ted Cruz. Sen. Cruz is a coward who is only interested in his own self-promotion. He doesn’t care about anything other than getting Ted Cruz elected president someday.

Cruz isn’t the only Senate Republican to set up their House colleagues on Obamacare. Sen. Rand Paul spent the entire summer doing his own Chicken Little dance where he claimed that the Senate couldn’t pass anything, so the House had to do his dirty work for him on Obamacare. Paul never went as far as Cruz did, and now Canadian Joe McCarthy is facing a giant backlash within his own party.

House Republicans believed Ted Cruz, and now he has set them up for a disastrous failure. It really couldn’t happen to a more deserving group of people.