<p>May 20, 2015 - Sheffield goalie Abdoulaye Thiam blocks a shot by Christian Academy of Knoxville during their semifinal matchup at Spring Fling in Murfreesboro Wednesday. (Jim Weber/The Commercial Appeal)</p>

When the moment arrived, when Jonathan Cole was asked to serve as coach of the varsity soccer team at Sheffield High School, he had two primary reservations about taking the gig.

“I had never coached anything,” he said. “And I knew nothing about soccer.”

Other than that, he was perfect for the job! Perfect, in that he was upright, and breathing, and he worked as an English teacher at Sheffield High.

“The coach from last year couldn’t do it,” Cole said. “The team didn’t have a coach. I was told that if I couldn’t do it, we might not have a team.”

So Cole thought about the offer. He thought about how preposterous it was. It’s not that Cole had never played soccer. It’s just that the last time he played he was nine, and in some youth league, and the coach put him in goal, and Cole got bored because the action was all at the other end of the field, and so he started fiddling with the net, and got his foot caught, and then the play came flying back to his side of the field, and young Cole freed himself just in time to get hit smack in the face by the ball.

“I spent the second half eating oranges,” said Cole. “I was not qualified to be a soccer coach.”

Except, he knew the kids. He knew them from his English class. He knew they were from Mexico and Senegal and Guinea and Mauritania. He knew they were skilled players, beautiful players, and he knew they needed a team.

So he said, “Yes.” Because what else was he going to say?

“There’s no way I could look at them every day coming into my English class and know that they didn’t have a soccer team because I didn’t want to get off my butt to do something to help them out.”

A teacher story

This is a story about a teacher. And it begins with a story about another teacher, a decade earlier, doing what the best teachers do.

“She changed my life,” said Cole, 39. “Now I can’t even remember her name. Miss Edwards? Miss Rogers?”

See what a thankless job teachers have?

Cole had decided to go back to school in his late 20s. He was weary of selling cell phones as his life work. He was going to start a career in music production, but then he stumbled into an English Class at Motlow State Community College, and that was that.

“I loved it,” he said. “I loved the literature in the class. But I really loved the way she taught the literature in the class.”

Next thing you know, Cole was teaching literature himself. And coaching soccer. Because someone had to do it, right?

“I went home and started Googling,” said Cole. “Luckily, soccer doesn’t have a lot of rules.”

First challenge: Try-outs. How do you pick the best players if you don’t know anything about the sport?

“That was awkward,” said Cole. “I wound up picking 26 players, which is a lot more than most teams. But a lot of them would say, `I can only practice these three days, because I have to work or babysit or something else.’”

Next challenge: The first game. It was at St. Benedict.

“We go over there, and see this beautiful field, and I’m intimidated,” Cole said. “And then there was their coach. He looks like a coach, you know? I’m a skinny guy with a big grizzly beard. You look at me and you think, `No. He’s not right. Where did they find this dude?’”

Sheffield beat St. Benedict that day, 5-3. Did I mention that the Sheffield kids are skilled?

Indeed, you could make the argument that they deserved a more experienced coach than Cole. Cole says this himself, all the time. But then, they deserved a practice field that wasn’t swamped by water from the school’s air conditioner. They deserved decent soccer balls and cleats.

“I had one player, Abdoulaye Thiam, ask me if I could help him find some cleats,” said Cole. “I said, `What size do you wear?’ He said, `I can wear anything from a size nine to a size 12.’ ”

This is life in our stratified America. So many learn to do with less. One of Cole’s buddies, John Beckham, helped out with strategy. Cole’s wife, Meridith, started a GoFundMe campaign to help pay for travel and equipment. But when Sheffield went to Memphis University School the third game of the year and managed a 0-0 tie, Cole started telling the team they could make it to the state playoffs.

“We were having a dream season,” he said. “Then, honestly, I can’t even think of the words to explain everything that hit us all at once.”

Alpha Diallo, one of the team’s younger players, lost everything in a fire at his family’s apartment.

Two days later, Dada Dia -- the sister of Ibrahima Dia, one of the team’s star players – was killed in a car accident on the way to a game.

“We went straight from the game to The Med,” said Cole. “As you can imagine, it was devastating.”

And here I could tell you that Ibrihimia played in the next game – the game to qualify for the state tournament -- because that’s what his sister would have wanted. And I could tell you that the team’s inspired run to the state semifinals gave this story the happy ending any screenwriter would require.

But who knows about the ending of any of this? Who knows what will happen to any of these kids?

The real happy ending may have unfolded Friday night at Sheffield, when 13 senior soccer players graduated. All of them, in one way or another, thanked Cole for getting off his butt to help out.

“That’s why you do it,” said Cole, speaking for teachers everywhere. “It’s not for the money, that’s for sure. Looking back, I made almost twice as much money selling cell phones. But how do you compare that to this?”

So here’s to all the teachers who could be making more money selling cell phones. Here’s to all the Miss Edwards and Miss Rogers out there, quietly and anonymously changing lives. And here’s hoping that on this, the first weekend after the end of school, they are taking a well-deserved break.

As for Cole?

“I’m thinking of joining an adult soccer league,” he said. “I've got to get better if I’m going to keep doing this.”