UnitedHealth's Likely HIX Exit Not a Death Knell

Because it has aggressively developed other business lines, UnitedHealth is far less interested than other large health insurers in working with exchange populations, says one industry observer. So far, no other large payers have indicated that they intend to follow United's lead.

In what would be a sharp change of direction for the nation's largest health insurer and an alarming harbinger for the marketplace, UnitedHealth Group has sent up signals that it may exit the public health insurance exchanges for 2017.

Citing big losses, the insurance giant in November reported that it had lost $425 million from health plans sold on the exchanges and had scaled back its marketing efforts for these products in 2016 while it reevaluates their viability.

The company also revised its 2015 net earnings to $6.00 per share, down from $6.25 to $6.35.

"In recent weeks, growth expectations for individual exchange participation have tempered industrywide, co-operatives have failed, and market data has signaled higher risks and more difficulties while our own claims experience has deteriorated, so we are taking this proactive step," said Stephen J. Hemsley, chief executive officer of UnitedHealth Group on a conference call last month.

"We continue to be pleased with the growth and overall performance of our company outside of the individual exchange products and look forward to strong, positive, and broad-based earnings growth across our enterprise in 2016."

Others Not Following Suit

While some media reports immediately called UnitedHealth's possible HIX exit "a blow to the Affordable Care Act" and a "bombshell" for Obamacare, these assessments seem far from the truth.

Other large health plans have not indicated any intentions to follow suit at this point. On an October 29 earnings call, Aetna chairman and chief executive officer Mark Bertolini said that while the exchanges are a "challenging" segment, his organization remains committed to its HIX products.

"We continue to work constructively with CMS and the states to serve our 1.1 million individual members. We have always said that Aetna would participate in this emerging opportunity in a prudent manner, in geographies where we have the cost structure to offer attractive products to consumers, and earn an appropriate return for our shareholders," Bertolini said.

"I think in the ACA-compliant plans and in the public exchanges, we view this as a long-term market potential… We view it still as a big opportunity for the company. I'll remind everybody it's just a little over 6% of our operating revenue, so we still view it as an opportunity to play."