During the VMCCA Car Show, Larry Rauckmann, of Golden, stands by a 1934 Chevrolet pickup, which he and his son-in-law completed together. ( Charlotte Burrous / Daily Record )

A variety of vehicles line up at the Royal Gorge VMCCA's 32nd annual Antique and Special Interest Car Show Saturday at the Abbey. (Charlotte Burrous / Daily Record)

He searched for it for 12 years, and when David Redding learned the pickup was up for sale, he bought it "sight unseen" from a man in San Bernadino, Calif., who kept it at his cabin for fishing and hauling firewood.

Redding was one of the car owners who brought his pride and joy to the Royal Gorge Chapter of the VMCCA's 32nd annual Antique and Special Car Show at the Abbey on Saturday.

"It's a 1956 Powell pickup," he said. "There were 1,020 built (in Compton, Calif., between) 1955 to 1957."

He said there are 13 in running condition and " a little more than" 100 still in existence.

Organizers said they were happy with the turnout for Saturday's event.

"There are a lot of people here," said Kathy Kunselman, car club member. "We had right at 400 cars. We have more people in the swap meet and flea market than we've ever had, and our craft people were full. It's been a perfect day."

This is the second time for Golden resident Larry Rauckmann to display his two-door, 1934 Chevrolet pickup at this show.

"I built it for my wife," he said. "She drove it (with primer on it) and pink hubcaps for eight years."

He and his son-in-law later painted it a light blue and now they take it to car shows around the area.

Mark Lezaroff said his 1946 Ford Coupe "was a basket case." Lezaroff said it was his father's dream to fix up the vehicle, but because he was always helping Lezaroff and his brother fix up their vehicles, the project never was finished.

Advertisement

"I took over the project years later," he said. "(My dad) spent years helping me fix my cars and my brother's first car (so) he put it on the back burner."

Pueblo resident Fred Quintana also brought his father's vehicle to the show.

"He passed (so) we take care of it," he said. "This is our first year to come to the show. We visited the show before and we liked it."

Attending the show has become a tradition for Steve and Megan Whitt.

A 1939 Plymouth Sedan is one of 400 vehicles on display at the car show Saturday at the Abbey. (Charlotte Burrous / Daily Record)

"We're admiring all the old cars. We come out here and look to see what people have and what they're doing," Steve said.

Megan said she likes the show, as well.

"I like to come here to figure out what I'm going to have someday when I can afford it," she said. "We're getting our wish list together."

John and Beverly Huntsman drove from Colorado Springs to attend the show.

"It's a nice car show," John said. "The atmosphere, on the grass is an easy car show to see. These are high-quality cars. The people are friendly down here."

Cañon City resident Jan Renfrow brought her sister, Diana Duncan, who lives in Iowa.

"She used to work at a car exchange and I thought she would like to see this," Renfrow said.

A 1952 Chevrolet Sedan Delivery vehicle is on display Saturday during the Royal Gorge Chapter of VMCCA's 32nd annual Antique and Special Interest Car Show at the Abbey. (Charlotte Burrous / Daily Record)

"And I do," Duncan chimed in. "It's wonderful. It's the biggest one I've seen, and I've seen some big ones, and they're beautiful. I like to see the past treasured."