Just set it — and forget it.

New York women are parting from the pill, breaking up with the patch and saying sayonara to the sponge. And no, these aren't women with a deep-seeded baby wish — they've all gotten IUDs.

The tiny intrauterine devices, which are implanted by a doctor or nurse practitioner, allow busy New Yorkers to ditch the daily ritual of taking the pill — or scramble for alternative methods when they forgot a dose.

"The pill was making sex with my husband a source of anxiety," one Queens-based writer who wished to remain anonymous told the Daily News. The scribe, now 36, had been on the pill for nearly a decade and "wanted a change."

After some research, she found Mirena, a popular plastic IUD, and calls it "fantastic." Others have discovered ParaGard, a copper IUD that is more than 99% effective at preventing pregnancy without hormones.

But why did it take so long for this renaissance of sorts?

IUDs are a solid method of birth control for New York women, who may be too busy and might forget to apply patches or take pills. (Peter Foley/Bloomberg)

FIRST THINGS FIRST

These long-acting reversible contraceptives (LARCs) were christened by the American Academy of Pediatrics last month as the best birth control available for teens for their high success rates.

And doctors are telling young women to consider LARCs because they are completely reversible and boast low failure rates — less than 1%

But the movement has been building over the last several years. "Nationally, what we know is that IUD rates have been rising substantially," Dr. Laura Duberstein Lindberg, a senior research associate for the Guttmacher Institute, said, noting a 400% increase in the last decade, or from 2.4% to 8.5% in seven years, through 2009. Nearly all of those women used IUDs.

Birth control pills, patches and rings, on the other hand, fail up to 9% of the time — mostly due to user error. And many of these methods carry hormonal side effects, such as weight gain and moodiness.

That was a big turnoff for 25-year-old Nichole LeFebvre. "I had been on the pill since I was 16 or 17," the Park Slope resident said, and "was sick of what hormonal pills were doing to my body."

After some Internet research, LeFebvre went to her OB-GYN in 2012 to get a ParaGard — a T-shaped copper device devoid of hormones. "I wish I had known about it in high school," she lamented, adding that LARCs should be part of sex education. She's already convinced several of her girlfriends to take the plunge.

Women like LeFebvre are increasingly becoming interested in these continuous-acting tools that pack few side effects (so long, mood swings!) and are effective at preventing pregnancy for up to 10 years.

Data for New York City women using IUDs is not available, though city officials sang the praises of long-term birth control at a press conference last summer, showing a promising change in the tides of effective birth control measures.

Doctors are noticing the shift, too.

"I definitely have more patients asking for them in my practice," Dr. Laura MacIsaac, the director of Family Planning for the Mount Sinai Health System, told The News. "I think we'll see more and more, but I've already seen them go up a lot."

MacIsaac, who only sees teenagers at her practice, says that her patients "are now hearing about these methods," either through more visible marketing campaigns or through word of mouth.

"They are being marketed and as more teens are getting them, our patients are hearing about them from their peers," MacIsaac said.

Dr. Natasha Withers, a doctor of osteopathy with One Medical Group, agrees. "There's just a lot more awareness," she said. "I think the trust factor is big because people are nervous about the IUD procedure."

CHANGE IN THE TIDE Would you consider getting an IUD? Yes - sign me up! Yes - but I have my doubts Maybe - not sure No - I'm happy with my current method No - It's not for me

WHAT IS THE WHAT

There are three different types of LARC IUDs. They all work differently from hormonal birth control pills, patches and rings, which all function the same way by using hormones to stop ovulation.

IUDs, on the other hand, are inserted into a woman's uterus and block sperm from swimming to a regularly released egg, either by hormones or copper ions. Mirena, Skyla and ParaGard are the three that are FDA-approved in the U.S.

Mirena lasts for five years, while Skyla — made by the same parent company, Bayer — lasts for three. Both are hormonal IUDs, meaning they release small amounts of progestin locally (just inside the uterus) to ward off sperm. Because hormones are not being pumped throughout the entire body, mental health side effects associated with the pill, patch or ring, such as depression and anxiety, are rare.

Because of the localized hormones, many women with this device find they no longer have periods. It's also FDA-approved to treat heavy periods and reduces bleeding by up to 90% over the course of six months.

ParaGard works in a similar way to ward off sperm, but it uses copper ions, not hormones. It's good for up to 10 years, but can cause heavier periods.

It is important to note that none of these IUDs protect against HIV or STDs.

Because they all work so similarly and have the same efficacy, choosing one that's best for you really depends on if you want your menstrual cycle to change.

Getting an IUD without insurance can cost between $500 to more than $1,000, though for those with private insurance, the Affordable Care Act has made this method much more low cost or even free, making it a cost-effective birth control method.

Doctors have reported an increase in use in IUDs. (javi_indy/Getty Images/iStockphoto)

RUMOR HAS IT

Despite its effectiveness, there is a lot of misplaced fear around IUDs.

This fear reached a peak in the 1970s when the Dalkon Shield, a popular IUD brand, was linked to serious infections and 15 deaths. It was pulled from the market in 1974.

"These aren't your mother's IUDs," Lindberg said.

"The method itself has changed and we've gotten farther away from the health concerns that aren't reflected in the new generation of devices," a movement that has come about from better research and study.

Another fear? That the insertion process, in which the cervix is dilated, will be uncomfortable or even extremely painful. This, for some women, is true.

"The actual insertion was the most painful thing I've ever experienced," said another anonymous New Yorker, a 29-year-old grad student from Inwood. "They brought (my boyfriend) in from the waiting room because I was crying so much."

These aren't your mother's IUDs. The method itself has changed and we've gotten farther away from the health concerns that aren't reflected in the new generation of devices.

LeFebvre agreed, saying the first few months after she got her IUD were "pretty brutal," as she was plagued by cramps and heavy periods.

Still, both women said that once their symptoms subsided, their new method of birth control was well worth the pain.

"The Mirena is fantastic," the Queens woman told The News. "But I can't recommend it without telling people how awful the insertion is."

Side effects —such as heavy bleeding in the first few months and cramping — are mild in most women. Much rarer are serious side effects, such as a perforated uterine wall, though Mirena has had several lawsuits brought to it with that concern.

But the benefits — lighter periods, less cramping and foolproof contraception — seem to have more women running to their gynecologists.

"The years of freedom from worrying have been amazing," the Inwood grad student said.

CHANGE IN THE TIDE

As paradigms shift and more information is made readily available, more women across the city and the country are taking the leap, finding that the IUD fits in with New York women's frenetic lifestyles.

"The great part of the IUD is you don't have to remember to do anything," Withers said. "For busy New Yorkers, it's often difficult to remember taking a pill at a certain time."

Lindberg agrees. "It's not just women's attitudes that have changed, it's the shifting biases of physicians.

"That has opened up the floodgate of this method."

ON A MOBILE DEVICE? WATCH VIDEO HERE

bstebner@nydailynews.com