In introducing the regulation, Mr. Obama called it “a sensible, state-based plan” and dismissed the criticism.

“I promise you, you will hear from critics who say the same thing they always say — that these guidelines will kill jobs or crush the economy,” he told environmental activists in a conference call organized by the American Lung Association. “What we’ve seen every time is these claims are debunked when you actually give workers and businesses the tools and incentives to innovate.”

New Goal for Emissions The Obama administration announced on Monday a proposal to significantly cut carbon pollution from power plants. Full Graphic » Carbon emissions from energy consumption Million metric tons New proposed level Would cut emissions by 30 percent from 2005 levels by 2030 8,000 6,000 UNITED STATES EUROPE 4,000 CHINA 2,000 Targets pledged by President Obama in 2009 U.N. accord. INDIA 1980 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 Carbon emissions from energy consumption Million metric tons New proposed level Would cut emissions by 30 percent from 2005 levels by 2030 8,000 UNITED STATES 6,000 4,000 EUROPE CHINA 2,000 Targets pledged by Obama in 2009 U.N. accord. INDIA ’80 ’90 ’00 ’10 ’20 ’30 ’40 ’50

The regulation, which must go through a public comment period before taking effect, will certainly be challenged in the courts and in Congress, but Mr. Obama has past judicial rulings to cite in his defense and enough votes on Capitol Hill that would allow him to veto any opposing legislation and make it stick.

If the regulation survives the lobbyists and lawyers intact, the battles will move to state capitals as businesses, environmentalists and lawmakers joust in 50 separate arenas over the scope of the resulting rules.

Just as some states balked at devising ways of carrying out Mr. Obama’s health care program, forcing the federal government to step in in many cases, some governors are signaling that they will resist the new restrictions on power plants. Gov. Mike Pence of Indiana, a conservative Republican who has been mentioned as a possible presidential candidate in 2016, said he would oppose the rule while finding “common-sense solutions” that protect workers and consumers. Indiana gets about 80 percent of its electricity from coal.

“These proposed regulations will be devastating for Hoosier workers and families,” Mr. Pence said. “They will cost us in higher electricity rates, in lost jobs, and in lost business growth due to a lack of affordable, reliable electricity. Indiana will oppose these regulations using every means available.”

A number of states are expected to sue the E.P.A. over the rule. Many Republican governors, in particular, are ideologically opposed to the prospect of enacting cap-and-trade programs. And some may follow the path of Gov. Rick Perry of Texas, who in the past has signaled his state’s opposition to E.P.A. pollution regulations by simply refusing to submit compliance plans.

Photo

That could set up a standoff in which the E.P.A. would step in and force states to comply with a plan devised by federal rather than state officials.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

White House officials recognized the possible challenges in a state-by-state plan, but said they had little choice given the language of the law on which the regulation is based, and they expressed optimism that industry would want an orderly process. “While I am sure that there will be holdouts amongst the states, most utilities will also want to work with their regulators to ensure successful implementation,” said John D. Podesta, Mr. Obama’s counselor.

In assigning the cuts, E.P.A. officials said, they took into account state economies and current emission levels and what each could practically achieve without causing economic harm. The rule calls on a coal-dependent state like Kentucky to cut its plant emissions rate by 19 percent and one like West Virginia by 21 percent, according to an analysis by the Georgetown University Climate Center.

By comparison, the plan calls on Washington State, which has just one coal-fired power plant, and relies on hydroelectric power, to cut its emissions rate 84 percent.

“Otherwise, what would have happened to states like West Virginia and Kentucky would be unacceptable, economically,” said Robert Stavins, director of Harvard University’s Environmental Economics Program.

Gov. Jay Inslee of Washington, a liberal who, like Mr. Obama, hopes to make climate policy a signature of his tenure, cheered the rule. He said it would “encourage and empower ongoing state and regional climate action, such as our collaborative efforts to grow the Pacific Coast’s clean energy economy.”