The budget: Opioids, moonshot and drug prices?

THE BUDGET: OPIOIDS, MOONSHOT AND? The White House has previewed its $1.1 billion proposal for an opioid epidemic response and the $755 million ask for the cancer moonshot. Almost all those funds would be mandatory, i.e., outside the budget caps that the Obama administration agreed to last year. We'll learn about discretionary funding when the budget's released Tuesday. Before last year’s $2 billion boost — much more than what the White House had requested — NIH funding had essentially stagnated for more than a decade. FDA also has a lot of programs it needs to ramp up, including biosimilars. More on that below.

DRUG PRICES — The White House is sure to re-up longstanding proposals to let Medicare Part D negotiate drug prices, and other familiar measures, like cutting the monopoly protection on biologics from 12 years to seven. The budget could highlight payment demonstrations related to drug spending at CMS's Innovation Center. CMS has talked a lot about bringing more transparency to drug pricing, but will the White House go beyond what the agency has done in publishing Medicare data? We’ll know the details Tuesday.

Story Continued Below

Happy Monday and welcome back to Prescription PULSE, where we recall that this month more than 230 years ago, Rene Laennec, who would go on to invent the first stethoscope was born in France. It was made of wooden tubing and helped doctors listen to patients' lungs and chest. For a detailed history of the stethoscope visit: http://1.usa.gov/1C4TXhi

HELP TO MARK UP FIRST ‘CURES’ BILLS — Tuesday will also bring the first step in the Senate’s new piecemeal approach to a medical innovation package, with seven bipartisan bills slated for markup. That includes ranking member Patty Murray’s legislation to step up FDA oversight of duodenoscopes — introduced last week — and other bills including significant health IT legislation with broad support. Expect Murray and fellow Democrats to talk up the need for action on drug prices and NIH funding. Lobbyists said that the first markup should be relatively harmonious, though whether that will extend to additional markups scheduled for March and April is anyone’s guess. The notice, with details on the bills: http://1.usa.gov/1Kohssb

… Chairman Lamar Alexander said last week that he hoped to include the Obama administration’s Precision Medicine Initiative and cancer moonshot in the innovation package, but he stopped well short of committing to new money for the NIH and FDA. For the moonshot “to succeed in the Senate, it needs to be a part of our biomedical research bill, which we're working on over the next 60 days and I think it can be," Alexander told Pro’s Jennifer Haberkorn. He indicated that the amount - and the "mandatory" funding label - is a "separate question but the goal is a good goal." Additional mandatory funding remains a hard sell for GOP appropriators. In any case, no such funding measures are on Tuesday’s agenda and no clear prospect has appeared on the horizon yet.

WILL ABORTION DEBATE IMPACT GENE EDITING POLICY? — A powerful new gene editing technology is forcing the United States and other countries to reexamine their regulation of research and it has caused both pro-abortion rights and anti-abortion groups to sound alarms. They’re opposed to using CRISPR/Cas9 to tinker with the human race through germline gene editing — that is, altering cells that become a human being, thereby changing an inherited trait for generations. The issue is ripe for more political debate and Congressional intervention. A policy rider in the year-end budget deal prohibited FDA’s reviews of germline gene research but it doesn’t prevent scientists from tinkering in the lab. And while federal money can’t be used for research on human embryos, the private sector has poured at least $1 billion into CRISPR. Plus, other countries like China and the United Kingdom have been more willing to allow scientists to experiment, which could have global ramifications. Sarah has more for Pros.

FDA NEEDS MORE RESOURCES FOR BIOSIMIARS — Reading between the lines, FDA wants some congressional appropriations for biosimilars. Janet Woodcock wouldn’t come out and say it directly, but she got House Energy and Commerce ranking member Frank Pallone to go there at a hearing Thursday. Woodcock explained that Congress never appropriated funds for FDA to implement the biosimilar pathway created under Obamacare in 2010 to speed cheaper versions of biologic medicines to patients. Two years later lawmakers passed a biosimilar user fee bill which allowed FDA to collect fees from companies — but it had to spend $20 million of taxpayer funding before it could spend any of the user fees. Now FDA is seeing increased activity from biosimilar companies and it needs some help. “What I’m concerned about is that this program is going to explode … I am concerned that we will not have the staff because we are always waiting to catch up,” Woodcock said at an Energy and Commerce Health subcommittee. “It sounds like you need some appropriations, but you aren’t going to tell me,” Pallone responded.

… CMS took a little bipartisan beating in the hearing as lawmakers criticized its decision to reimburse all biosimilars of the same branded biologic at the same rate, treating them like generic drugs. Subcommittee ranking member Gene Green said he understands the need to control costs but said he fears in this case “it undermines this infant market and creates a race to the bottom.” Two lobbying groups, The Biosimilars Forum and GPhA’s Biosimilar Council put out statements against CMS’s payment policy.

SECOND U.S. BIOSIMILAR IS ON THE WAY — If you’re keeping track as of Jan. 21, Woodcock said 59 proposed biosimilar products were seeking to copy 18 different branded biologics in FDA’s biosimilar program. The next biosimilar approval is likely to be Celltrion’s copycat of Johnson & Johnson’s Remicade (infliximab), which is used to treat Crohn’s disease, ulcerative cqcolitis, and rheumatoid arthritis, among other conditions. An FDA advisory committee will weigh in on the treatment Tuesday and FDA’s briefing document indicate the agency is satisfied with the drug. http://1.usa.gov/1PZELeo

SHKRELI WRAP-UP: WHERE DOES PRICING DEBATE GO FROM HERE? — The Martin Shkreli circus has come and gone from Washington, but there wasn’t even a hint of a policy consensus in the four-hour long House Oversight hearing into drug prices Thursday. Republicans put a lot of blame on the FDA for being too slow to approve generics, allowing companies to exploit market monopolies. Democrats brought up allowing Medicare to negotiate prices in Part D and the need for more transparency around pricing. Ranking Member Elijah Cummings told reporters after the hearing he plans to look at the behavior of other companies, but he was the only one to call out by name industry members besides Turing and Valeant for price hikes.

Supply chain and distribution practices including the use of co-pay coupons and the practices of pharmacy benefits managers got a bit of scrutiny but overall payers were overshadowed given lawmakers frustration with Turing and Valeant. A recap on the Shkreli drama is here. FDA’s beating is chronicled for Pros.

PAINKILLER ACTION BRINGS NO RELIEF FOR CALIFF (YET) — The Obama administration last week announced a $1 billion package to fight the opioid epidemic and a suite of FDA actions. But it didn’t budge the three Democrats — Bernie Sanders, Joe Manchin and Ed Markey — who have a hold on Robert Califf’s nomination for FDA commissioner because of painkiller concerns. Markey and Manchin insisted that the FDA’s action plan didn’t go far enough. Both said the commitment to additional advisory committee input should apply not only to new painkillers without abuse deterrent technology, but all of these powerful drugs. “Whether an opioid is abuse deterrent or not hasn’t prevented tens of thousands of people who have had their wisdom teeth removed or experienced lower back pain from getting addicted to these painkillers. That is why the FDA must change its decision,” Markey said Thursday. GOP Sen. Lisa Murkowski still has a hold on Califf over rules for labeling genetically modified salmon. Our story, ICYMI: http://politico.pro/1QifNBf

… Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell voiced his own concern on FDA opioid policy after meeting Califf Thursday. He said the agency “must do more” and pledged to review the new FDA plan. McConnell’s office had no news to share on plans for a confirmation vote.

A GOP pharma lobbyist said the Democratic opposition to the White House nominee had “thrown a monkey wrench” in the HELP committee’s plan to have Califf confirmed by now. “I think they made a mistake,” the lobbyist said. “Califf is actually the only one who is willing to go in there and shake the institutional cage. They would have done better to get him confirmed and then work with him.”

Califf still has very broad support, but the nomination may not be able to move without some legislation partially addressing concerns, the lobbyist said. A potential vehicle is due for a markup on Thursday — the Senate Judiciary Committee’s Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery Act — and it’s expected to get a quick ride to a floor vote. It doesn’t address FDA oversight now, however, and it’s not clear what could be included that the FDA could live with that might tamp down Dem opposition.

** A message from The Pharmaceutical Care Management Association: The Pharmaceutical Care Management Association's new campaign-That's What PBMs Do -highlights how pharmacy benefit managers (PBMs) reduce prescription drug costs and improve convenience and safety for consumers, employers, unions, and government programs. Click here to see the new campaign, That's What PBMs Do http://thatswhatpbmsdo.com/ and watch the new video: http://thatswhatpbmsdo.com/videos **

PHARMA IN THE STATES: OHIO DRUG COST MEASURE MOVES ALONG, MORE TRANSPARENCY BILLS — After a slight hiccup, Ohio Secretary of State Jon Husted submitted the patient advocates' initiative on drug pricing to the state legislature. Husted ordered re-certification of the signatures after attorneys for PhRMA alleged violations of Ohio law and fraudulent practices during the petition drive. A second review did lead to nearly 36,000 signatures being invalidated — but the initiative still surpassed the nearly 92,000 signatures needed. The announcement: http://bit.ly/1PZO4ev

Ohio’s General Assembly can decide to pass the proposal, which calls for the state to pay no more for medicines than the price negotiated by the VA. If it doesn’t act or passes an amended version, the petitioners must collect additional signatures to get it on the state’s 2016 ballot. PhRMA, the Ohio Chamber of Commerce, the Ohio Pharmacists Association, and a handful of other groups in a statement Thursday described the petition as “arbitrary and vague.” The groups questioned whether the proposal would reduce costs for medicines — and suggested it might actually cause prices to rise.

Colorado’s state legislature will take up its drug pricing transparency bill Feb. 18. It will be reviewed by the House Health, Insurance and Environment Committee. http://1.usa.gov/1VW4uCK. A similar bill stalled in Virginia last week: http://wapo.st/1PZSFNM. Washington’s Senate Health Committee also held a hearing on its transparency bill last week: http://1.usa.gov/1QLiM84

FROM THE 340B WARS — AIR340B released a fact sheet with new research finding that 340B hospitals accounted for about 60 percent of Medicare Part B drug reimbursements but less than half of all Medicare outpatient revenue. That suggests “perverse financial incentives” that are undermining the program, AIR340B spokesperson Stephanie Silverman said. The fact sheet: http://bit.ly/1PbNHdl

… Coming Wednesday: A media conference call with “physician leaders” and Ted Slafsky, CEO of 340B Health, warning of “negative implications … patients face if the program is scaled back.”

PEOPLE ON THE MOVE: KNEUER JOINES TAUZIJN — Mimi Simoneaux Kneuer joins former Rep. Billy Tauzin’s consulting firm as a principal. “She was executive vice president of external affairs at PhRMA, which Tauzin used to lead, and was his chief of staff when he chaired the Energy and Commerce Committee from 2000 to 2004,” POLITICO Influence reported.

CATCHING OUR ATTENTION: HOW MEDICARE PART D NEGOTIATIONS COULD WORK — Democrats love throwing out the idea of allowing the government to negotiate drug prices in Medicare Part D as a way to control costs, but few discuss how that might really work. It doesn’t have to be one-size-fits-all. A Health Affairs blog lays out a variety of ways the government could intervene in Part D pricing. Things to consider: whether HHS would negotiate prices for all drugs or just certain products, would it also negotiate formulary design and would the government’s authority apply to all or just some Part D plans? http://bit.ly/1nzyNEf

** A message from The Pharmaceutical Care Management Association: PBMs are projected to save employers, unions, government programs, and consumers $654 billion - up to 30 percent - on drug benefit costs over the next decade. PBMs reduce drug costs by: · Offering Amazon-style home delivery of medications and creating select networks of more affordable pharmacies; · Encouraging the use of generics and more affordable brand medications; · Negotiating rebates from drug manufacturers and discounts from drugstores; · Managing high-cost specialty medications; and · Reducing waste and improving adherence. Learn more at: http://thatswhatpbmsdo.com **