CLEVELAND, Ohio -- The aging of America is happening more quickly in cities such as Cleveland and states like Ohio, but that means the face of aging is changing more quickly here, too.

Today's senior citizens are healthier, wealthier and more diverse than ever before, Nancy LeaMond reminded a City Club of Cleveland audience Monday.

Welcome, she said, to the Longevity Economy.

"We have a new life stage," said LeaMond, a national strategist for AARP and its top lobbyist in Washington, D.C. "At AARP, we call it 'Life Reimagined.'"

Those reimagined lives, soon to be happening by the hundreds of thousands, will herald new jobs, new services and new opportunities, said LeaMond, the executive vice president of AARP's State and National Group.

They will also present communities with new expenses and responsibilities, but eras don't dawn cheaply.

"We are at the epicenter of a dramatic transformation, a special moment in time," she said during the sold-out luncheon.

In her speech and in an earlier, one-on-one interview, LeaMond said studies have detailed the costs and challenges posed by an older population. She hopes to illuminate the other side of the equation: the contributions of seniors citizens and the rewards of the new kind of economy they will drive.

For example:

People in their 50s are the fastest growing class of entrepreneurs and among the most successful, which is why the Small Business Administration now partners with the AARP to convene startup workshops.

Baby boomers are driving the fastest growing segment of the economy--healthcare. They form a huge market for innovations like drug store "minute clinics" and for expanding fields such as physical therapy.

Older people are pushing lifestyle trends like over-50 baseball, basketball and volleyball leagues, which are transforming recreational sports.

New technologies and services will rise to meet people who wish to "age in place," in their homes, and who will need assistance to do that.

"Sixty and 70 year olds are living longer, working longer, getting more knees replaced," LeaMond said in an interview. "They're thinking of this stage of life totally differently."

Alas, some of those thoughts are tinged with anxiety. While older Americans will generate demand for new jobs and products, they will also create new challenges and costs, LeaMond acknowledged.

In Ohio, more than half of people 65 and older live exclusively on their Social Security income, she told her audience, and seven out of 10 need long-term care. That makes the elderly financially vulnerable and dependent on a younger generation for help.

"This is going to pose challenges," she said in her speech. "Employers are going to find more demands from their workers for flexible schedules."

Ohio, already the 13th oldest state in America, will see "the great age wave" sooner than most. So will Cleveland. Since 2000, the city's median age has jumped from 37 to 41, LeaMond said.

"There are no Benjamin Button states," she added. "No place is getting younger."

The trend should inspire communities and their leaders to plan now for an older population.

Ohio Gov. John Kasich showed vision, she said, when he expanded Medicaid to cover more poor people, including seniors, as allowed under the Affordable Care Act.

A maturing population signals a need for more walkable communities, and for public transportation that works for young and old alike, she added.

A new lifestyle is fast approaching, LeaMond said. Communities, like their residents, need to reimagine.