Secretary of Health and Human Services Sylvia Burwell (Photo: AP file )

Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell said Thursday she will continue to work with Indiana on its alternative Medicaid proposal, although the plan will have to maintain protections for Medicaid beneficiaries.

“There are some core parameters that are both statutory and policy in terms of what Medicaid needs to provide,” Burwell said during a discussion with reporters. “That’s where we’re having the space in the conversation. We’re continuing the conversation.”

After Gov. Mike Pence met Monday with Burwell, he likewise said the two sides have not reached an agreement on getting federal funding to expand Medicaid in Indiana.

Neither Pence nor Burwell have specified what the disagreements are about.

Pence’s proposal is modeled after high-deductible plans with health savings accounts that advocates say give consumers an incentive to make smarter health care spending choices.

But advocates for the poor say the monthly contributions that recipients would be required to make to their savings accounts amount to premiums, which are not allowed in Medicaid for those making less than 150 percent of the federal poverty level.

Michigan and Iowa included monthly contributions for some recipients in their alternative Medicaid plans, but recipients can’t be kicked out for failure to pay.

Other Medicaid rules that Indiana wants waived include not charging more than $8 for getting non-emergency care from an emergency room, beginning coverage up to three months before a person is determined eligible, and providing transportation for non-emergency care.

Burwell said Thursday her department is listening to states that want to try different approaches to expanding Medicaid, which the Supreme Court ruled is optional under the Affordable Care Act.

“We have to think about what flexibility they need and what they think is the best approach for their state,” she said. “The governor and his team and our team have been working over a period of a year in good faith on this effort. I think everyone is coming to the table with a real desire to make progress and we’re going to continue to work on it.”

Burwell said the overall success of the Affordable Care Act will be primarily measured by how much it reduces the ranks of the uninsured.

“That’s why the legislation was passed,” she said.

Unlike in some states, Indiana’s 15 percent uninsured rate for adults hasn’t changed much since major parts of the law began this year, according to the Gallup-Healthways Well-Being Index.

The two main ways the law aimed to reduce the uninsured rate was by expanding Medicaid to those earning up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level and by creating health exchanges where those who don’t get coverage through an employer or government program can buy insurance.

Indiana’s current eligibility rules for Medicaid are among the toughest in the country.

In addition, Indiana is challenging the legality of the federal subsidies that have reduced the cost of the premiums for exchange plans. A federal judge heard oral arguments Thursday on the challenge, which Attorney General Greg Zoeller said will protect large employers from being subject to penalties for not offering coverage to workers. That’s because the penalties kick in if a worker receives a subsidy.

Read or Share this story: http://pinews.co/1xuHPC0