As the deadline for candidate filings for the 2014 Congressional primaries approaches next week, Maxey Scherr, an El Paso attorney, and David Alameel a dentist, have joined the race for Texas Sen. John Cornyn’s seat. Both are democrats.

Scherr says she is running to “get Texas off Cruz control.”

“Cruz control works great for big corporations, but it doesn’t work for middle class families, we’re left to deal with the wreckage,” Scherr said in her campaign announcement video.

Cruz is the very essence of what is wrong with Washington according to Scherr, as well as Cornyn.

“John Cornyn is stuck on Cruz control, and I won’t be,” Sherr said.

She is currently traveling around Texas in a recreational vehicle attached to a wrecked car in order to spread her message that Cruz has led to the destruction of the state.

If she is elected, Scherr said she will would work to raise the minimum wage to 10 dollars an hour, fix Obamacare to “not let insurance industry do whatever they want” and increase support for Texas public schools. The single mother is also supportive of gay marriage and abortion.

Alameel, who is from Dallas, is a former donor for Sen. Cornyn, but is now running against the long-serving lawmaker because he feel Cornyn’s main focus is only to get reelected and not on the issues.

“He’s part of the problem. He produced big deficits and big government and he has absolutely no solution other than giving tax breaks to the rich,” Alameel said, according to the Dallas Morning News.

Alameel said he will do “whatever it takes”, and that “money is not an issue” for him during his campaign. In 2011 Alameel ran to represent district 33 in the House of Representatives, but lost to Rep. Marc Veasey.

“Sen. Cornyn welcomes them into the race and he looks forward to discussing his record with Texans, who deserve better than skyrocketing healthcare premiums and dropped coverage at the hands of Democrats’ signature legislative failure,” Brendan Steinhauser, Cornyn’s campaign manager for the 2014 re-election, said.