By Daniel J. Meara

New Jersey is marked by its more than 500 cities, towns and municipalities. To these the The Star-Ledger/NJ.com has added one, a fictional locale whose ills are all too real. This imaginary place is blighted with heroin use and therefore bears the name Herointown. Its population of 128,000 — the estimated number of active heroin users statewide — would be the state's fourth largest city if they all lived in one spot.

Stephen Stirling's article stresses that these many heroin users are not all confined to a single area, or to one demographic group. In fact, the distinguishing feature of the imaginary Herointown is its diversity, with people of all races and income levels affected. This point about addiction's reach across all racial and economic borders is one that the National Council on Alcoholism and Drug Dependence-New Jersey has long stressed in its advocacy. The state's opiate crisis has crystallized this fact, as the majority of people falling into heroin use are white and live in the suburbs.

Like all communities, Herointown has a cemetery, the difference being that here the dates etched on the headstones reveal foreshortened lives. Herointown's burial ground has amassed more than 5,200 graves since 2004. These many deaths mean that drugs have overtaken car wrecks as the source of the most accidental fatalities. New Jersey's numbers here are particularly bad, as the state's rate of overdose deaths is three times the national average.

Many of these losses could have been prevented with treatment, provided it was appropriate for the person and was bolstered with recovery supports such as employment training, education or housing.

Treatment in the state, however, is elusive at best. One of the article's sections is titled "The Treatment Riddle." For far too many, treatment is indeed a puzzle, a maddening one to families trying to find help for a loved one.

The article presents two options for getting treatment: paying $20,000 for an extended inpatient treatment stay or have one's insurance cover the costs of care. The first of these underestimates the cost of long-term care. Many families in the state have exhausted their savings paying for loved one's treatment.

The second option, in far too many cases, is a mirage. While there is a law that requires health insurers to cover addiction just as they cover physical illnesses, many insurers continue to defy this law, either limiting care or refusing to pay for any treatment. This statute, known as parity, was signed into law in 2008 and is a provision of the Affordable Care Act. In response to rampant health insurers flouting the law, an effort has arisen to bring attention to the issue.

The New Jersey Parity Coalition has been meeting for the past year and will hold a workshop to see how the state compares with others in confronting the problem. (Anyone wishing to attend the parity workshop should email njparitycoalition@gmail.com)

The article profiles people who entered recovery from addiction as well the loved ones of some who did not. To combat the state's many overdose deaths, the state has implemented a program through which an antidote to opiate overdose, naloxone, is made available to police and other first-responders. This drug reverses the effects of an overdose, reviving people who otherwise might well have perished.



Some areas of the state, Camden for one, have implemented a program to refer people who overdose for detoxification and then inpatient treatment. For the most part, however, the state's naloxone programs lack the crucial treatment referral, leaving many who overdose to return to Herointown. Without directing the individual into treatment, this return to drug use is quite common because Narcan triggers the onset of withdrawal symptoms in the addicted person. Their cravings will likely lead them back into heroin.

The Star-Ledger accurately describes addiction as a family illness, in that spouses, parents, siblings endure the gradual disappearance of a loved one in the grips of addiction. The number affected in the state is approximately 350,000. The article quotes one of these family members, the partner of a man who died of addiction, describing his death as "the slowest suicide imaginable." It is an apt characterization of how addiction drains a life little by little. It erodes all that makes that person who he or she is.

It may be too much to hope Herointown will be completely abandoned anytime soon. But by increasing access to treatment for those who have overdosed, allotting more resources to treatment in general, and strengthening recovery with supports and services, the state can spur an exodus from this wasteland.

Daniel J. Meara is the public information manager the National Council on Alcoholism and Drug Dependence – New Jersey. You may reach him at (609) 477-7011 or dmeara@ncaddnj.org

Follow NJ.com Opinion on Twitter @NJ_Opinion. Find NJ.com Opinion on Facebook.

RELATED OPINIONS

Star-Ledger editorials:

Is Christie living up to his talk on drug treatment? (Nov. 27, 2015)

Viral video hides Christie's ugly truth and weak record on addiction (Nov. 29, 2015)

Christie has seen N.J.'s 'Herointown,' but only offers words, not actions (Dec.16, 2015)

Tom Moran

Christie on heroin: A prophet and a phony (Dec. 6, 2015)

Drew Sheneman Cartoon

N.J.'s opioid epidemic is bigger than you think

Guest columnists

McGreevey: N.J. is wisely choosing clinical treatment for heroin abuse

NCADD-New Jersey: Many deaths in 'Herointown, N.J.' could have been prevented with treatment

Full Recovery: No one wants to live in 'Herointown, N.J.' Addicts need your help

Reader feedback

Herointown: Here's what you're saying about N.J.'s heroin crisis