T o be honest I'd rather talk of my dog's chronic flatulence than to broach the subject of Obamacare in mixed company.

It's less noxious and volatile. And trust me, that's saying something.

Just bringing up the Affordable Care Act is like yelling fire in a crowded conversational theater. Set off the alarm and watch people scream and scamper toward the exits – or toward their tried-and-true talking points.

The ACA is an unconstitutional, job-killing plague on the middle class, GOP friends will vow. It's a tax magnet that will cost us doctors, policies, jobs and our way of life. Thanks Obama!

Wait, wait, wait, our Democratic brethren will respond. Americans need access to healthcare without a lifetime cap on coverage, with coverage for pre-existing conditions. It's good and right and warm and fuzzy and those website problems were just ... glitches. Thank you Mr. President!

We're at each other's throats, parroting partisan prattle about stuff most of us know precious little about.

Only 16 percent of Alabamians -- just about 1 ½ of every 10 of us -- even claim to know "a lot" about the health care law, according to a recent UAB study. About half of Alabamians don't even pretend to know much of anything about it, and a good half of us always pretend to know a little bit about everything.

At this point it really doesn't matter what any of us thought about the ACA at the start. What matters now is whether it works. How do we know what is truth? We can start by asking you.

Which is why it has been so fascinating to watch Alabama Media Group reporters Alex Walsh, Mike Oliver, Brendan Kirby and Challen Stephens start to slog through all the bilious gas that shrouds this issue.

Those reporters have begun to gather comments from readers, looking in particular for those who have had personal experience with the law.

It's not scientific, and they've seen their share of knee-jerk political drivel. But they've also collected dozens of accounts from people who have sought help under the new law, with differing levels of success.

Huntsville's Kim Herbert, for instance, said she has found affordable insurance for the first time in five years under Obamacare. Huntsville's Sandra Gray, on the other hand, said her premiums under the health care law now amount to more than she makes in a month.

So far in Alabama, if these responses are believable, experience with the law has not been all that positive for most.

We need to know more, and we need your help.

Please tell us your stories, your honest assessments of experiences with the new law. We don't want to clear the room, but we do want to find truth in the fog. Email your thoughts or visit AL.com to share your stories. And help us build an Alabama understanding.

I will host a live chat that we hope will guide us to the topics and stories that matter to you (just sign up free and type your questions and comments for all to see) at 10 a.m. Tuesday on AL.com.

We need you in the conversation. We need the conversation. If we talk about it enough, the whole discussion might become a little more comfortable. And a lot less smelly.

John Archibald is a columnist for Alabama Media Group. Email him at jarchibald@al.com.









At Alabama Media Group, we want to get the stories behind the statistics. Please help us by filling out the short form below. So far, we have responses from Decatur to Mobile, from Foley to Fort Payne. We'll share the results in future stories.

Online Database by Caspio