Unloading baggage. (Photo: Elise Amendola, AP)

Later this month, the Supreme Court will decide whether to hear a case about a promise made and a promise broken. The financial future of nearly two thousand retirees hangs on this decision — retirees who faithfully worked hard and played by the rules, operating under the misapprehension that their employer would honor its end of the bargain by paying out the pension benefits it had promised. Perhaps more important, this case examines whether we can count on our government to keep its word.

In 2002 my former employer, US Airways, declared bankruptcy. Shortly thereafter, the airline announced that it would terminate the pension plan it had created for pilots like me. Luckily for us (or so it seemed), our pensions would be backed by the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, a government agency that is supposed to act as an insurer for private pension plans. In the wake of the bankruptcy, the PBGC assumed control of our plan, insisting on also becoming its trustee. As the trustee, it was tasked with distributing our plan's remaining assets to beneficiaries, before then determining its insurance obligations.

Created under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, the PBGC is a terrific idea. Similar to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the PBGC uses the government's wherewithal and stability to back pension promises made by private employers.

If the employers can't meet those obligations, the idea goes, the government will make good on the promised benefits. In 1980 the Supreme Court itself described the PBGC as the government's attempt to rectify the "'great personal tragedy' suffered by employees whose vested benefits are not paid when pension plans are terminated."

Today the agency serves as the trustee for 1.5 million current and future beneficiaries of more than 4,000 terminated pension plans, and its appointment as trustee for the failed plans has become customary. But far from serving as the rectifier of broken promises that lawmakers envisioned, the PBGC has become an unregulated, self-serving menace to the very retirees it was created to protect.

There are three major issues with the PBGC becoming trustee of the same pension plans it insures. First, the agency doesn't have the expertise or the institutional resources to take on this role on a regular basis. Second, in acting as both trustee and insurer, the PBGC courts a dangerous conflict of interest — because the agency makes decisions as trustee that can save — or cost — money to the agency acting as insurer. Finally, in casting itself as the first, last and only authority in decisions that involve billions of dollars in retirement savings, the agency skirts the checks and balances that make our democracy tick.

The federal Office of the Inspector General has described the PBGC's asset auditing process as "seriously flawed," "seriously deficient," and subject to "serious errors and omissions." Worse, the agency doesn't just make simple mathematical errors in the calculation and allocation of benefits — it makes them very slowly.

In our case, it has taken more than a decade to get to this point. The PBGC took more than five years to complete its administrative review of our claims to our plan's assets. In a similar case of terminated pensions for Delta Airlines pilots, the agency took an interminable seven years. And if pensioners disagree with the PBGC's calculations, they're looking at years of costly litigation against an agency that uses its vast resources and legal muscle to wear down anyone who dares to question its edicts.

After enduring the PBGC's five-year administrative review process, my fellow US Airways pilots and I spent another six years fighting the PBGC in court; at times, the agency has assigned five times as many attorneys to the case as we can afford to retain. And the PBGC has plenty of incentive to slow-walk these proceedings: every additional day it can hoard its assets earns it millions in investment income.

While the PBGC continues to draw out this process, almost a quarter of my fellow pensioners have died, forced to live out their final years on a fraction of their promised benefits.

The PBGC's insistence on becoming trustee of the funds it insures also presents an immutable conflict of interest. As trustee, the PBGC's fiduciary obligation is to the pensioners; as an insurer, the PBGC endeavors to pay out the minimum amount possible. And because the agency as insurer is currently running a $35 billion shortfall, you can probably guess which interest wins out.

A pension is a promise. When such promises are broken, the circle of victims extends well beyond the pensioner. Parents become dependent on sons and daughters to help them afford eldercare, and grandchildren must watch as college funds are drained to pay for necessities. Indeed, the public itself suffers as seniors turn to government programs to help put food on the table, fuel in the furnace and prescription pills in the medicine cabinet.

If it returns to its role as a bulwark against the "great personal tragedy" of terminated pensions, the PBGC will once again be a force for good. This will not happen, however, as long as the agency continues to operate without oversight and with impunity, unilaterally picking winners and losers.

If the Supreme Court agrees to hear the US Airways pilots' case against the PBGC, it will take the first step in affirming a basic principle of American common sense: A penny saved should remain a penny earned. You don't need to be able to fly a plane to agree with that.

Joe Kernan is the president of the Retired Pilots Association of USAirways and a petitioner in Davis v. PBGC.

In addition to its own editorials, USA TODAY publishes diverse opinions from outside writers, including our Board of Contributors. To read more columns like this, go to the opinion front page or follow us on twitter @USATopinion or Facebook.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1iuabt6