Photo

Kei Okada, 55, at left, is a spiritual care counselor for the Visiting Nurse Service of New York. He visited with Edward Harris and his wife, Ruth, at their Manhattan home.

Q. What do you do as a spiritual care counselor?

A. I’m part of a hospice and palliative care program that provides spiritual, emotional and physical care to patients and their families. I’m a board-certified chaplain, a title that people usually associate with religion. However, I like to say I assist people with finding meaning in, and peace with, life’s final chapter.

When you were younger, did you ever think that you might enter this field?

Actually, I was drawn to art from an early age. I felt that I was born to be a creative force. I was an artist for four years, working in stage design, in dance theater and as a visual artist. Art is still a big part of my life. For me, there’s a huge connection between art and end-of-life care. It can help patients express their feelings.

What drew you to spiritual care?

When I joined the Riverside Church in New York, I became interested in Greek and Hebrew, the biblical languages, and wanted to learn more. I enrolled in Union Theological Seminary and heard a chaplain give a talk at a hospital about his role. At first, I didn’t understand why a person who was ill would want to talk to a stranger for comfort. But then I immersed myself in clinical pastoral education and found my calling. After that, I worked with AIDS patients for the Housing Works organization in New York for six years, and in 2006 I joined the Visiting Nurse Service.

Did it take you awhile to feel comfortable in your role?

I had a defining moment at the beginning of my first hospital rounds. As I passed a nurses’ station, I asked a couple standing there if they were family members of a patient. It turned out that the woman was a patient herself, and she and her husband had just learned that the doctors could not cure her cancer. He saw my student chaplain badge and started yelling at me that there was no God. That was a breakthrough moment for me. I realized that at a time like this, you don’t listen only to people’s words; you listen to their heart.