Clean up with clean soap

Lisa Gillespie's soap is all made by hand with no synthetic ingredients. ( Courtesy photo / Body Care by Shaman Lisa )

Aimee Heckel The Boulder and the Beautiful

Around this time of year in 2010, Lisa Gillespie decided to do 101 new experiences in 1,001 days.

The Boulder woman tried motocross. Riding her bike in a skirt. Juggling. Attending a TED Talk. It wasn't as much of a bucket list as it was an invitation of whimsy, she says. An excuse, a deadline, to follow her curiosity, be more spontaneous and try the things that she otherwise kept putting off.

Some new experiences made her bolder. Others, like a colonoscopy, weren't exactly worth repeating, she says.

At the time, Gillespie, an award-winning NYC-art-director turned Colorado self-coach for teens, was at a crossroads in her career. She knew it was time for change, but didn't know how that would look.

Little did she know, one of her new experiences would guide her way.

It wasn't the 101th new experience, which she completed in the fall of 2012. It was the 120th.

"Once you do that, you can't stop," Gillespie says. "So I started a 101-plus list."

For No. 120, in the spring of 2013, she attended a soap-making class. She made a batch, using only natural ingredients: no synthetic colors or fragrances. Just essential oils and pure ingredients. She tapped into her art background, playing with naturally occurring colors, textures and patterns.

Her neighbors asked her for a few bars.

But it wasn't until the floods of 2013 that she decided to go full force. She gave some of her Man-O-Man lemongrass-cedar soap bars to an out-of-town restoration crew that helped clean out her basement.

They were grateful, yet hesitant. Gillespie says she could almost see them thinking, "Only in Boulder. 'Here's some handmade essential-oil soap.'"

A week later, they called to ask if they could buy every bar she had in stock. They loved it.

That's when Gillespie realized she might be onto something with her small-batch, cold-pressed soap. While the community was rebuilding after the flood, she rebuilt her career path and launched Body Care by Shaman Lisa (lisamelligillespie.com), where you can find her artistically designed soap bars for $6 to $8 online.

An assortment of the prettiest soap you've ever seen. (Courtesy photo / Body Care by Shaman Lisa)

(And no, she's not a shaman. It's a nickname from her daughter's friends, who often seek her bodywork background to help with their various aches and pains.)

Gillespie was so on to something, in fact, that she now can't keep up with demand. After many holiday craft fairs this month, she says her supply is running low. Her soap needs four to six weeks to cure before it's hard enough to sell, so when if she runs out this month, she won't have a replenished stock until Valentine's Day.

But if you're quick enough, you can still stuff your stockings and fill your guest bathrooms with these locally made, inexpensive and practical works of art. Her "Three Kings" soap, scented with frankincense, myrrh and fir needle, subtly fills the air with a refreshingly natural scent of Christmas.

As she puts it, "There is no hot chocolate essential oil."

And many of the synthetic odors this time of year — evergreen candles, pumpkin spice everything, hot apple cider air freshener — can overwhelm the senses.

Shaman Lisa's Winter White bars (with peppermint, clove and fir) smell like mouthwatering buttermints, and they look just as yummy, with swirly patterns and carefully designed packaging from a local paper shop.

Gillespie says she cares about every detail of her soap, from the ingredients out. She calls her business "aroma art."

"When the water hits it, it releases the smell, and it's just beautiful, a whole experience," Gillespie says. "The packaging, the feel, they are all cool little creative decisions you can make."

Shaman Lisa's soap is a hidden gem in Boulder — you can't find it in any stores — and a rare intersection of practical and beautiful.

She says she makes each bar with glee, which I think transforms simple, everyday gestures, such as hand-washing, into those small, special moments that sprinkle across life like glitter. Except glitter that doesn't make a mess, but rather leaves things cleaner than before.

Aimee Heckel: 303-473-1359, heckela@dailycamera.com, twitter.com/aimeemay and twitter.com/Aimeemay.