Burgum makes stop in Jamestown

Gubernatorial candidate Doug Burgum addresses a crowd of about 50 people at Sabir's Buffalo Grille in Jamestown Monday evening. Alexandria Cremer | The SUN

Fargo businessman Doug Burgum said he can’t predict the price of future commodities, but he can control spending, and if elected the next governor of North Dakota, he will rightsize the government to help pull the state out of a projected $1.1 billion revenue shortfall.

“I feel like it takes a business leader who has budgeted this scale to go in and really understand how to make those trade-offs,” Burgum said in Jamestown Monday evening. “ … we’re going to have to really reprioritize what we’re doing and rethink how we do it, to make sure that we are still delivering the essential services.”

Burgum said he is also running for governor to help his opposing candidate, Wayne Stenehjem, complete his term as attorney general, a position he’s held since 2001.

A member of the audience asked Burgum to defend his endorsement of presumptive Republican nominee Donald Trump, to which he said:

“Do I want my kids to grow up and behave like him? No,” he said.

But Burgum said he endorsed Trump because he thinks he’s the best choice to benefit North Dakota citizens, citing Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton as a threat to the coal, oil and gas industry.

Burgum also spoke about his opinion on the Affordable Care Act. He said that he thinks the ability to have pre-existing conditions covered by insurance is good, but that the act doesn’t outline affordability of care, only affordability of insurance.

Burgum also criticized the act for not detailing how to innovate the health care system.

“There isn’t a word in there that’s about making the care better,” he said.

The solution for health care is to stray away from a federally centralized approach, Burgum said.

Burgum was also asked about his stance on transgender bathrooms, a rising political issue in America.

Burgum said he would do as Dennis Daugaard, South Dakota’s governor did, and veto a bill pledging for a statewide policy. Instead, Burgum said he would support the issue being handled by local community discretion.

acremer@jamestownsun.com | (701) 952-8453