Call them what you want, underperforming schools will continue to be referred to as “failing” in state statute.

Gov. Andrew Cuomo vetoed on Friday legislation that would have swapped references to schools that are “failing” with “struggling” in the Education Transformation Act of 2015, a broad education reform bill that included an overhaul of the teacher evaluation system and protocol for state receivership that was passed in the budget deal last March.

Not only was the term “failing schools” part of Cuomo’s sharp rhetoric as he pushed major education overhauls last year, it was included in the appropriation for schools designated as persistently failing in the budget. In vetoing the legislation, Cuomo wrote in his veto message that changing the terminology in only some places would leave inconsistencies.

“Further, all provisions (the Education Transformation Act of 2015) regarding the takeover and restructuring of failing schools were negotiated as a whole, and I do not believe in making isolated changes outside of a larger conversation about our State’s commitment to maximizing student achievement at these schools,” the governor wrote. “I am therefore constrained to veto this bill.”

Education advocates and some lawmakers took issue with the “failing” moniker late last session.

“One of the schools on the list (of failing schools) is from the City of Schenectady: Hamilton School,” Assemblyman Angelo Santabarbara, D-Rotterdam, said at the time. “I went to that school. I’m a graduate of that school. I’ve gone back there several times to visit them. … We have some of the best teachers in the state right there in the City of Schenectady and some of the brightest students. … That terminology is just not fair.”

“The stigma of being labeled as a failing or persistently failing school only further perpetuates the issues and difficulties these schools face,” the bill’s memo states. “By changing the designation status from failing and persistently failing to struggling and persistently struggling, this indicates that this is a temporary situation for these schools and that additional management powers and funding will be associated with such schools in order to improve their overall academic performance in order to be removed from these more negative accountability statuses.”

In New York’s current education climate, a simple name or terminology swap might help to a certain degree, though, at least in the case of Common Core, experts say the issue is just too deep for a cosmetic fix.

Friday’s veto messages are below. The veto message for this bill is No. 283.

Vetoes #274-304 of 2015