Sara Bleich, Julia Wolfson, and Marian Jarlenski

February 24, 2015

Just this past November, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) released sweeping final rules requiring that calorie information be posted on menus, menu boards, and vending machines. The regulations expand the proposed rule to include a wide variety of food outlets with more than 20 locations: quick service and table service restaurants, grocery stores and superstores, movie theaters, amusement parks, ice cream shops, takeout and delivery, vending machines, and even alcoholic beverages.

In the press release for the final rule, FDA Commissioner Margaret Hamburg stated, “making calorie information available on chain restaurant menus and vending machines is an important step for public health that will help consumers make informed choices for themselves and their families.”

Although the scientific evidence linking menu labeling to consumers’ purchasing behavior is weak, indirect effects may contribute more to incremental gains in public health. We highlight a few in the following blog post.

Peer Effects

Less than half of consumers (38 percent) report noticing the calorie information. However, those who do notice the information may influence the behavior of those who do not. Generally, peer effects or “social spillovers” are widely recognized as an important factor in purchasing behavior.

In the case of menu labeling, those who typically notice the information are female, white, over age 30 with higher income and education. This is an opinionated and influential consumer group, active on social media, who often determine where and what their friends and families eat. They are also a powerful market segment who increasingly demand healthier options and greater transparency from the food industry.

In an effort to attract this group, food outlets affected by the new regulations will likely compete for health-conscious consumers and may introduce new lower calorie options to respond to public demand and decrease “calorie shock” these conscientious consumers experience when they see the posted calories. For example, in 2013, Burger King introduced French fries with 20 percent fewer calories than Burger King’s current fries, called Satisfries.

Changes in Restaurant Behavior

Large chain restaurants reduced the calories in their new menu items by 60 calories (or 12 percent) from 2012 to 2013, possibly in anticipation of the FDA regulation since no meaningful changes were observed from 2010 to 2011. Using the most recent data from Menustat.org, we updated the earlier estimate to include 2014 data. Compared to items on the menu in 2012 only versus items newly introduced after, mean calories declined in both 2013 (-63 calories) and 2014 (-56 calories), driven primarily by the introduction of foods with lower calories (Figure 1).

Figure 1. Mean Calories for Items on the Menu in 2012 Only Versus Items Newly Introduced in 2013 and 2014.

Note: The food category includes all menu categories (pizza, sandwiches, burgers, entrees, salads, soups) except beverages and toppings/ingredients. Predicted mean per-item calories in each year are adjusted for children’s menu item status, whether a restaurant chain is national, and restaurant type (fast food, full service, fast casual). Standard errors are clustered to account for correlation within restaurants. Data were obtained from the Menustat project. 2,656 items were on the menu in 2012 only, 4,550 items were introduced in 2013, and 3,760 items were introduced in 2014.

If this downward trend continues, it may have a sizable impact on population obesity. Americans eat out a lot, spending over $600 billion annually in restaurants which is almost one-half of all food dollars. While a reduction of 60 calories may not seem like a lot for one meal, over time it may help reduce obesity. This is because consuming 60 fewer calories at a restaurant visit will help to considerably chip away at the number of extra daily calories responsible for the current obesity epidemic for adults (220 calories per day) and children (165 calories per day). The population impact on obesity may be greatest in lower income and minority neighborhoods where fast food restaurants are more prevalent.

Changing Consumer Expectations

Nutrition knowledge in the United States is generally poor. The typical American knows little about how many calories or nutrients are in the foods they consume or their daily calorie requirements. The FDA regulation only requires additional nutritional information including sodium, fats, sugar, and other items to be available upon request.

However, the display of calorie information on menus and menu boards may spur consumers to demand additional nutritional information that impacts their overall health. This may encourage consumers to demand the calorie information in a more easily understandable format (such as miles of walking to burn off a particular item), which has been shown to impact consumer behavior. Growing consumer distrust in the food and beverage industry may also contribute to the demand for more readily available and easily understandable nutrition information.

Threat of Regulation

The food and beverage industry has been under increasingly strong pressure from the public and consumer groups to make their products less unhealthy. Of the many potential regulatory options, providing nutritional information to consumers may be viewed by the industry as a less-intrusive form of government intervention. In fact, the restaurant industry supported the passage of the original menu labeling provisions in the Affordable Care Act (ACA) in an effort to dodge a growing patchwork of city and state rules, and it should be noted that the FDA regulations pre-empt states or local governments from imposing stronger policies.

Past industry action has shown that food outlets could proactively make voluntary changes to products to reduce the threat of future, more stringent nutritional regulation. In the end, these voluntary changes can lead to the regulations that the industry initially opposed. For example, mandatory labeling of trans fats and certain state bans led food manufacturers to eliminate the ingredient in their products, paving the way for the FDA to propose regulations essentially banning trans fats in foods late last year.

In summary, the FDA’s menu labeling regulation is one of the most significant federal efforts towards obesity prevention. While the FDA emphasized the potential direct effect on those consumers who notice the information and make different choices, the public health improvements may actually be a result of indirect effects such as peer effects, restaurant behavior, consumer expectations, and regulation of labeling requirements.

More research is needed to understand the mechanisms by which menu labeling might affect health; for instance, examining the relative impact of direct vs. indirect effects on restaurant purchases. Results from such research will inform future policy efforts aimed at supporting a healthier food environment.

Author’s note: We thank the New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene for the Menustat data. All authors conceived of the perspective. SNB drafted the perspective and each author contributed to the final draft. This work was supported by a grant from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.