Stephen B. Smith is chairman of Haury & Smith Contractors, Inc. (Photo: Submitted)

Many of the nation’s governors have been outspoken in their criticism of the Affordable Care Act and extremely skeptical of accepting the offer of Medicaid expansion on the program’s traditional terms.

Gov. Bill Haslam was one of the governors who rejected expansion when it was first available nearly two years ago because he believed that expanding a broken, budget-devouring, Washington-driven health care system didn’t make sense.

Instead, he insisted that any plan would be market-based and designed specifically for Tennessee, and he went to work to develop proposals that had the potential to gain Tennessee an exception to traditional Medicaid from the Department of Health and Human Services.

As he learned, pushing reform in Washington, D.C., is tough, slow business. After almost 18 months of effort, Tennessee received word on Dec. 12 that HHS would support the state’s reform plan, Insure Tennessee.

If approved by the General Assembly, Insure Tennessee will begin providing coverage and access to health care for hundreds of thousands of Tennesseans who are in the workforce but currently lack health insurance. And the bargain Gov. Haslam struck stands up to fiscal scrutiny as a strong deal for taxpayers.

This plan does not create any new taxes for Tennesseans and will remain sustainable within the state budget. All it does is insure hundreds of thousands of Tennesseans.

As a businessman and a Republican, I find what Gov. Haslam has done impressive — the result of conservative priorities, good management and traditional Tennessee horsetrading.

In contrast to traditional Medicaid, Insure Tennessee will promote personal responsibility and incentivize choice of preventive and routine care rather than unnecessary use of emergency rooms. It requires those who can afford it to pay co-pays toward the cost of coverage — “skin in the game,” as the governor likes to say.

The proposal prepares enrollees to permanently transition to private, commercial health coverage. The policy fundamentally operates much more like the private health insurance possessed by just about every Middle Tennessean reading this column.

The governor should also be credited with forging ahead to find a solution rather than simply saying “no,” because Insure Tennessee addresses a number of challenges that would have worsened without this plan. My experience tells me that if you demand everything you want, you’ll soon be out of business.

This plan addresses the needs of people who go to work every day, bringing access to doctors and care, helping Tennesseans live healthier lives and avoid expensive and prolonged illnesses that bankrupt families.

Not only will Insure Tennessee be good for Tennesseans, it will also greatly benefit the economy, particularly by stabilizing hospitals and other providers who today are at economic risk. Insure Tennessee will raise the productivity of our entire state while combating chronic illnesses that burden the entire health care system.

And it ensures that the billions of dollars that Tennesseans pay in Medicaid taxes will remain in our state to provide care for our own citizens. Today, we are exporting an enormous amount of money to pay for coverage costs in California, Massachusetts, New York and other states.

Many Republicans in the General Assembly campaigned on practical conservative state management. This plan delivers on that promise and deserves to be approved by the legislature.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1IVNViT