In Living Textbooks, the Register invites university faculty to share their knowledge and expertise with readers.

First of three parts on religion.

Whether or not you are a believer, religion will have an impact on your world. The debates over abortion, contraceptive coverage in Obamacare, global warming, teaching evolution in public schools and gay rights all intersect with the faith factor.

If you agree with renowned biologist Richard Dawkins or comedian Bill Maher, religion is a disaster that has been a source of far more human misery than joy. If you side with Pope Francis or Pastor Rick Warren, it has been the source of peace of soul and immense philanthropy.

Many of us might find ourselves somewhere in the center of the discussion – aware of the vast potential of faith to heal wounded hearts, fight bigotry and feed hungry children – yet also conscious that terrorism, ethnic persecution and bigotry have religious roots.

In any case, the world’s religions are hugely influential in the lives of many millions of adherents. Yet, in the arenas of government, business, medicine and education, religion’s power is often discounted.

When Ayatollah Khomeini swept into power in Iran in 1979, the State Department was largely unaware of the degree to which Shi’a Islam saw politics as an extension of religion. So, when 52 State Department workers were taken hostage by Khomeini’s fanatical devotees shortly thereafter, our government and the public were shocked and incredulous.

Closer to home, the Obama administration miscalculated how much the Affordable Care Act’s mandating of comprehensive birth control coverage would offend the Roman Catholic hierarchy. True, Catholic women use artificial contraceptives about as often as the general population. And the mandate did not apply to employees of officially Catholic organizations, such as diocesan headquarters. However, Catholic teaching on the practice has been clear since Pope Paul VI issued his 1968 encyclical “Of Human Life” prohibiting artificial birth control. The ACA rules meant women working for Catholic hospitals and universities would get contraceptive coverage, which prompted the bishops’ complaint that they were paying for an immoral practice.

President Barack Obama and Secretary of Health and Human Services Kathleen Sebelius fashioned a compromise whereby insurance companies would pay separately for the coverage. Despite this, the hierarchy, joined by the evangelical CEOs of Hobby Lobby Stores and Conestoga Wood Specialties Corp., challenged the decision. On March 25, the Supreme Court heard oral arguments on Sebelius v. Hobby Lobby Stores Inc., et al.

Then there is the nearly century-long debate over teaching evolution in public schools. In 1925, science teacher John Scopes stood trial in Dayton, Tenn., for agreeing to do so. Though Scopes was convicted (later overturned on a technicality), the so-called “Monkey Trial” humiliated conservative Christians and deepened the divide with their liberal counterparts. Since then, the Supreme Court and a lower federal court have overturned state laws granting equal time to the teaching of creationism or intelligent design in schools alongside evolution.

Despite these rulings and the almost universal opinion of the scientific community, a third of Americans reject evolution. One might conclude such people are intellectual dunces or Bible-pounding fundamentalists. Yet, doing so overlooks the deeply felt reasons for their opposition to the idea. For example, if mankind is descended from lower life forms, what about being created in the “image and likeness of God” (Genesis 1:27)? And what about natural selection, which conservative believers sometimes equate with atheism, Nazi-era “survival of the fittest” eugenics or genocide?

The point is not that intelligent design is authentic biology, but that the religious sensibilities of millions of Americans must be viewed emphatically if a respectful dialogue is to occur. That dialogue might win over conservative believers, who are similar to political conservatives, to at least give evolution, with God as its catalyst, a fair hearing. Otherwise, the great divide in American political and cultural life has another reason to keep festering.

Next week: a look at whether religion breeds violence.

Benjamin J. Hubbard is professor emeritus and

former chair of Cal State Fullerton’s Department of Comparative Religion. He

is co-authoring a book on political, cultural and

religious polarity in America, due out next year.