It is an issue that has polarized politicians and voters alike ever since the president signed his landmark health care law nearly six years ago.

Click to view News 9's coverage.

It has caused controversy from the courts to Congress.

“This was not the healthcare that was promised to Americans," said Sen. Dan Sullivan, R-Alaska.

"Health care should be a right for all," said Sen. Tammy Baldwin, D-Wisconsin.

After dozens of attempts, Republicans resurrected legislation to repeal the law they dub “Obamacare."

Lawmakers also chipped away at portions of it in a massive budget bill and may use it as a talking point in 2016

From a political perspective, Obamacare has been the gift that keeps on giving for Republicans,” said Josh Kraushaar, of the National Journal. "Whenever they've run on it aggressively, they tend to do fairly well."

Republicans have done what they could to put down the bill, putting Democrats on the defensive.

"You can't go in and tell 12 million people who have insurance because of Obamacare we're taking that away. You can't tell people, say with cancer, who have gotten insurance because of Obamacare that they no longer have insurance," said Marc Sandalow, political analyst.

The public remains divided over the health care law. According to a Kaiser poll, 40 percent of people favor it and 46 percent are opposed.

While the presidential hopefuls may play up the issue on the trail, the issue has lost steam with some voters.

"Obamacare has cooled a little bit as an issue," said Drew Altman, the CEO of the Kaiser Family Foundation.

Altman said polling shows the public has more pressing health concerns.

“We found that the high costs of drugs, this is really a surprise to me, emerged as the number one issue for people as their top priority for the president and Congress," said Altman.

Kaiser said the majority of those surveyed are concerned about the prices of so-called super drugs for chronic illnesses and rising out-of-pockets costs, especially when it comes to deductibles.