Several have Ivy League credentials, law degrees or were successful in business before winning elections. While the members are concentrated in the South, West or Midwest, they also come from states as varied as Arizona and New Jersey. Some are young, like Representatives Justin Amash of Michigan, 35, and Ron DeSantis of Florida, 37; others are older, like Representative Steve Pearce of New Mexico, 68.

Some are in their first term in Congress; some are well into their second decade. They are mostly white men.

In keeping with its anti-establishment bent, the Freedom Caucus usually meets in the basement of a local pub rather than at the Capitol, and its founders have cultivated an aura of subterfuge, in part by never releasing an official membership list.

Several members said the group serves as a forum for vigorous policy discussions that they feel are lacking on the House floor.

“I think it’s the desire for good government, for the process to work in the House, the desire for amendments to be offered, just for regular order,” Mr. Stutzman said in an interview, standing by the elevators outside the House chamber. “I really think that’s what brings us together.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Yet Mr. Stutzman and the others have made an impact, often in a highly destructive fashion. They forced the shutdown of the government in 2013, hoping to undo the Affordable Care Act. Many seemed ready to shutter the government again this year in a fight over funding for Planned Parenthood.

More mainstream Republicans have accused the hard-liners of pursuing a strategy of trying to “burn the House down,” as Representative Bill Flores of Texas put it. Others have said that Mr. Boehner’s real mistake was kowtowing to the newly elected conservatives and allowing them too much rope — to the Republican Party’s detriment.

Photo

In a confrontation on Fox News on Sunday, Representative Tom Cole, Republican of Oklahoma, accused Mr. Mulvaney and his conservative allies of castigating Republican leaders while achieving nothing.

“What have you done that’s accomplished anything?” Mr. Cole asked Mr. Mulvaney. “The last time we followed these kind of tactics on the government shutdown October of 2013, we lost. We didn’t win. We certainly didn’t repeal Obamacare.”

And last month, Representative Tom McClintock of California quit the Freedom Caucus and denounced its tactics in a resignation letter, saying the group had effectively become an ally of Nancy Pelosi of California, the House minority leader, by helping to block Republican initiatives.

The bottom line, however, is that the hard-liners still have their jobs and that Mr. Boehner is on his way out.

Their demands for a different way of doing things in the House are likely to get a lot of attention this week, given that their numbers are large enough to prevent any candidate from securing the 218 votes needed to be elected speaker.

That means no Republican is going to be elected without at least making some commitments toward ending business as usual.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Mulvaney complained that legislation was more likely to be written by staff members working for the leadership than by lawmakers, who are called upon only at the end, to vote as demanded by the leadership.

“If you say yes, you are a good team player; if you say no, you are a pariah,” he said. “That cannot be the way the Republican Party should function.”

But even if they get some of what they want, such as a greater ability to offer amendments on the House floor, it is unclear that they will gain anything beyond paralyzing the House with endless debate. Mr. Obama still has veto power, and Senate Democrats can still use a filibuster.

If nothing else, Freedom Caucus members say they have succeeded in sending a message to their constituents that they are willing to fight harder — against Mr. Obama, Planned Parenthood and other perceived opponents. Some are also building their careers. Mr. Stutzman, for instance, is running for Senate, where Ted Cruz, Republican of Texas, has often waged a lonely battle for goals similar to those of the Freedom Caucus.

Mr. Mulvaney, who has a degree in international economics from Georgetown and a law degree from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, said: “It’s what I thought being in Congress was going to be like: smart people with real-world experience getting together and trying to hash through issues. That does not happen in the Republican conference.”

The leader of the Freedom Caucus is Representative Jim Jordan of Ohio, a former college wrestling coach who holds a law degree and a master’s degree in education.

Mr. Jordan, 51, who is now in his fifth term, represents a central Ohio district that is adjacent to Mr. Boehner’s district north of Cincinnati. He has repeatedly said that he has no personal animus toward Mr. Boehner, even as he has rallied House conservatives to pressure the House leadership on almost every major issue.

After Mr. Boehner said he would resign, Mr. Jordan issued a statement on behalf of the Freedom Caucus saying that the group did not have a preferred candidate for speaker, and calling for a “careful and deliberative” search that would “ensure that we follow regular order in the House and give a voice to the countless Americans who still feel that Washington does not represent them.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Perhaps fittingly, on Wednesday the Freedom Caucus decided on its choice for speaker: Representative Daniel Webster of Florida, the longest shot in a three-person race.

“It doesn’t work just to change the leaders,” said Representative Tim Huelskamp of Kansas, 46, a farmer and former state legislator with a doctorate in political science. “You have got to actually talk about changing policy, you have got to talk about principles, instead of planning on losing every time.”

Mr. Huelskamp is the leader of the House Tea Party Caucus as well as a member of the Freedom Caucus.

“When two-thirds of the Republican Party, 60 percent, whatever it is, says they have had enough of the establishment in Washington, you can’t just move people up the ladder,” he said. “You have got to be talking about other changes as well. Here’s a chance to restore trust in the Republican Party.”