GILMER — Signs on the doors of the hospital that served this East Texas community for 17 years now offer this advice for those with a medical emergency: Dial 911.

Since East Texas Medical Center ceased operations in Gilmer late last year, making that call or driving to an emergency room, clinic or hospital in another town are the only remaining options for those in need of care.

It's a situation that's becoming increasingly common across rural America as a growing number of hospitals are closing their doors, citing a complex combination of changing demographics, medical practices, management decisions and federal policies that have put more financial pressure on facilities that sometimes average only a few in-patients a day.

Across Texas, 10 rural hospitals have closed since 2012, according to data from the National Rural Health Association. Five of those — including ETMC Gilmer — ARE in East and Northeast Texas.

A total of 50 hospitals in the rural U.S. have closed since 2010, and the pace has been accelerating, with more closures in the past two years than in the previous 10 combined, association data show. That could be just the beginning of what some health care analysts fear will be a crisis.

An additional 283 rural hospitals in 39 states are vulnerable to shutting down, and 35 percent of rural hospitals are operating at a loss, according to iVantage Health Analytics, a firm that works with hospitals.

Medicaid's role

Most of the rural hospital closures so far have occurred in the South and Midwest. Of those at risk, nearly 70 percent are in states that, like Texas, have declined to expand Medicaid under the federal Affordable Care Act, although some experts are hesitant to draw a cause-and-effect correlation.

In some cases, the shuttered hospitals have been replaced by clinics offering urgent care and other outpatient services. That was not to be in Gilmer, though.

ETMC said last summer its hospital was struggling but it hoped to maintain some services.

Within less than four months, the Tyler-based health system made three announcements. The first came in August when ETMC said the Gilmer hospital would stop providing inpatient care effective Oct. 31.

ETMC Senior Vice President Perry Henderson said at the time: "ETMC remains committed to the people of Upshur County and our mission of care. We tried providing inpatient care for the past 10 years, and despite some of the highest patient satisfaction scores in the nation, filling our beds has been a struggle. So, we are going to return to our roots in this community and refocus our efforts on emergency and primary care."

The commitment did not last long. It ended with the second announcement, that ETMC would close its Physician's First clinic in Gilmer and stop providing emergency, laboratory and imaging services.

About a week later came the last and final blow with the announcement ETMC would no longer provide EMS service to Upshur County.

Each step was in direct relation to the cost of providing services compared to the money being brought in.

Life and death

Such closures have left a void that's difficult to fill.

"When a hospital closes, the physicians leave. A lot of the health care infrastructure leaves. Sometimes the local businesses will leave ... the schools suffer," said George Pink, deputy director of the Rural Health Research and Policy Analysis Center at the University of North Carolina. "There's a whole multiplier effect that really can devastate some towns."

Big city hospitals have been closing at about the same rate as rural ones during the past five years, but an abundance of alternatives in most major metropolitan areas typically reduces the effect on patients. When a rural hospital closes, people might have to travel dozens of miles to reach the nearest hospital, an inconvenience that can sometimes be a matter of life or death.

When 18-month-old Edith Gonzalez choked on a grape in August 2013, her parents rushed to Shelby Regional Medical Center in their hometown of Center, unaware the hospital had closed several weeks earlier. Their daughter was dead by the time an ambulance brought her to the next nearest hospital, more than 45 minutes later.

Kathy Hagler, whose family owns a local grocery store, helped Edith's relatives gather 1,500 petition signatures pleading with Texas and local officials to reopen the hospital. But nothing has come of it.

"I didn't want baby Edith to be forgotten," Hagler said, "because we had no hospital here, and that could have saved her life."

In rural North Carolina last summer, 48-year-old Portia Gibbs died from cardiac arrest after waiting 90 minutes for a medical helicopter to arrive. She could have been at a hospital in less than half that time had not the Vidant Pungo Hospital in Belhaven closed just six days earlier.

'People needlessly dying'

Her death prompted Belhaven's mayor to walk 273 miles to the nation's capital in an attempt to raise awareness about the plight of rural hospitals.

Mayor Adam O'Neal said he plans to lead a similar march June 1 with supporters from at least 41 states. The city now is trying to acquire the old hospital through eminent domain and seeking $6 million in federal loans to re-open it.

Since Gibbs' death, O'Neal said, several other people have died before they could make it to more distant hospitals, including a 16-year-old boy hurt in a farming accident in April.

"We have people needlessly dying," O'Neal said.

Prime factors

A steady decline in population, a depressed local economy and changes in inpatient admission guidelines were prime factors.

Those same factors have played a role in numerous other hospital closures.

When Good Shepherd Health System announced it was shutting its 25-bed hospital in Linden and two associated clinics a year ago, President and CEO Steve Altmiller said it was purely an economic decision.

"Even with community support, investment in quality personnel and equipment, patient activity was not at a sustainable level," Altmiller said at the time. "This decision, while a very difficult one ... has been made so that Good Shepherd Health System remains a viable and financially stable health care organization."

The Longview-based health system said it had suffered operating losses of $12 million since acquiring the Linden hospital in 2005, and the average daily patient census was fewer than five.

Rural areas tend to "have older, poorer, sicker populations," said Michael Topchik, senior vice president of iVantage.

That means they often have a higher percentage of patients covered by Medicare and Medicaid, government health care programs that pay a lower reimbursement rate than private-sector insurers. Hospitals that rely heavily on those programs have been particularly hard hit by federal budget cuts and provisions in the 2010 federal health care law that reduced charity care reimbursements and linked a portion of hospitals' Medicare payments to quality standards and readmission rates.

ETMC's moves

The effects of the federal health care law were the prime factor leading East Texas Medical Center to close three of its 12 rural hospitals last year, said Henderson, the ETMC executive.

"The small rural hospitals are the most brittle of the bunch," he said. "When you began cutting on those reimbursements, it hits their margins and pretty quickly drives those hospitals to some pretty significant losses."

The framers of the federal health care law assumed the cuts would be offset as more patients became covered by private insurance and Medicaid. But Texas, which continues to have the nation's highest uninsured rate, is among 21 states mainly in the South and Great Plains that have declined to expand Medicaid eligibility.

The trend also has reached into California, where the booming economy along the coast contrasts with Central Valley agricultural communities that have been devastated economically by years of drought.

Left with clinics

A hospital serving the farming community of Corcoran closed in 2013, leaving residents with a clinic but no emergency room or major medical service.

Corcoran District Hospital buckled financially in part from treating residents without adequate insurance. In a second blow, a state prison within the city limits scaled back its contract with the hospital, diminishing an important source of revenue, said Jerry Robertson, the mayor and a pharmacist.

At Sac-Osage Hospital in Osceola, Missouri, poor management was among the reasons the rural hospital fell into financial ruin. Some of its doctors, for example, were never approved to be paid by particular insurance companies.

One local doctor made a last-ditch effort to buy Sac-Osage for $150,000. But the hospital board rejected his proposal as too vague and too late, deciding instead to close the facility and use part of its continuing tax revenue to pay for an ambulance service run by a hospital in a larger town 35 miles to the south.

For state Rep. Warren Love, a Missouri cattle rancher who tried to help save the hospital, its passing now seems sort of inevitable.

"Everything has evolved to the big gets bigger and the littlest disappears," Love said, "and that's really what's happened with these hospitals."

— Phil Latham writes for the News-Journal; David Lieb writes for The Associated Press. Scott Smith of the AP contributed from Fresno, California.

Texas hospitals closed since 2010

Hospitals closed in U.S. since 2010

List of vulnerable hospitals in U.S.

Number of vulnerable hospitals by state