CLEVELAND, Ohio -- In a first-of-its-kind organization in Ohio, five of the state's largest independent physician groups are forming a statewide collaborative to help compete with corporate hospitals and preserve small local practices.

The Ohio Independent Collaborative formally begins operations Wednesday, a first step toward reducing the costs and complications that are driving many independent medical groups out of business.

So far, members of the collaborative are all based in the northern half of the state, but its organizers hope to expand to other regions in coming months. Members will use the group to jointly purchase medical supplies, coordinate patient care, and adapt to the new insurance and funding landscape created by the Affordable Care Act, otherwise known as Obamacare.

"This organization will allow independent doctors to stay independent and stay strong," said Dr. Gary Pinta, president of the collaborative and an internal medicine practitioner with the Pioneer Physicians Network. "We're trying to preserve the type and brand of medicine that we practice now."

The founding members of the organization include Community Health Care, Inc., Northern Ohio Medical Specialists, Pioneer Physicians Network, Premier Physicians and Unity Health Network. Together, they employ more than 400 primary care doctors and specialists who currently care for more than 450,000 patients from Canton to Cleveland to Sandusky.

Independent practices are often prized for their ability to preserve direct and lasting relationships between patients and doctors. But their business model is also one that is slowly disappearing in the rapidly consolidating health care industry.

In the last decade, the number of independent physicians across the United States has declined from 366,000 to about 289,000, a drop of more than 20 percent, according to Becker's Hospital Review, a healthcare trade publication.

That's because the attributes that make independent doctors successful from a care perspective – being patient-focused and accessible – make it harder for them to compete in a health care system that rewards size and efficiency.

For example, larger health care systems have the financial leverage to negotiate favorable insurance contracts, as well as the support staff to handle the myriad reporting requirements necessary to qualify for higher rates of Medicare reimbursement and comply with other governmental rules.

A recent survey published by Becker Hospital Review found that the Affordable Care Act is only accelerating the consolidation trend, as doctors are required to spend more time on paperwork and other non-medical issues.

Some doctors say managing electronic records can become too much to handle for small practices.

"If I'm by myself and my computer screen suddenly freezes, what do I do?" said Dr. Robert Wergin, president of the American Academy of Family Physicians. "I know about caring for patients, but not computers. A small practice isn't going to have an IT team to help out."

Wergin, a family physician in Milford, Nebraska, said health care collaboratives can help to provide the logistical resources that independent practices need to survive and compete effectively. Joining forces also helps them hold the line against insurance companies that are consolidating and gaining greater power to dictate contract terms to smaller providers.

"Bullies don't pick on other bullies, they pick on the wimps," Wergin said, adding that it is easy for insurers to control arrangements with providers who care for 100 patients, but much harder when those providers are part of a group that cares for one million.

Pinta, the president of the Ohio Independent Collaborative, said the group is negotiating deals to add new members in the central and western portions of the state, and hopes to expand to the south as well.

Medical practices that join the organization will retain their financial and operational independence, but they will be able to use the collaborative to cut costs by jointly purchasing medical supplies and share insurance risk. Pinta said it will also help to deliver better care for patients.

"In order to get the costs savings and improvements in quality of care, you need a team-based approach," he said. "You need the specialists and the hospitals and the primary care doctors to feel like they're pulling in the same direction."

The formation of the collaborative is not expected to result in job reductions at the medical practices. If anything, Pinta said, it will lead to hiring of additional staff to coordinate patient care.

He said he hopes the organization will preserve a way of doing business for independent doctors and help keep them from selling their practices to corporate providers.

"If you talk to most doctors when they sell out to the hospital system, they realize one of the costs is not being able to make decisions on the fly," Pinta said. "There are committees and all kinds of things that hospitals do that independent practices don't want to do. You want to feel like the people in the room are the most important, not the people outside the room."