It’s been a battle for the ages over Medicaid expansion between the Obama administration on one side and Gov. Rick Scott and the Florida House of Representatives on the other this year. Just days ahead of the budget special session, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services has blinked first.

In a letter sent to the Florida Agency for Health Care Administration today, the U.S. Department of Health and Human services has tentatively agreed that $1 billion is how much hospitals and safety-net providers can expect to be made available for uncompensated care next year, through a program known as LIP, or the Low Income Pool.

What’s the split? About 60 percent of that sum comes from the federal government, under their formula, while 40 percent comes from a state match. (If Florida had expanded Medicaid, 100 percent would come from the feds.)

That pretty much of a win for Scott, at least for this year. That $1 billion is close to what the LIP has been for many years, with the exception of last year, and it’s a lot better than zero, which was the concern raised in the closing days of the regular legislative session. So does that mean Scott and House Speaker Steve Crisafulli can declare victory and ignore Medicaid expansion? Not quite.

Health care safety net providers will have about half the amount of money available for uncompensated care in 2015-2016 compared to the current year, unless Florida decides to boost doctors’ Medicaid rates or expand who can get Medicaid.

Next year, the amount will drop further still, to about $600 million, split 60-40 between the feds and the state. The letter from Vikki Wachino, director of the Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services, reminds Florida that the agency is holding firm to its stance that it will only provide uncompensated care funding for patients who couldn’t benefit from Medicaid expansion.

For those of you who don’t speak bureaucratese, that means the feds are only willing keep compensating hospitals for emergency room care for undocumented immigrants, who are forbidden from participating in the Affordable Care Act. Regular folks caught in the so-called gap are on their own — those who earn too little to enroll in Obamacare, but who cannot get Medicaid because Florida refused to give it to them in the wake of a U.S. Supreme Court decision that said the feds couldn’t force Medicaid expansion through the Affordable Care Act.

In a letter to his fellow senators, Senate President Andy Gardiner urged them to stay the course:

“It remains clear that a sustainable long-term solution is needed. As you are aware, the Senate has proposed a Florida solution that will promote the well-being of our constituents and protect the fiscal health of our state,” Gardiner wrote. “While we may not agree with every policy decision that comes from the federal government, I do agree that coverage, rather than backend supplemental payments, is a better investment for our taxpayers.”

Here’s the letter from the feds: