@Shahid_Akarim on Twitter

NEW HAVEN>> Latara McPherson’s then 19-month-old daughter wouldn’t correctly latch on to her breast to nurse.

But McPherson is trying to change that with a different approach with her 3-week-old baby.

“I used the nipple shield the whole time (with the older child) while I nursed her and I wanted to get away for that this time,” said McPherson, who has three children.

So McPherson joined the B.A.B.Y. Program at Yale-New Haven Hospital’s St. Raphael campus.

Advertisement

“I’ve heard great things about Irene (Cullash )and I wanted to come in and check out the group,” McPherson said.

The program launched three years ago to offer breastfeeding education to mothers for the first year of their baby’s life.

“Its free to moms and babies. Once the moms go home they should still be supported and the hospital should be the first place besides their pediatrician,” said Cullash, a lactation specialist.

“Any issues that come up along the way, they can get the help they need or come for just peer support and mother time with other adults who are experiencing similar issues,” said Cullash.

Cullash said babies are weighed, checked for jaundice and any feeding issues.

“We want to solve problems sooner, so they can breastfeed longer and more exclusively,” she said.

The sessions run from 11:30 a.m. to 1:30 p.m., Tuesday and Thursday and from 3 to 5 p.m. Sunday.

According to hospital staff, 10 to 22 moms attend an average session.

Mom Kate Bruce said she used a breast pump for four weeks after the birth of her child.

“I got very tired of using the pump and I came to group and Irene was able to get her to latch every time I came,” said Bruce, who is now volunteers her time helping other moms.

“I would nurse while here and still go home and pump; I think pumps are good for moms, but it can be tiring,” she said.

Bruce said her first two weeks home, her hormones took her through lots of changes.

“You’re sore and not prepared for that, but you get the help you need here,” she said.

Some of the challenges moms face when breastfeeding are: babies who have difficultly latching on, babies who gain weight slowly, issues when weaning from a nipple shield, and sore nipples, among others, said Kate Manuel, an advanced practice registered nurse and international board certified lactation specialist.

“Our B.A.B.Y. Program along with our breastfeeding class provide families with additional support and effectively promotes strategies to allow for more of our mothers to successfully breastfeed for as long as they desire,” said Manuel.

Among challenges in Connecticut, some women have been denied health insurance benefits that cover breastfeeding assistance, which violates the Affordable Care Act, according to a study by the National Women’s Law Center, as reported in a story by the Connecticut Health Team.

According to the study and story, Connecticut women have been denied coverage for breastfeeding counseling and education after two months following delivery, infertility treatments after the age of 40, sterilization procedures, emergency birth control, and maintenance care for such things as lupus, HIV, and hormones after breast cancer treatment. Coverage was also denied for transgender transitions.

The story noted that the state’s Insurance Department informed insurers to provide breastfeeding counseling coverage for an undefined postpartum period, according to spokeswoman Donna Tommelleo.

Mom Nakia Matheney sad breastfeeding services have been beneficial for her.

“At first I wasn’t going to breastfeed (her daughter Elise), because I heard how painful it was,” said Matheney, 22. “I tried it and didn’t like it, but I kept doing it and began to come to classes and talking to other women who helped me.”

Matheney said she encourages other young black mothers to breastfeed.

“It’s not enough black women breastfeeding. Some black women say they rather do formula, not realizing it’s much healthful for their baby,” she said.

Matheney believes the pain of breastfeeding, time and embarrassment are reason black women tend not to nurse.

According to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s most recent figures, 62 percent of black babies born in the U.S. in 2010 started breastfeeding, compared to 79 percent of white babies. After six months, 36 percent of black children were still being breastfed, compared to 52 percent of white children.

But McPherson, who also is black, said black women do need to seek more help when it comes to breastfeeding.

“Black women feed as much as other cultures do, I think the younger black women don’t,” she said. “We tend to look for family for advice or support, versus going outside of that circle.”

Other services offered by the Yale program include a couples class on breastfeeding and on going back to work while breastfeeding.

Free and reduced price classes are available to those who qualify for certain financial assistance.

For class information visit www.ynhh.org/events and choose childbirth education from the categories on the left or register by calling 203-688-2000 or toll free at 1(888) 700-6543.

Reach Community Engagement Editor Shahid Abdul-Karim at 203 680-9343.