Today in Obama

Ouch: As the ruble continues to crater and the Ukrainian crisis drags on, the White House announced President Barack Obama will bring some more pain to Russian President Vladimir Putin’s struggling economy. The president will sign legislation kicking in more economic sanctions, looking to force Putin to back down in Ukraine.

Double Ouch: Sen John McCain, R-Ariz., took to the floor today to blast Antony Blinken, Obama’s choice for a top State Department job, as “abysmally ignorant” about Iraq and Afghanistan and by far the president’s worst choice, ever, about anything: “He is not only unqualified but, in my view, one of the worst selections of a very bad lot that this president has chosen.”

Not Bristol Palin: Obama signed a memorandum banning oil drilling and exploration in Bristol Bay, Alaska – and let everyone know about it via a YouTube video on the White House channel:

Close Enough: Director Rob Marshall, via actress Emily Blunt, says he was inspired to make his latest film, an adaptation of the Tony Award-winning play “Into The Woods,” by a speech Obama gave during the 9/11 10th anniversary memorial service: “Obama said, 'You are not alone, no one is alone,' which is the lyric, the actual lyric word for word [from the show].” Only it doesn't appear to be what the president said, according to this transcript.

Dubious Achievement: Chris Cillizza of The Washington Post has weighed the evidence and concluded that, without a doubt, Obama had the Worst Year in Washington, “for losses at home and crises abroad.” Given what happened in the midterms, it’s hard to argue with Cillizza's logic.

Today in Torture:

No Girls Allowed: 9/11 mastermind Khalid Sheik Mohammed, who was allegedly waterboarded more than 100 times, is on trial at Guantánamo but facing a different kind of torture: being touched or escorted to court by female Gitmo guards, a practice against his religion.

Today in 2016:

Your Move, Jeb: No sooner had Jeb Bush announced he’s exploring a possible run for president than potential GOP competitor Sen. Rand Paul of Kentucky welcomed him to the party and spiked Bush’s drink. He took out a Google search ad on Bush’s name with a link to RandPAC, Paul’s leadership super PAC, and a solicitation for emails.

Glenn Doesn’t <3 Elizabeth: While progressives are mooning over the chances – slim and fat – that Sen. Elizabeth Warren, D-Mass., might challenge Hillary Clinton for the Democratic presidential nomination, don’t count Glenn Greenwald of The Intercept as among the starry-eyed. Greenwald triggered some ire by hitting Warren over her somewhat conventional stance on Israel.

Today in Hillary:

Franken Sense: DemocraticSen. Al Franken of Minnesota declared today that he’s ready for Hillary and heartily endorses her currently nonexistent campaign for the 2016 Democratic presidential nomination. Franken believes Clinton – who campaigned for him in his midterm re-election campaign – is good enough, smart enough and, doggone it, he likes her.

Today in Everything Else:

Bailed Out: Rep. Kevin Yoder, an obscure Kansas Republican, is making a name for himself in a way he’d probably prefer not to. He’s the legislator who inserted the language gutting the Dodd-Frank Wall Street reform bill into the "CRomnibus." But he’s been mum on why he did it.

Corrected on Dec. 19, 2014: This story has been updated to correct the spelling of Antony Blinken's name.