SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

On Breitbart News Sunday, Former Arkansas Governor and GOP presidential candidate Mike Huckabee said Americans must stand with Kim Davis, the country clerk who was jailed without bail for refusing to issue same-sex marriage licenses because doing so went against her Christian faith, to show that they are against the “criminalization of Christianity” and “judicial tyranny.”

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Speaking to guest-host Matthew Boyle on Sirius XM Patriot channel 125, Huckabee announced that he will attend a rally for Davis in Kentucky on Tuesday–he said that a number of churches are busing people to the rally and supporters from as far away as Virginia, South Carolina, and California will be in attendance.

“We need to show the country that not only do we stand with Kim Davis but that we stand against judicial tyranny,” Huckabee said. “You cannot stand by and have the criminalization of Christianity, which is essentially what we have sen when an unelected judge has not jailed, without bail, an elected official who was in fact doing her job, according to the Constitution of Kentucky.”

Huckabee noted that Jeffrey Dahmer, the Boston Strangler, John Wayne Gacy, and Al Capone all received bail but “Kim Davis–a country clerk in Kentucky who’s a Christian and, most ironically, she’s a Democrat–didn’t get bail.”

“If you can put a county clerk in jail and hold her there without bail… if this can happen to her, who’s next?” Huckabee said. “Your pastor? The president of a Christian school? The chancellor of a Christian university? Who’s next?”

Huckabee also emphasized that this is not an “isolated incident.”

“This is what many of us said was going to happen when you start having the courts decide something that violates not only the conscience of a great many people but violates common sense,” he said, emphasizing that the high court’s same-sex marriage ruling was an act of judicial tyranny because they were “just making it up.”

He praised Davis for having “more courage than virtually anybody in Congress, more than most pastors standing at a pulpit on this Sunday day.”

“It’s remarkable, and what is essentially stunning about it is she’s a relatively new believer.” Huckabee said, noting that Davis has “only been a follower of Christ for the last four years” and by her own admission “she had many areas of her life that were not what they should have been… and when she came to Christ she really felt an extraordinary sense of grace and forgiveness.”

“Her conviction is stunning, inspiring, and it frankly puts most of us to shame,” Huckabee said, adding that that is “all the more reason to believe that God has raised up Kim Davis to be the representative because she is maybe one of the most unlikely people–a relatively new Christian, a country official in a small rural county in Kentucky and a Democrat.”

Huckabee also said he was “stunned that people think that the courts can make a law.”

“The court doesn’t have the constitutional authority to make law,” he said.

Huckabee cited St. Augustine, who said that an “unjust law is no law at all,” which as Huckabee noted was repeated by Martin Luther King in his Letter From a Birmingham Jail, and noted that Thomas Jefferson warned against judicial tyranny “if we allow the courts to be the final arbiter of what a piece of legislation was.”

“And that’s what we have today,” he said. “We have judicial tyranny with the courts just making it up.”

Huckabee asked if the Supreme Court had ruled 5-4 against same-sex marriage, “do you think the left would be saying it’s the law of land, let’s shut the Human Rights Campaign down… and we’re not going to protest and we’re not going to ask for it anymore because that’s the final word?”