John McAfee: We Need Chinese Approach to Cybersecurity

McAfee says United States is in the Stone Age

By: Elias Atienza

Libertarian Party presidential candidate John McAfee has advocated for a Chinese approach to cybersecurity in a recent interview with CNN, where he also dismissed Hillary Clinton’s call for more surveillance, Donald Trump’s call for torture of terror suspects, and Ted Cruz’s call for patrols of Muslim neighborhoods.

McAfee said they “missed the point” by focusing on monitoring individuals instead of foreign nations with sophisticated cybersecurity systems before blasting the United States for having an outdated cybersecurity strategy.

“We are blinded in our history in what used to work. It no longer works,” McAfee said. “The digital age has changed the paradigm.”

McAfee called for a complete overhaul of U.S. cybersecurity systems.

According to CNN,

“I wouldn’t care if the entire country of Syria came here, if we had the cybersecurity system in place,” McAfee said. McAfee said his preferred system would detect terrorist plots before they can go into effect. “If we had a coherent cybersecurity policy, we would’ve known about this the moment it was hatched,” McAfee said, advocating for what he called the Chinese approach to national security.

“It would be impossible to hatch a plan against the Chinese,” McAfee said. Having so much data in the hands of the government would seem counter to libertarian ideals. McAfee, however, disputes this. He argues the policy wouldn’t be a violation of American citizens’ privacy because it would be focused outside of the country. McAfee did say that his system would be “difficult to explain” in the interview. In a recent op-ed for Business Insider , McAfee wrote that China was “capable of gathering all inputs prior to encryption and capturing screen shots after data has been decrypted” and “don’t care what encryption techniques are used.”

McAfee writes:

How does China achieve such dramatic results compared to the US? The answer is through a brilliant application of the foundation upon which digital science rests – mathematics. One of the most powerful tools of intelligence gathering in this new age of digital communications is a nearly forgotten field of mathematics called “Point Set Topology”.

He continues, “It would be better to subcontract our security to the Chinese, eat crow and swallow our pride, until we can stand on our own as a nation in this sea of cyber security chaos which we are clearly incapable of navigating.”

McAfee has been extremely critical of U.S. cybersecurity and has made it a primary focus of his campaign.