Rahim Moore entered last season seeking redemption. The safety exited thankful to be living, the foot-long scar on his left leg a reminder of a chilling episode that ended his season Nov. 18.

When the Broncos reassemble Thursday for the start of training camp, Moore will appreciate the fresh start even more than teammates who were thrashed 43-8 by the Seattle Seahawks in Super Bowl XLVIII.

The start of camp represents the first day of the rest of his NFL career, an opportunity to play a critical role on a revamped Denver defense that replaced its dentures with fangs.

Moore cried on the first day of minicamp last month, another mile marker on his road back from compartment syndrome.

“I was a little teary-eyed. I felt like it was my first time ever playing football,” said Moore, who put his jersey on backward and forced his arm through the wrong hole as he headed to the field.

With Moore in the fold, the Broncos could have seven different starters from the defense that faced the Seahawks. After the Broncos’ final organized team activity last month, Moore lingered on the practice field, absorbing the moment. He talked on the phone for several minutes, then walked off with a smile.

“I am looking forward to getting back out there again (with pads on),” Moore said. “I have had no (residual) issues because of the injury.”

The resiliency of athletes rarely disappoints, yet Moore’s return warrants attention. His injury was so serious, it represented a bigger hurdle than surrendering a Hail Mary touchdown pass to the Baltimore Ravens in the playoffs of the 2012 season. The touchdown pass stung. Moore wore the mistake, addressing waves of reporters after the Broncos lost. He walked out of the locker room facing mental demons.

It’s something else entirely when you wonder whether you’re going to play — or walk — again. Moore’s frightening journey began Nov. 18 against the Kansas City Chiefs. Moore, a third-year pro from UCLA, believed he was poised to finish the season with a flourish. Instead, he limped off after just a few series with needling pain in his left calf.

He was confused because it didn’t occur from a hit, figuring it was cramping or dehydration. After a postgame dinner with his family, the pain returned with ferocity. Moore rushed to a hospital, where doctors diagnosed him with compartment syndrome, an exercise-induced muscle and nerve condition that causes swelling. Moore’s pain was acute, typically associated with an automobile or motorcycle accident. It required emergency surgery to remove fascia and release pressure. Doctors estimated he was only 12 hours from amputation, and perhaps a day from jeopardizing his life. It wasn’t until three months later that he believed he could resume his NFL career.

“I was in Florida running hills and doing sand work,” Moore said. “I wanted to get my strength back up and I realized from my first run, I got up the hill with no problem. Then I started doing some change-of-direction type of stuff. The process was tough, because I had to get my strength back up. But at the end of the day, my quickness and my speed was still there. I was very surprised, to be honest with you. I didn’t know how I was going to be.”

Denver defensive coordinator Jack Del Rio remains encouraged. He had never heard of Moore’s injury when he addressed the media in November. His eyes tell him that Moore is right again.

“To go through what he went through, obviously it was a scary situation,” said Del Rio, who uses Moore as a reminder for players to communicate openly with the team’s training staff. “Greek (Broncos trainer Steve Antonopulos) was obviously on top of it. The doctors did a great job and he’s back at full strength. We are glad to have him back.”

Moore serves as a strong complement to new strong safety T.J. Ward. Ward represents a classic thumper, the team’s first at safety since Brian Dawkins, and Moore possesses athleticism to cover a variety of receivers and routes.

“Rahim is a young, smart, talented player. He works hard. He is very hungry,” Ward said. “He got hurt last year, and you can tell he is trying to bounce back from that and have a great season this year.”

The scar remains. The pain is gone, replaced by the ache to be a key contributor again.

“I believe we’re going to be very special (secondary),” Moore said, “but we’ve got to put the work in.”

Troy E. Renck: trenck@denverpost.com or twitter.com/troyrenck