House Speaker John Boehner threatened to sue President Barack Obama last week over the Iran nuclear agreement.

Boehner said the president did not disclose every piece of the accord to Congress as required by law and that a lawsuit over the deal is “an option that is very possible.”

“If you read the provisions in [the congressional review law], it’s pretty clear that the president has not complied,” Boehner said during his weekly press conference Thursday. “Because it makes clear that any side agreements and any other type of an agreement—including those that do not directly involve us—must be turned over as part of it. I do not believe that he’s complied.”

In question are two secret agreements between Iran and the U.N.’s International Atomic Energy Agency allowing Tehran to inspect its own nuclear sites. Reportedly, no one beyond the negotiators involved has seen the text of these agreements, including Obama and Secretary of State John Kerry.

Republicans contend that the side deals violate the Iran Nuclear Agreement Review Act, which was passed unanimously in the spring and required Obama to hand over all of the documents associated with the deal to Congress, including agreements “entered into or made between Iran and any other parties.”

Dan Holler, the communications director for Heritage Action, said the process under the review act has been a “complete failure” in allowing Congress to “reassert” its constitutional authority.

“The House’s refusal to go along with that process is encouraging, though lawmakers will need to do more if they want to rein in this administration,” he said.

Boehner vowed to leave all options on the table, describing the accord as “worse than anything I could’ve ever imagined.”

“This debate is far from over and, frankly, it’s just beginning,” Boehner said. “We will use every tool at our disposal to stop, slow and delay this agreement from being fully implemented.”

The House will vote later this week on a bill condemning Obama for not transmitting the side agreements to Congress.

House members will also cast an up-or-down vote approving the agreement Thursday or Friday, but Senate Democrats have already ensured the deal’s passage after blocking a Republican-led resolution of disapproval last week.

Congress has until Sept. 17 to vote on the accord before it is implemented.

White House spokesman Josh Earnest brushed aside Boehner’s threat to sue Obama, saying, “We obviously feel quite confident in our ability to move forward with the rest of the international community,” according to the Associated Press.