Topics: Breitbart, CNN, darren wilson, Ferguson, Media criticsm, michael brown, Rush Limbaugh, News

It seems the entire conservative universe has come to the conclusion that a recording released by CNN that claims to capture the sound of the gunshots that killed Michael Brown is a hoax.

This rush to judgment comes from the very same people who have decried what they claim has been a rush to judgment of the shooter, Ferguson police officer Darren Wilson. What is their evidence that the recording is a hoax? Well, it’s two “experts” who haven’t analyzed the audio who told a CNN morning show host that they have a feeling it might be a hoax.

And as usual, that was all the conservative media needed to start pushing half-truths and complete nonsense into the national conversation.

Once again, they seem completely wrong. Let’s review how it all happened:

It starts when CNN’s Michaela Pereira asks a former Los Angeles police officer named David Klinger whether the audio recording, on which 10 or 11 shots can be heard, was authentic.

“I have no idea,” he replied. “I’ve told your producers that for all I know this is something that one of Howard Stern’s punk people have been doing … I don’t have a high degree of confidence in it … I look at this and my first inclination is that someone is trying to punk CNN.”

CNN law enforcement analyst Tom Fuentes appeared to agree.

“When I heard this yesterday I thought the exact same thing,” Fuentes said. “It’s a hoax.”

It’s important to note that both men made it clear that they had no way of actually knowing if the recording is authentic or not. Both said it could well be authentic, but that they had no way to know. The FBI is analyzing the recording now, and has interviewed the man who made it. He has chosen to remain anonymous, but according to his attorney, Lopa Blumenthal, he inadvertently recorded the gunfire during a video chat session.

In reporting the existence of the recording, CNN was careful to say that they “cannot independently verify the authenticity of the tape.” If the FBI verifies that the recording is authentic, it will be an important piece of evidence in reconstructing exactly what transpired on the afternoon that Ferguson police officer Darren Wilson shot and killed an unarmed Michael Brown. Particularly important: On the recording, a volley of five or six shots in quick succession can be heard, then a pause of three seconds, followed by another volley of four or five shots. The three-second pause could indicate Wilson had some time to think before firing the final shots, the last one believed to be the shot to the top of the head that killed Brown.

Despite the uncertainty, the conservative blogosphere quickly latched onto the comments of Klinger and Fuentes to cast doubt on the authenticity of the tape. On the Breitbart website Big Journalism, John Nolte chose to concern troll with a side of dog whistle under the headline “CNN NOW WORRIED FERGUSON SHOOTING AUDIO IS HOAX,” though nobody at CNN has said any such thing.

“Even if the audio ends up being authentic, the fact that CNN is now concerned over its authenticity and laying the groundwork to claim they were always skeptical, tells you how irresponsible the network is,” Nolte wrote.