The use of “physician extenders” has become more popular in Fort Smith health clinics over the past few years, and some say a necessity to cope with increased health care demand.

An increase in access created by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010 and the Medicaid expansion in Arkansas known as the private option have created more need for physician extenders. Also known as “mid-level providers,” nurse practitioners (NPs) and physician assistants (PAs) extend the reach of physicians by freeing them up for more specialized health care like surgery.

“Where nurse practitioners are really helpful to health care is with common problems,” Nina Copeland, APN, FNP-C at Johnson Dermatology said. “Where we are helping heath care is we’re seeing all those common problems, which is giving physicians more time to see the more complicated problems.”

Nurse practitioners are licensed and physician assistants are certified health-care providers. There are 2,176 advanced practice registered nurses in Arkansas as of June 2014, the latest data available from the Arkansas State Board of Nursing. That’s 320 more than in 2010.

Copeland’s cohort at the clinic, Honey Schaumburg, PA-C, says she sees about the same number of patients as the doctor per month — about 800. She is able to free the doctor up for more complicated cases.

Education of what PAs and NPs can do is needed sometimes, Copeland said, but once patients are informed they are less resistant. At her blog, www.theskinnyonskin.net, Copeland dishes out the details on just exactly what she and other nurse practitioners such as herself do, and what they don’t do.

“We don’t want to replace doctors,” Copeland writes. “We need physicians to be able to practice at our highest level. Each practice uses physician extenders in different capacities … Dr. Sandy (Johnson) manages the difficult medical issues and Honey and I are more expert with common dermatology issues such as acne or warts.”

PAs get a bachelor’s degree, a master’s degree and then are tested for certification by the National Commission on Certification of Physician Assistants. NPs are registered nurses who have a bachelor’s degree in nursing, a master’s degree and are licensed by a state board in which they work.

There are a number of different kinds of NPs, including registered nurse anesthetists, midwives and nurse specialists.

“There are some patients that don’t quite understand what we do, but for the most part after we explain to them that we both have medical degrees and are licensed providers and we can both do these things they want us to do, then they are more open to it,” Schaumburg said.

It’s a matter of “getting over the unknown,” Copeland said. For the most part, Schaumburg adds, patients feel like they get to spend more time with the physician extenders and the patient is not necessarily just rushed through the office.

Valued Provider

Mercy Clinic Fort Smith has 41 physician extenders, with 31 NPs and 10 PAs.

“There is a significant shortage of physicians here in the River Valley and the entire nation,” Dr. Cole Goodman, president of Mercy Clinic Fort Smith, said in an email. “As a result, Mercy Clinic uses advanced practice registered nurses and physician assistants in our clinics. Using these highly valuable physician extenders is the only way we are able to meet the health-care needs of the population in the River Valley.”

Donna Bragg, Sparks Health System’s communications director, said they have seen an increase in physician extenders. No exact numbers were available. Cooper Clinic has four NPs.

Arkansas and Mississippi have the fewest physician assistants in the nation, but in the past two years both states had the highest percentage growth in the field.

According to the National Commission on Certification of Physician Assistants’s most recent statistical profile, there were approximately 74,777 certified PAs at the end of 2009. The profession grew 36.4 percent over the next five years reaching 101,977 certified PAs at the end of 2014.

Mississippi and Arkansas experienced the highest percentage growth between 2013 and 2014, 25 percent and 17.8 percent respectively. More than 104,000 physician assistants have been certified by the national commission since 1975.

As seen on the American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons website, athletic trainers are moving from the sidelines to the doctor’s office to fill the demand.

“These days, you’re just as likely to find an athletic trainer (AT) in an orthopaedic exam room—taking a patient’s history or applying a cast—as in a sweaty locker room,” Carolyn Rogers writes. “With a growing number of orthopaedic surgeons seeking to enhance their practices through physician extenders, certified athletic trainers are stepping up to the plate.”

The role of physician extender in the orthopaedic setting has expanded in recent years to include physical therapists, and athletic trainer.

“Because physician extenders tend to be less rushed than surgeons, they have more time to spend with patients— often resulting in happier patients, greater productivity and increased practice revenue,” Rogers added.

Broadened Scope

The National Institute for Health Care Reform has called for the scope of practice for nurse practitioners to be broadened to account for the increase in access now offered by mandatory health insurance.

“One possible approach to alleviating pressures on the primary care workforce is greater use of nurse practitioners and physician assistants, which could both increase the number of primary care providers and potentially free up physicians to care for more complex patients,” the institute’s website states.

To improve the scope of practice for NPs, the Arkansas General Assembly in its most recent session approved a law that allows the state’s nurse practitioners and physician assistants to prescribe the Schedule II narcotics with hydrocodone.

The nurse practitioner or physician assistant must have a collective practice agreement with their oversight physician and be approved by both the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration and the Food and Drug Administration as well as the board of nursing.

To combat overuse of the drug, the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration had moved hydrocodone from a Schedule III to a Schedule II in October 2014.

State Rep. Justin Boyd, R-Fort Smith, a pharmacist, cosponsored the recent legislation because he said there was a fear that people who legitimately need and do not have access to the pain medication create a demand for black-market prescription pills and heroine.

Recognizing the theft of prescription medication from homes, hydrocodone has a street value of $1 per milligram, which translates to higher cost than cocaine, Boyd said.