February marks the two-year anniversary of the adoption of Colorado’s groundbreaking rules aimed at reducing methane emissions from the oil and gas industry. If imitation is the sincerest form of flattery, Gov. John Hickenlooper — who championed the rules and won the support of environmentalists and energy producers alike — should be blushing.

In recent weeks, Pennsylvania (the nation’s second-largest gas producer) and California (the third-largest oil producer) have both launched similar efforts to regulate oil and gas methane emissions. The Federal Bureau of Land Management is also moving forward with a methane rule that would tamp down on emissions from operations on federal and tribal lands.

In each of these cases, the officials are taking a key page from the Colorado book, requiring companies to find and fix methane leaks at the thousands of oil and gas wells and other equipment that are already up and running, not just facilities that will be deployed in the future. Unfortunately, the importance of addressing existing sources of pollution instead of just future sources hasn’t taken hold with one of the most important players on the issue.

Last August, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency released a draft proposal to target methane emissions from newly developed oil and gas facilities. But because the EPA leaves out existing polluters, it misses the mark on the greenhouse gas reductions the nation is striving to achieve.

In short, the EPA can learn a lot both from the BLM and leading states such as Colorado, Wyoming, California and Pennsylvania. Like Colorado, the regulators in these leading states and the BLM understand that regulating existing sources is a proven, cost-effective way to address climate change, improve air quality, reduce waste and increase operational efficiency without undermining the economic benefits oil and gas production generates for communities.

These measures enjoy strong support from the public. As the BLM moves to finalize its proposal to reduce methane leaks, excessive venting and flaring practices from new and existing drilling operations on federal and tribal lands, polling demonstrates that more than 80 percent of Westerners support these efforts.

Due to the narrow focus of the BLM proposal and the existing source loophole of the EPA proposal, the administration is at risk of falling short of its goal of reducing 40 to 45 percent of oil and gas methane emissions over the next decade. In fact, with current efforts, we’re unlikely to get more than 14 percent reductions across the country because the facilities and equipment that currently put more than 7 million metric tons of methane pollution in the air every year would be virtually untouched.

The job of controlling emissions can’t be left to the states alone. There are more than 10,000 oil and gas companies operating in over 30 states, most of which don’t have strong rules and have no intention of adopting any. Consider Texas, the leading producer of oil and gas — and, not coincidentally, the leading supplier of methane emissions, contributing to about a third of our nation’s total. The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality has said that it has no plans to take on methane and even continues to question the science of climate change.

Between Colorado, California, Wyoming and the BLM, the American West has emerged as a champion of cleaning up the oil and gas industry. These agencies have proven that clean air and responsible energy development can co-exist. Regulating existing sources of methane pollution is a concrete way to deliver on both.

In the quest to combat climate change, we need every level of government to do its level best to reduce methane emissions from the oil and gas sector. We can’t afford to have the EPA sitting on the sidelines while leading states and the BLM wage the existing source battle.

Dan Grossman is the national director of state programs for the Environmental Defense Fund’s oil and gas work.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.