Print Email Font Resize Font Resize Boulder braces for world's largest Ironman Other cities cite economic impacts of between $7M and $9M

Laurie Allen, of Austin, Texas, finds space from the pack in the waters of Lake Coeur d'Alene shortly after the start of the Ironman triathlon swim June 29. (Shawn Gust/Coeur d'Alene Press) Race routes Full route maps: Click here Road closures: Boulder officials say they expect to announce Ironman road closures and detours for Aug. 3 by mid-July. Ironman Boulder fast facts More than 3,000 participants 70 percent from out of state 2.4-mile swim in Boulder Reservoir 112-mile bike ride on Boulder, Larimer and Weld county roads 26.2-mile run on Boulder Creek Path 6:20 a.m. professional start Midnight cutoff at the finish line Unexpected Ironman effects The race has had some unexpected effects on Coeur d'Alene, Idaho, a city of 46,000 just east of Spokane, Washington. Since Coeur d'Alene began hosting an Ironman triathlon 12 years ago, the town has gotten more health-conscious, which city spokesman Keith Erickson attributes, in part, to the race's presence. "We've got more bike trails, more biking events, more triathlons," he said. "It's a much more active community." In Panama City Beach, Florida, breakfast and brunch places see their business skyrocket the week before the Ironman. As participants prepare for the grueling race, they scarf down high-carbohydrate and high-protein meals. Advertisement "Our breakfast places go through the floor because (participants) eat tons of pancakes and grits and eggs," said city manager Mario Gisbert, laughing. In less than a month, thousands of athletes will be splashing through Boulder Reservoir, riding on county roads and running along the Boulder Creek Path for the city's inaugural — and the world's largest — Ironman triathlon. Though the up-to-18-hour race Aug. 3 will cause a few road closures and thick traffic for a few days, it's also expected to bring tourism dollars to the city as participants, their families and coaches eat, shop and pack into Boulder-area hotels. More important, a full-length Ironman triathlon — with its 2.4-mile swim, 112-mile bike ride and 26.2-mile run — reinforces Boulder's identity as a health-conscious, extremely athletic city, said Mayor Matt Appelbaum. When it was approved by the City Council last summer, many local athletes said a Boulder Ironman was long overdue. Boulder has been the site of a half-Ironman race for 13 years, but the upcoming full-length race sold out in less than a week almost a year ago. "Most Boulderites appreciate events like these," Appelbaum said. "There is always some impact, there's some upset, of course, whether it's the Bolder Boulder or a bicycle race or now the Ironman, but I think most people realize just how important this is for the city. "So many people are engaged in these activities and know people who are engaged in these activities. They don't just accept the fact that Boulder is the center of these things but enjoy that, revel in that. That's why a lot of people are here." Economic impact Though Mary Ann Mahoney, director of the Boulder Convention and Visitors Bureau, declined to speculate how much money Ironman will bring to the city, she said the event is unique from an economic standpoint. Roughly 70 percent of the more than 3,000 athletes registered to compete in the Ironman are from out of state, which means they'll likely do some spending in Boulder and along the Front Range, she said. Roughly 200 Ironman staff members will also travel to Boulder, and some of the 3,000 volunteers will come from out of state, Mahoney added. Race organizers also predict that each participant will bring two to four people as supporters, Mahoney said. "The support team will be there throughout the day of the race, but they'll also be enjoying Boulder for the three to four days as they lead into the Ironman," she said. Many athletes will arrive in Boulder about a week early to train at altitude, said race director Dave Christen. Professional triathlete Derek Garcia, of Coeur d'Alene, Idaho, celebrates at the finish line of the Ironman there last weekend. Garcia finished seventh overall with a total time of 8:57:57. (Tess Freeman/Coeur d'Alene Press) In its one-year agreement with Ironman, the city of Boulder has budgeted to spend up to $60,000 for the race, including the use of Boulder Reservoir, police services, barricades and cones. To see what Boulder gets out of the event, the Convention and Visitors Bureau will measure Ironman's economic impact this year. Only after the statistics come back will officials know if hosting a large event during an already-busy month is worth it for retailers, Mahoney said. "August is already traditionally a very busy month for tourism and travel in Boulder," Mahoney said. "We just need to establish our baseline to see what (the race )does. I think everybody is supportive, but it's like, 'Boy, it's August; we're already busy.'" 'On the map' At more than 3,000 registrants, the Boulder Ironman becomes the largest in the world, Christen said. Based on the economic impact of the race in other cities, Boulder can expect a boon for business in late July and early August. Panama City Beach, Florida, has been hosting Ironman since 1999. City officials have calculated that participants and guests check in to 3,150 hotel rooms and stay an average of six nights each. Direct out-of-state spending from race visitors to Panama City Beach is estimated to be almost $9 million. Because the race is held in November, during the off-season for tourism, city manager Mario Gisbert said it's welcomed with open arms. The city of 13,000 permanent residents in Florida's panhandle attracts spring-breakers in March and April and summer travelers in May, June, July and August, Gisbert said. Even though some residents may be a bit annoyed by street closures, most understand that Ironman brings in tourism dollars during a slow time. "If we have traffic during our off-season, that to most people is a success," Gisbert said. "The race itself close to doubles the population of our city." The Coeur d'Alene Convention and Visitors Bureau in Idaho, which tracks data for the city's annual June Ironman, estimates that each of the 2,500 race participants is accompanied by two to three others. They all stay an average of four nights in the area. Between hotels, dining and entertainment, the race has a $7 million impact on the economy, said Coeur d'Alene Convention and Visitors Bureau manager Katherine Coppock. Though there will always be a vocal minority who oppose having so many people flood the city, for the most part, residents are happy to have the tourism dollars, said city spokesman Keith Erickson. "There are going to be some of the people that don't like the influx of people downtown, but for the most part our community has embraced Ironman," he said. "The current contract is through 2017, and I wouldn't be surprised if we work together to get it extended. It really puts us on the map and gives us national, if not international, attention." For future tourism dollars, Coppock said it's important for volunteers to consider the impression they make on Ironman participants and guests. "(Volunteers) are the people that these visitors to town first meet, so being hospitable and helpful is something everyone strives for," she said. That may not be as true for Boulder, which already is a popular spot for travelers, outdoor enthusiasts, athletes and vacationers, Appelbaum said. "Will more people know about Boulder because of an event like this? Perhaps," he said. "As far as I know, people already know about Boulder anyway. I don't think, like some cities, we have events like this to put ourselves on the map. We're already on the map." 'International attention' Though it's still unclear what kind of effects Ironman will have on Boulder, many area hotels have been booked since last summer, and some participants are taking to Facebook and Craigslist to find other temporary housing situations, such as sharing a house or renting an RV. The Boulder Twin Lakes Inn, a few miles from the Boulder Reservoir, sold its last room for Ironman in January or February, said owner Binesh Prasad. Most people are staying for between five and seven days, he said. While August is already a popular time at the inn for running groups who train in Boulder, Binesh said the Ironman business will bring people back to the city the rest of the year. "People over time are going to want to keep coming and training and doing a lot of things," he said. "It's not just during the Ironman, but it's getting our name out there for the city. It's very important to do events like this because it brings international attention." Contact Camera Staff Writer Sarah Kuta at 303-473-1106 or kutas@dailycamera.com.