Derek Jeter’s cap from the All-Star Game earlier this month is among the newest items at the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum in Cooperstown, New York. (Photo: PHOTO BY MILO STEWART JR./NATIONAL BASEBALL HALL OF FAME AND MUSEUM )

Here are some questions and answers about the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum, with information provided by the institution:

So why Cooperstown?

This sleepy hamlet nestled between the Adirondacks and the Catskills in Central New York was chosen as the home for The National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum after a commission published a report stating that Abner Doubleday — a decorated Union Army officer who directed the first shot from Fort Sumter at the start of the Civil War and later served at the Battle of Gettysburg — invented baseball in Cooperstown in 1839.

And the truth is …

Doubleday was at West Point in 1839. It’s widely accepted that Alexander Cartwright developed rules in the 1840s that are the basis for the modern game. So while Cooperstown may not be the birthplace of the game, it represents the living, breathing spirit of the game for the 300,000 or so visitors who visit each year.

So what’s there?

Think of it as a giant warehouse for the historic, the notable, even the obscure. You will find everything from the helmet Hank Aaron was wearing when he hit his then-record 715th homer on in 1974 to the scorebook from a 33-inning Triple-A game between Pawtucket and Rochester to the jersey that 3-foot, 7-inch Eddie Gaedel wore for his only appearance for the St. Louis Browns in 1951. Even Joe DiMaggio’s locker from the 1941 season when he put together his 56-game hitting streak is on display.

So what’s new?

The Hall collected several items from the Dodgers-Diamondbacks season-opening series in Sydney, including the spikes worn by pitcher Wade Miley, who started the March 22 game for the Diamondbacks. More recently, the Hall acquired the spikes worn by the Angels’ Albert Pujols when he hit his 500th career home run on April 22, a game-used ball from Dodger pitcher Clayton Kershaw’s perfect game and hats worn by the Yankees’ Derek Jeter and the Angels’ Mike Trout from the All-Star Game earlier this month.

About Sunday’s induction ceremony

Fifty-six of the 66 living members of the Hall of Fame are expected to be in attendance, including former Yankee greats Yogi Berra and Whitey Ford, and Mets great Tom Seaver. Willie Mays, Johnny Bench, Sandy Koufax, Hank Aaron and Cal Ripken are just some of the others heading to Cooperstown to bear witness as Greg Maddux, Tom Glavine, Frank Thomas, Joe Torre, Tony La Russa and Bobby Cox are inducted.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1mPHG4G