Obamacare passes one-year anniversary but fresh US Supreme Court challenge looms

Updated

If the Australian Government warns its citizens not to travel to the United States without private health insurance, imagine what it is like for those who live there without it.

"Medical costs in the United States are ... extremely high," the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade's Smart Traveller website warns.

"A visit to a doctor in the US for even minor complaints can cost several hundred dollars, excluding laboratory tests or medication costs."

Magaly Zapata, an assistant nurse in Washington DC who earns $US9.50 an hour, said she was lucky her three now-adult children never really got sick while they were growing up.

"All the time I visited the doctor I have to pay the money from my pocket," she said.

"We'd go to the pharmacy and [get] medication over the counter - that's it."

But four years ago she slipped at work, hit her head and ended up in hospital with a $US7,000 debt she is still paying off.

"They took an x-ray, the doctor checked what happened with me," Ms Zapata said.

"They took an MRI with my head. The doctor said you can't work like that [for] two to three weeks because [my] knees [were] swelling, hands swelling and I was staying home.

"I'm making arrangements - paying monthly little bit, little bit."

Under Obamacare - president Barack Obama's healthcare reforms - Ms Zapata can get a monthly private health insurance plan worth $US499.97, for which she will pay just $US25.97.

"My heart is bumping more fast - this is something wonderful for me," she said, clearly emotional when she signed up.

Over 10 million Americans covered by Obamacare

More than 10 million Americans have medical insurance under the Affordable Care Act which came into effect at the end of 2013.

The president's health secretary said it was meeting its goals of access and affordability, and significantly, people with pre-existing health conditions could also no longer be denied health coverage.

Dr Linda Blumberg, an economist and former adviser to the Clinton White House who is now at the Urban Institute in Washington DC, said the program had cut the number of Americans without insurance by a third.

"The program put in place was not intended to cover everyone," she said.

What is Obamacare? Affordable Care Act was passed by Congress in 2010

Promised to help tens of millions of uninsured Americans get health coverage

Under the plan, people can buy cheap insurance on healthcare.gov

Most coverage will cost less than $100 per month

Policies vary according to person's income, location, family size and level of coverage desired

More than 10 million people now have medical cover under the laws

Number of uninsured adults reduced by 26 per cent

"It was not a universal coverage plan. Our best estimate is that with everyone participating and changing their behaviour and realising what's out there for them, that we would decrease the number of uninsured [people] in the US by half.

"Right now we think we are probably in the neighbourhood of decreasing it by about a third."

Ms Blumberg said it was a political failure that the US was "the only remaining developed nation that still has a large uninsured population".

"That's a failure of political will essentially here and an aversion to re-distributing income and relying on government programs," she said.

"This law provides a great framework but doesn't solve problems until we put more resources into it.

"In a large number of states people can be extremely low income and have no federal assistance available to them, even though the law intended that to be implemented across the country."

Low income for a family of four is defined as about $US24,000 per year.

A total of 19 mostly Republican states have decided not to carry out the full expansion of Obamacare which would have allowed those low-income people to get help.

The campaign to repeal Obamacare has stagnated, although the speaker of the House, Republican John Boehner, described the program as America's "biggest job-killer".

After the mid-term elections in November he said Obamacare was "hurting the economy and hurting middle-class families and hurting the ability for employers to create more jobs".

Last month the House passed a federal budget giving Obamacare full funding, but some Republicans are now backing a legal challenge in nation's highest court.

Four potentially fatal words

The Supreme Court challenge to the law to be heard in March could derail Obamacare entirely. It hinges on the words "established by the state".

Four residents of Virginia launched a case that argued the federal government could not pay subsidies to people if they received private health insurance in a state which did not establish its own Obamacare insurance exchange.

The exchange is a website which allows people to input their personal information and shop across a range of private health insurance plans to decide what they like and can afford.

The plaintiffs in the King v Burwell case are essentially arguing that the law as it stands allows for Obamacare subsidies to be paid only in states which have opted in to the law by running their own Obamacare insurance exchanges.

Thirty-six states do not have their own exchanges, and rely on the federal government for the service.

A lawyer representing several Republican senators who have joined the case as interested observers wrote in an online blog that "state is a defined term under the act and plainly does not mean the federal government".

The defendant, new health and human services secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell, disagreed, telling a press conference before Christmas that she believed the law was on the government's side.

But if the Supreme Court decides in favour of the applicants, Dr Blumberg said it would be "devastating" for coverage in those 36 states without exchanges.

"You would see many more people becoming uninsured again, and the financial burdens for buying insurance increases and the average premiums go up at the same time," she said.

"It could all unravel in those states, and then the big question is, if the clock is set back to the pre-Affordable Care Act days, does the law remain in the states where it is working or does political pressure to repeal it there become even stronger?"

Obamacare is certain to remain an issue for debate in a now Republican-controlled Congress from January 6.

Topics: world-politics, obama-barack, health-insurance, united-states

First posted