You may have noticed a tipping point in media coverage about retirement readiness in America: After a few years of dire headlines about the steep financial cliff looming for baby boomers walloped by the Great Recession, lately there have been variations on the it's-not-so-bad-after-all theme.

Which is true? Well, it depends on who you are. People 60 and over are sitting on more resources than younger Americans. But if you're a woman, single, a person of color, over 75, a resident in a costly housing market -- or any combination of these factors -- the risk escalates that your needs will exceed your means.

One cause for alarm, says Ramsey Alwin of AARP, is the level of debt many folks are carrying into retirement. Alwin is the "director of thought leadership for financial resilience" at the organization -- a sign of the shared sentiment that some fresh ideas are needed to make these numbers work.

Speaking Friday for a Grantmakers in Aging webinar, Alwin pointed out that when a new Census Bureau formula reflecting health care costs is applied, the share of U.S. elders in poverty goes from 9 to 15 percent. If this trend plays out, she said, "that means there will be more than 11 million older adults living in poverty by 2020."

The time-honored retirement benchmark of burning your mortgage is slipping away from us, it seems. More than 60 percent of households headed by someone 60 and older are carrying debt, Alwin said -- a median debt of more than $40,000.

"They're balancing the books on the plastic safety net," she said.

Even more precarious: 59 percent of older renters and 33 percent of older mortgage holders spend more than 30 percent of their income on housing.

"There's more to the story than those living in poverty," Alwin stressed. "And that is those living on the edge, one crisis away."

An uphill battle won

There was quiet celebration among aging advocates this week when President Barack Obama signed a reauthorization of the 1965 Older Americans Act, which serves one out of every five Americans aged 60 and older.

In the 10 years since the act was last authorized, this segment of our society has grown by about a third. As needs grew more pressing for meals and other services, funding remained flat. Now there is some hope -- since official status means everything in Washington -- that Congress will consider reviving some of the programs that were gutted while this legislation languished.

“The Older Americans Act affects everyone; our senior population, their families and caretakers, those that financially support our seniors and our economy in general," Pines of Sarasota CEO David Sylvester noted in a statement.

Follow Barbara Peters Smith on Twitter @BarbaraPSmith.