Count Peggy Jensen and her five kids as part of the good news of the latest jobs numbers this Labor Day weekend.

On Friday, U.S. unemployment dropped to 5.1%, the lowest since April 2008.

This was accomplished the old-fashioned American way that starts with good parenting and hard work.

Ask Jensen, 55, a Lindenhurst, L.I., mother of five kids who are all working. “I'm the office manager of Napco Heating and Cooling of Lindenhurst," she says. "All five of my kids have gone to college on subsidized loans and every one of those loans so far is already paid off. And all five of my kids have jobs."

Daughter Heather, 27, is a teacher in Bellmore, pursuing a master’s degree at Dowling College; Holly, 24, went to Plattsburgh State College and just landed a job with a major accounting firm in North Carolina; Jennifer, 22, studied to be a paralegal at Farmingdale State College and works for a matrimonial law firm in Commack; Jessica, 20, also attended Farmingdale and is working as a physician's assistant; and, Eddie, 18, studies heating, venting and air conditioning at Suffolk Community College and works in his field.

"It's an amazing feeling to have all five kids studying and finding work in the careers of their choice," says this proud mother. “Every one of them will start life with a clean slate, no outstanding loans, gainfully employed. It makes all my hard work worth it. I'm a very proud mom these days."

With the economy improving, President Obama has been on a roll. (YURI GRIPAS/REUTERS)

That's the kind of Labor Day story that built America. It is the story of the American Dream come true, proving that this country is still a place where a strong family structure that encourages hard work in school leads to good jobs in life in the professions of your choice.

"Three of my kids still live at home," Jensen says. “They all have a great foundation in life. They have their own pocket money. And they already know what they want to do in life and they don't worry about the future."

That sounds like the kind of America my parents crossed an ocean from Ireland to find in the early days of the last century. They passed Lady Liberty in the shimmering harbor, were processed through Ellis Island and raised seven American-born kids in a tenement and a housing project, working in a factory and a movie theater, putting an emphasis on education, and telling their kids that anything was possible in America if you were willing to work.

The same is still true for a mom like Peggy Jensen and her five kids in the early days of the 21st century.

“I was a stay at home mom until my last kid was old enough for me to go back into the work force," says Peggy Jensen. “I went back to work nine years ago to help pay my kids' way through college."

Looks like Obama has beaten Donald Trump to making America great again. (Richard Drew/AP)

With the economy improving, President Obama has been on a roll. The Affordable Care Act, providing medical coverage to some 16 million previously uninsured Americans, was upheld by the Supreme Court and is here to stay. Gay marriage became the law of the land under this administration, ending decades of bigotry. The Iran nuclear deal is poised to be approved by Congress as a major foreign policy accomplishment.

With the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq over, and terror kingpin Osama bin Laden dead, Obama has cleaned up most of the horrendous mess left by the Bush administration and has accomplished much of his presidential agenda.

Somehow we did all this without a ludicrous 1,900-mile wall on the Mexican border, without dividing families to deport 11 million undocumented immigrants, without embedding trackable microchips under the skin of tourists.

Looks like Obama has beaten Donald Trump to making America great again.