MCKINNEY, Texas, Dec. 9, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- Aging Baby Boomers, increasing healthcare demands, introduction of compulsory medical insurance rules of the Affordable Care Act and shortage of doctors paint a grim situation for healthcare in America. The healthcare industry is struggling to cope with these challenges. Keeping this scenario in consideration, Rey Colon, former partner and Chief Marketing Officer of AmeriDoc, a national telemedicine service provider, recently launched MyTelemedicine.com to help healthcare providers meet rising medical needs.

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20141208/162898LOGO

MyTelemedicine.com launched its website on November 15. At the launch, Rey Colon said, "To cope with today's healthcare demands, you need modern day healthcare solutions. This is the only way to fill the healthcare supply and demand gap. This is what MyTelemedicine.com aims to achieve. MyTelemedicine.com is currently in development of its secure and HIPAA-compliant cloud-based telemedicine platform. It is designed to connect healthcare providers with patients scattered across the U.S. using the latest telecommunication and video technology."

He further explained why and how investment in telemedicine technologies could help healthcare providers: "Telemedicine is revolutionizing the healthcare industry. The global telemedicine market grew from $9.8 billion in 2010 and is expected to triple to $27.3 billion in 2016. What's interesting, even those not related to the healthcare industry are also showing interest in telemedicine." Telemedicine is capturing the attention of employers, and with good reason. Including Telemedicine as part of a portfolio of group employee benefits has become an important healthcare cost containment tool. Telemedicine reduces office co-pays for employees and claim costs to the employer's group healthcare plan.

As a cloud-based solution, healthcare providers can offer 24-hour services remotely. This will help cope with the demands of the Affordable Care Acts mandatory insurance policy. Currently there are 48 million people without medical insurance, but these figures will fall drastically, which means more people will want to use their health benefits. Therefore, investment in telemedicine technology today makes sense.

About The Company

Cloud-based telemedicine service provider MyTelemedicine.com is headquartered in McKinney, Texas. MyTelemedicine.com has developed a proprietary, secure and HIPAA-compliant telemedicine platform that enables healthcare providers to consult with patients remotely. Physicians can perform on-demand consultations with members nationwide via telephone and video technology. Patients will be able to seek advice, recommendations and a diagnosis, which may include a prescription for common acute illnesses. The goal is to make quality and cost-effective care accessible to all. To learn more about MyTelemedicine.com please visit http://www.mytelemedicine.com

Contact

Shandra Warren

214-284-1209

Email

To view the original version on PR Newswire, visit:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/telemedicine-executive-launches-cloud-based-telemedicine-platform-300006634.html

SOURCE MyTelemedicine.com

Related Links

http://www.mytelemedicine.com