It's no wonder there's been so little outrage from the Left over the phenomenon known as the Knockout Game. The Left loves the game and is increasingly expert in knocking out conservative opposition with one swift and lethal blow to the head of any and all who oppose progressivism.

We on the right have seen a rapid succession of punches aimed at taking down everyone and everything conservative. Whether it is potential presidential candidates or conservative organizations like the Tea Party, the aim is the same. Go in from behind in packs and sucker punch the unwitting victims, using governmental entities such as the IRS, the DOJ, or state AGs to deliver the fatal strikes.

It's clear the end game has a dual purpose: Get potential presidential competitors out of the game and provide distractions from the deep and dangerous scandals afflicting the Obama administration. The attacks against "enemies" like the Tea Party also provide additional and convenient diversions that channel attention away from the disaster that is ObamaCare.

Let's take a look at just five examples of people and organizations that are on the knockout list:

Knockout punch #1: In Virginia, former governor Robert McDonnell, was indicted on federal corruption charges scarcely ten days after leaving office. The governor, who has just been released on his own recognizance, may have been blindly obtuse when he accepted gifts. But he firmly maintains he did nothing criminal. Be that as it may, fighting the charges will knock him out of the 2016 presidential race. He was seen as a potential GOP candidate.

Knockout punch #2 is aimed at the skull of New Jersey's Chris Christie, also seen as a frontrunner candidate for the presidency. The U.S. Attorney General has now inserted himself into the Bridgegate scandal, in which Christie has been accused of deliberately tying up traffic in order to get back at Democrat mayor Mark Sokolich, who did not endorse him for the governorship. Fighting the charges against him will take up most of Christie's time -- time he could have spent campaigning for the presidency. The knockout appears to have achieved a twofer, as Christie himself dismissed Bill Stepien, who had been seen as a prospective manager for the governor's 2016 possible presidential bid.

Knockout punch #3 is aimed at Mike Huckabee, who is falsely being accused of misogyny because he said, "For Democrats to reduce women to beggars for cheap government-funded birth control is demeaning to the women that I know who are far more complicated than their libido and the management of their reproductive system."

Jay Carney quickly deemed Huckabee's comments as "offensive." Look for Huckabee to be a knockout target, as he has also been cited as a potential candidate for the presidency. He will continually and incessantly berated by the Left as being "anti-woman." The hope is that no woman in America will even think of supporting him. If that were to be the case, he would be toast.

But you don't have to be a potential candidate for the presidency to be targeted. Democrat knockout gangs are roaming around looking for other potential victims.

One such potential victim is Dinesh D'Souza, target of Knockout punch #4. D'Souza has been charged with making illegal contributions via others and of making false statements. The leaders of the D'Souza knockout gang are the FBI and the U.S. Attorney for Manhattan, Preet Bharara, an Obama appointee who primly stated of D'Souza's supposed criminality, "As we have long said, this Office and the FBI take a zero tolerance approach to corruption of the electoral process."

Cough, cough.

Of course the fact D'Souza directed the very successful 2012 film, 2016: Obama's America, a work extremely critical of Obama, would have nothing to do with his indictment. Nor would punching him in the face have anything to do with interest in deterring the scheduled July 4th release of his next film. And the fact the FBI said it found no criminality in the IRS targeting of conservative organizations means its investigations into D'Souza's affairs are completely unbiased.

Knockout Punch # 5 is directed against the conservative Hollywood organization known as "Friends of Abe." The group is being harassed by the IRS after they applied for tax exempt status. The Heritage Foundation writes, "According to the Times, federal tax authorities have requested detailed information from the group about its meetings with several conservative politicians, including Representative Paul Ryan (R-WI) and former presidential candidate Herman Cain. Sources say the application has been under review for two years and that the IRS requested access to Friends of Abe's private website, which would have revealed member names."

This is the same trustworthy IRS that was given a clean bill of health by the FBI after revelations it has been harassing conservative groups seeking tax exempt status.

There's no doubt any knowledgeable conservatives could add to the "Knockout Punch" list. The number of the Left's knockout targets is simply too long to review in a short essay. Certainly the targets are diverse, as they include everybody and everything opposed to the Left's agenda. Targets include, but are not limited to the Catholic Church, "terrorist" evangelicals, parents who home school, owners of guns, dissenters in academia and on and on.

The list of the Democrats' potential victims is longer than the number of Don Juan's conquests, which in Spain alone numbered 1,003. That number probably pales in significance to the number of potential knockout victims on whose backs Democrats have a big bull's eye painted.

But in the meantime, conservatives of all stripes wonder where the indictments on the IRS targeting of conservatives are. They wonder why there have been no charges filed over the "Fast and Furious" scandal and the Benghazi debacle. They wonder why there have been no consequences for the outrageous actions and inactions of Harry Reid, Eric Holder or Kathleen Sebelius; why there has been no investigation of the Solyndra debacle and why there never seem to be any lasting and effectual investigations into our president's imperial ambitions and behavior.

But wondering aside, those on the right can see there's a clearly recognizable motive driving the Democrats' vicious targeting of conservative candidates for the presidency and conservative organizations in general.

It's called "vengeance."

Democrats are afflicted with it and are hell bent on exacting it.

Republicans should recall the words of Valerie Jarrett, who is often considered the brains behind the Obama administration:

"After we win this election, it's our turn. Payback time. Everyone not with us is against us and they better be ready because we don't forget. The ones who helped us will be rewarded; the ones who opposed us will get what they deserve. There is going to be hell to pay. Congress won't be a problem for us this time. No election to worry about after this is over and we have two judges ready to go."

Our president indicated his contempt for congress and a desire to bypass and get back at his opposition when he said, "I've got a pen and I've got a phone -- and I can use that pen to sign executive orders and take executive actions and administrative actions that move the ball forward." His statement is right in line with his "I won; you lost" mentality. Losers get ignored or punished.

Andrew Cuomo, for all his attempts to "contextualize" his recent comments about "extremist" conservatives, actually declared New York had no room for any who opposing his radical agenda. He said of those who were against his proposed gun control legislation: "Their problem is not me and Democrats. Their problem is themselves. Who are they? Are they these extreme conservatives, who are right to life, pro assault weapon, anti-gay. Is that who they are? Because if that is who they are, and if they are the extreme conservatives, they have no place in the state of New York. Because that is not who New Yorkers are."

Valerie Jarrett, President Obama, and Governor Cuomo: We get the message.

We understand the knockout game. We may even go down after a sucker punch to the head.

But we conservatives have a way of picking ourselves back up and continuing the fight. We will remain bloodied but not bowed. We will rise and fight again, not out of vengeance, but out of a deep love for our wonderful nation and for the principles on which she was founded.

We will fight for love of God, our fellow citizens and our country.

Love will trump vengeance every time.

Fay Voshell is a frequent contributor to American Thinker and other online publications. She may be reached at fvoshell@yahoo.com