Name: Bill Johnson

City of Residence: Marietta, OH

Party Affiliation: Republican

Office Desired: U.S. Representative

Facebook: facebook.com/BillJohnsonLeads

Twitter: @JohnsonLeads

Website: BillJohnsonLeads.com

Why should you be elected

I believe I’ve used my experience in the Air Force and as a small businessman to effectively serve as a strong advocate for the hardworking families of Eastern and Southeastern Ohio. I’ve had seven bills signed into law and am honored to represent Ohioans on both the influential House Energy & Commerce Committee and the Budget Committee.

I’ve used my experience to lead the fight against President Obama’s War on Coal, helping to push bipartisan legislation through the House that would stop it. I’ve authored legislation that has passed the House to push the Obama Administration to approve more natural gas export permits to help create more oil and gas jobs in Eastern and

Southeastern Ohio, and to serve as a geopolitical check on Russian, Iranian, and OPEC energy production.

My military experience gives me pause when looking at the world stage. The continuing threat of ISIS, and other terrorist groups, must be met head on, and the President’s refusal to assert American leadership on this issue has created a void that evil is filling. We need more people in Washington who have served in our Armed Forces, and who understand how vital American leadership is to protecting our national security.

I’m using my experience as a businessman to work towards reining in government spending while simultaneously pushing for a complete overhaul of America’s tax and regulatory policies.

I also support a measure that would ensure that Congress passes a budget, or else they don’t get paid. I support a balanced budget amendment. Obamacare costs continue to skyrocket. We have made some progress, but much more is necessary.

Top three priorities

1) National security. We must face the threats to our country both here at home and abroad and deal with them forcefully. The world continues to grow more unstable, and America must lead to protect our interests across the globe.

2) Jobs and the economy. America’s onerous tax code and regulatory framework make it hard for our job creators to create jobs and hardworking families to make ends meet. Both must be overhauled. Obamacare must be repealed and replaced, the war on coal stopped, and this Administration’s efforts to slow oil and natural gas development must end.

3) Taxes and spending. I’m committed to eliminating the IRS and replacing our tax code with something that is simpler, fairer, and flatter. This will help hard working families, and it will help make our government more efficient. This is an important step toward a balanced budget and getting a handle on our spiraling national debt.

Biography

Congressman Bill Johnson’s life and career have always centered around a commitment to hard work and making a difference in the community.

Born and raised on family farms, he learned early the values of hard work, honesty, and sacrifice. Those values have stayed with Johnson throughout his life and have made him the leader he is today.

Johnson entered the U.S. Air Force in 1973, and retired as a Lieutenant Colonel after a distinguished military career of more than 26 years, including serving as Director of the Air Force’s Chief Information Officer Staff at U.S. Special Operations Command.

Bill is also a proud recipient of the Air Force Meritorious Service Medal, the Air Force Commendation Medal, and the National Defense Service Medal. Following his retirement from military service, Johnson helped create two information technology consulting companies, and served as Chief Information Officer for a global manufacturing company headquartered in Eastern Ohio. He’s been active in his church and community.

He was first elected to Congress in November 2010, where he serves on the influential House Energy & Commerce and Budget Committees.

Bill Johnson resides in Marietta with his wife LeeAnn and son Nathan. Johnson is also the proud parent of three other successful grown children: Joshua, Julie, and Jessica, and he has six grandchildren.