Lisa Perry (Credit: Lisa Perry) 67 Main St., East Hampton; 631-324-7333, lisaperrystyle.com



Bam! That's the effect that designer Lisa Perry's goods have in this blazingly white space, where the stock includes vividly colored towels, swimwear, cover-ups, beach bags and her own seasonal collections. Perry, whose flagship store is on Madison Avenue, also sells Op Art-inspired tableware and created a capsule collection of Perry's favorite Manolo Blahnik shoes. Hot stuff, except for the cool, yummy PopBars (gelato on a stick) sold from a cart inside the store.

BLOW Hampton (Credit: BLOW) 2462 Main St., Bridgehampton; 631-537-8000, blowhampton.com



It's $40 for a blow-out at this new salon, and you get to choose from an adorable style menu with offerings ranging from "The Jen" (classic) to "The Gwyneth" (polished, smooth and sleek) to "The Blake" (beachy waves). "It's an affordable luxury," says owner Lila Beudert, who encourages folks to hang out coffee- house style, serves complimentary rose wine and plays "great music." Other services include up 'dos -- called "The Audrey," natch.

Bandier (Credit: Jennifer Bandier) 44b Main St., Southampton; 631-488-4304, bandier.com



Tired of the same old, same old when it came to workout wear, Jennifer Bandier stocked her new, year-round store with a curated and interesting selection of luxury, stylish, functional fitness clothing including Adidas by Stella McCartney, Norma Kamali, and Lucas Hugh. The store, sleek and clutter-free, boasts a leggings area ("they're the little black dress or denim of the fitness world," says Bandier), a bra bar and a selection of Nike Flyknit sneakers. Outside of the garb, there are funky, cool sunglasses by Etnia Barcelona and Beats by Dre headphones. Bandier says she wants her shop to be a place that "promotes a positive attitude. I might put up a sign that says 'Leave your negativity at the door.'"

ADVERTISEMENT ADVERTISE HERE

Peloton (Credit: Peloton) 53 Main St., East Hampton; 631-745-1379



It's out with the baubles, in with bikes at this space, formerly Tiffany & Co. (closed in April), where state-of-the-art stationary bikes feature smooth rides with an HD multitouch console that connects to your home WiFi to deliver live and on-demand studio cycling classes from the best instructors whenever you want. Along with the bikes, which sell for just under $2,000, the store will offer fitness and swim apparel from brands such as Beyond Yoga, VPL, Pret-à-Surf, and fun flip-flops from Havaianas. Also for sale, the thirst-quenching Jack's Stir Brew coffee and cold-pressed Pelotonic juice (peppery, lemony, healthy). Ahhh.

Cruciani C (Credit: Cruciani C) 28D Jobs Lane, Southampton; 631-204-5836, crucianic.com



Remember those old school macramé bracelets? At Cruciani C, they've bettered them, and now these colorful, delicate lace jobs have become a craze sported on the wrists of luminaries such as Beyoncé, who Instagrammed herself on vacation wearing them, and other fashionable types, including Heidi Klum, Rita Ora and Bar Refaeli. They sell here for $13-$30 and go higher (of course!) when gold and diamonds get into the mix. There's also a selection of bags and leather goods.

Zimmermann (Credit: Zimmermann) 27 Newtown Lane, East Hampton; 631-304-6291, zimmermannwear.com



Housed in a charming stand-alone cottage, the Zimmermann sisters' (Aussies Nicky and Simone) store showcases some of the best swimwear around. The aura here is casual, fresh and a touch urban, and the goods include cleverly printed bikinis and maillots, coquettish playsuits and airy dresses and skirts. There are shoes, too (sexy lattice booties), and accessories. All sweet with a hefty dollop of spice.

Samantha Drew Interiors (Credit: Samantha Drew Interiors) 88 Main St., Westhampton Beach; 631-941-4663, samanthadrew.com



This summer outpost of interior designer Michelle Mancuso's East Setauket store is a swell resource for freshening up your Hamptons home with colorful pillows, bedding, trays, napkins and candles. Or redo the joint -- you can actually leave with a couch, no waiting; they have a deep stock. The mix is eclectic. "We go from super mod to super traditional," says Mancuso.

DASH (Credit: Marjorie Robins / Newsday, Getty Images) 64 Jobs Lane, Southampton; dashboutiqueclothing.com



The trendy merchandise mix at this much-hyped Kardashian pop-up mirrors the other stores (Soho, L.A., Miami) and includes dresses, tunics and tops from Myne, Jen's Pirate Booty, Aryn K; Blank NYC jeans; swimwear brands Acacia and Eberjey; Sugar Bean and Jacquie Aiche jewelry and sunglasses from Wildfox and Dita. And just maybe Kourtney or Khloé Kardashian will assist you -- they're supposedly working at this 600-square-foot former art gallery this summer. Likely they'll have a film crew in tow.

ADVERTISEMENT ADVERTISE HERE

Letarte (Credit: Letarte) 60B Jobs Lane, Southampton; 631-204-5777, letarteswimwear.com



Aloha to Letarte, a small, classy swimwear boutique stocked with this Maui-based label that blends a tropical island vibe with global chic. They'll offer swimwear, sportswear, tropical-weight cashmere, after-sun skin care and Petite Letarte children's beachwear. The space will conjure the Hawaiian lifestyle with surfboards and coastal art.