2 graduates return to teach at their former school

Sadie Adney

STERLING — — Students at Sterling High School are saying hello to six new faces this year.

Sadie Adney

Sadie Adney is the new CAD/technology teacher.

She is SHS graduate herself and is now teaching at the same school her younger sister attends, but she doesn't have her in any of her classes.

After graduating from SHS, she went to Northeastern Junior College and graduated in two years with an associate's degree in general studies. Then she went to Colorado State University for two years and graduated this past May with two Bachelor of Science degrees in animal sciences and agriculture business.

Adney decided to come to back to Sterling, because she really wanted to come home and be an active part of the community she grew up in.

"When I heard of the opening to teach my favorite classes from high school - drafting, engineering and architecture - I jumped on the opportunity," she said.

While at CSU she couldn't wait to graduate and get out in the workforce. If she was unable to find a job, plan b would have been to possibly get her master's degree in education or animal science.

"I am very fortunate to have stumbled into such a perfect opportunity, where I can teach classes I was passionate about in high school and be involved in the northeast Colorado community," Adney said.

Her favorite part of teaching is community involvement and interacting with the youth.

Laura Clark

Laura Clark is a new special education teacher. She is a 1995 graduate of SHS.

Advertisement

"It is quite the feeling to be teaching at my alma mater," she said.

After graduating from SHS, she went on to the University of Phoenix, where she graduated with a Bachelor of Science degree in health care management, in 2007.

She isn't totally new to RE-1 Valley School District, having taught at Ayres Elementary since August of 2008.

Clark has a son in sixth grade, Brayden, and her husband, to whom she has been married for 14 years, is employed with the Logan County Sheriff's Office.

"Sterling is home to us," Clark said.

Since she was 17 years old, she dreamt of being a teacher. She credits Barb Nelson, a retired RE-1 teacher, for helping to guide her towards a teaching career.

"I guess one could say, I am finally fulfilling my childhood dream," Clark said.

Her favorite part of teaching is "seeing my students smile, be successful and (to) know at the end of the day I gave them everything I had."

"I love to see their successes, celebrate those successes and help them with their sadness."

When not teaching, she loves to read, spend time with her family, including her nieces and nephews and spend time on her parents' farm.

Kassandra Kinney

Kassandra Kinney

Kassandra Kinney is the new agriculture teacher.

She grew up in Colorado and Arizona and was very active in 4-H and FFA. After graduating high school, she went junior college at Clarendon College, in Texas, and then transferred to CSU. While in college, she participated in meats and livestock judging.

Last spring she student taught at Peetz School and graduated from CSU with a bachelor's degree in animal science and animal education.

Kinney decided to come teach in Sterling, because "I really like the area and the people."

She was inspired to go into teaching by an "awesome" ag teacher she had in high school.

"He had a way of figuring out what people's gifts were and how to get them to realize how talented they were. He certainly made a difference in our lives. It is my hope that I will be able to do that for students," Kinney said.

Her favorite part of teaching is sharing her experiences in agriculture, as well as learning from her students' experiences.

"I learn just as much from them as they do from me," Kinney said.

She would like to grow upon the legacy that the SHS ag program has already started.

"I would like to see this program to continue to become more involved in and give back to the community," Kinney said. "Additionally, I would like this program to remain as competitive as they have been in the past."

Aaron Lambertson

Aaron Lambertson is also a new special education teacher.

He grew up in Akron. After graduating from high school, he went to Mesa State College, now Colorado Mesa University, for three years and then transferred to Evangel University in Springfield, Mo., where he was a two sport athlete and honored with a Major of the Year award nationally.

Lambertson decided to come teach in Sterling, because it's "a great supportive community that is close to home."

"I saw the potential of students from the outside looking in and wanted to be part of it."

Lambertson wanted to go into teaching because it is a powerful position to lead students on a better path for their future well being.

"I believe every student has more potential in them than is portrayed. I want to help develop the potential of each student and continue a mentor relationship with them," he said.

His favorite part of teaching is creating a relationship between lessons learned in education and real life situations.

"Whether it is being on time for class that correlates with being on time to work or appointments, all the way to the other end of the spectrum, of developing a trusting relationship between student and teacher or employee/boss to client," Lambertson said.

In addition to his teaching responsibilities, he is also the head baseball coach and assistant football coach for the Sterling Tigers.

Kirk Smock

Kirk Smock, who has helped coach the Tigers softball team for the last three years, is expanding his role with RE-1, as a new PE and special education teacher at SHS. He will also help coach baseball later this school year.

"It's been a big part of my life," he said about coaching. An athlete himself, he played one year of college baseball and he's also played on fast-pitch softball and basketball teams.

As he got older, he decided to start coaching.

"I like the kids. I enjoy the athletic part of it a lot," Smock said.

Prior to coming to teach at SHS, Smock spent four year's at Kidz Ark, before it closed. He also taught for 18 years at Peetz School and in Brush for several years. For the last two to three years he's been doing construction work.

He had been looking for teaching jobs in the area and when he found out about the position at RE-1 he decided to apply.

Smock decided to go into teaching, because being into athletics, being able to have the summer off was appealing.

"I really enjoy the kids though too," he said. "They're fun to be around, they keep you young. Hopefully I'm doing a good job with them, made a difference in their life."

The other new face is Brenda Kloberdanz, a special education teacher.

For more on RE-1 Valley School District's new teachers see Monday's Journal-Advocate.

Contact Journal-Advocate staff writer Callie Jones at 970-526-9286 or cjones@journal-advocate.com