Stars are not role models.

If you didn’t know that before this week, the news that Bill Cosby is an alleged serial rapist should finally put to rest the notion that we can expect celebrities to be good influences on our children. If you can’t even depend on “America’s dad,” then there’s no public figure you can trust.

That doesn’t mean you and your kids can’t watch “The Cosby Show” in reruns. TV Land may have cancelled them, but don’t feel guilty about ordering them on Amazon. With all of the bad reality TV and unfunny, inappropriate comedies on primetime television these days, “Cosby” stands out as one of the best, most wholesome bits of pop culture left. I, for one, will be happy to let my kids watch the Huxtables till they are ready for college.

It’s not because I don’t believe Bill Cosby is guilty of multiple felonies. The evidence on that front looks pretty damning. It’s just that Hollywood and professional sports are filled with jerks, narcissists and criminals. Maybe among celebrities the proportion of rapists and child abusers is the same as in the rest of the population. But it certainly seems a lot higher. We must separate what happens on the field or in fiction from real life, otherwise we’d need to boycott popular entertainment all together.

Perhaps it is a natural inclination to assume that the folks we “spend time with in our living room” each week are actually people we know. And it is certainly true that our celebrity culture has a way of encouraging this. Magazines like Us Weekly and People, websites like TMZ and even shows like “Dancing with the Stars” pretend to show us what actors are like “in real life.”

We want pictures of them without makeup, showing a tiny bit of fat, caught unawares by a camera on the beach. But this too is all part of the façade.

But whether they are news anchors or actors or contestants on “The Biggest Loser,” what celebrities have in common is that they are people we do not really know.

When I allow one of my kids to watch a television show, it is not because I am endorsing the moral qualities of the people in it. They are nothing more than a collection of colored pixels and we can make them disappear anytime we want. Like magic.

If, when my kids get older, they ask me about the behavior of Bill Cosby or anyone else they see on screen, I will explain that though it’s OK to cheer for a team or enjoy an actor’s movies, stars are not people we should look up to.

Which is depressing. The unwritten social contract used to be that the people who were lucky enough to make millions in acting or sports would show a certain amount of humility, charity and moral fortitude. We didn’t expect perfection, but we at least hoped they would try to be someone worthy of the worship of children.

That has slowly eroded away, at least since Charles Barkley starred in a 1993 commercial in which he defiantly declared, “I am not a role model.” Scandals used to be covered up; now Charlie Sheen goes on tour with them.

Other celebrities and athletes even have complained about expectations, arguing that being a good person should not be their responsibility just because they are rich and famous.

Well, no, you should be a good person just because it’s the right thing to do. But if you have won life’s lottery, and you’re Ray Rice the running back or Woody Allen the director, is it really too great a burden to imagine how your behavior will influence your fans?

Apparently so. A-Rod, Kobe, Tiger . . . why did Derek Jeter elicit such an emotional response at his farewell? Not just because of what he did on the field, but what he didn’t do off of it. I worry we will never see his like again.

Therefore, celebrities, you win. Your decades-long revolt against being role models has come to an end. Whether you’re in a boy band or a third baseman, it’s up to us, the parents, to teach our children the hard truth: You’re bound to be disappointed.

Parents seeking role models for their children should consider looking to people they actually know. They may never be as funny as Bill Cosby is, but at least we have a good shot at understanding what they’re about before we let them get into our kids’ heads.