Yadira Castillo was pulled over for not having her lights on as she was driving home from her waitress job in Denver three years ago. Because she was a suspected undocumented immigrant and could not produce identification, a deputy handcuffed her and she was booked into the Aurora Detention Center.

Even though Castillo wasn’t charged with anything but a minor traffic infraction, she spent nearly 48 hours behind bars before Immigration and Customs Enforcement decided to release her. She suffered a miscarriage a week later and blames it on the stress of her incarceration.

“I didn’t know I had rights, and that they had violated those rights,” the 34-year-old Castillo, who has lived in the United States without legal status for 15 years, said recently.

Cases such as Castillo’s have been the impetus for a change that has spread across Colorado in recent weeks.

The Aurora Detention Center is now one of 16 jails in Colorado refusing to honor ICE requests to detain suspected undocumented immigrants after they are eligible to be released on other charges.

The move comes in the wake of recent Pennsylvania and Oregon court rulings that found sheriffs could be liable for constitutional violations if they hold people for ICE in their jails past the time they would otherwise be released.

The court rulings determined that ICE’s detainer holds do not meet legal standards for detention. The ICE holds are merely requests and not warrants that have been approved by a judge.

While some Colorado counties quickly made a change in line with the court rulings, others are still studying the matter.

Gary Cure, assistant director of the County Sheriffs of Colorado organization, said sheriffs are planning meetings with county attorneys and with ICE representatives to try to come up with a uniform policy across the state.

Mark Silverstein, director of the American Civil Liberties Union in Colorado, said his organization has sent letters to every county in the state asking them to stop jailing people for ICE. The organization is now keeping a running tally of counties that have agreed.

“We will continue our efforts to try to get sheriffs to discontinue the practice of holding people against Colorado law,” Silverstein said.

ICE last week issued a statement saying the agency would continue to “work cooperatively with law enforcement partners across Colorado.”

Silverstein said ICE has tried a new tactic in that cooperative effort. Instead of issuing the detainer requests, the agency has been issuing a form that is called an I-200 and that says it is a warrant. Silverstein said the form is still not legally binding because it continues to bypass a judge’s approval.

Castillo said she is glad the detainer policy is changing so others won’t have to go through what she did. But she wants something more.

“I would like to hear there is an end to any collaboration between police and ICE,” she said. “They should be completely independent.”

Nancy Lofholm: 970-256-1957, nlofholm@ denverpost.com or twitter.com/nlofholm