MOBILE, Ala. — Republican State Auditor Jim Ziegler immediately attacked a new program he dubbed “ObamaNet” on his Facebook page after the Federal Communications Commission announced last Thursday plans to formally consider subsidized Internet service for low income individuals.

The three Democrats on the FCC’s governing commission voted to expand their controversial “ObamaPhone” program to add subsidies to those who cannot afford broadband Internet service.

“The Federal Communications Commission is moving forward with Obama’s plan for Internet subsidies for low-income folks,” Zeigler wrote. “We have got to stop these giveaways. We are $17 trillion in debt with no plan to repay it. ObamaPhone, ObamaCare. Now, ObamaNet. We badly need a Waste Cutter in Washington.”

Zeigler, whose Facebook page is titled “Zeigler: Waste Cutter”, has shown willingness to slash costs before, cutting around 8% of his office’s budget — almost $200,000 — for the 2016 fiscal year, which will begin in October of this year.

The FCC’s new proposal would give a $9.25 per month subsidy for broadband in addition to cell and landline phone service. The program is funded by fees paid by cell phone customers as listed on their telephone bills.

Republican commissioners on the FCC understand Zeigler’s frustrations.

“We still have a long way to go if we are going to fix this program,” said Commissioner Ajit Pai. “Waste fraud and abuse are still rampant.”

Michael O’Rielly, the other FCC Republican, stated “It is clear that the majority wants to spend as much as it possibly can” before the administration changes in January of 2017.

Animosity towards ObamaNet is everywhere in Congress. Opponents have called for its budget to be capped and for individuals receiving subsidies to be charged co-pays. “Before again expanding the program, we need to consider what problems remain and how we can address them, since consumers are bearing the cost of funding the program with increasing phone bills,” said Sen. Roger Wicker (R-Miss.) at a hearing last month.

As of now, The FCC is seeking comments on whether the program should have a set budget and what metrics could be used to better judge the efficiency of the program. Zeigler says he intends to issue formal comments which will go beyond the narrow subject matter called for by the commission. “I will oppose the program,” he said.