Mitchell, SD

Saturday marked the first official day of pheasant hunting season. Bird reports are in! According to Game, Fish and Parks officials, the best success was found in Edmunds and Faulk Counties.

Bird numbers are up 40 percent over last year. This kind of success brings in hunters from across the country.

Hunters from Texas, Georgia and Arizona flock to the Rooster Roost Ranch in Mitchell for opening pheasant hunting weekend.

James Welch is a former probate judge in Georgia. He's been coming to hunt in South Dakota for nearly a decade. Welch says he first came to the Mount Rushmore State when a friend invited him to tag along. However, there are a few other things that keep him coming back.

"I like the people, I like to be able to go to like Cabella's and this type of thing. You know, you meet different people and you see different things and it's just always fun to come back every year," Welch said.

The hunters brave the windy South Dakota plains looking for birds. Although, the men at the Rooster Roost Ranch don't mind.

Hunters outside of Mitchell are enjoying the cool weather, considering their southern roots. But one hunter tells me he doesn't expect the strong winds to affect his shot, too much.

"It doesn't matter. My shot's so bad; it doesn't affect it at all," hunter Saul Levy said.

Levy, a Morgan Stanley employee in Atlanta, says the wind creates changes for the birds, as well.

"The birds will be moving fast in the wind and it's nice. It's a nice change," he said.

Only two people were hurt while hunting - and both received minor injuries.

Outdoors {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.