By

The Oakland Raiders interviewed Denver Broncos defensive coordinator Jack Del Rio for their head coaching vacancy Saturday.

A person with knowledge of the interview said the Raiders met with Del Rio as they seek a full-time coach. The person spoke on condition of anonymity because the team is not releasing details on interviews.

Del Rio, who grew up in the Bay Area, has been defensive coordinator in Denver for the past three seasons, helping the Broncos win three straight AFC West titles.

Del Rio previously was head coach in Jacksonville for nine seasons. He had a 68-71 regular-season record and made the playoffs in 2005 and 2007, winning one playoff game in his second postseason trip. Del Rio was fired with five games remaining in the 2011 season.

The Raiders also have interviewed Philadelphia offensive coordinator Pat Shurmur. Seattle coach Pete Carroll said that Seahawks offensive coordinator Darrell Bevell also interviewed.

Oakland reportedly also is interested in interviewing San Francisco assistant Eric Mangini, who has head coaching experience with Cleveland and the New York Jets, and Indianapolis offensive coordinator Pep Hamilton.

Jets interview Marrone: Doug Marrone and Woody Johnson huddled up to discuss the New York Jets' coaching vacancy.

The former Buffalo Bills coach met with Johnson and consultants Ron Wolf and Charley Casserly as the Jets seek a replacement for the fired Rex Ryan. Marrone became one of the Jets' top candidates when he surprisingly opted out of his contract with the Bills.

Marrone led the Bills to a 9-7 finish in his second season for Buffalo's first winning campaign since 2004. Buffalo still missed the playoffs, extending the NFL's longest active postseason drought to 15 seasons — but beat the Jets twice. The Bronx native previously went 25-25 in four seasons as the coach at Syracuse, including two Pinstripe Bowl victories.

His lengthy coaching history includes a stint as the Jets' offensive line coach under Herm Edwards from 2002-'05.

Marrone was the fourth confirmed candidate to interview for the coaching position, completing his meeting in New Jersey early Saturday night.

Johnson, Wolf and Casserly returned from Seattle on Friday night after two days during which they talked to Seahawks defensive coordinator Dan Quinn and assistant head coach-offensive line coach Tom Cable. The Jets also have interviewed Anthony Lynn, who served as running backs coach and assistant head coach under Ryan.

New York also is in the process of finding a new general manager, running concurrent GM and coaching searches after Johnson fired John Idzik along with Ryan on Monday.

Seahawks director of pro personnel Trent Kirchner interviewed for the job Thursday while the Jets were in Seattle. New York already has interviewed Cleveland executive chief of staff Bill Kuharich and will talk to Houston director of college scouting Mike Maccagnan and Philadelphia director of pro personnel Rick Mueller in the next few days.

New York also has requested permission to interview Kansas City director of player personnel Chris Ballard, Miami director of college scouting Chris Grier and New Orleans director of player personnel Ryan Pace.

Green won't play: Cincinnati Bengals receiver A.J. Green will miss a first-round playoff game in Indianapolis on Sunday because he is still recovering from a concussion.

Green suffered the concussion during a loss in Pittsburgh that relegated the Bengals to a wild-card berth.

The Pro Bowl receiver didn't pass concussion tests and was ruled out Saturday.