Pharma's next steps on TPP

PHARMA STILL REELING FROM TPP — The drug industry is in a standoff with the White House for now, sticking to its demand for 12 years of market protections for biologics in a deal that only delivered a baseline of five. In a meeting with pharma executives on Thursday, President Barack Obama highlighted that the agreement would deliver an international standard for the drugs where there is none now. But that did little to assuage the industry’s anger over U.S. negotiators inability to push Australia, which dug in its heels against a longer mandatory period.

… What comes next is far from clear. Late last week, one industry source described the strategy moving forward as “formless.” Another acknowledged flatly that “we don’t know what our next steps are right now.”

Story Continued Below

… The deal has run into powerful headwinds already on the Hill, with key GOP trade advocates like Sen. Orrin Hatch saying he fears the agreement falls “woefully short” and Rep. Paul Ryan citing serious concerns as well.

… Global health advocates, however, say that while the industry didn’t get what it had hoped for, it got protections for drugs that go beyond past trade accords — and they will cost lives. “The monopolist pharmaceutical industry has won a lot with the TPP, at the expense of people’s health,” Burcu Kilic, policy director for Public Citizen’s Global Access to Medicines program, said. “They should stop crying crocodile tears.” Pro’s story here.

… Wikileaks published a leaked version of the TPP deal text on Friday. It confirms that the 12 TPP countries would have two options – to provide eight years of data protection or five years as long as other measures or market circumstances “deliver a comparable outcome.” By pharma’s lights, the vagueness of the language essentially means there are no protections beyond 5 years. The text.

… If the TPP is approved, it could provide a boost to Democrats' efforts to chip away at the 12 years of market protection provided under Obamacare — another major industry concern. Obama has proposed cutting it to seven years repeatedly. “I’m not exaggerating here when I say that would be absolutely devastating,” an industry source said.

Happy Monday and welcome back to Prescription PULSE, where we note, apropos the new House select committee to investigate Planned Parenthood among other things, that 99 years ago this week Margaret Sanger opened the first birth control clinic in Brooklyn. The new clinic was raided by an undercover policewoman and vice officers and shut down 10 days later, after serving more than 400 women. http://bit.ly/1MiAdrV

HELP PLANS TO CONSIDER CALIFF NOMINATION BEFORE THANKSGIVING — Obama’s nominee to lead the FDA, Robert Califf, is still meeting with lawmakers ahead of confirmation hearings, which are expected to go pretty smoothly. HELP majority spokesman Jim Jeffries said the committee intends to consider Califf’s nomination before the Thanksgiving recess, although an exact date had not been set.

SANDERS IS A "NO" — Califf appears to have broad support, but he can expect a grilling from Bernie Sanders. After meeting with Califf, Sanders said last week that he wouldn’t vote for him, citing Califf’s extensive ties to industry. Sanders said he wanted someone who would work to “substantially lower drug prices,” a duty not typically in the job description of FDA commissioner, but on the minds of Democratic presidential candidates. "Instead of listening to the demands of the pharmaceutical industry and their 1,400 lobbyists, it is about time that the FDA and Congress started listening to the overwhelming majority of the American people who believe that medicine is too expensive," the senator said in a statement.

OPIOID PRESCRIBING GUIDELINES COMING — HHS ASPE Richard Frank told a House panel Thursday that the agency expects to release final opioid prescribing guidelines “early next year.” The CDC is developing the recommendations in hopes of reducing the overuse of the drugs. Obama administration officials at the hearing of the House Energy and Commerce Health Subcommittee said enough prescriptions for opioids are written each year to provide every American adult with 75 pills. The CDC effort has drawn criticism from pain patient groups for a lack of transparency, not to mention the attention of drug makers. The agency has published only a summary of draft guidelines so far: http://1.usa.gov/1jTLLej

… OBAMA ADMINISTRATION: EXPAND MAT FOR OPIOID ADDICTION — Frank told the House lawmakers that medication assisted therapy for opioid addiction is the most effective treatment but is “woefully underused.” The health subcommittee is considering six bill to address opioid abuse — including measures that would ease restrictions on prescribing the opiate replacement therapy buprenorphine — itself an opiate. Details on the bills: http://1.usa.gov/1GoVoqg

… Rep. Tim Murphy cautioned that buprenorphine was the third-most diverted drug on the market, and said any expansion efforts should take care not to add to the problem. Expanding access to MAT is one of several priorities for addressing the epidemic, including better education for providers on prescribing and the expansion of state prescription drug monitoring programs. Subcommittee Chairman Joe Pitts said a second hearing on the bills would be scheduled for later this month.

PHARMA IN THE STATES: COMPANIES DONATE $10 MILLION TO FIGHT CA BALLOT MEASURE — The drug industry is spending big bucks to ensure states don’t pass laws or ballot measures that hurt its bottom line. PhRMA reported more than $10 million in contributions from its members to beat back the AIDS Healthcare Foundation’s initiative to have state health programs pay no more than the Department of Veteran’s Affairs pays for drugs, The Sacramento Bee reported. Johnson & Johnson has provided more than half of that money (nearly $6 million). http://bit.ly/1Zir5gB

… The AIDS Healthcare Foundation has raised more than $1.25 million, the Sacramento Bee reported. But as Prescription PULSE reported this summer, the group already has enough signatures to move the measure to next year’s presidential election ballot. The infamous drug price hike of Turing Pharmaceuticals Martin Shkreli has captivated Californians' attention and helped keep the signatures rolling in, the San Francisco Business Times noted. http://bit.ly/1MP722j

BROWN SIGNS CO-PAY CAP AND BIOSIMILARS BILLS — California Gov. Jerry Brown signed a law capping out-of-pocket spending for most prescription drugs at $250 per month statewide, following a move by the exchange to impose similar restrictions on Obamacare plans. Over objections from insurers, the cap will take effect next year for the largest insurance market in the country. Hillary Clinton has proposed a similar cap as part of her approach to bring down prescription drug costs, although critics say it does nothing to address the underlying high prices of medicines.

… Brown also signed off on legislation providing for the generic-like pharmacy substitution of interchangeable biosimilars for the biologics which they are copying. Eleven states and Puerto Rico have now passed similar legislation, although only one biosimilar has yet to reach the U.S. market, and it’s not been deemed “interchangeable.” “With billions of dollars in health savings at stake for the nation’s patients, it is vital to make sure that the legal and regulatory framework enables competition and provides for timely access to safe, effective and more affordable therapies,” GPhA CEO Chip Davis said in a statement.

BIPARTISAN SENATE OPPOSITION TO BIOSIMILAR BILLING POLICY — A group of 18 senators asked CMS not to finalize a proposal that would pay competing biosimilars at the same level. The senators say the agency should hold off until the FDA finishes its regulations for the new biosimilars approval pathway. “We urge you to allow the biosimilar pipeline and market to stand up and continue to develop before implementing a final” payment policy, the wrote to CMS Acting Administrator Andy Slavitt on Wednesday. The letter follows a recent statement of support for the proposal by Sen. Ron Wyden, but a number of House lawmakers have also registered objections. The letter: http://bit.ly/1OpWASk

AUSTRALIA SUPREME COURT INVALIDATES GENE PATENTS — The high court down under ruled Wednesday that Myriad’s patents on the BRCA genes involved in breast and ovarian cancer were invalid, following the U.S. Supreme Court’s line of reasoning that “products of nature” can’t be patented. The ruling reversed lower court findings. The decision: http://bit.ly/1Qete6L Analysis at the Patent Docs blog: http://bit.ly/1LDTDgj

DRUG SPENDING STILL SPIKING — Prescription drug spending was again the fastest growing category of health spending in August, with growth at 9.2 percent year over year, according to the latest data from Altarum Institute. Health spending overall that month was 5.7 percent higher than in August 2014. http://bit.ly/1AtaQSH

EXCHANGE PLAN COST SHARING FOR DRUGS 2X HIGHER THAN WORKPLACE COVERAGE — The out-of-pocket drug costs for a chronic condition are about two times higher for people enrolled in Obamacare’s silver plans than for those in the average employer-based plan, according to a new study in Health Affairs. That’s partly because the exchange plans more often use combined medical and drug deductibles, which means the out-of-pocket maximum for drugs is equal to the total cost sharing limit. The study: http://bit.ly/1R6EzXk

NEW EHR RULE WOULD REQUIRE UNIQUE DEVICE IDENTIFIERS — The massive new rule for Stage 3 of the meaningful use program will require electronic health records to include a field for unique device identifiers. UDI advocates including Pew Charitable Trusts have pushed for the requirement, saying it will improve adverse event reporting and help quickly identify affected patients in the event of a recall.

CATCHING OUR ATTENTION: PAYING FOR Rx VALUE NOT ALL ITS CRACKED UP TO BE? — A popular solution to the drug-pricing controversy — paying for drugs according to how well they work or “paying for value,” isn’t likely to be successful, Memorial Sloan Kettering cancer doctor Peter Bach writes in the Harvard Business Review. The outspoken critic on drug pricing issues argues that the approach doesn’t work when patients are taking multiple drugs, for starters. In other cases it’s hard to directly document the benefit a drug has provided. For example, Bach said the largest gains in cancer treatment often come from giving drugs to patients “after the cancer appears to (but actually may not) be gone.” http://bit.ly/1jMQhLG



** A message from The Pharmaceutical Care Management Association: PBMs are projected to save employers, unions, government programs, and consumers $654 billion - up to 30 percent - on drug benefit costs over the next decade. PBMs reduce drug costs by: · Offering Amazon-style home delivery of medications and creating select networks of more affordable pharmacies; · Encouraging the use of generics and more affordable brand medications; · Negotiating rebates from drug manufacturers and discounts from drugstores; · Managing high-cost specialty medications; and · Reducing waste and improving adherence. Learn more at: http://thatswhatpbmsdo.com **