China's rail industry behemoth CRRC has its sights set on international expansion.

The result of a merger between the state-owned companies China CNR Corp. and CSR Corp., CRRC instantly became one of the largest industrial companies in the world when it was created June 1. While most of its business is domestic, CNR has already made headway into international markets, winning a $566 million contract to build subway cars for Boston's MBTA in Springfield and a deal to modernize Buenos Aires' subway system in Argentina.

At the groundbreaking for its subway car manufacturing facility at the long-vacant Westinghouse Electric facility in Springfield on Thursday, company officials said they were focused on Massachusetts but had their eye on nation-wide projects.

Transit consultant Robert Doyle, who worked with CRRC on the MBTA bid, said the company was interested in building cars for the Los Angeles rail system, and was one of two companies in competition for a Chicago subway bid. And CRRC Vice President Weiping Yu, in on-stage remarks at the groundbreaking, said he hoped his company would eventually build a potential high-speed rail line from Springfield to Boston, currently under study on Beacon Hill.

Yu, speaking through a translator, confirmed the company had been in talks with both cities, as well as very preliminary discussions with New York City's MTA. But, he said, the company's attention remains on its MBTA contract.

"Our goal is we're focused on getting this one done right and solidly before moving on to other expansion plans," Yu said. "That said, we want to partner with any city or state that may have the same needs."

CNR's winning of the MBTA's subway car bid marked the first time a Chinese rail company had won a public manufacturing contract in the United States, according to a news release on CNR's website.

The company's international ambitions have not come without challenges; the half-billion dollar MBTA bid survived protests from losing bidders Hyundai Rotem, Bombardier and Kawasaki Rail Car, as well as a lawsuit from Hyundai Rotem.

Since the merger, CRRC has continued its efforts at global expansion. According to the trade publication International Rail Journal, CRRC has reported profits while filling international orders and increasing its international business, still a small fraction of its total output.

CRRC has begun filling a 2013 order for 18 trains for Belarus Railways, and this month shipped the last of 709 rail cars of a 2013 deal to modernize the Buenos Aires, Argentina suburban rail system. In July, a subsidiary of the company signed a deal to partner with the American company Maxwell Technologies to develop energy storage solutions for Chinese light rail and metro trains, according to the International Rail Journal.

The merger is part of an increasingly aggressive expansion strategy, bolstered by the new company's scale, according to Bloomberg. CRRC is now the second-largest industrial company in the world, behind General Electric, with a market capitalization of $130 billion. And a Chinese government official told the Beijing-based Caixin news agency that a motivation for the merger was to help state owned companies compete overseas.

On Sept. 1, the company reported a 61.2 percent increase in international revenue and a 6.85 percent jump in profits in the six months since June 30, according to the International Rail Journal. An initial spike in the newly merged company's Shanghai stock exchange price has not persisted, though; CRRC is currently trading at 12.83 Yuan, compared to 32.40 Yuan on June 8, the day of the merger. The decline mirrors the overall crash of the Chinese stock market, which has lost 38 percent of its value since June 12.

The company's international ambitions have been aided by the merger, Yu said, increasing its resources for both future and current projects.

"This is good news because this means we have combined resources and effort for the Boston and Springfield project," Yu said.