Three native surfers ride their boards with ease at Waikiki Beach, with Diamond Head in the background, Honolulu, Hawaii, 1920s. (Photo by Underwood Archives/Getty Images) Underwood Archives/Getty Images

Hilo Hattie, a popular chain for Hawaii’s tourists in search of souvenirs, laid out a plan to get out of bankruptcy and repay some of its debts after selling its most valuable location for $5.1 million earlier this year.

In court papers, Hilo Hattie lawyers proposed to use the sale money to repay a portion of the company’s debts, including a $360,000 chunk of sale money that would flow to unsecured creditors who are owed more than $3 million.

The plan projects that the 52-worker chain, which has downsized from seven to three locations, will start seeing sales grow starting next year. By 2020, the chain expects to take in about $7.5 million from the sale of its travel trinkets, Hawaiian floral-printed shirts and other inventory, according to documents filed in U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Honolulu.

The survival plan still needs approval from Bankruptcy Judge Robert Faris and from creditors, who have the power to vote against it.

Founded in 1967, the chain filed for bankruptcy on Feb. 19 facing eviction and collection demands “against which the [company] does not have a viable defense,” said Chief Operating Officer Mark Storfer in court papers.

The company blamed its financial problems on sales that slowed after the global financial crisis weakened Hawaii’s tourist-dependent economy. It sold about $15.6 million worth of products—down from $23.6 million the year before.

After bankruptcy, Hilo Hattie found a buyer for one of its two Honolulu locations. In recent years, the company stopped making its own products and bought from overseas suppliers to cut costs, which eroded its reputation for selling high-quality, Hawaiian-made products and hurt sales further.

The retailer had already downsized during a 2008 bankruptcy, which it filed after an aggressive, failed expansion to Guam and in mainland U.S. The new stores didn’t make money, and many closed.

Write to Katy Stech at katy.stech@wsj.com. Follow her on Twitter at @KatyStech