TALLAHASSEE — After more than six months of meetings, including a special legislative session, Florida lawmakers passed a $78 billion budget Friday night, but the spending plan must now clear a large hurdle: Gov. Rick Scott.

Scott is expected to wield a heavy veto pen on a budget packed with more than $300 million in last-minute spending by lawmakers.

The final spending plan is a negotiated byproduct of a House and Senate whose relationship was publicly soured after a fight over Medicaid expansion under Obamacare. Even some legislative leaders are eager to see Scott strip the final product of excess spending it picked up late in the process.

Possible low-hanging fruit could be $301 million in projects budget-negotiators tacked onto the spending plan during a final 11 p.m. meeting just before reaching a budget deal.

Though House Speaker Steve Crisafulli, R-Merritt Island, and Senate President Andy Gardiner, R-Orlando, told reporters the relationship could be mended, throughout the Senate budget debate, members took shots at the House.

“The House did dance, but not with the people,” said state Sen. Arthenia Joyner, D-Tampa, who was expressing frustration over the lack of health care expansion.

One of the biggest hurdles facing lawmakers headed into special session was finding a way to help state hospitals absorb a $1 billion federal cut to a pot of money used to provide indigent care.

To help fill the gap, the state offered up $400 million but will likely have to work on a more permanent hospital funding fix next session.

Once the decision was made to add money to make up the gap for indigent care cost, the GOP-dominated House and Senate were able to come to quick agreement on a budget. The proposed spending plan passed 37-0 in the Senate and in the House on a 96-17 vote, with a handful of Democrats in opposition. Scott has until the end of the June 30 fiscal year to sign the budget.

The plan includes a boost to public school funding of $60.8 million for Hillsborough County and a $23 million boost for Pinellas County schools.

The overall 4 percent funding increase is driven by a boost of $425 million in the “required local effort,” or the pot of local taxes used to fund public education. The local tax rates were not increased, but increasing property values generates more money for the system, which concerned some members.

“We are shifting responsibility for core state functions from state to local tax bases,” state Rep. Jose Javier Rodriguez, D-Maimi, said Thursday during the House’s final budget debate.

The proposed budget also includes a $230 million boost to programs that help those with developmental disabilities, a top priority for Senate President Gardiner. The Orlando Republican’s son, Andrew Jr., was born with Down syndrome.

“This critical funding will give people with unique abilities and their families a road map to education and employment opportunities that will help them on the path to economic independence,” Gardiner said

The budget cuts more than $400 million in taxes next year, a measure that will help unite Republican lawmakers after months of infighting over health care policy.

The plan’s biggest portion is a cut to the communication services tax, which is applied to things like satellite and television. The cut will amount a more than $200 million annual savings, roughly $27 month for the average cellphone users.

“Every Floridian will see a benefit in lower taxes … not just the lobbyists or special interests,” said state Rep. Matt Gaetz, a Fort Walton Beach Republican who writes the chamber’s tax policy.

Environmental funding was also a contentious issue, as lawmakers for the first time worked through the requirements of Amendment 1, a constitutional provision passed in November that requires revenue from real estate taxes to be spent on the environment.

Throughout session there was a fight between environmentalist who wanted the roughly $750 million that flows through the amendment to be used to purchase large swaths of conservation land, while others said it should be used to maintain current land owned by the state.

Ultimately, lawmakers put $55 million into land buys, a number that disappointed environmental activists, who are now threatening legal challenges. State Sen. Thad Altman, a Rockledge Republican who had pushed for more land buys, said people were “totally devastated” by the budget, but said he would vote for the spending plan.

Underscoring the rift, during final House debate, state Rep. Matt Caldwell, R-Lehigh Acres, said that insisting the money be spent on land buys was an “obnoxious” argument. He, like others, pointed to amendment language that said the funding could be used for land maintenance.