Sen Bernie Sanders has the image of a curmudgeonly grandfather with strange ideas about politics and economic. But, running contrary to that image, the socialist candidate accused Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker of pursuing policies that kill people, according to the Hill Newspaper. At issue is Walker’s refusal to expand Medicaid under Obamacare, something that some Republican governors have refused to for the reason that such a move would bust their states’ budgets and would not expand access to health care in the long run.

Some observers found Sanders’ accusing an American elected official of mass murder to be ironic, considering his past support for regimes in Cuba and Nicaragua that have directly imprisoned and killed tens of thousands of dissidents. Sanders also honeymooned in the Soviet Union, a country directly responsible for the deaths of tens of millions of people.

Democratic politicians have been accusing Republicans of wanting to kill people for decades. Sanders is getting away with it, thus far, because he is not expected to win the Democratic presidential nomination. While he has racked up a number of primary victories, is raising a ton of money from small donors, and has an enthusiastic fan base, Sanders is losing to Hillary Clinton by the only metric that matters, the number of pledged delegates.

The wild card in the Democratic race is the possibility that Hillary Clinton being indicted, which would likely knock her out of the race on the brink of what might be her biggest victory. While talk exists in Democratic circles of getting a white knight candidate, say Vice President Joe Biden, the fact remains that Sanders would be the only person left who has won primary votes. An effort to deny Sanders the nomination may succeed, but at the price of tearing the Democratic Party asunder.

The prospects of an avowed socialist doing well in the general election are dim at best. Polls have shown a marked lack of enthusiasm for electing someone with that kind of ideology. Sanders’ past support for tyrannical regimes would be an opposition researcher’s dream and would likely ensure a landslide defeat in November,