Topics: 2016 Elections, Affordable Care Act, Apple Watch, Free Market, healthcare, Healthcare Reform, Jeb Bush, Obamacare, Video, Politics News

Jeb Bush has some ideas about healthcare. He spent most of last week trying to explain, re-explain and then explain again his stance on the Iraq War, but in between explanations he managed to weigh in on healthcare policy. His remarks on the topic were drowned out somewhat by his headline-grabbing Iraq War shambles, but they were noteworthy for how they captured the bankruptcy of the GOP’s approach to healthcare.

As reported by Bloomberg News, Jeb was holding an event at a brewery in Arizona and he launched into a standard-issue exhortation to repeal the Affordable Care Act. In the middle of his spiel, Bush started talking about his Apple Watch and how wearable technology holds the potential to shake up how we access health information.

“On this device, in five years, will be applications that will allow me to manage my healthcare in ways that five years ago were not even possible,” Jeb imagined. “I’ll have the ability – someone will look at my blood sugar, there’ll be a wireless – someone will send me a signal, it’ll come here, I’ll get a double beep saying ‘you just ate a butterscotch sundae,’ or something like that. You went way over the top, you’re a diabetic, you can’t do that, whatever.”

It’s an amazing vision of the future! And I have no doubt that someone like Jeb Bush, who is very wealthy and can afford to purchase fancy Wi-Fi-enabled watches that sync up to a system that remotely monitors his blood levels and whatnot, will happily take full advantage of this incredible service. But the question is: How do the rest of us get there? What does Jeb have in mind healthcare policy-wise that makes this revolutionary (and likely very expensive) system broadly accessible?

After all, as Vox’s Sarah Kliff points out, these amazing healthcare services aren’t going to materialize out of thin air. “There is not some army of benevolent people out there monitoring blood sugar.” The “someone” Jeb imagines who will keep an eye on his sugar consumption is going to want to be paid for doing so, very likely through insurance. So what does Jeb propose?

Well, he wants to get rid of Obamacare and replace it with … something. In his Apple Watch remarks, Jeb called for replacing Obamacare with “a consumer-directed model where people are engaged in making healthcare decisions for themselves, and where they’re given the tools to do so.” That’s meaningless boilerplate that pretty much every Republican candidate endorses when talking about healthcare – more choice, more freedom, more flexibility, etc.