By

This past Monday, I introduced a bill to expand BadgerCare for 81,000 people in Wisconsin. Sounds expensive? Actually, it will save Wisconsin taxpayers a whopping $241 million.

Under the Affordable Care Act, Wisconsin may accept funds for Medicaid — in Wisconsin, what we call BadgerCare — to cover more working families and individuals. Gov. Scott Walker turned that money down in favor of a plan that covered fewer people but at greater expense to Wisconsin taxpayers.

My bill is modeled after the plan the Republican administration in Iowa implemented just over a year ago, championed by their six-term Republican Gov. Terry Branstad. Iowa provides Medicaid to its citizens who are in poverty. Those Iowans above the poverty line up to 133% of the poverty line get help to purchase private plans on the state's exchange.

Sound familiar? That is because Iowa's plan is uncannily similar to what we do in Wisconsin. The difference: Iowa gets more of its taxpayers' money sent back from the federal government to pay for it. We don't. Historically, we have been one of the few states in the U.S. that sends more money to Washington than it gets back. Walker's rejection of Medicaid funds worsens this imbalance and costs the Wisconsin taxpayer $241 million over the next two years.

Here's how my plan saves Wisconsin $241 million. My bill calls for a switch to the Iowa plan that helps people afford private insurance on the health care marketplace for those who are above the poverty line but who still struggle to access truly affordable coverage.

In Iowa, the money is funded in full by the federal government under the provisions of the Affordable Care Act that expand Medicaid. Currently in Wisconsin, the funds come, to a much larger degree, from Wisconsin taxpayers because we turned down the federal money that Iowa accepted. The savings Wisconsin's taxpayers gain from making the switch: $241 million over the next two years. Hundreds of millions more in the future.

So far, Wisconsin Republicans, unlike Iowa Republicans, have objected to accepting increased federal funding for Medicaid based on one main argument — that because of national budget deficits, there may come a time when our national government might reduce funds for BadgerCare. In other words, Wisconsin Republicans argue we should refuse the money from Washington now because there is a chance it will be reduced someday. This is like refusing to get married because some couples get divorced.

My bill removes any risk of getting stuck with future costs. The current federal funding rate of Medicaid is 100% (and will not drop below 90%) for states that fully expand the program or adopt a plan like Iowa's. Because Wisconsin's plan falls short, the national government only covers around 60% of the cost of coverage for BadgerCare recipients.

By adopting the plan I have proposed, Wisconsin gets at least a 90% commitment from our national government to fund BadgerCare, which will save Wisconsin $241 million over the next two years. And to protect Wisconsin taxpayers in the unlikely event the federal government reduces funding for Medicaid, my bill includes an escape clause permitting the Wisconsin Legislature to review any new federal funding formula.

If Congress and the president alter the deal, we can return to the way things are now without losing a cent. The governor claims he is concerned about federal deficits. Yet he is making Wisconsin's own deficits worse by refusing the federal funds our citizens have paid for by sending our tax dollars to Washington.

So let's bring our money home, and save Wisconsin taxpayers $241 million. My bill will help Wisconsin reduce the $300 million in cuts to the University of Wisconsin that the governor's budget calls for. And, make no mistake, nearly all our neighboring states are investing more into higher education as the path to achieving income growth for their citizens.

So tell the governor and Republican legislators that we want the tax dollars we send to Washington returned to Wisconsin through Medicaid funding. Tell them to stop the posturing, cut the gimmicks and save Wisconsin taxpayers $241 million by expanding Medicaid. This will allow us to invest the money in essential education and infrastructure that will grow Wisconsin's middle class.

Daniel Riemer, a Milwaukee Democrat, is a state representative for the 7th Assembly district.