Pete Crossland of Copley Township and James Donenwirth of Cleveland both say Wadsworth GOP congressman Jim Renacci's conservative views are out-of-step with the constituents he represents in a district that includes all of Wayne County and parts of Stark, Summit, Portage, Cuyahoga and Medina counties.

But the Democrats vying against each other in May's primary for the chance to take on the two-term 16th district congressman disagree on which one of them is best equipped to defeat Renacci, an adept campaigner who won his seat by defeating successive incumbent Democrats.

Renacci had $750,000 in his campaign account at the end of 2013. Donenwirth and Crossland have not yet reported raising money at the Federal Election Commission, though Crossland has filed organizational paperwork.

Crossland, 76, is a retired Kent State University political science professor who spent a decade as an Ohio state legislator and 22 years as a Summit County Council member. He says experience sets him apart from Donenwirth, who has never before sought public office. Donenwirth, a Canton native, does not currently live in the 16th congressional district, but says he'll relocate there.

"I am really thinking a lot more about the general election than I am about the primary," says Crossland, who has already established a campaign website and begun to raise campaign cash.





Donenwirth, a 62-year-old designer of computer programs that translate other languages into English, believes he'd be a more viable candidate than Crossland because he's somewhat younger, and because Crossland's government service ended in 2006. Donenwirth also maintains he has a clearer vision for the district and better developed issue positions than Crossland. He says he plans to sell his business and be a full-time candidate if he wins the primary.

"In short, I don't think he has much of a chance to defeat Renacci," Donenwirth says of his primary opponent.

Both candidates say Renacci got under their skin last year by repeatedly voting to shut down the government and refusing to extend the debt limit. Renacci also voted against the deal that reopened the government, saying he could not "lend my support to legislation that once again raises the debt ceiling while doing nothing to impose needed fiscal reforms nor address the drivers of the massive debt that is crippling this nation." Renacci attributed the shut-down to the U.S. Senate's failure to approve House-adopted government funding measures that contained provisions to delay Obamacare's implementation.

"In my view, he is extreme," says Crossland. "If you look at his position on a variety of things, it is very rigid and very conservative. Whether you are looking at his environmental record, or his position on immigration, guns or women's issues, he is pretty far over the edge."

Crossland cites Renacci's opposition to a bipartisan immigration reform compromise approved by the U.S. Senate as one example that shows Renacci is "out of the mainstream," and not the "very bipartisan guy" he claims to be. Crossland criticized the incumbent for saying he'd never vote for any legislation that would permit citizenship for someone who immigrated illegally. Crossland also points to a poll commissioned after the shutdown by Democratic Moveon.org, which showed an unnamed Democrat would beat Renacci.

"I don't like how he is representing me with these extreme positions," says Crossland. "It is deeply disturbing. I wish he'd move to Texas and join in league with Senator Cruz down there."

Renacci thought the Senate immigration bill was flawed and rushed through the Senate, said his spokeswoman Megan Taylor. She said he "believes we must secure our borders first" and "cannot put those who have come here illegally before those who have lawfully gone through the process."

She also said Renacci has worked with Delaware Democratic Rep. John Carney to establish a bipartisan working group that has introduced several bipartisan bills, including measures that would provide more transparency to the budgeting process and would provide veterans with more educational and job opportunities.

Donenwirth says that if he's elected to Congress, he would focus on legislation that would reverse destructive environmental policies, achieve real equality for women, and promote jobs and prosperity in Northeast Ohio, among other things. On immigration, he says the focus should be on integrating immigrants into the nation's economic and social fabric, "not on obsessing about punitive measures."

"The constituents who elect me will get constant, unrelenting work to bring prosperity back to this region," says Donenwirth. "This can come in the form of federal contracts to the businesses that are located here, research grants for our colleges and universities, development grants for cities and other federal money to make sure the infrastructure that exists does not fall into decay."

Both Democrats say they basically support the Affordable Care Act, which Renacci and other Republicans have repeatedly tried to repeal. Donenwirth describes the "conservative clamor against Obamacare" as "histrionic."

"Offering medical care to someone who needs it is compassionate and the right thing to do," Donenwirth said on candidates' questionnaire compiled by the League of Women Voters and Northeast Ohio Media Group. "Preventative care is more cost-effective than treatment of a condition that could have been avoided. Third, other countries that have similar health policies have not been ruined financially."

Crossland said that if he's elected, he would vote to fix problems with the law "while recognizing that its benefits are many: extending health care access to millions, removing the caps on coverage, eliminating pre-existing conditions as a basis to deny coverage and more."

"Ultimately, we must find a way to provide good access to health care for all citizens" Crossland said on the same questionnaire.