(My husband) should be at the front of the line, because he doesn't work and ... has medical issues." -- Mary Lang

A 49-year-old man in South Carolina who declined to enroll in the Affordable Care Act because he has always eschewed insurance in favor of paying his medical bills himself now needs an expensive eye surgery that he can't afford. His doctor says he'll go blind without it.

Despite his deliberate decision to refuse Obamacare when he had the opportunity -- the mandate -- Luis Lang, a self-employed handyman who had big-time contracts with the federal government and banks maintaining foreclosed properties, tells The Charlotte Observer that he assumed help would be available to him when he needed it. His diminishing eyesight has left him unable to work. His inability to work makes him ineligible for a federal subsidy to purchase private insurance. And his state's opposition to the Affordable Care Act means Medicaid was not expanded, so that's not an option either.

Guess who he and his wife blame for his predicament. President Barack Obama, of course, and the Democrats who passed a bill that doesn't allow conscientious objectors to just jump into the Affordable Act when their medical bills overwhelm them. The bill Obama and the Democrats came up with is too complex, too confusing, the Langs say, and it's causing the 49-year-old to suffer.

Conceptually, the Affordable Care Act is quite simple. Everybody buys health insurance or pays a penalty for his or her refusal to do so. People who buy in get treated when they get sick. People who don't buy in and who live in states like Louisiana that are too Obamaphobic to help its folks, well, they get to put their dedication to self reliance to the test. Back when this was a Republican issue -- i.e, back when then Gov. Mitt Romney was pushing for its implementation in Massachusetts -- the emphasis was that there is no such thing as a free lunch. The idea of mandated health insurance was based on the conservative notion that people who have the resources and should have had the foresight to buy medical insurance shouldn't expect treatment after they get sick.

"(My husband) should be at the front of the line, because he doesn't work and because he has medical issues," Mary Lang said. "We call it the Not Fair Health Care Act."

It's got to be hard for supporters of the president's health care law not to succumb to Schadenfreude, not to glory in Lang's misfortune because he so desperately needs what he so defiantly refused. I've seen at least one mocking treatment of Lang's story. Gawker.com has the headline "Man Who Would Rather Go Blind Than Get Obamacare Now Going Blind."

The Charlotte Observer story, done in collaboration with Kaiser Health News, is more sensitive. Its headline is a question: "Who should save sight of SC man who can't afford surgery?" That story mentions that the Langs have started a GoFundMe.com page to raise money for his needed surgery. It has attracted many apparent liberals who have given him a lecture with their money: You shouldn't have opposed something that could have helped you and others just like you.

The Charlotte Observer reports that it received an email from a staff member in the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services revealing that Lang's case has been "discussed here in DC at a fairly high level." Officials there apparently want to help find a solution for Lang.

If a solution is found for Lang, it will not only be good for him, but it's likely to also be good for the government. A doctor of his points out that if Lang does go blind, he'll probably be dependent upon the federal government. A little money now will prevent a much bigger expense later.

Funny, but that's the same concept behind health insurance.

Jarvis DeBerry can be reached at jdeberry@nola.com. Follow him at twitter.com/jarvisdeberry.