For Rex Brothers, shock has turned into possibility.

The left-handed reliever admits he never thought the Rockies would cut ties with him, but said he’s eager for the next chapter in his career.

Brothers also said, quite pointedly, that he doesn’t blame the Rockies for his poor performance over the last two seasons.

“I was very surprised in a lot of ways,” Brother said Saturday from his home in Tennessee. “You come to know, learn about and love the people you’re around. And I’ve been there so long. So surprised would be an understatement. I thought I had put myself in a really good place to be in the Rockies’ bullpen next season.”

Brothers, 27, was selected by the Rockies as a supplemental pick in the first round in the 2009 draft. He was designated for assignment Friday along with veteran closer John Axford, catcher/first baseman Wilin Rosario and right-hander reliever Tommy Kahnle. The moves were made as general manager Jeff Bridich overhauled Colorado’s 40-man roster.

The Rockies have a 10-day window in which they can trade Axford, Brothers, Rosario and Kahnle. If the club can’t work out a trade in that time frame and the player clears waivers, Axford, Brothers and Rosario can elect free agency because they all have at least three years of service time. Kahnle, however, does not have three years of service, so he can be outrighted to the minors and remain in the organization if he clears waivers.

Explaining the decision to part ways with Brothers, Bridich said: “It was just time for a fresh start for everybody involved.”

Brothers agreed, once the shock wore off.

“That’s the only way you can look at it,” he said. “When I was told about it (Friday), I sure didn’t think it was a breath of fresh air, but now I definitely do. I think I’m in a really good place.

“I’m healthy and I’m always working on my craft. I’m ready for what’s next. I’m not just paying lip service when I say that I think my best days in the game are ahead of me.”

Brothers was one of the best lefty relievers in baseball in 2013 when he posted an overall 1.74 ERA and notched 19 saves in 21 opportunities when he took over as closer in the second half of the season. He was penciled in as the Rockies’ future closer, but he struggled mightily in 2014 when his ERA soared to 5.58 and his mechanics got out of kilter.

He spent much of the 2015 season at Triple-A Albuquerque, but his velocity returned and his fastball touched 97 mph at times. In 45 appearances at Triple-A, he had a 4.46 ERA. In 17 appearances with the Rockies, he posted a 1.74 ERA.

Brothers puts the blame for his struggles on himself.

“I got to a spot where I was laboring a little bit physically, had a couple of bad outings and started searching for the success I had,” Brothers said. “I think I got away from the athleticism that helped my success. I got away from that aggressiveness.

“But that was not because of a pitching coach or anybody else. Looking back on it, I think I backed myself into a corner and I had to start back from square one. I think, now, I’ve got that competitive fire back. I think I was showing that again this past season.”

Staff writer Nick Groke contributed to this report.

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@denverpost.com or @psaundersdp