Buy Photo Shoppers look over gently used prom dresses at the annual 4-H Junior Leader Prom Aid event at the Clark County 4-H Fairgrounds in Charlestown on Saturday. (Photo: Jenna Esarey, special to the CJ)Buy Photo

Prom season is nearly here and that means the fun, angst and expense of prom dress shopping is striking thousands of local teenage girls nearly simultaneously. To help reduce the expense of prom, the Clark County 4-H Junior Leaders hosted their annual Prom Aid at the 4-H Fairgrounds in Charlestown on Saturday.

Hundreds of dresses, collected by the group throughout the year, were offered free of charge with no requirements of the recipients other than the promise that they were to be worn to a high school prom.

“We had a line waiting to get in at 9,” said Macie McCarty, 16, a Junior Leader and a junior at New Washington High School. “Most of them found dresses.”

The sparse, concrete-floored Community Building at the fairgrounds was transformed into an ad hoc department store, with rack upon rack of dresses, one small rack of menswear, and a small selection of shoes and jewelry.

Now in its ninth year, the Junior Leaders collected about 500 dresses for the event. Most are gently used, but a very few still had their original tags. Donated clothing is cleaned by Nu Yale Cleaners at no cost to the group.

The building's restrooms were transformed into dressing rooms with the addition of a few throw rugs, and an open area nearby was decked out with a plethora of mirrors resting on metal folding chairs to provide the ladies with views of every angle.

Chris Collins patiently waited outside the dressing room while his daughter, Taylor, 17, tried on dresses. “I’m mostly just here to hold things and say yay or nay,” he said.

Taylor found a dress she loved on only her second try. “This is the one,” she said as she spun in front of the mirror. “I love this one.”

“We came last year, too,” said her mother, Vicki Collins. “It’s a great thing for the community. We priced dresses last year. I don’t even want to look this year. Plus, we have a junior son, so we’ll have to get him a tux. Doing both would be crazy.”





Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1RblqSU