ONLINE VOTER GUIDE: Read candidate bios and Q&A's for Manatee and Sarasota primaries

Elections for Sarasota Memorial Hospital’s nine-member, unpaid board are generally a stately affair, with incumbents often running unopposed and the players rarely changing.

In 2010, four board members’ seats out of six were unchallenged, and in 2012 three out of four were.

But this year, incumbents have competition for their seats in the five races that are up for grabs.

All candidates belong to the Republican Party, so the five races will be decided in the Aug. 26 primary. Although members represent specific districts, they are elected by voters countywide.

Board members oversee a $540 million budget for the public health care system, with just over $40 million of that coming from county property taxes. In recent years the system has expanded aggressively, adding a circle of urgent care centers and an emergency room in North Port.

The five incumbents say the experience they bring to the table is especially important this year, after the recent departure of longtime CEO Gwen MacKenzie. In July, the board tapped interim CEO David Verinder to replace her permanently as part of the succession plan, but they maintain that knowledge of ongoing issues is important to the transition.

The challengers include a businessman who works with the health care industry, a registered nurse, a hearing aid specialist, an emergency medical technician and a former security guard at Sarasota Memorial. Three of the five have been active in local politics.

The high number of challengers in this normally low-profile race gave rise to rumors that the competition had been encouraged by parties in Tallahassee that would like to see Florida’s remaining public hospitals taken over by for-profit chains. A July 16 story in the Herald-Tribune dispelled these rumors, and all but one of the candidates have affirmed their commitment to keep Sarasota Memorial in public hands.

Here are the candidates for the central and northern districts.

Central District, Seat 2

Joseph J. DeVirgilio Jr. was appointed to the board by fellow members in May 2013, to replace elected member Thomas Kelly, a cardiothoracic surgeon who left the board to join Sarasota Memorial’s First Physicians Group. Before retiring to north Venice, he served for three decades in executive positions for a utility company in Poughkeepsie, New York, and was a hospital trustee there for 12 years.

He believes the foremost challenge in the next four-year term will be implementing the board’s strategy to maintain the system’s community leadership in health care, as the nation moves toward a patient-centered model and away from fee-for-service payments.

“Obviously, we’re still evolving toward a decentralized health care delivery system,” DeVirgilio said. “Sarasota County’s well ahead of the game. But as the feds begin developing their model — where someone is going to own responsibility for the user of health care services — the hospital is going to have to figure out where we fit into that.”

Challenger Michael A. Sutphin, a 35-year resident of Sarasota, describes himself as a small-business owner. He became a candidate, he said, in the interests of “truthful transparency and real clarity and more prudent responsible decision-making and immediate and future accountability in all matters, especially financial.”

Sutphin said his job as a security guard at the hospital was terminated in 2012 for “insubordination.” He is the lone candidate who believes Sarasota Memorial should be privatized, arguing that the health care system’s recent expansions are a waste of taxpayer dollars, and would not stand up to the scrutiny of a for-profit operation.

Northern District, Seat 1

Richard C. Merritt was appointed to the board in 2007 and elected by voters in 2008. A former auto sales executive, he was a member of the Board of CGH Medical Center in Sterling, Illinois, for 24 years before coming to Sarasota.

Merritt said he wants to serve another term to help “keep the momentum together.” Merritt, along with other incumbents, mentioned the March 2013 public hearing Sarasota Memorial was required to hold, to solicit community opinion on whether the hospital should remain public and not-for-profit.

“The public basically stood up and said, ‘Keep our hospital the way it is,' ” he said.

Merritt believes the board’s highest priority is to “keep the status quo. That’s the biggest job, when things are hitting us from all angles. Hospital-centered health care is now going away, and the focus is to keep people out of the hospital. We’ll be relying on our urgent care clinics, home care and our partnership with the Senior Friendship Centers to keep people well.”

Challenger Stefan Butz is a hearing aid specialist who has served on the Sarasota County Charter Review Board since 1996.

He is running for the hospital board, he said, because “I want to continue to serve my community, and I believe that my background as both a conservative elected leader and a local health care worker would benefit both the hospital and our entire community.”

In the next four years, he said, financial uncertainty will be the board’s most pressing challenge.

“It’s no secret that the entire health care sector is in a period of upheaval,” he said, “and without the expansion of Medicaid here in Florida, the funding for unmet costs will decrease while the volume of uncompensated care will continue to increase. It will be the board’s responsibility to stay ahead of the uncertainty by being fiscally conservative and good fiscal stewards of our tax dollars.”

Northern District, Seat 2

Robert K. Strasser has served on the hospital board since 1994, and has seen Sarasota Memorial struggle through tough times to achieve its current financial stability.

He said he places a priority on helping the next CEO find ways to continue in the direction set by MacKenzie.

“Hospitals are facing a reduction in Medicare and Medicaid reimbursement,” Strasser said. “We have to work to make sure we find ways to increase revenue to offset this.”

To be an effective board member, he said, “It’s best if you have some hospital experience. You have to love the hospital, and can’t have someone who wants to change it to a for-profit hospital. And there has to be a good working arrangement and a trust” between the board and the hospital’s executive staff.

Challenger John “Jack” Brill is a sales executive with a national company that provides food service for schools, employers and health care providers. Sarasota Memorial has its own catering operation, he said, and is not a current or prospective client.

Brill is active in the local Republican Party and serves on the Longboat Key Code Enforcement Board. But what he wants to contribute to the hospital system is his “business acumen,” from working with health care customers and the Florida Hospital Association, along with “compassion and caring” for hospital workers and patients.

Brill said MacKenzie approached him last year about the possibility of serving on the board, and “I thought it would be a great way to give back to the community with my business experience.”

He believes the Affordable Care Act will curtail traditional hospital revenue streams in the next four years, and the solution for the hospital is to seek more areas of excellence so that no one has to leave the community for top-quality care.

“Medicare reimbursements are already discounted by 60 percent; they are on track to be down by $9 million this year and $15 million next year,” he said. “There are 58,000 non-insured people in Sarasota County and we need a facility that takes care of everybody.”