CINCINNATI - Heart disease tops the list of health issues facing African-American men, according to a prominent local doctor.

“African-American men are more at risk for heart disease because of issues relating to being overweight, as well as issues related to smoking,” says Dr. Nita Walker.

Walker is vice president of primary care for University of Cincinnati Health, and she’s encouraging African-Americans to fight heart disease and other potential illnesses by adopting a more healthy lifestyle.

Top 5 risks

Other health issues have a significant impact on the lives of African-American men, too -- issues that Walker sees in her own practice. Here are the most common problems:

Heart Disease: Cardiovascular conditions -- most common among them the buildup of plaque in the arteries -- are the leading cause of death in the United States, killing more than 375,000 Americans each year. Heart disease can lead to heart attacks and other major health problems.

According to the American Heart Association, 46 percent of African-American men have some form of heart disease.

Stroke: African-Americans are more impacted by stroke than other racial groups and are twice as likely to die from stroke as Caucasians, according to the National Stroke Association.

A stroke happens when blood flow to an area of the brain is cut off by a blood clot or a ruptured blood vessel. As the brain cells are deprived of oxygen, they begin to die. People are at higher risk for heart attack and stroke if they have unhealthy cholesterol levels, diabetes or high blood pressure. Smoking and obesity also raise the risk.

High Blood Pressure/Hypertension: It’s called the “silent killer” because it can permanently damage the heart before symptoms are even noticed. High blood pressure affects more than 40 percent of African-Americans, according to the American Heart Association. Research suggests that African-Americans carry a gene that makes them more salt-sensitive, increasing the risk of high blood pressure.

Prostate Cancer: The Prostate Cancer Foundation reports that “African-American men are more likely to develop prostate cancer compared with Caucasian men” and that they are nearly two-and-a-half times more likely to die from the disease. Scientists don’t completely understand why, but they believe it is a combination of genetic and lifestyle differences, including nutrition and access to medical care.

Violence: The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) considers all types of violence to be a serious public health problem in the United States. The CDC says violence erodes communities by reducing productivity, decreasing property values and disrupting social services.

“African-American men, unfortunately, are disproportionately impacted by gun violence,” says Walker. “This is a multi-factorial issue that relates to deeply rooted structural barriers to education, opportunity and mental health services in our area.”

Survivors are left with permanent physical and emotional scars.

What Stands in the Way?

Walker says many barriers stand in the way of good health for black men.

Less medical care: Men are less likely to get routine health screenings than women. “Women start their pap smears and obstetric care in their 20s, and that starts a pattern and expectation of engagement with the medical community,” says Walker.

Job and family responsibilities also stand in the way, says Walker. Many African-American men work second jobs or less flexible jobs that limit their time for medical appointments.

Health insurance: Both cost and access to health insurance can be challenges. “This issue is greatly improved with the Affordable Care Act, but is still not where it needs to be,” says Walker.

Too few African-American doctors: “It’s very common for African-American patients to prefer African-American physicians, and in Cincinnati we don’t have quite as many as other cities,” says Walker. Some patients think African-American doctors may better understand their cultural issues relating to diet, exercise and family life.

“We need a local pipeline in high schools and the community that encourages home-grown talent in the medical field,” said Walker.

Access to healthful food: Many African-American neighborhoods and communities don’t have access to fresh vegetables and fruits. These areas have been dubbed “food deserts.”

“This lack of access contributes greatly to problems that African-Americans have in terms of obesity and maintaining a normal weight,” says Walker.

What African-American men can do

Despite the barriers, Walker encourages African-American men to take these important steps to improve their health:

Stop smoking: Walker says among the health woes linked with smoking is atherosclerosis, commonly called hardening of the arteries, which can lead to heart attacks, strokes and vascular disease in the legs. The risk for stroke doubles among those who smoke, according to the National Stroke Association, and that risk begins to decrease immediately in those who stop smoking.

Limit salt: Adopting a lower-sodium, lower-fat diet and becoming more physically active can lower blood pressure and stroke risk.

Exercise: The CDC recommends at least two-and-a-half hours of moderate-intensity, aerobic activity each week, such as brisk walking.

Moderate alcohol use: Men should have no more than two drinks per day, and women should limit their drinks to one a day, according to the latest CDC guidelines.

Eat better: Eat more vegetables, fruit and lean protein. Avoid fried and fatty food and refined carbohydrates. Reduce portion sizes, too.

Routine checkups: For patients with limited access to health care, Walker says UC Health offers helpful options. These include the Hoxworth Center, which serves Hamilton County residents who may be uninsured, and UC Health primary care offices throughout the region, as well as their newest partnership with the Little Clinic at Kroger.

Resources