Topics: California Drought, Conservation, endangered species, Endangered Species Act, House Republicans, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, wildlife, Sustainability News, Life News, Politics News

Even before the region descended into a years-long drought, it was never easy being an aquatic species in the deserts of the western United States. But as need to allocate California’s dwindling water resources intensified this year, it suddenly became necessary to justify the continued existence of some of the state’s most endangered species. House Republicans in February attempted to override the Endangered Species Act in the interest of pumping more water out of the San Joaquin-Sacramento River Delta, calling the federally threatened delta smelt, which their bill would have doomed to extinction, a “stupid little fish.”

Conservation biologist Christopher Norment begs to disagree. “There is water enough in the desert if you live properly,” he writes, and the real problem comes from the “bulldozers and pipelines, pumps and wells, ditches and dams, lawns and lakes, fields of alfalfa and fields of houses, and the thousands and millions of people living a few miles or a few hundred miles away from the waters,” — in short, from our tendency to live as though water were a limitless resource.

“Relicts of a Beautiful Sea” is Norment’s lyrical natural history of six Great Basin species — the Inyo Mountains slender salamander, the black toad and four types of pupfishes — that are dependent on water and yet live in a place where that resource is in alarmingly short supply. All are toeing the line of extinction, and are so rare that you’ve probably never heard of them. But they’re worth protecting, Norment argues, and the choice to do so doesn’t have to come at the great expense some hard-line Republicans suggest.

Norment spoke with Salon about the personal inspiration he takes from these resilient species, and about the reasons — beyond mere practicality — why preserving biodiversity continues to matter. This interview has been lightly edited for length and clarity.

I wanted to start with your approach. How did you choose to feature these six species? What it was about them that you found unique and book-worthy?

To go back just a little bit, my first job as a biologist way back in the ’70s was working in the Death Valley area. I was focused there on large mammals. But when I was up in Death Valley, I really grew to love that portion of the American Southwest, the Mojave Desert, and when it came time for a sabbatical, I wanted to go back to that part of the world. So there was sort of this landscape aesthetic that was really important to me. But I also wanted to work on species that were really different from the ones that I typically worked on — I wanted to get away from birds and mammals. At the same time, I started hearing stories about the Devil’s Hole pupfish and some of the role that it’s played in conservation controversies in that part of the world. I’ve also had a fascination with species that live on or in islands. So as I started working out there in 2009 and 2010, the species that I wanted to focus on just started adding themselves to the list.

The first one was the the Inyo Mountain slender salamander, and as I talk about in the book, I remember walking up into this heat-blasted canyon, and I knew that the species was supposed to be there because I’d read some of the papers on it, but to actually flip a rock and find one of these creatures that is so dependent on water … I mean, there is a trickle of water there, and that’s where they’re restricted to. They just shouldn’t be there. There are only two desert salamanders in the world, both of them are in the Mojave Desert, and it was just stunning to me. I was overwhelmed, in a sense, by it. And very curious about them, and so I started exploring that species.

So they told one story about the American Southwest and about water, and their sort of survival, if you will, but then there were other kinds of stories out there. Like there was a story of near-extinction in the case of the Owens pupfish and now the Devil’s Hole pupfish. But there is also a story about how a seemingly insignificant species occurring in one very, very small part of the world can have very, very strong effects on development, on water use. I mean, the Devil’s Hole pupfish — this tiny little creature that weighs about one raisin, half of a gram, and is about an inch and a half long — has dramatically affected how water is used in the Southwest. I mean, that’s a very interesting, and to me, compelling, story.

And the Salt Creek and Cottonball Marsh pupfishes are evolved from freshwater fish, and yet they live in environments that may be twice or even three times as salty as the ocean. You walk out on the salt pan on Death Valley, and you find fish out there. There’s something to me that is just spectacular about it. I thought I was going to do a typical scientific research project, but I realized several things: first of all, logistically, given the fact that I’m back in New York State, it would be very hard to do this kind of intensive research that would result in a series of technical papers. But also, there was something about their mystery that was very attractive to me, and I thought, “This is what I’d like to focus on.” I’d like to focus on their stories, and tell their stories in a way that hopefully will draw other people into them, make them concerned about these species, and by extension, other little-known species, the ones that aren’t the charismatic mega-vertebrates.

That problem you mention of allocating these limited water resources from humans in order to protect the pupfish is becoming more controversial as California’s drought worsens. I’m wondering, how did you even begin to draw that line? How do you decide how much we can afford to allocate to a species like that?

Well first of all, as with so many problems in our world, I’m very wary of false dichotomies. In other words, it’s either the pupfish or it’s the people. I don’t think it’s ever that easy. To me, what the pupfish and these other species are saying is, if we’re going to persist in this environment, there’s going to have to be wise water use on the part of people. And water use in that part of the world has often not been very wise. And it’s gotten us into a lot of problems. So to me, theses species are a valuable resource, and they can tell us about how best to use water and how to use it in a way that is sustainable and that can hopefully nourish the people of California, the people of Nevada, the people of Arizona. But if we don’t — if the drought continues, water levels keep going down in the Colorado River basin, groundwater keeps getting depleted in California, etc. — then, alright, we kill off these species, but we’re still going to have the same problems, only we’re not going to have these species that, to me, are valuable and worth protecting.

So I think there can be both: these species can persevere, and humans also can have their water. Maybe not as much as they want, but hopefully as much as they need. I really do believe that there’s water enough in the desert if you use it properly. But it’s going to take some shift in terms of how we think about water and its use. And I think actually Karen Piper made this point in her interview: she said that when we think about water, we don’t think about it in terms of local or even regional carrying capacity. We think about it sort of almost at a much larger level, in other words, if Las Vegas doesn’t have enough water that’s available to it locally or even from the Colorado River, well, we’ll just get it from somewhere else. We’ll get it from northern Nevada, we’ll go ahead and deplete their water resources, and on and on, well then maybe there’s this Mississippi River, maybe there’s a Great Lakes, maybe there’s a Columbia River, etc. As Las Vegas had been developing, if they were thinking within the context of not depleting their local groundwater, and also not over-using the Colorado River, maybe they would be in a better situation than they are now.

A lot of the situations you explore in your book examine these extremely local conflicts. I’m thinking about Gary Giocomini, this person you write about who’s grappling with the fact that he could be responsible personally for wiping a species off the planet.

Right, and Giacomini’s a rancher: he wants water for his cows, for alfalfa, whatever. But when you actually sit down and talk to people like him, it’s not that they don’t have a concern for those species and that they don’t want them to persist. But of course they also want to make a living from the land. In the case of the Owens pupfish, I personally think that there’s enough water for his cows and there’s enough water for the fish. Maybe not quite as much water as Garry would want, maybe not quite as much water for the pupfish as I might want, but we can reach some kind of a compromise. Now it may not always be practical; there may be cases where it won’t happen, but I think in a lot of cases it can.

There was that House Resolution last year, the Sacramento of San Joaquin Valley Emergency Water Delivery Act. And basically what it was doing was to preempt state and federal endangered species laws that protect the delta smelt. And my view, and a lot of people’s views, is it would do nothing to alleviate California’s long-term water shortages. It was opposed by the Obama administration, California’s governor, state agencies, etc. Luckily it stalled in the Senate and has never become law, but to me, it’s sort of the easy answer: let’s blame the endangered species. Let’s blame environmental laws for some of these issues.

There’s an ideological factor there.

Right. Oh yeah, I mean, drought is interpreted ideologically; it’s the same way that climate change is interpreted ideologically. And so back in 2009, the Wall Street Journal talked about the “government-made drought,” and if you go and look at the website of the U.S. House Committee on Natural Resources, they say basically the same thing. Humans don’t like to think that certain aspects of nature are beyond their control. And what happens with precipitation in California and other parts of the arid West, well, we don’t have a lot to say about it. I guess we have a lot to say about how we use the water, but we’d better use it in a wise way.