Del. David Yancey, R-Newport News, and his Democratic challenger, School Board member Shelly Simonds, clashed over health care and the environment as they debated who would best represent the 94th House of Delegates district.

Each promised strong support for schools and a focus on the region's transportation needs. Yancey emphasized his ability to win bipartisan support for legislation on workforce development and education. Simonds said the House's lack of transparency and focus on divisive social issues showed a need for new faces in Richmond.

"I want to bring the conversation back to the middle," she told an audience of 200 during the debate Tuesday at Christopher Newport University. "We need to stop fighting over fringe issues."

"I've worked hard to deliver for this community," Yancey said, citing his efforts to push the widening of Interstate 64; state funding to support Jefferson Lab's bid for a new ion collider; clearing a path for Hampton University business incubator; and to crack down on payday lending, the high interest rate short-term loans that often overwhelm low-income Virginians with debt that's impossible to repay.

"It's not right to do to these people what's being done," Yancey said, "they're being hammered."

The district covers Newport News between the shipyard and Fort Eustis and is one of a handful that is competitive, leaning Democratic in national and statewide elections, while having twice elected the Republican Yancey.

Simonds blasted the House's practice of killing bills without any recorded vote — the Transparency Virginia coalition this year said three quarters of the bills delegates kill die that way.

"When it comes to transparency, the General Assembly is a mess," she said.

Yancey meanwhile, broke step with most others in his party by saying he does not support gun bills he feels do not make sense, citing a bill that he opposed this year that would allow people to drive around with a loaded rifle or shotgun in their car or truck.

Simonds said she supports universal background checks and a ban on allowing people convicted of domestic abuse to have a gun, and criticized Yancey for suggesting that the main way of dealing with mass shootings and gun violence is a better focus on mental health care.

The two clashed more sharply over Medicaid expansion, the idea of using federal Affordable Care Act funds to cover more low-income Virginians, an idea backed by Gov. Terry McAuliffe but strongly opposed by the GOP majority in the House.

Simonds said expanding Medicaid would mean coverage for 400,000 Virginians, and would create 30,000 jobs.

Yancey said the problem was the impact on the state budget, since Medicaid is already growing.

"We've got to do this in a very smart way," he said. He said his budget amendments to boost funding for the state's free clinics and to expand the Virginia Independent Clinical Assessment Program — so that it can help adults, as well as children, with mental illness — show one way forward.

Simonds said she would push for more school programs focusing on STEM — science, technology, engineering and math — as well as giving schools more freedom to offer extended time for learning, as the city schools did with this summer's SPARK academic enrichment program.

She also said the state needs to boost community services for aging Virginians, so that no one needs to do what one friend did, leave work in order to care for a relative.

Simonds said boosting state support for K-12 schools would be a priority, noting that Newport News schools' state funding is down $22 million from 2009 levels.

When Yancey said the General Assembly has been trying to boost spending despite a difficult economy and that he wanted to ensure more funds went to classrooms than to administration, Simonds fired back that the city schools' teaching staff fell 11 percent while central office administration is down 17 percent since 2009.

The debate was sponsored by CNU's Wason Center for Public Policy and the Daily Press.

Ress can be reached by phone at 757-247-4535.