Silverio Nuanez, the homeowner of 330 Collyer St., said he doesn't allow people into his home who he doesn't know. ( Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call )

Although illicit activity appears to have slowed down at a nuisance house at 330 Collyer, Longmont police are still keeping tabs on the property.

"In the course of a year-and-a-half, there were three search warrants for drug activity," Master Police Officer Augie Bernal said. "It's got a very long history of drug activity."

Bernal said the house, which was formally listed as a nuisance house last April, has been associated with drug activity, people fighting and yelling at each other in the streets and trespassing at nearby homes and St. John the Baptist Church across the street.

"They've got a school at this church," Bernal said. "When the kids are out on the playground, that is a big concern."

Police raided the home four times — once in 2011 and 2012 and twice last year.

Bernal said that activity at the home has slowed down, but police still respond there on a variety of calls.

Police arrested two people in February who had been staying at the home in defiance of the court order that only allows the owner, Silverio Nuanez, to have one blood relative living with him. It also limits the number of visitors he can have.

Nuanez, 75, told the Times-Call on Friday that there are no drugs in his house anymore and he has been keeping it cleaned up. Court records show he pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor drug charge stemming from an arrest last year, but a felony charge was dismissed.

He said that the two people police arrested in February no longer live at the home, but his grandson lives with him.

Police calls to another property at 103 St. Clair Avenue have slowed to a trickle after the home was declared a public nuisance, according to Master Police Officer Dan Kilian.

Boulder County District Court records show the owners signed a permanent injunction listing the home as a public nuisance in 2010.

Kilian said the home had become a haven for gang members — police responded 362 times between 1989 and 2008 — but calls to the home and neighborhood have slowed considerably.

He said police responded to numerous harassment and assault calls from neighbors who had been hassled for wearing colors that offended some of the gang members. City officials also reported being harassed when coming to the house.

Kilian said the owner of the home, Joseph DeHerrera, has largely complied with the nuisance order, which limits people who can live at the home to blood relatives and visitors who are not on probation or parole.

He added that a neighborhood clean up project helped spruce up and reunite the neighborhood.

"Since then, we have had very low calls for service in that whole neighborhood," Kilian said.

DeHerrera told the Times-Call that there haven't been any problems at his house for a long time and the police "haven't been here in a while."

Bernal said a nuisance house can be seized if the owner continues to violate a court order, but courts are reluctant to do so. He added that Nuanez' home was once up for sale but isn't any longer.

He said that police want to move forward with getting stricter regulations imposed on the home but cannot do so unless they can show more violations to the court.

"I really feel for the neighbors for what they have experienced in the past and what they are still experiencing," Bernal said.

John Bear: 303-684-5212, bearj@timescall.com or twitter.com/johnbearwithme