Innovative program allows students to grow up through acting out

BROOMFIELD — It's not often that a library boasts a roomful of giraffes, but on Saturday, the Mamie Doud Eisenhower Public Library in Broomfield did just that.

The giraffes were actually teens participating in Show Me Something New Improv workshop, a free program the library offered Saturday from 2 to 4 p.m for grades six through 12.

Although a consensus on what sound a giraffe makes was never decided upon, the attempts were so loud that Fran Jenner, manager of the library's young adult department, closed the workshop's door to avoid disturbing nearby library guests.

Facilitators of the program, Kitty Kaler and Dayna Scott, yelled out animals, emotions, and scene setters for the teens to act out, and the young adults delivered.

Kaler and Scott founded the Colorado project Teens Acting Out, which Scott said uses theater improvisation games as a way to boost awareness about different teen issues.

"The way we raise awareness is through play and laughter, "Scott said.

Kaler and Scott held an improv workshop at the library in July, and it was so popular with the teens that the library invited them back, Jenner said.

"We try to have programs where teens develop healthy skills that can supplement what they learn in school. With this one, they might discover that they have a talent in acting, and they might have a new hobby to enjoy," Jenner said.

James Holschen, 12, said he signed up for the workshop so he could get better at thinking on his feet.

"I need to learn how to tell better jokes. I need better comebacks for when I'm messing around with my friends," Holschen said.

After a few introductory exercises and name games, the one elementary student, 19 middle schoolers , and four high school students dove into improvisation scenes. Kaler and Scott provided suggestions and guidance and let the teens take it from there.

The group played a mirroring game where they mimicked their partner's gestures and facial expression. They split into groups and performed improvised skits with each other, playing off of each other's lines and emotions, and they took turns being giggling audience members and performers.

Scott set some ground rules such as "no put-downs" and "try to be agreeable to keep the scene going." She explained that improv is, essentially, a mix of imaginative story-telling and collaboration.

"In improv, there's no wrong answer. We really want to support each other and be there for each other," Scott said.

Jenner, who sat in on the workshop, said the best thing about the workshop was the outlet it provided for teens to meet and connect.

"What's cool is they don't know each other when they first come in, and you can see them start to interact and open up with each other," Jenner said.

Kayle Lingo, 16, said she's been acting since she was 11 and really enjoys improv because she likes to come up with new ideas on the spot.

"My favorite part today has been interacting more with people and getting out of the box," Lingo said.

Kaler and Scott used the "challenge by choice" method during the workshop. They explained to the teens that they weren't going to make them do anything, but encouraged them to try something new.

"Improv teaches them self-confidence and teamwork that they can use throughout their lives," Kaler said.