In a Republican primary dominated by Donald Trump and a dozen men, the lone woman in the game is trying to hang on. As part of Glamour's continuing coverage of the 2016 race, conservative columnist S.E. Cupp checks in with Fiorina on the campaign trail.

Reporting From New Hampshire: The author, right, interviews presidential candidate Carly Fiorina at City Hall in Franklin.

Growing up, I thought the Republican Party was primarily for men because all I saw were men: male presidents, male governors, male legislators. Since then, a plethora of conservative women have helped change the face of the party, and in this election a role model who never existed when I was a kid emerged: Carly Fiorina.

As a conservative woman (and yes, we exist), I like smart disrupters. And Fiorina is that. She was the first female CEO of a Fortune 50 company, Hewlett-Packard, and once topped Oprah as the most powerful woman in business. She infamously shook up the status quo at HP with bold and sometimes unwelcome strategies. (Once, she asked staffers to send her a list of "The 10 Stupidest Things We Do!" promising, "I'll read it.") I also like that she created environments for women in business to succeed without punishing men in the process. And candidly, after covering her policies and interviewing her myself in my day job as a pundit for CNN, I also think she knows her sh-t, in everything from business and technology to foreign policy and national security.

Many young women disagree with some of her policy positions—she supports defunding Planned Parenthood, opposes government-mandated paid family leave, and wants to repeal and replace Obamacare. But I think young women should consider a wide array of issues before they choose a candidate. (And I personally believe that if young women cared as much about tax reform as they do about abortion, we'd have a much more equitable economy for women. You can argue these issues with me at Glamour's bipartisan election platform, The 51 Million.)

Regardless of party, we can all agree that diverse voices deserve to be heard. And in a campaign during which Donald Trump's overweening ego and hateful outbursts are dominating the landscape, real conservative ideas like some of those Fiorina stands for are getting short shrift. (I'm that rare Republican who hopes Trump runs as an Independent, even though that likely means we'll lose the Oval Office—his anti-immigrant, anti-Muslim ideals will do lasting damage to the party.) We deserve better. Better debate on the issues. Better dialogue that starts with respect, not demagoguery.

At press time Fiorina, 61, was tied for seventh in an ABC News/Washington Post poll. She'll have to do better than that to have any chance at the nomination, but win or lose, she'll have made a mark—she's only the fourth major female Republican presidential candidate in history. So I caught up with her on the trail in Franklin, New Hampshire, to learn a little more about who she is.

S.E. Cupp: As a teen, you lived in England, Ghana, and North Carolina. Was moving around that often tough, or did you like it?

Carly Fiorina: Both. It was pretty cool going to an English girls' school [in London] at 14 and getting to play Juliet in Romeo and Juliet. I loved living in West Africa, in Ghana. The hardest move for me was when I moved to North Carolina. Everyone else was in their senior year, with their friends. And I was leaving all my friends and having to make new friends. [But it] makes you resilient.

SEC: You graduated from Stanford. Then you attended UCLA law school for one semester and dropped out—and joined a real estate firm as a secretary. What was the Carly plan at this point?

CF: I'm, like, 23 years old. I'm reeling from the fact that I hated law school. But I'm also reeling from the fact that I quit. I wasn't a quitter. I was a Goody Two-shoes. I was a parent pleaser, and my parents [were] appalled: "What are you going to do with your life?" I have zero plan. But the [company's] founders, after about six months, say: "You can do more. We want to introduce you to our business." They took a chance on me, which we all need.

SEC: You met your husband of 30 years, Frank, at AT&T. What was that dynamic like, working in the same place?

CF: Well, I was a brand-new salesperson [in AT&T's government sales office]. I had this customer with a problem, and everyone kept saying, "We can't solve this problem." I was like, "No, I'm not gonna give up." Finally someone said, "You need to go talk to this technical expert." And the first thing that I remember—aside from the fact that he was very cute—is that he took me seriously; he said, "We can solve that." For a long time we didn't do anything. We thought, We work together. Then the company split, and he went to work [elsewhere]. Problem solved!

SEC: You were approached about the HP CEO job in 1999. You knew there were tremen­dous challenges ahead. Did you ever think, Maybe I shouldn't take this risk?

CF: Well, sure. It was a very long recruitment process. They were testing me, but I was testing them: "Are you ready to do what has to be done?" I wanted changes. But I say change is like heaven—everybody wants to go there; nobody wants to die…. And I concluded, yes, they were prepared. I've learned in my life that if we don't do things because we're afraid of them, that's not a good reason not to do things.

SEC: You've defended your record at HP. [She was forced out of the company after nearly six years; at the September CNN debate Fiorina said she led Hewlett-Packard through the worst technology recession in 25 years.] At some point might it be useful to talk about some of your failures in a way that lets women know it's OK to fail?

CF: First of all the word failure for anyone, I think, is the wrong word. Was it Thomas Edison who said something like, There is no such thing as failure, just learning what not to do? You cannot make the most of yourself in life if you don't take risks. And risk taking, by its nature, is mistake making. I think women feel a lot of pressure to be perfect, [but] if you want to fulfill your potential, you have to take risks. And that means you will make mistakes. You will get challenged. You will be criticized. Criticism is not failure. And I'm here to tell you that.

SEC: I have a question from a Glamour reader. Lia Avellino, 28, a graduate student in New York City, asks: "What tactics did you employ to elevate women at HP, and how might you apply these as president to help grow representation of women in the boardroom and elsewhere?"

CF: We would see a lot of women and minorities at entry level; in middle management they would leave. They didn't feel the climate encouraged them or helped them make work-life-balance choices…. So we pioneered job sharing…and technology so we had flex time to work anytime, anywhere. I said, "For every opening I insist we have a diverse, qualified set of candidates." At first people would say, "We can't find a qualified woman." I would say, "Yes, you can." Frequently someone would say, "She's never done this job," or the woman would say, "I've never done this." Then we would say, "We will support you, but you need to take a risk." By the time I left, half of my direct reports were women…. That's how you elevate women. That's how I went from secretary to CEO.

SEC: Donald Trump has attacked practically everyone, including you. He's attacked your poll numbers, your business acumen, even your looks. Are you surprised he's doing as well as he is?

CF: The short answer is yes. On the other hand, I really am not as impressed by all this polling data as the media appears to be. When Gallup, one of the nation's most respected polling outfits, says they will not engage in horse race polling for the presidential race, because [the data is] so suspect, I think it tells you a lot…. Look, Donald Trump is controversial. Donald Trump is entertaining. Donald Trump is not a leader, and I do not think Donald Trump will be our nominee. If he were, Hillary Clinton would wipe the floor with him.

SEC: If he is the nominee, would you support him?

CF: We'll cross that bridge if and when we ever get to it.

SEC: Are you surprised at how hard it has been for Jeb Bush to catch on?

CF: I guess what I would say is, money does not a campaign make. A candidate is important. I don't count Jeb Bush out. But I think the rationale so many pundits had [for] saying "Jeb Bush is gonna be it" was how much money he'd raised. But in the end money doesn't buy elections.

SEC: Let's talk about your positions. In light of the terrorist attacks in Paris, what should we be doing to defeat ISIS?

CF: [President Obama has] talked about climate change as our greatest near-term national security threat. No—ISIS is.... When the President talks about "containing" them, it's clear he doesn't understand the nature of the threat. We cannot contain them. We must defeat them. And we start by denying them territory, which is why I've said over and over, I will lead a coalition, particularly of our Sunni Arab allies, to deny ISIS territory.

SEC: Are you talking about air strikes? More boots on the ground?

CF: I'm talking about more effective air strikes, guided by more special operations forces. Our allies, who are fighting ISIS as we speak, have asked us for specific support that Obama isn't providing. King Abdullah II of Jordan, a man I've known a long time, [was in this country] when the Jordanian pilot was burned alive in a cage.... He [has asked] for bombs and matériel for his air force. We haven't provided it. I will.... The Kuwaitis, Jordanians, Saudis, Egyptians, Bahrainis, Emiratis, Kurds, Turks—all of them understand this is their fight also. But they can't win it without our leadership. [Glamour fact-check: In February President Obama pledged up to $1 billion a year over three years in aid to Jordan. In July a bill providing that support passed the House, but at press time it was still awaiting a vote in the Senate.]

SEC: And where do you stand on the debate over Syrian refugees?

CF: Until we can vet them properly and assure the American people there are not terrorists among them, we cannot let them into this country…. If we can't vet them—and we cannot adequately today, because they come from a war-torn region and don't have documentation—we can't let them in.

SEC: Here's another question from a Glamour reader: Grace Hendry, 22, a member of the Army Reserves in Norfolk, Virginia, says: "I'm using Obamacare for my health insurance. It is the least expensive option for me. But you plan to change how healthcare.gov works. What will health care look like for me if you're elected?"

CF: I'm a cancer survivor; I understand why we have to cover preexisting conditions. Our younger daughter died from addiction, so I understand we have to invest more in mental health and the treatment of addictions. All of these things were goals of Obamacare. I'm glad it's working for this young woman, but the problem is, the Affordable Care Act isn't working for most people…. Emergency room visits are up. Health insurance premiums are up. We're throwing more and more people into Medicaid, and yet fewer and fewer doctors are accepting reimbursement for Medicaid insurance. We need to try the free markets…. [But] one thing the government should mandate—I don't use that term lightly—is that every health care provider, every health insurance company, the pharmaceutical industry publish their prices, costs, and outcomes…. That's the only way to start putting power back in the hands of patients: transparency.

SEC: Glamour reader Lizzy Montgomery, 26, a field biologist in Los Angeles, wonders: "How do you plan on providing health care services to women after you defund Planned Parenthood?"

CF: Well, let's talk about Planned Parenthood, and just ask how much they actually do for women's health care. They do some things. But mostly what they do is refer women to other people. [Glamour fact-check: According to Planned Parenthood's 2013 medical services data, it is not true that the organization mostly refers women out; STD testing and treatment and contraceptive services—none of which involve referrals—accounted for 76 percent of the organization's services. Fiorina's campaign manager, Sarah Isgur Flores, responded to these facts by saying that, "for mammograms, 100 percent of them are referred out," which is accurate.] So let's fund, with taxpayer dollars, community health centers or pregnancy centers. There are more community health centers around the country, in poor neighborhoods as well, than there are Planned Parenthood clinics. Good, let's fund them. [Glamour fact-check: According to a Congressional Budget Office analysis, if Planned Parenthood were stripped of its federal funding, up to 650,000 who use its services could lose access to care—care that experts say community health centers could not absorb. In response, Isgur Flores said, "Presumably, with additional funding, they could absorb more patients."]

SEC: You've lived so many lives already. If you don't happen to become the next president, what will your next life be?

CF: Oh, who knows? I intend to win this election. But I have never spent a lot of time worrying about the future. I try to spend every day trying to make a difference. And that's served me well.