There's no need to ever feel left out again at the water cooler conversation. Here's a rundown of the stories currently trending in the world, the country and your backyard.

Yahoo





Looking for her parents: A 4-year-old girl found at a Gypsy camp in Greece, has authorities searching Europe for her parents. DNA testing on the child showed she was not related to the Gypsy couple who claimed to be her parents. She was found after Greek authorities raided the camp on reports of drug activity. She was taken into custody when drugs and weapons were found at the site. Officials are looking into the possibility of a link to a child trafficking ring. Full story: The Associated Press



How many have signed up: The White House is saying nearly 500,000 people have applied for health insurance coverage in the three weeks since the Affordable Care Act went into effect, but have not said how many people have actually enrolled following a rollout plagued by computer glitchs. The White House has refused to say how many people have made it through the enrollment process, but the president is set to speak on the issue today from the White House. He is expected to outline steps being taken to address the computer problems. Full story: The Associated Press

What killed the witness: The Massachusetts Medical Examiner's Office says cyanide was the cause of death for Stephen Rakes, a man who was set to be a witness in the trial of mobster Whitey Bulger. Rakes, who claimed Bolger extorted money from him, died during the middle of the mobster's trial. William Camuti has confessed to putting cyanide in an ice coffee he gave to Rakes. Full story: CNN



Google

Second oarfish found: In what was described as “the find of a lifetime” last week, appears now to be a trend with the discovery of a second giant sea creature known as an oarfish. This one was 13 ½ feet long, and was found on a beach in Oceanside Harbor, Calif., this weekend. Oarfish can grow to up to 50 feet in long, and live in deep water – usually around 3,000 feet deep. No one knows what happened to the two animals, or why they would be coming to the surface. Full story: The Associated Press



Another reason to fear clowns: A gunman dressed as a clown shot and killed a Mexican drug lord while he vacationed in a rented beach house in Los Cabos, Mexico, Saturday. According to authorities, Francisco Rafael Arellano Felix was shot two times by a man wearing a clown suit, wig and red nose. The 63-year-old, along with his brother, controlled the drug trade in the Mexican border town of Tijuana. Full story: The Associated Press

Mon Dieu!: The French Foreign Minister says the American ambassador has been summoned to appear Monday morning to explain why the National Security Agency has been spying on French citizens. The allegations of spying, reported by the French newspaper Le Monde, include claims that the NSA collected phone records from French citizens. The newspaper reported that 70.3 million pieces of telephone data was collected by the agency. Full story: The Associated Press

Click here for more world and national news



YouTube







At least they look guilty.

You go, girl.