U.S. Sen. Bill Nelson is Florida’s only statewide elected Democrat, polls show he would be hard for Gov. Rick Scott to beat and he has decades of political experience.

So why isn’t he running for governor in 2014?

The answer might just lie in West Virginia.

When U.S. Sen. Jay Rockefeller, D-W.Va., announced earlier this year he would not seek re-election, it put Nelson next in line to lead the powerful Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Committee.

When pressed by reporters about why he is not running for governor, Nelson, first elected to the Senate in 2000, brought up his growing stature in the U.S. Senate and what it could mean for Florida.

“I have no plans to run for governor and I have no intention of running for governor,” Nelson said.

As the chairman of the Commerce committee, Nelson would be in a key position to set the agenda on federal transportation issues, coastal zone management, the space program, U.S. deepwater ports, the Panama Canal and the outer continental shelf. For a state with 1,100 miles of coastline, 15 sea ports, the Kennedy Space Center and a long history of opposing offshore oil drilling, Nelson would be in a power slot like no Floridian in 95 years.

The last Floridian to lead the Senate Commerce Committee was U.S. Sen. Duncan Fletcher, a Democrat and the state’s only senator elected to five terms. Fletcher ran that committee from 1916 to 1919 and later used his power to create the Everglades National Park in the 1930s.

But that chairmanship is hardly certain. To get the post, Nelson needs Democrats to maintain the majority of seats in the U.S. Senate. Currently Democrats hold 55 of 100 seats. But if Republicans gain six seats, they would lead all committees, blocking Nelson.

Nelson would not just be Commerce chairman, but he would also likely be the No. 2 Democrat on the Senate Armed Services Committee.

Florida has rarely had such clout. In the last century, only four Senators from Florida — all Democrats — have led any committee in the Senate. Former Sen. Bob Graham was chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee in 2001, former Gov. Lawton Chiles was chairman of the Senate Budget Committee in 1987; Fletcher led the Commerce Committee then Banking Committee; and Nelson currently chairs the Senate Committee on Aging.

County Commission primaries coming

Sarasota County Republicans are bracing for primary battles for two County Commission seats in 2014.

On Monday, Siesta Key resident and long-time neighborhood activist Lourdes Ramirez is expected to file to run for the seat held by Commissioner Nora Patterson, also a Republican. Ramirez is the second Republican candidate to announce. Earlier this year Al Maio, vice president of design and engineering firm Kimley-Horn, filed to run for the seat.

In another open commission seat for 2014, current Sarasota City Commissioner Paul Caragiulo and Pete Theisen have both filed to run for the seat currently held by County Commissioner Joe Barbetta.

Sarasota Republican Party chairman Joe Gruters said the party will not play favorites in the primary contest and will support any Republicans who run for the seats.

“We support all of the candidates,” Gruters said.

No Democrats have filed to run for either of the two County Commission seats.

Sarasota county commissioner candidates run countywide.

The winners will earn four-year terms with annual salaries of about $78,000.

Stand your ground abuses?

Florida’s stand your ground law will likely be under a microscope again.

The Manatee/Sarasota Democratic Black Caucus plans to hold a town hall style-meeting on Nov. 16 in part to collect accounts of how the stand your ground law may be being abused, among other issues.

Organizers of the event say it is designed to allow people to express their “frustrations and hardships as a result of violations to their civil liberties, racial profiling, ‘stand your ground’ law abuses, overuse of law enforcement in schools, and lack of access to suitable healthcare.”

The event is part of a statewide series of town halls called “Florida Speaks” organized by the Florida State Democratic Black Caucus to collect testimony that will be passed on to state lawmakers, the governor and the Florida Cabinet.

“We have seen terrible abuses in Sarasota and Manatee counties, and we sorely need to be heard,” said Cornelle J. Maxfield, president of the Manatee/Sarasota Chapter of the Democratic Black Caucus.

The event is scheduled to start at 10 a.m. on Nov. 16 at 2826 Leonard Reid Ave., Sarasota.

Area political events

Tuesday

National radio talk show host Michael Smerconish, a regular political analyst on national television programs, will be the featured speaker at Sarasota Tiger Bay’s bi-annual fundraising dinner. The event starts at 6:30 p.m. at Michael’s On East, 1212 East Ave., S., Sarasota. Cost is $85 for members.

Thursday

Sarasota County Democrats hold a presentation and take questions about the Affordable Care Act starting at 10:30 a.m. at the party headquarters at 7358 S. Tamiami Trail, Sarasota. Suzanne Dickie, of the League of Women Voters, leads the session to answer questions about the law. For more information call 330-9400.