On a warm afternoon in July three years ago, I played in the water at the beach on Belle Isle in Detroit. It was a spontaneous stop after a day of dancing, eating and the energetic company of my friend and his two great kids. Perhaps the buoyantly unfurling day was to blame for my inflated sense of my acrobatic abilities, as I found myself doing a backflip into the water. It was only four feet deep. My head hit earth. My legs crumpled. My scalp cracked and bled. I needed help tottering to shore. If not for persistent efforts to keep me talking, I would have promptly passed out on a beach towel.

For the next 40 minutes, my friend asked me questions. What is the name of this flower? Who is the president? Words came slowly. I kept sliding into the dangerous black sleep that slunk at the edges of my mind. A police officer asked if he could call an ambulance. When I said no, he urged us to go to a hospital ourselves. This was my head that we were talking about. “The brain, it’s the main computer,” he said, several times. “You don’t want to take any chances.”

He was right. But did I go to a doctor? No. I did not.

Instead, I went home. While I laid on my futon, my friend trawled the Internet for articles on how to treat head injuries. He didn’t let me sleep for more than 20 or so minutes at a time.

The next morning, I got up, brushed my hair and got on with the day.

There was no willful pride in this. No stubborn sense of immunity. I didn’t go to a doctor because I didn’t have health insurance. Medical costs frightened me more than my bleeding, concussed head did.

Here in Detroit, I have been a full-time, freelance journalist for nearly four years. I love what I do — as I must, given that this vocation comes with zero insurance, sick days, employee protections, benefits or regular paychecks. At a glance, working without insurance may seem like a reasonable risk: I am single, am in my early 30s and have no dependents. I am in good health. I could pay out of pocket for periodic checkups with the dentist, gynecologist and eye doctor.

But I was unsafe. Though I pretended otherwise, the massive risk I was taking would occasionally come into plain sight. The day at the beach reminded me. So did a car accident a year ago that set off an airbag, cost me $2,000 in automotive damage and left me achy and rattled for several days. (I again did not see a doctor to confirm that I was fine.) Friends’ stories about unexpected diagnoses, pregnancies, broken limbs — these, too, frightened me. But what was I to do?

I took the best care of myself that I could. For nearly four years, I just worked and lived.

It was with a reporter’s eye that I followed the politics of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) and the government’s health care exchange website, HealthCare.gov. Of course, I had a stake in the law’s success. But I couldn’t let myself think of it. Surely something would go wrong — the HealthCare.gov website broken, the ACA outlawed, Michigan’s refusal to set up its own exchange making it difficult to get accurate insurance information, my unpredictable income making enrollment impossible. I couldn’t quite believe this would work for me. I waited. Two days before the enrollment deadline, I finally logged onto HealthCare.gov for the first time. Item by item, I typed in my information.

An hour later — with no delays or glitches — I had health insurance. With some modest budget adjustments, I can afford it too: It is about $232 a month for the Humana Connect Platinum 1000/1500 Plan. An HMO with a $1,000 deductible, it costs $25 for primary-care visits and $35 for specialists. My medical out-of-pocket maximum (including drugs) is $1,500.

This stunned me. For many long moments that snowy morning, I sat still. My coffee cooled beside me, and my skin bristled. With a shock, I felt, for the first time, how unsafe I had been over the years. Before, there was no use noticing this fear. But with the email confirming my enrollment blinking before me, I suddenly had permission to recognize the fear and relief that welled up in me, and it took my breath away.