The Bethlehem Area School Board tonight tabled a proposal to hire a company to handle the district's substitute teacher staffing.

The board unanimously agreed with Director Angela Sinkler that it needed to spend more time reviewing a switch to Substitute Teacher Services and communicate with the district's substitutes.

The board will revisit the issue at its Feb. 10 meeting.

Superintendent Joseph Roy has said the district doesn't have the resources to properly manage and train its pool of substitute teachers. And the Affordable Health Care Act could mean districts will have to start providing health benefits to substitutes that average 30 hours or more a week.

If Bethlehem Area hires the company, substitute teachers would become the employees of the business, not the district. Such a switch would allow teachers to collect unemployment over the summer. And they no longer would have to contribute a chunk of their $90-a-day pay to the Public School Employees' Retirement System.

Substitute Teacher Services proposed a two-year contract, which would start next school year, and cost the district 28 percent of the wages paid to the subs.

Bethlehem sub Rita Malone-Sorensen, of Hanover Township, Northampton County, said she gets most of her substitute teaching jobs through her relationships with principals and secretaries, not the computer system. She just finished 84 days as a day-to-day sub at James Buchanan Elementary School after the principal approached her.

"I think all the districts could do a better job with their substitutes," Malone-Sorensen said.

She suggested actually integrating the sub pool with teachers by offering orientations and training. The Parkland School District pays its substitutes more -- $105 to $138 a day -- and increases the pay the number of days a teacher fills in, Malone-Sorensen said. Substitutes who worked more than 20 days last school year were invited to technology training this summer, she said.

Malone-Sorensen is bothered that Bethlehem Area wants to outsource substitute staffing. It seems to be saying, "It's not important enough to manage," she said.

If the district hires the company, all of the substitutes will have to undergo new background checks, get new references and go through the application process again, Malone-Sorensen.

It just might mean substitutes stop working for Bethlehem, she said.

Sinkler wants to be sure all of the district's substitutes have proper notification of the proposed switch and are equipped with all of the details, she said.

Board Vice President Shannon L. Patrick asked that the potential benefits for the substitutes be identified as well.

Director Eugene McKeon asked if the district would be saving money or just shifting responsibility to another entity. The school district adds 30 percent onto the base cost of substitute wages to account for payroll taxes and pension contributions, he said.

Director Michele Cann pointed out that she thinks the switch will save employee effort more than it will save money.

As pension costs rise, the switch could result in savings down the line, Roy said. But right now, the administration is looking at it as cost-neutral, with the potential to avoid increased health insurance costs, he said.

The Affordable Health Care Act requires businesses with 50 or more employees to provide health care to workers who average 30 hours a week.

To calculate this average, a business, like Substitute Teacher Services, can look over the entire year, Roy said. School districts have a shorter window that could mean Bethlehem is on the tab for paying health benefits for some of its nearly 300 day-to-day subs, he said.

Subs are required to contribute a portion of their pay -- 7.5 percent to 10.5 percent depending on when they entered the system -- to the pension system. And that is calculated into a district's pension obligations.

The Easton Area School District hired another agency to handle its substitute teaching staffing over the summer to save money, Superintendent John Reinhart said.