ANCHORAGE, July 27 (Reuters) - When it comes to influencing politics, few billionaires are more effective than the industrialist brothers Charles and David Koch.

Americans for Prosperity (AFP), the nonprofit organization they founded and continue to support, achieved a 95 percent success rate in the 2014 election races where it spent money. But in Alaska, a state that could be pivotal in the 2016 elections, the group's reception has been surprisingly chilly.

Republicans outnumber Democrats by nearly two to one in America's northernmost state, and the GOP candidate has won every presidential contest in the state for the last 50 years. The conservative AFP's message of free markets and limited government, along with its strong support for oil industry interests, resonates here. But the same independent spirit that defines Alaskans also makes them bristle at attempts by outsiders to shape their thinking, political analysts say, and the Kochs are viewed as outsiders here by many Democrats and Republicans alike.

Dave Stieren, a conservative talk radio host in Anchorage, said that in Alaska the group has been neither the "boogeyman" liberals fear nor the "engine for change" the Kochs would like it to be. It just hasn't had much impact, he said. "When you say Americans for Prosperity in Alaska," he said, "I'm like, 'Who?'"

The problem isn't that AFP supports causes and candidates unpalatable to Alaskans. In 2014, for example, the group targeted Democrat Mark Begich, who was defeated by Republican Dan Sullivan in the U.S. Senate race. But even some Alaskans closely aligned with AFP's goals question whether the group's efforts in the race helped. Alaskan Republican strategist Art Hackney, who last month signed on to Florida Senator Marco Rubio's presidential campaign, is happy to credit AFP with a long list of accomplishments outside the state, including in Iowa, North Carolina and Colorado.

"In most of those states what they did worked but in Alaska it doesn't," he said. "In Alaska they had an impotent system."

As evidence, he cites a commercial AFP ran during the Begich-Sullivan race featuring a woman describing how Begich's positions hurt her family.

"Senator Begich didn't listen. How can I ever trust him again?" she asked.

But the woman decrying Begich turned out to be an actress from Maryland, and that didn't play well in Alaska, where it drew considerable media attention.

"Alaskans know she is not Alaskan and never voted for Begich in the first place and it's a lie," Hackney said.

In the end, Hackney said, he believes the AFP ad actually helped Begich, who lost to Sullivan by the narrowest margin of any Senate race in the country.

AFP STRATEGY

Christopher Neefus, a spokesman at Americans for Prosperity's Washington headquarters, disputes claims that the group has struggled in Alaska. He notes that AFP opens chapters only in states where support has reached critical mass. A year ago, he said, 5,000 people in Alaska had either signed AFP-sponsored petitions, connected with the group on Facebook or Twitter, or in some other way added their names and contact details to a list maintained by AFP.

That's six-tenths of a percent of Alaska's population of 730,000, the same percentage that led AFP to open an office this month in Mississippi. And since AFP's Alaska chapter opened, three thousand more people in the state have added their names to AFP's lists, Neefus said.