Giorgina Cimino Nigro (Photo: ~Courtesy of Angela Cimino) Story Highlights Angela Cimino's grandchildren have started the new school year in Woodbridge

She would like to see them relocate out of New Jersey

The children are receiving counseling following the death of their mother

WOODBRIDGE Angela Cimino said her three young grandchildren cry every weekend when they leave her care.

"It breaks my heart," said Cimino. "They are brokenhearted. I'm really very concerned about their emotional state."

A Middlesex County Family Court judge has postponed making a decision about the future custody arrangement for the children following Wednesday's court hearing because the state Division of Child Protection and Permanency has not finished its investigation, Cimino said.

No new hearing date has been set, Cimino said.

Cimino is the mother of Giorgina Cimino Nigro, 32, of the Colonia section of Woodbridge, who was killed inside her Devon Road home on July 22. Cimino Nigro's ex-husband, Vito Nigro, 42, with whom she lived, has been charged with her murder and possession of a weapon for an unlawful purpose. Cimino Nigro died from blunt-force trauma. The type of weapon used in her death has not been disclosed by officials.

"My daughter died in a very brutal way," said Cimino, whose daughter had a rocky marriage during which she was allegedly abused by Nigro. "My daughter was afraid if she left (Nigro) she would never see the kids again."

Cimino Nigro's death was one of two high-profile deaths in Central Jersey this summer. Heidi Errickson, 45, of Warren, was fatally shot by her fiancé at her home Aug. 16. Her fiancé also killed her brother, Frederick Errickson, 55, of Middlesex Borough, before he turned the gun on himself.

Nigro remains at Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital in New Brunswick after allegedly attempting to commit suicide by jumping onto the Garden State Parkway shortly after his wife's death on July 22. No date has been set for his first court appearance, according to the Middlesex County Prosecutor's Office.

His mother, Pasqualina Nigro of Colonia, owner of European Hair Designs, a hair salon off Oak Tree Road in South Plainfield where she worked with her son and his ex-wife, has physical custody of the couple's three children, ages 10, 6 and 4.

Pasqualina Nigro has custody of the children during the week. Cimino and her family have custody of the children on weekends from 6 p.m. Friday to 8 p.m. Sunday.

Cimino said the state Division of Child Protection and Permanency is still involved in the case because Vito Nigro has parental rights. She understands that if his parental rights are removed, the state will be removed from the case and just the Cimino family will be fighting Pasqualina Nigro for custody of the children.

"I want the children to have the ability to express themselves and have the loving support they need," said Cimino. "I want them to be laughing."

She said the children aren't able to verbalize the nightmares they experience.

"It's a cry for help," said Cimino, adding that the children are receiving counseling. "They have to be able to express their sorrow and tears."

But being under the care of the paternal grandmother, Cimino is concerned that Pasqualina Nigro may be placing her son's needs and safety above her grandchildren's. Cimino questions if the children are being emotionally abused.

Pasqualina Nigro's attorney, Esther Sieira-Alvarez in Union, said the state Division of Child Protection and Permanency is involved and working with the families to create a best situation and do what's in the best interest of the children, and declined further comment.

Cimino said the children returned to school this week, but she has no way to get in touch with them during the week to see how they are doing.

Cimino, who lives in California, said her goal is for her daughter in Chicago to adopt the three children. The family has started a GoFundMe page at http://www.gofundme.com/fub4pws8 to raise funds to help pay for legal funds to gain custody of the children and raise them in a loving environment. So far, about $6,805 of the $100,000 sought has been raised.

"I want to take the children out of the state where their mother was murdered so they can have a fresh start and a new healthy life," said Cimino, adding that she doesn't want her grandson to get into disputes over the loss of his mother.

Cimino said her daughter in the Chicago area has a five-bedroom home and grown children. One of her granddaughters also has a five-bedroom home nearby.

"They would love to adopt them," Cimino said. "They would be loved and shown attention. If it's not the right thing to do, I'm willing to do what is best for the children."

Staff Writer Suzanne Russell: 732-565-7335; srussell@mycentraljersey.com

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1EA4m8p