The Family Health Center of Boone County will open a second site on Columbia’s east side by Sept. 6.

“That’s where the highest need is,” health center CEO Gloria Crull said. “That’s what the data tells us.”

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Or, use your facebook account: facebook Need an account? Create one now.

The Department of Health and Human Services gave the federally funded health center $549,000 for the new site. The money is meant to expand primary health care services as part of the 2010 Affordable Care Act. The clinic also operates public medical and dental clinics in Salisbury and Marceline.

Annual funding will be $650,000 starting next year.

The Family Health Center was one of five Missouri community health centers among 164 in the country that shared $101 million in this round of funding. Centers in Ava, Kirksville, Clinton and Sedalia also received money.

The Family Health Center serves a 10-county area in Central Missouri. Administrators have not selected a location for the new Columbia site, Crull said Thursday morning, although her administrative team was reviewing possible buildings for lease or purchase.

The new site will operate just like the facility at 1001 W. Worley St., Crull said. It will target “medically underserved people” — those without insurance or who are under-insured — but will provide care to anyone, she said.

The center will provide primary medical, dental and mental health services. Crull, director of the multicounty health center since 1995, said the new center will have seven employees, including one physician and a nurse practitioner.

“We’re expected to be operational by Sept. 6,” she said, adding that the center has a good history of being able to start new sites and meet operational goals.

“We essentially told” Health and Human Services “we’d be able to pull it off,” Crull said, noting that more than 500 centers applied for funding.

The Family Health Center used a $2.6 million federal grant in 2012 for renovation and construction of the 8,800-square-foot health and dental clinic in Marceline. The center used a $250,000 federal grant last year to renovate its Columbia clinic to increase patient privacy and improve coordination of patient care.

U.S. Sen. Claire McCaskill, D-Mo., said Wednesday in a news release that the latest grant awards were proof that that Affordable Care Act is providing more access to health care.

“The Affordable Care Act is working, and these additional resources for local health services in Columbia are part of that story,” McCaskill said in the news release.

Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell said the 164 new health centers are projected to increase access for nearly 650,000 patients to needed primary care services.

Some 550 new health centers already have opened since passage of the Affordable Care Act.

Crull said the annual funding for the new Columbia site will help offset subsidized care provided to patients who are uninsured or under-insured. Patients have to provide income documentation to show they are at less than 200 percent of the federal poverty level to receive a discount.

But because Missouri has not expanded the Medicaid program, many low-income individuals and families do not qualify for federal subsidies for insurance exchange plans or for Medicaid and are still mostly uninsured, she said.