Update: Note that in the GOP primary for the nominee to take on Denver Congresswoman Diana DeGette, there is no longer an active race. Kathleen Cunningham dropped her race against Martin Walsh. This post has been updated with that information in mind.

We’re happy to offer this midterm election cycle The Denver Post Voter Guide, ready for your review this primary season.

The guide gives readers a chance to read biographical information about the candidates and candidates’ answers to several questions posed by The Post. Readers can browse the answers of any candidate they wish, or simply enter their postal Zip Code to have the guide filter their choices by those races in which they can actually vote. The primary version of the guide stops at the state legislative level.

Mail ballots already are out. Voting concludes at 7 p.m. June 24.

Colorado’s primary season features a pair of big races among Republican Party candidates.

Republicans must nominate candidates for a challenger to the well-funded Gov. John Hickenlooper’s re-election bid. Their choices: former Congressman Bob Beauprez, Colorado Secretary of State Scott Gessler, former state Sen. Mike Kopp and former Congressman Tom Tancredo.

Unfortunately, despite our best efforts, we haven’t been able to get answers to our questions from two of the top gubernatorial candidates. Teams Beauprez and Gessler aren’t participating. We hope they will change their mind.

Republicans also are seeking to replace Rep. Cory Gardner in the conservative 4th Congressional District now that the congressman is running against Sen. Mark Udall. Running for the nomination are Weld County District Attorney Ken Buck, Weld County Commissioner Barbara Kirkmeyer, newcomer candidate Steve Laffey and state Sen. Scott Renfroe.

Democrats seeking to represent the Republican stronghold are Vic Meyers, who was nominated at the 4th CD assembly, and Dan Chapin, a write-in candidate.



Also of interest are several state legislative primary races, a Democratic race in the state board of education contest.

For the junkie, the guide also offers answers from opposition party races in the district of Colorado Springs Republican Rep. Doug Lamborn. The 3rd Congressional District features a Republican challenger to Rep. Scott Tipton.

The Post will relaunch the guide for the general election shortly after the primary season concludes.