Transcript for 'The View' Co-Hosts on Donald Trump, Hillary Clinton's Political Flip-Flops

So Donald Trump keeps getting away with completely changed his stance on so many issues and some people are calling upon and I think it's our time to call him on it as well also here just a few examples watch. I am pro choice in every respect and as far as it goes as you know and pro life. I think it at home very liberal when it comes to health care and I believe in universal health care. Obamacare is a disaster do you want Texas I'm not a welcome to go up or down they will go up. I'd like everybody of course what this resist. Everybody's getting a tax cut especially the middle class. I've known her and her husband for years and I really like about the line. I think she really works I think she does the job in the history of the United States there's never been a secretary of state. So bad as Hillary. He's getting himself. But don't have views can't what do you think about that and he's flip flops. If you thought it would what pops into deep flurries taper off after it dropped that Jackson you know he's got a big stack of pancakes all right but. Automatically pops up well in the edges of fair play he's not the only politician who does this take a look. Yes. Not just eight bond but a sacred bond between a man and a woman. I support marriage for lesbian and gay couples whose exactly to blame for the housing crisis homebuyers who paid extra fees to avoid documenting their income. Should have known they were getting in over their heads. I went to Wall Street. In December of 2007. Before the big crash that we had and I basically said cutting out. Quit for closing on homes. Occasionally I'll flip flip through hours and they did last night at a few laps went summertime I think. I. I just evolving and honestly I don't have a problem with that I think we've all involved at some point but you know listen Hillary is a master adequate indicating net giving kind of both sides as to confused. Here's Donald Trump who is beaten negotiated the art of the DL he said everything is negotiable this weekend quote I'm capable of cheap indeed anything I want to. So he switched on the minimum eight on the entitlement reform tax policy in Muslim bash brother lot of trumps all else. And it's 24 hour here feel okay about about a 24 hour period Eden involved. That's a cricket evolution I think quite get to enact a bit. Yeah. Now that's a few years in between that hair cut resulting from. I get that I you know this man and I think actually approach does it wants you don't like no debt and get the what's the way talks to his pant and his fans. He wanted eleven lick me it looks good right he wanted a love it all the time it's annoying. He's like a used car salesman it kind of its anatomy class. Want it's I've I can't get cited several land but it works the dots yeah.

This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.