Gone are the days of tiptoeing around the sensitivities of the Latino community. 'Amnesty' card: GOP's border war

So much for that fresh start with Latino voters.

In a dramatic departure from their determination only months ago to win a second look from that rapidly-growing community, national Republicans have embarked on a sustained campaign to make the immigration crisis a central issue in 2014 and exhort voters to punish the White House for failing to lock down the U.S.-Mexico border.

Story Continued Below

The intensity of their rhetoric has increased as a surge of child migrants has renewed attention to the border and amid anticipation that President Barack Obama will issue a set of executive actions on immigration, including potentially suspending deportations for countless migrants.

Gone are the days of tiptoeing around the real and perceived sensitivities of the Latino community, which holds powerful sway over the Electoral College in presidential elections.

( WATCH: This summer's hottest issue: Immigration)

Public and private polling shows border control creeping up the list of concerns among conservative voters and independents, and the GOP is responding accordingly. Republican candidates are lacing into the Obama administration and its congressional allies for supporting “amnesty” and casting them as unable to secure the southern border.

Three major Republican Senate hopefuls – Tom Cotton of Arkansas, Scott Brown of New Hampshire and Terri Lynn Land of Michigan – are airing commercials blasting their Democratic opponents for supporting “amnesty” and attacking “lawlessness” and “chaos” on the border. Other candidates are expected to join them.

At the start of August, the House of Representatives voted to reverse the White House action – dating to 2012 – that deferred action on deportations for illegal immigrants brought into the country as minors. The measure was hugely popular among Latinos during the presidential campaign that year, but it caused an outcry on the right as an example of brazen executive overreach.

And the most prominent national Republican voice on immigration and the border is no longer Florida Sen. Marco Rubio, the Cuban-American legislator who supported the Senate’s immigration compromise bill, but rather Texas Gov. Rick Perry, the swaggering border-state conservative who has deployed national guardsmen to the Rio Grande.

( Also on POLITICO: Immigration status may cost people Obamacare coverage)

It’s hard to overstate how sharply the GOP’s new strategy breaks with the party’s determination to enact sweeping new immigration policy in the aftermath of the 2012 election, when Obama won more than 7 in 10 Latino votes and prompted the release of a grim Republican National Committee report to endorse immigration reform as its primary policy recommendation.

Many prominent Republicans, from House Speaker John Boehner to billionaire super-donor Sheldon Adelson, still support immigration reform in word. But with the 2014 election squarely in sight, the party has spun away from a national quest to reintroduce itself to Latinos and planted itself squarely on the turf of the midterm campaign — where individual races are playing out in largely conservative territory in the Deep South and Mountain West states with fewer Latino voters.

Even Republicans who fear the party’s dire position with Latinos will hurt them in the presidential race just two years out say that prosecuting the case against Obama may need to come first for now.

Former Mississippi Gov. Haley Barbour, one of the GOP’s premier strategists and an endorser of immigration reform, called it appropriate for Republicans to campaign against any Obama action to “give amnesty to thousands and thousands – hundreds of thousands or however many it is – of children who have crossed the border illegally.”

( Also on POLITICO: GOP, DOJ duel on migrants’ legal aid)

“He doesn’t have the authority to do that by law. That’s something that Congress should decide,” Barbour said. “We do need to have immigration reform, but it does need to secure the border and do so demonstrably.”

But Al Cardenas, the former Florida Republican Party chairman who helmed the American Conservative Union, cautioned that what voters hear from the GOP in 2014 may resonate to the party’s detriment later on.

“The bigger the political prize is, the more counterproductive these hard-hitting amnesty positions are,” Cardenas said. “You can find certain congressional districts where, politically, maybe this kind of harsh rhetoric is self-serving.”

Republican leaders in Washington say that even a few months ago, the short- and long-term political math might have argued against a border-hawk message in 2014. Yet as the economy shows fresh signs of life and the white-hot national firestorm over the Affordable Care Act’s botched rollout subsides at least modestly, Republicans have turned with greater frequency to the broad-strokes argument that Obama and his party are simply incompetent to run the country.

Border control would seem to be a case in point: At the end of July, an AP/GfK poll showed that 68 percent of Americans disapproved of Obama’s handling of immigration. About the same fraction called illegal immigration an “extremely” or “very serious” problem.

National Republican Senatorial Committee spokesman Brad Dayspring predicted that go-it-alone immigration actions from the White House “would be the political equivalent of nuclear explosion for Democratic candidates.”

“President Obama’s Executive Amnesty would inject adrenaline into an electorate already eager to send him a message of disapproval,” Dayspring wrote in an email.