Residents can submit name suggestions for four public access natural areas along the Big Thompson River Greenway

Jennifer Hofmeister walks with her dogs Friday on the Loveland Recreation Trail between Taft and Wilson avenues. The city of Loveland is taking suggestions for names of this area and three other natural areas. ( Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Name the Natural Areas • Wilson and Taft avenues: "The natural areas between Taft and Wilson Ave. were acquired in the early 1990s for expansion of the Recreation Trail. Cottonwoods, willows, shrubs, grasses, and wetlands provide an outstanding diversity of habitat, benefiting songbirds, waterfowl, raptors, amphibians, and mammals. Birds to watch for include mallards, herons, hawks, chickadees, blackbirds, swallows, warblers, and orioles. You may also see amphibians such as garter snakes, frogs, or turtles. Mammals using this area include deer, fox, and mink." • 990 S. Lincoln Ave.: "This 13-acre river property just east of S. Lincoln Ave. was also purchased for the Recreation Trail. Many large cottonwoods shade the site and provide habitat for raptors and songbirds, and the dense shrub understory provides a movement corridor for mammals such as deer, fox and raccoon. Invasive Russian olive trees have been removed and lush native vegetation is thriving. This site is an urban oasis for wildlife and people." • 1135 Rossum Drive: "The 12-acre Rossum Drive property was purchased in 2015 and is part of an "oxbow," a U-shaped bend in the meandering river. The natural area contains wetlands, willows, cottonwoods, and upland fields, and conserves habitat for small mammals, songbirds, and raptors using the riparian corridor for nesting, resting, and feeding." • 1010 S. St. Louis Ave.: "The 37-acre St. Louis Ave. natural area was purchased in 2003 to conserve the wetlands created as a result of gravel mining. Many willows and small cottonwoods are establishing throughout the site, providing habitat for amphibians and songbirds. Deer, fox, raccoons, and mink have also been spotted here. This stretch of the river includes several large "point bars" and an inside bend of the river with an active heron rookery." Site descriptions from cityofloveland.org. To submit names, go to: http://bit.ly/1UdJN8U.

The city of Loveland Open Lands Division is taking suggestions for names for four natural areas along the Big Thompson River Greenway through Monday — and possibly a little later if needed.

Two of the sites people can submit names for have been owned by the city since the 1990s and are part of the Loveland Recreation Trail: the Rec Trail between Wilson and Taft avenues and 990 S. Lincoln Ave. Both are accessible to the public.

The other two areas, 1010 S. St. Louis Ave. and 1135 Rossum Drive, city officials purchased in 2005 and 2015, respectively. Both are expected to have public access within six months.

"It's become more of a priority to get more of our property open to the public," Open Lands Technician Debbie Eley said.

The 2014 Parks and Recreation Master Plan, adopted last summer, listed more public access to the Big Thompson River as a priority after conducting a study and survey feedback from residents.

Eley said officials encourage people submitting names to go out and look at the sites and think about them as well as to look up aerial street view photos of the sites to get a feel for the area. For the two areas not yet open to the public, she said people need to stay on public streets and right of ways.

Suggestions for naming the areas after individuals will not be considered unless the person is an owner of one of the properties who has made a significant donation, Eley said.

Anyone interested in submitting names can go through the website,www.cityofloveland.org/openlands or directly to the survey at http://bit.ly/1UdJN8U.

Staff members will narrow down the names submitted and the Open Lands Advisory Commission members will vote on the names at their Sept. 9 meeting.

Saja Hindi: 970-669-5050 ext. 521, hindis@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/SajaHindiRH.