He attended an afterhours networking event in Dublin, toured Crider Foods manufacturing in Stillmore, and visited Rocker Supply in Millen and Yardmaster in Swainsboro, two family-owned small businesses that sell a variety of home and garden supplies.

Less than two weeks before Election Day, the Republican nominee tabbed to unseat Democratic Rep. John Barrow was highlighting a relationship-building experience he said illustrates his strategy to remove the top-down regulations he believes are killing east-central Georgia’s economy.

If elected Nov. 4, Allen, a 62-year-old construction company owner from Augusta, said he’ll work to repeal the Affordable Care Act, commonly known as “Obamacare;” eliminate unnecessary environmental and safety regulations burdening farmers; and allow local banks and small businesses to say what practices are best for them through a system of peer reviews.

“We have to stop what this administration is trying to do to this country,” Allen said Monday at Sunrise Grill in Martinez before starting a four-day bus tour through the district. “They’re running wild. All of them need to be reined in.”

Allen believes the economy is ready to grow and said it can under a Democratic president, but only with a Republican-controlled Congress.

For instance, he argued that under Democratic President Bill Clinton and a Republican majority, a well-balanced budget resulted in a booming economy in the late 1990s and the U.S. having a projected federal surplus for the first time in 30 years.

Today, he said, a $500 billion deficit and added compliance and costs required under the 2010 Dodd-Frank Act have almost paralyzed the district’s small banks, the largest lenders for small businesses, which create 60 percent of the region’s jobs.

“We have to get the government off the backs of the business community,” said Allen, whose first plan of action is to work with constituents to determine what’s clogging up the economy. “People are making more money sitting at home than going to work. The government shouldn’t be doing that. We must give folks an incentive to work, otherwise we will not be competitive globally.”

Born and raised in Evans, Allen said he has specialized in free enterprise for 27 years through the support of his Christian faith, his wife of 41 years, Robin Allen, and his four now-grown children.

He has no experience in public service, but nearly qualified to run against Barrow in 2012, losing the Republican nomination to Columbia County farmer and former State Rep. Lee Anderson by 159 votes in a primary runoff.

He said through a lot of family encouragement he decided to run again and this time, after gaining commitments lost to Anderson in 2012 and studying midterm voting trends for the counties added to the 12th district’s in 2011, he projects a 58-42 win.

Allen said he will not become a career politician like Barrow, who is running for his sixth term. He plans to only stay eight years – or four terms – an agreement he made with his wife to return home and spend time with his eight grandchildren, one of whom is on the way.

“He does not need a job – we’ve had a job and a career already – but he really is passionate about this country and the direction it’s heading,” Robin Allen said. “We hope our children and grandchildren have the same opportunity for the American dream that we had.”

Allen asked voters to help this vision become a reality.

“If you like the direction this country is headed, vote for the same guy, but if you want real change, send a businessman to Washington and we will fix this,” he said.