This article is based on a piece first published by the Conservative Review, which you can read here in its entirety .

Conservative commentator and former Secret Service agent Dan Bongino, in an open letter published Wednesday by the Conservative Review, issued three questions to “liberals” as the 2016 general election cycle is nearly underway.

“I think it’s appropriate to start asking the remaining candidates questions about the ideology that guides their decision-making,” Bongino wrote. “Barack Obama said a lot of things as a candidate but when it mattered (i.e. executive amnesty, Obamacare, foreign policy) he disregarded what he said and took actions guided by his big–government-knows-best ideology.”

With that, Bongino issued a “challenge” to liberals to “answer these three questions.”

1. Do you believe in the rule of law?

Bongino said liberals “tend to give conflicting answers to this question when it involves specific legislative actions.”

The former secret service agent cites how liberals have defended Obamacare by saying it’s the “law of the land,” while criticizing current immigration laws as “broken.”

“You can’t be consistent and say that you believe in the rule of law if that belief means you only recommend following the laws that comport with your ideology,” Bongino wrote.

2. What is the safe limit for government debt?

Bongino said that modern liberals have “completely abandoned” fiscal responsibility, even as President Bill Clinton often spoke of balancing the federal budget fewer than 20 years ago. But now, according to Bongino, that idea “has become heresy to the modern liberal.”

“Despite our national debt closing in on an astounding $20 trillion and our future liabilities doubling, tripling, or quintupling that amount depending on the estimates you use, liberals continue to whistle past the economic graveyard as if all of this red ink is somehow a net positive,” Bongino said. He added that if liberals see debt as a “net positive,” they should be able to say how much debt is the “sweet spot.”

“Is it 30 trillion? Fifty trillion? One hundred trillion? … Don’t you think we’re entitled to know?” Bongino asked.

3. What special knowledge do government bureaucrats have about the economy?

Bongino pointed out that modern liberal candidates no longer seem to agree with the idea that free markets create prosperity.

He cited President John F. Kennedy cutting income tax rates in the 1960s and President Bill Clinton infamously declaring in the 1990s that “the era of big government is over.” He went on to draw a contrast between those two Democratic presidents’ statements and President Barack Obama saying to business owners, “You didn’t build that.”

“Given this, I would like to hear from liberal candidates what special knowledge government bureaucrats have that enables them to manage the economy?” Bongino asked. ”Are they telling us with a straight face that over 300 million Americans are simply too stupid to make their own business decisions and that a federal government…is better equipped to become the largest investment portfolio manager…in the history of humanity?”

-

Bongino’s challenge came just hours after Ted Cruz dropped his bid for the Republican nomination for president. John Kasich, who vowed on Tuesday night to stay in the race, canceled a scheduled appearance in Virginia on Wednesday morning. He is now scheduled to speak in Columbus, Ohio, Wednesday evening, where he is reportedly set to announce his own campaign’s suspension.

RNC chairman Reince Priebus declared Donald Trump his party’s “presumptive nominee” after the billionaire businessman’s crushing defeat over Ted Cruz in Indiana, while most agree that Hillary Clinton will be the Democratic Party’s nominee.

(H/T: Conservative Review)

–

Follow the author of this story on Twitter and Facebook:

Follow @jonstreet