“The greater the power, the more dangerous the abuse.” ~Edmund Burke, Father of Conservatism

Section 8 of the Constitution states that our government has the authority “To make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing powers, and all other powers vested by this Constitution in the government of the United States, or in any department or officer thereof.”

In other words, this clause grants them the power to intervene in our states affairs only when it is “necessary and proper.” This might sound ambiguous considering how the federal government has grown so dramatically since the Great Depression, but to them, it is quite clear: “It is a license to steal our rights any time they choose.” We have learned this about Congress: That “A man with a briefcase can steal millions more than any man with a gun.” (D. Henley)

The dreadful Necessary and Proper Clause was contentiously protested by the Anti-Federalists when it was first proposed by Alexander Hamilton in 1787. Its inclusion in our Constitution became a focal point of criticism for the states that opposed ratification.

Patrick Henry, Tom Paine, George Mason and other prominent Anti-Federalists angrily protested claiming it would destroy states rights and independence. Federalists James Madison and Alexander Hamilton argued in defiance. They defended its necessity claiming without it our Constitution would be “a meaningless piece of crumpled parchment paper!”

Patrick Henry, a great orator, delivered an impassioned speech that denounced the Necessary and Proper Clause. He claimed it would inevitably destroy individual liberty.

“I know not what others may choose but, as for me, give me liberty or give me death.” ~Patrick Henry

After the Constitution was ratified, the interpretation of the Necessary and Proper Clause was questioned constantly by both the Democratic-Republican and Federalist parties. Every time the Federalists steeped out of line they used this infamous clause as absolution for “stretching” their authority.

This was done so often it became known as the “Elastic Clause”. Until 1791 it was tolerated but when the government decided to get into the banking business those from both sides of the aisle called“foul”! Thomas Jefferson vociferated the loudest and scolded them harshly: “I believe that banking institutions are more dangerous to our liberties than standing armies.”

Hamilton’s plan to charter the first federal bank and have the government assume the war debts of the states made the South very apprehensive. James Madison along with Jefferson and others opposed the creation of this bank believing it would lead to increased federal authority over the states. They claimed there was no necessity or benefit for the government to get into the business of printing money.

In other words, it was not “necessary and proper.” Madison, a Federalist, who wrote the “Federalist Papers” under the pen name of “Publius”, sided with the Anti-Federalists in this dog fight, condemning this abuse of power. To embarrass Madison, Hamilton read excerpts from his claims in the Federalist Papers when he boldly defended a strong federal government: “Wherever a general power to do a thing is given, every particular power for doing it is included.”

When this historic bill was passed and signed by President Washington, many constitutional historians claim this was the beginning of the end of limited federal government. The legislative and executive branches had ventured into un-chartered waters blatantly violating the enumerated powers granted to them in the Constitution. With a stroke of a quill they set the stage for the continued reduction of the “unenumerated” rights of the states.

The Constitution which was once the main guardian against abusive federal bureaucracy and the protector of the individual rights of our citizens and states had been severely injured. And Madison was on the right side of history when he argued “It was unconstitutional to create the bank of the United States because doing so was “a great and important power” not expressly enumerated and therefore could not be implied.”

Throughout the years the Judicial Branch, whose obligation is to hold the government in check and protect the rights of the states, has broadly misinterpreted the provisions granted to Congress in the Necessary and Proper Clause. Some Judges have declared that it limits Congress to being a “servant” while others claim that it entitles them to be “masters.”

These judicial opinions about the clause become more tautologous and redundant with each court decision depending who is on the bench. The Supreme Court has exercised too much leniency by permitting unconstitutional laws and decisions by the other branches to stand, out of respect for this clause.

“Society is well governed when its people obey the magistrates, and the magistrates obey the law.” ~Solon

Justice John Roberts rocked the world with his recent precipitous back-flip to uphold Obamacare. By “stretching the elastic” of this elusive doctrine claiming it was necessary and proper to “tax” our citizens as a form of punishment not following an unconstitutional law, he set a new precedent!

Only a handful of Americans were happy with this decision. But “This was some good news today for embattled Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius. Obamacare will cover all her injuries after the White House throws her under the bus. She is totally covered.” (Jay Leno)

For decades Congress has taken a few more of our rights and privileges each session in the name of doing things that are necessary and proper. This makes one wonder who is the benefactor of this necessary and proper legislation? Is it necessary and proper for their special interest groups and the political groupies who financed their campaigns?

Judging by these continual, intolerable assaults against our rights and privileges, it is not being done to secure the “Blessings of Liberty” guaranteed to us citizens by the Constitution. According to Hamilton it was only meant to protect us from ourselves in the event we proved incapable of managing our own governments, and nothing more. Yet eventually even George Washington changed his tune shortly after he had been elected: “Arbitrary power is most easily established on the ruins of liberty abused to licentiousness.”

James Madison warned us that “The essence of Government is power; and power, lodged as it must be in human hands, will ever be liable to abuse.” Our Constitution clearly states that all laws enacted by Congress must be necessary to secure liberty, aimed at goals consistent with the enumerated powers, preserving federalism and the separation of powers and to protect the natural rights of our citizens. They have been violating these principles powers for decades.

The legislative and executive branches of the federal government need to be held strictly accountable to the provisions of the Constitution. But until we demand the judicial branch to strictly enforce the provisions of the Constitution instead of manipulating them with misguided political interpretation, we will continue to see the abusive growth and domination of federalism. “Judicial abuse occurs when judges substitute their own political views for the law.” (Lamar S. Smith)

George Washington told us “Liberty, when it begins to take root, is a plant of rapid growth.” And each day that our states rights are violated, we lose another liberty. John Adams warned us that “Liberty, once lost, is lost forever.” There is nothing “Necessary and Proper” about the loss of our rights and liberty!

“Liberty is always dangerous, but it is the safest thing we have.” ~H. Fosdick

All images courtesy of Shutterstock.com

William Haupt III William Haupt III is a retired professional journalist, citizen legislator in California for 40 plus years, and author. He got his start working to approve prop 13. More Posts

RELATED ARTICLES

COMMENTS