"This important achievement demonstrates what happens when Congress works for the American people," said Senate Finance Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch. | AP Photo Congress on verge of passing major tax deal

Lawmakers unveiled a $650 billion tax-cut package late Tuesday that would offer breaks to everyone from big banks to school teachers to small businesses to the working poor, in what would be the biggest tax agreement since the fiscal cliff deal.

The bipartisan legislation, which lawmakers have been working on in secret for weeks, would make several temporary business provisions backed by Republicans a permanent part of the tax code. Among them: a credit for corporate research and development programs that lawmakers have been rolling over a year or two at a time since Ronald Reagan was in office.

Story Continued Below

Democrats would get permanent renewals of stimulus-era expansions of two big low-income tax breaks, the Earned Income Tax Credit and the Child Tax Credit, that are set to expire at the end of 2017. A number of other provisions, such as so-called bonus depreciation, would be extended for five years, while others would get two-year extensions.

Lawmakers also plan to delay the Affordable Care Act's "Cadillac tax" on costly health benefits, though they've included that in separate legislation needed to fund federal agencies into next year. An Obamacare excise tax on medical devices would be suspended for two years, and a special tax on insurance companies would be delayed by a year.

The bill amounts to what is likely the last major tax deal of the Obama administration, as well as an instance of bipartisan cooperation at a time when gridlock has been the rule on Capitol Hill.

"This important achievement demonstrates what happens when Congress works for the American people," said Senate Finance Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch. "After years of short-term extensions, good faith bipartisan compromise prevailed."

The House aims to put the bill to a vote on Thursday, with Republicans predicting it will win approval, and the Senate plans to follow before lawmakers there head home for the holidays.

House Republicans will likely have to provide the bulk of the votes, after Democratic leaders there lined up against the plan.

House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi has complained the bill costs too much, and that it is tilted towards Republicans and their allies in the business community. She had demanded lawmakers include provisions indexing the $1,000 Child Tax Credit for inflation, at a cost of more than $70 billion, a proposal that was rejected.

Though House Republicans have been enthusiastic supporters of tax cuts, there are elements of the plan that could give some rank-and-file conservatives pause.

Perhaps the touchiest are provisions aimed at cracking down on questionable payments in the EITC and CTC. Republicans have long called for cutting off assistance to undocumented immigrants, who may claim the child credit. Unauthorized workers received $4 billion in child credits in 2010, and expanding the break could open Republicans to charges of adding to that.

But the idea of barring immigrants from claiming the break altogether is a nonstarter for Democrats, and the bill stops short of Republicans' demands to require people receiving it to provide Social Security numbers.

Instead, the measure includes about a dozen other provisions related to refundable credits. They include one that would prevent undocumented workers given quasi-legal status by President Obama's immigration order last year from retroactively claiming the EITC. That order is now tied up in court.

Other provisions would put more restrictions on who may receive individual taxpayer identification numbers, increase penalties on tax preparers for filing fraudulent claims and gives the IRS more time to review refunds claiming the EITC and CTC.

House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Kevin Brady called that a "downpayment" that would generate around $6 billion or $7 billion in savings. They would be "the first significant anti-fraud provisions in a very long time," he said.

Conservatives may also balk at the cost of the measure, which would reverse a string of declining deficits the government has seen in recent years. An official cost estimate of the measure was not immediately available, though Brady put its price tag at $650 billion.

Lawmakers also will have little time to consider the 233-page measure, and rank-and-file conservatives have long complained about being forced to vote on complicated matters on short notice.

In the unlikely event that the ambitious tax plan craters, lawmakers have backup legislation that would renew the so-called tax extenders through next year.

The bill's unveiling comes after weeks of closed-door negotiations that were complicated when the legislation became entangled with other issues, including the omnibus spending bill and proposals to ease restrictions on oil exports.

The legislation offers something to both sides. It vindicates a two-year effort by Republicans to make at least some of the business provisions temporary, something Democrats have long balked at over the cost. Back in May, the Obama administration threatened to veto House Republicans' plans to make the research credit permanent, because of the cost.

"We've got a number of provisions permanent that we've been working on for a long time," Rep. Charles Boustany, chairman of the Ways and Means tax policy subcommittee, said Tuesday evening.

That will also make it easier for Republicans to eventually overhaul the tax code because every dollar in tax cuts they can get now are ones they won't have to pay for later.

Democrats would secure prized anti-poverty provisions, without having to worry about who wins next year's presidential contest. The Cadillac tax delay would also let Democrats off the hook, heading into next year's elections, for creating the hugely unpopular tax that had many of their union allies up in arms.

The dozens of tax extenders that make up the bulk of the measure would get renewals of varying lengths.

More than a dozen would be made permanent, including a deduction for state and local sales taxes; expansions of the American Opportunity Tax Credit; so-called Section 179 investment writeoffs for small businesses; a deduction for teachers' expenses; a provision known as the "exception from subpart F income for active financing income" that allows multinational banks to defer taxes; and various charitable provisions.

Others would get five-year renewals, including "bonus depreciation," which gives companies extra-large writeoffs for investment expenses; the New Markets Tax Credit; the Work Opportunity Tax Credit; and a provision important to multinational corporations known as the "CFC look-through rule."

And still others would be extended for two years, which would be for this year and next.

The legislation could potentially put an end to the tax extender phenomenon, where, for decades, lawmakers have approved a hodgepodge of temporary tax breaks one or two years at a time, because they weren't able to stomach the cost to the federal budget.

That could be bad news for those whose favorite breaks would only get two-year renewals. The ones getting longer extensions are among the most popular provisions and stripping them away will give Congress less incentive to renew the rest after 2016.



Authors: