× District Court judge issues preliminary injunction against two provisions of NC’s voter law

WINSTON-SALEM, N.C. — The same federal judge who denied a preliminary injunction against North Carolina’s new voting law granted Friday, blocking two provisions of the law that prohibited same-day voter registration and out-of-precinct voting, according to the Winston-Salem Journal.

But the rules that North Carolina voters will face within the next month are up in the air because of a flurry of court filings that has now landed the case in the lap of the U.S. Supreme Court. On Wednesday, the 4th Circuit of the U.S. Court of Appeals ruled 2-1 to block the two provisions and ordered that U.S. District Judge Thomas D. Schroeder immediately issue a preliminary injunction.

State attorneys filed a letter asking that the Supreme Court issue an emergency stay of the injunction that Schroeder issued on Friday. Attorneys for the plaintiffs filed a letter late Friday asking that the court deny any emergency stay. Schroeder has scheduled a hearing Tuesday at 3 p.m. to find out how the state will comply with his order.

Schroeder had denied a request in August for a preliminary injunction that had been sought by the state NAACP, the League of Women Voters and others against the state’s voting law. The law not only eliminated same-day voter registration and out-of-precinct voting but also reduced the number of days for early voting, eliminated preregistration for 16- and 17-year-olds and increased the number of observers that political parties assigned at polling sites. The law also took away the discretion of county election officials to keep polling sites open an additional hour on Election Day in “extraordinary circumstances.”

The plaintiffs, who have also filed lawsuits challenging the constitutionality of the law, appealed Schroeder’s decision to the 4th Circuit, which heard oral arguments in Charlotte on Sept. 25. On the same day that the 4th Circuit issued its decision, state attorneys asked the court to stay its order. The court refused, and state attorneys immediately went to the U.S. Supreme Court. The plaintiffs in the case have until Sunday to file a response.

A trial on the lawsuits is scheduled for July 2015.

The 4th Circuit ruled that Schroeder abused his discretion in denying a preliminary injunction against same-day voter registration and out-of-precinct voting, that eliminating both would cause irreparable harm to black voters. The court ruled that other provisions, including reduction in the days for early voting, would remain for November’s election.

The timeline is tight. Early voting starts Oct. 23 and ends on Nov. 1. Election Day is Nov. 4 and features the closely watched U.S. Senate race between Democratic incumbent Kay Hagan and Thom Tillis, the speaker of the House and one of the main architects behind North Carolina’s election law.

Eugene Mazo, a Wake Forest law professor and an expert on election law, said he thinks that the U.S. Supreme Court will reverse the 4th Circuit in a 5-4 decision. One of the big questions in the case is whether Republican legislators were discriminating against Democrats or against black voters, he said.

“There is nothing wrong with discriminating against Democrats,” Mazo said. “There is something wrong with discriminating against African-Americans. In fact, it’s illegal. … It so happens most African-Americans are Democrats. What they’re targeting is unclear.”

State elections officials said Friday they plan to comply with Schroeder’s order.

“We will attempt to accommodate the mandate as best we can, pending any relief from the Supreme Court,” Joshua Lawson, a spokesman for the State Board of Elections, said in a statement.

Lawson echoed the concerns expressed by state attorneys in court filings that county election officials will have to use a manual process to handle same-day voter registration. State attorneys have argued that poll workers haven’t been adequately trained on that process, leading to the potential for errors. And, Lawson said, with out-of-precinct voting — when a ballot is cast in the right county but wrong precinct — election officials will have to determine which races a voter would have been eligible for and then hand-count the votes for those races only.

“Our counties are not created equal, and what may be manageable in large counties may be more difficult in others,” he said. “A large number of our counties have only one or two full-time workers.”

The Rev. William Barber, the president of the state NAACP, dismissed that argument during a conference call with reporters Friday afternoon.

“Without this injunction, African-Americans will have to bear the burden of losing their constitutional rights,” Barber said. “The courts have said that constitutional rights trump any other claim, especially a claim that we don’t have time.”

Barber said he’s prepared for whatever happens with the U.S. Supreme Court, referring to what civil-rights activists did during the days of segregation.