“Fatima is a young woman who went to work in a small community in Guinea (where) many of the women suffered unsafe, painful, and prolonged deliveries. … Fatima taught the women and the men about family planning … . The women then started to have much healthier children, and child mortality plunged.”

That anecdote was the high point of a speech delivered by Secretary of State John Kerry in September at the 20-year reunion of the U.S. Delegation to the International Conference on Population and Development (ICPD) held in Cairo in 1994. And Fatima’s is only one of the poignant success stories told.

Here are some of the statistical achievements revealed since 179 countries at the ICPD signed off on an agreement that promised to promote sustainable development, women’s education/empowerment, and environmental enhancement:

• Both infant and maternal deaths worldwide have been cut by 50 percent.

• Sixty-one percent of married women ages 15-59 in the less developed world now use family planning.

• The world population growth rate has fallen from 1.52 percent in 1995 to 1.15 percent projected in 2015.

But, as Kerry’s anecdote indicates, numbers are only part of the story. In 1994, for the first time at an ICPD, leaders of non-governmental organizations (NGO) were included in every delegation. Their presence forced the delegates to hold firm to the principle of “Make people count; don’t just count people.”

Here are two of the hundreds of NGO achievements over the past two decades:

• Thirteen African countries have now allowed injectable contraceptives to be administered by trained community health workers instead of doctors, vastly increasing usage.

• According to the State Department: “Marie Stopes International brings family planning services to women and men in 30,000 isolated urban shantytowns and remote rural locations in 26 countries, sometimes delivered by mule and camel train.”

Villagers who live on the remote shores of Tanzania’s Lake Tanganyika face two interconnected crises: how to protect their health and the environment that they depend on for survival. Impoverished and without health care, women and infants are dying.

Their fish — the villages’ livelihood and major food supply — are disappearing. Deforestation is a growing problem, as communities cut down trees in search of more firewood. This, in turn, forces Tanzania’s last remaining chimpanzees from their home.

Yet, as I write, a turning point has been reached. “Tuungane” — a multipronged project led by Pathfinder International, the Nature Conservancy and the Frankfurt Zoological Society — is partnering with these villagers. Their first job was to share knowledge with women on building latrines while ensuring that they finally have a choice about pregnancy.

The end result: Cholera disappears, babies live, mothers choose to use contraception to protect their own health and to devote their families’ limited resources to the children they have. Villagers are empowered to live healthy lives in balance with their environment. And the fish population revives.

A stove using minimal wood is introduced, so forest depletion is arrested. Chimpanzees are making a comeback.

But there’s more to the story … in my next column.

Dottie Lamm (dolamm59@gmail. com) former first lady of Colorado, was a member of the U.S. delegation to the ICPD in Cairo in 1994.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.