BOULDER — Lean and lanky at 6-foot-2, 167 pounds, Duane McClurkin has the ideal frame to soar as a high jumper, and it is for that event that he was recruited to compete for the University of Colorado track team. He would not appear to have the body type to blaze through the 400 meters, but he has been a revelation in that event this year as a freshman. He appears to have a bright future in both events, an unusual combo in track and field.

McClurkin surprised himself and his coaches last fall when he ran a 400 at practice without being in peak shape in 47.51 seconds.

“They were like, ‘All right, he’s going to be pretty fast,’ ” said McClurkin, who ran and jumped for Fountain-Fort Carson in high school.

“Incredibly fast,” said Lindsey Malone, who coaches multi-events and jumps at CU. “At that point, I think his mind was more open to what could be accomplished this year.”

Sure enough, McClurkin ran 47.78 at an indoor meet Feb. 13, putting him No. 3 on the all-time CU indoor list. He was 0.03 of a second off the mark needed to qualify for the NCAA Indoor Championships, and Malone has seen enough to believe McClurkin might have the talent to compete at the elite or Olympic level one day — in one or both events.

“There are certain athletes, you look at them going, ‘You have the potential to do this,’ and he is one of those athletes,’ ” Malone said. “It’s an honor to get to say that, to be in the presence of someone you think could accomplish those goals. And it’s incredibly intimidating, because that’s a lot of responsibility on both sides.”

Like most military kids, McClurkin moved around a lot while growing up. His mother is retired military. His father is in artillery, stationed in El Paso, and is deploying soon to South Korea. McClurkin started track in grade school when the family was stationed at Fort Stewart, Ga.

“I was pretty good then,” McClurkin said. “My nickname was Flash.”

In high school he discovered his ability in the high jump, which was apparent when he leaped 6-7 his sophomore year.

“I was like, ‘I could really go somewhere with this,’ ” McClurkin said. “I really started taking it more serious — started lifting more, really trying to have a love for the sport.”

Fountain won Colorado 5A titles in 2014 and 2015 as McClurkin posted high school bests of 47.97 and 6-8. He wants to compete in both events through his college career, offering a “guarantee” that he will qualify for both events at the NCAA Outdoor Championships this spring.

The 400 meters is one of the most painful events in track. Because pacing is critical, McClurkin follows advice he received from his high school coach, breaking down each 100 meters by “the four P’s,” which are: push, pace, position and pray.

“That last 100, you’ve got to just pray you keep your form and keep strong,” McClurkin said. “That last 20 to 25 meters is really starting to hurt.”

The high jump is far more technical, incorporating four different somersaulting moves to get over a bar higher than the athlete is tall.

“It takes consistency,” McClurkin said. “When you’re coming up to the bar, you have to make sure your run is not too fast but controlled. Your curve, make sure you have an angle. And when you jump, make sure you drive straight up. Most people would think you have to bend your knee. It’s kind of weird: You don’t bend your knee at all. You just have knee drive and make sure you use your arms. Then you have to make sure you have that nice little bend around the bar.”

Malone is working hard with McClurkin on his jumping technique, breaking down the elements piece by piece, willing to sacrifice setbacks now to help him realize his full potential. It’s a little like breaking down a golf swing to rebuild it.

“High school, they go out and have a meet every three days and they win and they have fun doing it,” Malone said. “It’s a three-month season. There’s not much time to practice.

“We have time. We have four years, five years maybe. That’s the challenge. How can we break this down so we can develop this correctly from the bottom up? My ego has to take a slight shot, his ego has to take a slight shot, because we’re going to be taking steps backward. The heights might not be there. It’s not going to be as consistent. But if we develop this correctly, it’s going to be the right foundation for years.”

Despite that process and the potential for what Malone calls “paralysis by analysis,” McClurkin surpassed his previous best high jump marks three times in the indoor season with a best of 6-9¾.

He also has an “adorable” personality, as Malone put it, funny and popular with teammates.

“He’s very focused, he’s very driven and he’s very competitive — I love all of those things — but he does all of those things with a really light-hearted demeanor,” Malone said. “That’s how I think he’s going to be so successful.”

John Meyer: jmeyer@denverpost.com or @johnmeyer