The Avalanche walked away with three of the four individual NHL awards it was nominated for in Las Vegas, but that was so 24 hours ago.

Nathan MacKinnon is already back to training for next season — and looking for a bigger trophy.

“It was something I wanted to receive,” MacKinnon said Wednesday at the Pepsi Center of winning the Calder Trophy for NHL rookie of the year. “Regardless of if I had won or not, I wouldn’t have changed anything of my season.

“You’d like to get something better than that as a team.”

MacKinnon didn’t know, at 18, that he was the youngest player to win the Calder Trophy. He credited his teammates and the organization for helping him win the honor.

“You kind of have a speech in your head, but you never know” if he was going to need it, MacKinnon said. “You don’t really get to enjoy it, because you’re thinking: ‘Oh, crap. I have to go talk in front of all those people.'”

Ryan O’Reilly, who won the Lady Byng Memorial Trophy for the player who best exemplified a high level of play with sportsmanship, offered no new details on his contract situation.

“It is what it is, the business part,” he said. “This summer, we’ll go through it, and it should resolve sometime soon.”

O’Reilly was penalized only two minutes the entire season, assessed after he played the puck with a broken stick in his 72nd game of the season.

Winning the award was a mixture of luck — including a few times he said he should have been tagged with a penalty — and the influence of his parents, who had encouraged him early on to play hickey intensely and with passion while respecting other players.

“They said to me they were very proud,” O’Reilly said. “To win this is a tribute to them for everything they showed me, and I’m proud to be their son.”

O’Reilly said the three awards were a credit to the change in culture from management and first-year coach Patrick Roy.

“We’ve changed the culture ,” O’Reilly said, “with everything the management has done, with (Patrick) changing the team and Nate (MacKinnon) coming in and being the huge factor he was. I think people are noticing that. We’re a team that competes, and we’re going to have a good chance at winning.

“Going to the awards and being around the top players in the game, I feel like I can be a bigger factor and contribute more. It’s a confidence booster.”

Roy, who won the Jack Adams Award for NHL coach of the year, was not present for the media, nor was Avs goaltender Semyon Varlamov, who finished second for the Vezina Trophy voting for the top goaltender. Roy was the first coach to claim the Jack Adams Award in his first NHL season behind the bench since Washington’s Bruce Boudreau in 2008.

Daniel Petty: 303-954-1081, dpetty@denverpost.com or twitter.com/danielpetty