Pictured (from left): Jeffrey Levi, Ph.D., Executive Director, Trust for America’s Health; James Knickman, Ph.D., President and CEO; New York State Health Foundation; Nirav R. Shah, M.D., M.P.H., Commissioner, New York State Department of Health (podium); Thomas Farley M.D., M.P.H., Commissioner, New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene; and Dan Sisto, former president, HANYS. (Photo courtesy of the New York State Department of Health)

The Department of Health’s (DOH) Population Health Summit, Making NY the Healthiest State: Achieving the Triple Aim, brought together state and national leaders to learn about the role public health plays in improving population health. Held on December 3 at the New York Academy of Sciences, the Summit was convened by Commissioner of Health Nirav R. Shah, M.D., M.P.H., and featured speakers who provided insight into public health approaches to improving population health.

Commissioner Shah kicked off the Summit with a panel discussion, A Whole System Approach to Achieving the Triple Aim--the New York State Experience. He reviewed DOH initiatives and goals related to the New York State Prevention Agenda and the “Triple Aim” of improving patient health and outcomes, enhancing the patient experience of care, and reducing costs; and population health management.

Jeffrey Levi, Ph.D., Executive Director, Trust for America’s Health, provided a national perspective on population health, the Affordable Care Act, and return on investment for public health. New York City Health Commissioner, Thomas Farley, M.D., M.P.H, highlighted Take Care of New York (TCNY): A Policy Agenda to Improve the Health of all New Yorkers, which tackles the leading causes of preventable illness and premature death in New York City. Dan Sisto, past president of HANYS, discussed hospitals’ role in improving population health.

Richard Besser, M.D., from ABC News, conversed with U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Director Dr. Thomas Frieden on key health topics including the importance of using reliable data and evidence-based strategies in program development, the safety of e-cigarettes, the proposed federal trans-fat ban, prescription opioid drug abuse, and antibiotic resistance.

Another panel featured examples of effective and unique partnerships to improve the health of communities, from Syracuse and the Bronx, and the day concluded with a panel that addressed The Role of Employers in Population Health: Improving Worker Health and Reducing Healthcare Costs. Jeremy J. Nobel, M.D., M.P.H., Medical Director, Northeast Business Group on Health, moderated the discussion, which included representatives from Johnson & Johnson, Inc., North Shore-Long Island Jewish Health System, IBM Integrated Health Services, and Service Employees International Union.

HANYS co-sponsored the Summit and has played a leadership role in the Statewide Prevention Agenda Technical Support Group. Contact: Eileen Clinton