Topics: Do Ya, Electric Light Orchestra, elo, Jeff Lynne, Movies, Mr Blue Sky, Music, soundtracks, Entertainment News

I have the Electric Light Orchestra on my iPod because… I own an iPod. And I tear up when I hear the do wop, dooby doo do wop background vocals to the ballad “Telephone Line,” because my brain is connected to my body and I’m not a fucking monster. But I have never truly embraced ELO., who are currently having a moment thanks to the release of their first album of new material in a decade and a half, “Alone in the Universe” (credited to Jeff Lynne’s ELO) and a few key TV appearances including the Grammy Awards, Jimmy Fallon’s “Tonight Show” and “Jimmy Kimmel Live.”

Part of my trouble with the band is Mr. Lynne himself. I like to look a man in the eye before I play air guitar to his towering riffs like that on “Ma-Ma-Ma Belle,” and the guy (who is sighted) has not removed his sunglasses in public in 40 years. There’s also a beard issue. Lynne’s persona is so un-rock ‘n’ roll that he makes Dave Stewart of Eurythmics look like Darby Crash. In the ’70s, ELO’s colorful logo was inescapable, but it always reminded me of Milton Bradley’s remedial computerized “game” Simon.

My father, a gambling man, once had a stake in a horse called “Strange Magic,” after another ballad which appears in Sofia Coppola’s “The Virgin Suicides” (although maybe Dad merely posed in the winner’s circle with the horse, as he used to like to do that). AM and FM radio were saturated with ELO hits. “Turn to Stone,” “Sweet Talkin’ Woman,” and “Rockaria!”— an aria… made of rock! You just couldn’t get them out of your head.

In the ’80s and early ’90s, while ELO went into something of a false hiatus (they still ruled radio, only now it was the “classic rock” format), Lynne gained a reputation for taking once nitty gritty guitar playing singer-songwriters like George Harrison and Tom Petty and making their records sound like they were recorded at the bottom of a wet Heinz beans can … and backed by ELO. People bought these records by the multi-millions. Lynne was also the second Traveling Wilbury to never remove those fucking shades (it’s amazing Ian Hunter wasn’t in that band).

Now before you roll up your sleeves, I’m not saying ELO were charmless or even pretentious (the whole O thing with the strings and the classical gas). I am confessing that I simply chose to resist them (I even had a very beautiful woman re-enact most of “Xanadu” in my apartment, to my utter lack of interest, but that could be my antidepressants in action). However, there’s a difference between resistance and escape, and there ain’t no escaping Mr. Beardo Shades. These days, it feels like I’m the only one who even wants to try.