At the risk of offending women — all women, in general; thinking women, in particular — let me say that “The Transit of Venus” is the girliest art exhibit I’ve ever seen in Colorado.

It’s not just a show of women’s art, it’s an audacious festival of middle-aged, menopausal, hippie chick affirmation. It made me wish I’d brought my yoga mat along to the RedLine gallery.

That’s not to say it’s frivolous. In fact, it’s feminist, serious, skilled and, at times, very good. The show features work from members of Front Range Women in the Visual Arts, a group that banded together in 1974 to pop the balls of sexism that surrounded museums, galleries and academia back in the day. The movement was largely successful, and this show serves as a celebration.

And so it indulges in gal power, starting with the gallery’s entry wall, painted the prettiest, pastel pink curator William Biety could have dreamed up. That serves as an unapologetic warning to the visual references that follow.

And they do. From babydolls, ponies and panties to quilting, meditating and makeup, and on to the doubled-edged imagery of Diet Cokes, flabby skin and food prep.

This isn’t art about those things, necessarily, but it taps such symbols to make its points. Cumulatively, it’s the rare exhibit that lets women be womanly, cliches and all.

The power of this excess is that it makes you look hard at the work, to see beyond those cliches. In doing so, Barbara Takenaga’s large-scale paintings go from giant tie-dyes replicated on linen to rich, acrylic abstractions. You look past the animal prints that catch your eye on Barbara Baer’s three-dimensional floor works and grow to respect their references to Alexander Calder and Joan Miró.

You swallow the icky feeling that Margaretta Gilboy’s oil of a couple kissing is about relationships and see it as deft, timeless and painterly; and you come to understand Virginia Maitland’s floating acrylic color blocks not as soft and fluffy tissue paper, but as serious explorations of form and shape.

It’s important to say that not all of this looking reaps the same rewards. As with every group show, the quality of individual pieces varies and the overall level isn’t what you see at every RedLine display, but it feels important at every turn.

Companion show

Female artists actually get a better showcase at a corresponding exhibit being staged by the Sandra Phillips Gallery in the Golden Triangle. Phillips, a trailblazer herself in Denver’s commercial art scene, jumped at the chance to highlight some of her female artists as a complement to RedLine. Her small group offerings prove just how far women have come.

Phillips has exceptional paintings by Maitland, including a multicolored diptych titled “Bright Red” that drapes together blues and blacks with one streak of crimson slivered down its middle.

Other highlights include Virginia Folkestad’s 3-D constructions of mesh and thread that resemble flowers, Ania Gola-Kumor’s small, mixed-media collages and Irene Delka McCray’s swirling, surreal scenes in oil.

This work has its feminine traits, too. It’s full of creamy lines and craft-making allusions. But here’s the thing: It sells for serious money and brings home the fact that women don’t have to mimic the work of men to have careers.

It wasn’t always that way. Four decades ago, when Front Range Women in the Visual Arts formed, women couldn’t get a break from curators or colleges. The group’s strategy was to be visible and mentor each other and the generations that followed. Their radicalism amounted to putting on shows.

People still argue about the role of women in art, but female artists now have solid places on the schedules of the Denver Art Museum and the Museum of Contemporary Art Denver and other institutions, on the faculties of the region’s art schools, in local galleries (though, room for improvement remains there).

They can succeed by making whatever kind of art they want: huge constructions of steel and concrete or delicate paintings set in kitchens. They can reference blood or butterflies.

At the risk of offending men, let me say that testosterone can be a barrier to rendering such intimacy. I see a lot of art by men, and it steers suspiciously clear of the human figure while professing to examine humanity. It leans toward social commentary and away from self-exploration. It can be distant, rely too heavily on technology and need too much explanation. Sorry, dudes.

Of course, women fall short, too. But failing means there is a chance to succeed in the first place, and that opportunity wasn’t always there. Some women, somewhere along the line, had to claim it. These chicks at RedLine were the ones who did.

Ray Mark Rinaldi: 303-954-1540, rrinaldi@denverpost.com or twitter.com/rayrinaldi

“MOVERS AND SHAPERS: COLORADO CONTEMPORARY WOMEN” A group show at the Sandra Phillips Gallery featuring Virginia Folkestad, Ania Gola-Kumo, Virginia Maitland, Irene Delka McCray, Carley Warren. Through Feb. 28. 303-573-5969 or thesandraphillipsgallery.com

“THE TRANSIT OF VENUS: FOUR DECADES, FRONT RANGE WOMEN IN THE VISUAL ARTS” Redline presents work by members of the ground-breaking Front Range Women in the Visual Arts, a group founded in 1974. Through Feb. 23. 2350 Arapahoe St. 303.296.4448 or redlineart.org