Thursday evening there was a gathering of high flying New Jersey Republicans who landed in the Hudson County Democratic Organization's own nest in Jersey City.

Hudson County GOP Chairman Jose Arango is head of the statewide county chairs this year and he decided to host a fundraiser at the Liberty National Golf Course Clubhouse for about 50 people, raising about $20,000. The plan is to start funding GOP races in urban areas, including parts of Hudson County.

Such a large group of Republicans in Hudson is a rare sighting so I decided to do some GOP watching and got an invite.

First I noticed there was a different aura to this event compared to Democratic Party shindigs. It's sort of the difference between Starbuck's and Dunkin' Donuts. What is the same is the congregation around the bar/altar. Also, there is a lot more fake kissing on the cheeks when GOP members meet.

Overall, they have more power ties and on the whole they're probably better dressed. Also, sorry Dems, but this group must have more runners because both male and female members look very athletic. That's not saying there aren't some Pandas, here and there, right Jose.

When I was about to be introduced to one woman and her friends, I thought she was a model. Her name is Tiffany Glenn Burress, who is an attorney in Ron Dario Jr.'s law firm in Hackensack. (I knew Dario's dad, Ron, quite well.) Oh wait, she was also a model and is married to former NFL wide receiver Plaxico Burress. Plaxico was there, tall and lanky, and, as polite as he was, I just didn't feel he was all that comfortable. There was no sign of a limp (don't ask). They're obviously the best-looking couple of any party.

The keynote speaker was Steve Forbes, editor in chief of Forbes Media, that includes that big financial magazine "Forbes." He was also nominated as a GOP presidential candidate a couple of times. He said that his Forbes Media empire will complete relocation from Manhattan to 499 Washington Blvd. in the Newport section in about three weeks. Forbes Media is bringing 350 jobs after being enticed over by a 10-year, $27 million New Jersey tax grant. Some of the company offices are also being moved to another Big Apple location.

Forbes noted that unlike others in the room, his drinks were free. Actually, I don't know anyone who had to pay – another big difference. I guess it depends on who's there and size of an event. I didn't have to pay for my Diet Coke when I asked the nice lady at the bar. Hmmm and the Johnny Walker looked good.

In his speech, Forbes lanced the tax code and the heavy amount of business regulations. It reminded me of Forbes' old line when he asked an audience to imagine "what would happened if government was in charge of clocks." He believes business and entrepreneurs can solve many of the nation's problems but government gets in the way.

When speaking about the United States' low ranking in encouraging business growth, Forbes says: "We're behind France! C'mon, France!!!"

He criticized President Obama and the Affordable Care Act. I'm sorry -- it's a GOP article -- I meant to write "Obamacare." He notes that improvements and corrections will take place once a Republican president is in place and the GOP has more control of government.

"You just can't get sick for the next three years," he said.

It was interesting to hear him say that several GOP congressional members-elect are ready to introduce legislation calling for a flat tax, the kitchen sink approach to tax reform. This issue has been debated for decades.

Others at the speaker's podium included potential GOP gubernatorial candidates: Lt. Gov. Kim Guadagno and two Union Township legislators, state Sen. Tom Kean, Jr. of Union, and Assembly Minority Leader Jon Bramnick. Bramnick sounds like he's ready to start wearing war paint. He says his job now is to get others elected to the Assembly. "I'm ready right now," he said "It's going to be fun."

Hamilton Councilwoman Ileana Schirmer attended. I believe her maiden name is Rodriguez, once a Cuban-American resident of Union City, graduating from Union Hill High School. Cuban-Americans vote Democratic, locally, and Republican statewide and nationally. The older generation blames Kennedy and the Bay of Pigs fiasco.

Schirmer said she left for Jersey City early to make sure she can find the golf course. Impressed by the clubhouse, I told her that a Jersey Journal photographer once grabbed a shot of Tiger Woods at a Barclay tournament, when he was just exiting a porta potty. I can tell by her expression that you have to know how to make small talk.

Crystal Ortiz of Jersey City's Hudson Catholic was there. Crystal is the state girls non-public school B cross-country champ. She received a big ovation and the teen seemed a bit shy about being the center of attention. Guadagno spoke to her about the young athlete's accomplishments and probably about, well, running.

Some other GOP chairs present were Aillish Hamble of Sussex County; Douglas Steindhart of Warren; Shaun Golden, Monmouth; Bob Yudin, Bergen; Al Gaburo, Somerset; Thomas Booth, Camden; and John Traier, Passaic.

Others of interest are Lobbyist Dale Florio, principal of the Princeton Public Affairs Group, Somerset County biggie; Ron Gravino, Gov. Christie's campaign treasurer; Russell Maffei, Jersey City Republican Party chairman; Hoboken Council President Jennifer Giattino; Republican State Committeewoman Irene Kim Asbury of Jersey City; Valerie Smith, co-director of the New Jersey Interdistrict Public School Choice Association.

Jersey Mayor Jerramiah Healy's son-in-law Jude Anthony Tiscornia, 29, a tax appeal attorney, who failed to win an Assembly seat in the 33rd District in 2013, was on hand. He told me that the Hudson Reporter's Al Sullivan wrote a nice article about him. I said he was lucky and went for another Diet Coke.

I should point out one guest, Frank Messini. He is a poet and actor, who played a bodyguard for the Al Capone character in "Boardwalk Empire." Frank purchased a Downtown Jersey City home and was recruited to join the local GOP, after the Dems suggested he join them but never followed up. He's not big into the hugging, yet. Messini just wants to get involved in his new hometown. -- very poetic.

BRAKER HAS LAST LAUGH

It was a bit of surprise, but then it shouldn't have been. Bill Braker, former Jersey City police officer, freeholder and more, was re-elected to head the Jersey City chapter of the NAACP.

There were some who believed that Braker's NAACP days were over and that The Rev. Reginald McCrae would come out on top. Instead, Braker won by a 105-63 vote margin.

Boy did the local political observers have this one wrong. Not only did the other ministers fail to help out McCrae, but what happened to his 600-member church? I guess none of them are card carrying members of the NAACP. What about all the area ministers? They can carry the gospel but not the vote.

All McCrae had to do was get 50 people to join the NAACP and he was a winner. I just wonder if anyone under age 50 voted. If people thought Mayor Steve Fulop was going to somehow help McCrae, they were mistaken. Even Housing Commissioner Aneesah Abdullah, considered a Fulop backer, was left in the dust by incumbent NAACP Secretary Phyllis Gordon, 125 to 34.

Now Braker's critics can complain about him for another two years.

Other winners were Mofalc Meinga, first vice president; Isnel Sanon, second vice president, Chanel Gordon (defeating Frances Thompson) is third vice president; Paulette Gordon, assistant secretary; and Harry Laurie, treasurer.