Jesse Watters thinks the term “anchor baby” is so unobjectionable that, in his “love the fetus, hate the child” mind, the media scrutiny over Republicans using that term can only be some kind of liberal conspiracy to avoid talking about how awful Hillary Clinton, President Obama’s Iran nuclear deal and “criminal illegal aliens” are. Or so he said.

Subbing for Bill O’Reilly last night, Watters hosted a debate about the term “anchor baby,” asking, “So, Republicans making a mistake by using the term ‘anchor baby’ or is it just the latest example of political correctness run amok?”

Watters gave away what he thought the answer should be before either of his two guests had a chance to speak, when he “joked” up front that he’s an anchor baby because he was substituting for anchor O’Reilly. “I don’t find it offensive at all,” Watters said.

Which is no surprise given Watters’ own race-baiting record and the cesspool of racism he presides over at Fox Nation.

Watters put another thumb on the scale of “fair and balanced” when he said to liberal guest Cathy Areu, “You have to admit, Cathy, that people do break into this country and have babies …in order to gain citizenship. That’s a fact. So what do you find offensive? Is it ‘anchor’ or ‘baby?’ What’s the offensive part?”

After Areu explained why she finds the term offensive, Watters took a gratuitous swipe at Planned Parenthood. “You think anchor baby is offensive. You know what I think is more offensive is Planned Parenthood harvesting the body parts of babies and then selling them for a profit on the tax payer dime. Isn’t that more offensive?”

In the first place, that’s a lie about Planned Parenthood. And secondly, if Watters is so pro life, then why does he keep allowing readers to talk murder on his Fox Nation site?

But that wasn’t enough smarminess from Watters. He said he was watching CNN in an airport the day before “because anytime anybody watches CNN, it’s in an airport.” According to Watters, all CNN was talking about was anchor babies.

WATTERS: Anchor baby, anchor baby, anchor baby. You know why? I think it’s a diversion. They don’t want to talk about Hillary being investigated by the FBI. They don’t want to talk about criminal illegal aliens. They don’t want to talk about the president letting the Iranians nuclear inspect theirselves (that’s a falsehood). So they want to talk about this ‘cause they think this makes Republicans look insensitive.

Later, as Areu continued to argue that the term is insensitive, Watters sneered, “You’re OK with aborting the baby, you just don’t want to deport the baby, is that what it is?”

Too bad Watters doesn’t have the same “pro life” attitude toward the born fetuses that his readers openly wish get murdered.

Watch Watters’ phony-baloney sanctimony below, from the August 21 The O’Reilly Factor.