Where is all this extra cash Americans are supposed to be swimming in thanks to a low average gas price of $1.85 per gallon?

The country’s largest motoring group, AAA, which tracks gas prices and driving habits, estimates that Americans saved $115 billion last year on gasoline.

If you listen to the monetary brain trust in Washington, with oil down to this level, it’s the equivalent of a gas tax cut, which should be moving the economy along.

True to form, US Treasury Secretary Jack Lew, speaking at the $100,000-per-invitation World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, last week, remains clueless and stubbornly out of touch with our economy.

Lew said, “The effect of lower oil prices on consumers may not yet be fully apparent.”

OK, that may be the most ridiculous and perhaps scariest comment he’s made yet.

Oil is in its third year of a colossal sell-off. It has fallen from a 2013 high of $111 a barrel all the way to below $27 last week — that’s a more than 76 percent decline.

How low do gas prices have to go for the US consumer to realize a dividend?

Compare the $1.85-per-gallon national average price of gas today with $2.82 just last July and $3.79 three years ago. We’re saving almost $2 per gallon from 2013, and the country is just not feeling it yet. So, Jack, could it be your analysis is amiss?

A savings of $115 billion should result in a huge direct infusion to Main Street. Where exactly did it go?

Retailers don’t seem to be feeling it, nor do the restaurant or leisure industries.

One area that is seeing increased spending is health care, which isn’t getting any cheaper.

The average rise in premiums for 2016 is expected to be 6.5 percent. Add in the deductibles and co-payments that seemingly grow larger and larger, and it’s evident a good chunk of the savings is going toward health care — and, of course, prescription drugs.

For many others, taxes also have been creeping up on the federal, state and local levels.

One other fact the administration and numerous economists seem to be blind to is that 95,000 jobs were cut from US-based energy firms in 2015.

“True to form, US Treasury Secretary Jack Lew, speaking at the $100,000-per-invitation World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, last week, remains clueless and stubbornly out of touch with our economy.”

Those were well-paying jobs for hard working middle-class Americans. If the average energy-related job pays $100,000 including benefits, the AAA estimate of $550 per licensed driver saved on gasoline in 2015 is really rather a trivial amount.

Perhaps my favorite comment made by Lew in Davos was, “I don’t think all that money is evaporating.”

Well over $2 trillion of wealth “evaporated” in the first three holiday-shortened weeks of trading in 2016, So I beg to disagree.

With Lew’s contention that the drop in oil prices acts as a tax cut, he forgot to add that higher taxes and out-of-pocket medical costs, and the loss of well-paying jobs, cancel out the gains offered by that “cut.”

He also forgot to mention that many pensions, 401(k)s and IRAs own oil stocks and bonds owing to their historically high dividends and payouts, and as prices fall, so do people’s nest egg values.

Oil is in a full-on contagious collapse that has spread to the entire stock market due to some stupid policies inside and outside of Washington.

There goes your gas dividend, Mr. Lew.