SAGINAW, MI — Saginaw's Health Delivery Inc. and Lapeer's Hamilton Community Health Network are among five Health Centers in Michigan to receive a total of more than $4 million in New Access Point grants to serve new patients.

Health Delivery has received a $1,083,333 grant, and Hamilton Community Health Network has received $983,333, according to a Michigan Primary Care Association news release.

The grant will allow Health Delivery to open a new Health Center in Old Town Saginaw, said Jeff Reinarz, director of communications and development.

Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell announced these awards among an additional $169 million in Affordable Care Act funding to support 266 new health center sites in 46 states across the country, according to the release. The new Health Center sites are projected to increase access to health care services for more than 1.2 million patients.

The more than $4 million in grants to Michigan Health Centers will allow them to provide care up to a proposed 24,435 Michigan residents, the release states. That's in addition to the more than $5 million awarded to eight Michigan Health Centers in May.

Health Delivery Inc.'s Old Town Community Health Center is expected to open at 804 S. Hamilton by Thanksgiving. He said the location will offer primary care to uninsured and under-served patients.

Though Health Delivery has 25 locations throughout the Great Lakes Bay Region, lack of transportation is a barrier for some patients.

"There's a huge need on that side of Saginaw," Reinarz said.

Health Delivery's grant also certifies the Arthur Hill school-based health center, Saginaw High school-based health center, and Saginaw Community Mental Health health center as Federally Qualified Health Centers.

"These funds build on the strong legacy of the Health Center program and provide even more individuals and families with access to the care they need the most," Acting Deputy Secretary Mary Wakefield said in a statement.

Rebecca Cienki, chief operating officer of Michigan Primary Care Association, said the New Access Point grants "will allow Health Centers to reach further into communities where necessary health care services are often scarce."

"This added investment recognizes the pivotal role Health Centers play in the lives of over 600,000 Michigan residents and the success Health Centers have demonstrated in improving health and wellness in the communities they serve," she said in a statement.

Heather Jordan is a reporter for MLive/The Saginaw News/The Bay City Times. She can be reached at 989-450-2652 or hjordan@mlive.com. For more news, follow her on Twitter.