People Moves of the Week: Citigroup, Paul Hastings, Carlyle

Citigroup names global head; Paul Hastings hires duo from DLA Piper; Carlyle taps former Covidien chief José Almeida

Carlyle Group (Nasdaq: CG) — José Almeida, former CEO of Covidien plc, has joined the Washington, D.C., asset management firm as an operating executive. Almeida oversaw the $50 billion sale of Covidien to Medtronic plc (NYSE: MDT) in a deal that closed in January. Almeida will provide strategic guidance and advice to Carlyle professionals and portfolio companies pertaining to the health care sector. Covidien won Mergers & Acquisitions’ Mid-Market Award for Strategic Buyer of the Year for 2012.

Citigroup Inc. — The New York investment bank reorganized its U.S. commercial banking business, and hired Murray Roos as global head of sales, equities and prime finance. Roos joins from Deutsche Bank AG, where he spent the past eight years, most recently as global co-head of prime finance and co-head of European equities. He previously worked at UBS, where he ran the Europe, Middle East & Africa index flow trading desk. Roos will join Citi's London-based office and sit on the global equities executive committee. This appointment follows the hire of Adam Hermann from UBS AG as global head of prime finance.

K&L Gates LLP — The law firm has expanded its Austin, Texas office with three new hires: Bill Moltz, Steve Morton and Janessa Glenn. The partners join K&L Gates from Moltz Morton & Glenn LLP, also in Austin. They specialize in various sectors, including manufacturing, agriculture, oil and gas, chemical, real estate and waste management.

Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group Inc. — Kanetsugu Mike has been named regional executive for the Americas, while Stephen Cummings was called up as the first American president and CEO of MUFG Union Bank NA, the banking subsidiary of MUFG Americas Holdings Corp. Mike was most recently a senior managing executive officer and deputy CEO of the global business unit of Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ, a wholly-owned commercial banking subsidiary of MUFG since 2013. He will retain that position. Mike began his career at the Mitsubishi Bank Ltd. in 1979. Cummings was previously chairman of investment banking for the Americas for UBS Investment Bank and head of corporate client solutions for the Americas at UBS Group AG. Prior to UBS, he was with Wachovia from 1998 to 2008, including as senior executive vice president and global head of corporate and investment banking.

Paul Hastings LLP — Partners Chris Dickerson and Matt Murphy have joined the firm’s restructuring and bankruptcy practice in Chicago. Dickerson and Murphy were previously partners with DLA Piper. Dickerson has assisted several large corporations in their Chapter 11 proceedings, including Circuit City Stores Inc., CIT Group Inc. and Zenith Electronics. Murphy, meanwhile, has advised ALCO Stores Inc., Velti Inc. and Education Holdings 1 Inc.

Reed Smith LLP — Sahra Dalfen arrived at the New York law firm as a partner along with Jody Saltzman, a commercial real estate lawyer with whom she has worked alongside for many years. Dalfen and Saltzman were both previously with Crowell & Moring.

WeiserMazars LLP — The New York accounting, tax and advisory services firm, the independent U.S. member of the Mazars Group, has added European firm Roever Broenner Susat GmbH to Mazars as a member firm in Germany. Christoph Regierer and Gregor Kunz, executives at the Hamburg, Germany-based adviser, are expected to join Mazars' executive board and group governance council.

For more information on related topics, visit the following: