HSBC made its name in Hong Kong and China more than 150 years ago, and now Europe's biggest bank is looking to the same area to secure its future. (Reuters)

With HSBC's announcement that it will lay off 25,000 workers, sell its Brazilian and Turkish businesses, and separate its retail operations from its investment banking in the United Kingdom, you could be forgiven for thinking that the financial sector is in some kind of trouble again, or that regulators have forced the industry to cede some of its stake in the global economy. You'd be wrong.

At least in this country, finance is back and feeling better than ever, as Neil Irwin wrote in the New York Times last month:

Seven years after a crisis that shook Wall Street to its core, the financial sector’s economic imprint has largely recovered. The number of people working in the securities business nationally has returned to 2007 levels, as has the gap between the compensation of Wall Street workers and that of everyone else. The financial sector as a whole is reporting profits that are as large a share of the overall economy as in the early 2000s and more than double their average level over the 70 years ended in 1999.

National and investment banks, though, are the ones that have enjoyed this success, not the behemoth international firms such as HSBC that have simply proven too cumbersome to manage, the Economist explained earlier this year. The costs of global scale outweigh the benefits, it turns out:

The panic about global banks reflects their weak recent results: in aggregate the five firms mentioned above reported a return on equity of just 6% last year...

There is a growing fear that the costs of global reach — in terms of regulation and complexity — exceed the potential benefits.

It all seemed far rosier 20 years ago. Back then banks saw that globalisation would lead to an explosion in trade and capital flows. A handful of firms sought to capture that growth. ...

These giant firms proved hard to manage. Their subsidiaries struggled to build common IT systems, let alone establish a common culture. Synergies have been elusive and global banks’ cost-to-income ratios, bloated by the costs of being in lots of countries, have rarely been better than those of local banks. As a result these firms have all too often been tempted to make a fast buck.

HSBC, apparently, has not been able to resist that temptation. In case you've forgotten, former Attorney General Eric Holder was explaining why the Justice Department hadn't prosecuted HSBC for its alleged involvement with Mexican drug cartels when he famously said that some banks have become "too big to jail."

If the decision not to prosecute HSBC resulted from its importance to the global financial financial system, that choice looks questionable in retrospect. Maybe a criminal investigation by Holder's staff and the possible loss of HSBC's license to bank in this country would have been the straw that broke the camel's back, or maybe not. It's clear the firm has serious problems, apart from the actions of regulators here.

Welcome to Wonkbook. To subscribe by e-mail, click here. Send comments, criticism or ideas to Wonkbook at Washpost dot com. Follow Wonkblog on Twitter and Facebook.

What's in Wonkbook: 1) HSBC consolidates 2) Opinions, including Brooks and Bump on Clinton 3) Obama to give speech on health care.

1. Top story: HSBC cutting 25,000 jobs

The decisions raises questions about the future of the bank and of British financial regulation. "HSBC is to cut up to 25,000 jobs around the world – including as many as 8,000 in the UK – as its chief executive, Stuart Gulliver, embarks on a fresh strategy to reduce costs and bolster returns to shareholders. ... Hundreds of branches will be closed in seven major markets including the UK, where the bank employs 48,000 in total. Unions in Britain reacted angrily. ... In a detailed presentation to shareholders Gulliver also set out the criteria the bank will use to decide whether to keep its headquarters in the UK... The job cuts are not part of that review, which will kickstart a debate about the government's tax policy and attitude to financial services companies." Jill Treanor in the Guardian.

HSBC has run afoul of regulators around the world. "Explaining why the bank had failed to hit its previous return on equity target — set when Mr Gulliver took over in 2011 — the chief executive said the performance was undermined by $11.1bn of legal, regulatory and other charges, as well as rising compliance costs and higher capital requirements. HSBC has been hit by fines and compensation for a number of legal scrapes, including rigging foreign exchange markets, breaching US sanctions and money laundering rules, and mis-selling payment protection insurance in the UK." The Financial Times.

"'Cutting 25000 jobs is inevitable consequence of loss of our core business of money-laundering, tax avoidance and Libor manipulation' - HSBC" -- @davidschneider

Other banks have been laying off workers, too. "The plans announced on Tuesday are the second major job reductions at HSBC since Mr. Gulliver became chief executive in 2011. A number of the bank’s rivals, including Barclays, Credit Suisse and Royal Bank of Scotland, have announced similar plans to reduce the size of their work forces and exit higher risk businesses. HSBC cut about 37,000 jobs between 2011 and 2014, but it has not benefited as much as it had hoped from the move because costs associated with regulatory compliance skyrocketed in recent years... Like many of its rivals, HSBC is looking to reduce the amount of riskier assets on its balance sheet, including cutting the size of its global banking and markets business and focusing on strategically important and profitable businesses." Chad Bray in The New York Times.

2. Top opinions

There's no evidence of a new nationwide crime wave, writes Franklin E. Zimring, a law professor at the University of California, Berkeley. "Is there a nationwide crime wave? On current evidence, probably not, and a careful analysis of official statistics in New York and Los Angeles provides reason for reassurance rather than alarm. Let's start with the uptick in violence in New York City. The most recent official crime statistics indicate that so far in 2015, the city has experienced significant declines from 2014's ultra-low levels in burglary, robbery and larceny. At the same time, total homicides for the first five months of the year at 135 are higher than in 2014 — but quite close to the pace of 2013 and around 30% lower than in 2010. At their current rate, killings in New York City would end 2015 as either the third or fourth lowest year in the city's modern history. ... For Los Angeles, some categories of crime are up from 2014 but the best indicator we have for 'spiraling gun violence,' the homicide rate, is down by 14.7% during the first five months of 2015. What spiral? To a student of crime data, this sounds much more like white noise than a blaring siren." New York Daily News.

BROOKS: Clinton is wrong to focus on her party's base. "America has always had tough partisan politics, but for most of its history, the system worked because it had leaders who could reframe debates, reorganize coalitions, build center-out alliances and reach compromises. ... If the next president hopes to pass any actual laws, he or she will have to create a bipartisan governing majority. That means building a center-out coalition, winning 60 reliable supporters in the Senate and some sort of majority in the House. If Clinton runs on an orthodox left-leaning, paint-by-numbers strategy, she'll never be able to do this. ... The mobilization strategy over-reads the progressive shift in the electorate. ... If Clinton comes across as a stereotypical big-spending, big-government Democrat, she will pay a huge cost in the Upper Midwest and the Sun Belt." The New York Times.

BUMP: Her strategy is the only one that makes sense. "There are fewer of the fabled 'swing voters' that Clinton counted on in 1992. Democrats vote for Democrats, Republicans for Republicans, and the main difference between the two of late has been turnout. ... Arguing that Clinton should focus on Southern states makes little sense for another reason: The South is not what it was in 1992. ... The rightward shift in the South is not a secret, but its totality also came more recently than you might think. ... So why would a sensible campaign try to yank Tennessee 15 points to the left instead of trying to get two points back in North Carolina?" The Washington Post.

YORK: Jeb Bush is shaking up his campaign team. "The move comes amid bewilderment and disappointment among some Republicans who saw Bush as the natural leader of the GOP race. ... Back in January, Bush stood nearly six points ahead of his nearest rival in the RealClearPolitics average. Now, he's just another candidate in an expanding first tier. Yes, it is still early, and yes, there is a long way to go, but that is not where Bush planned to be at this moment. ... More than a few observers were baffled by his halting, multi-day response to the question of whether he would have ordered the invasion of Iraq, knowing what he knows today. While a single episode won't sink a campaign, it shook supporters' confidence in Bush's ability to handle future setbacks." The Washington Examiner.

BADGER: An altercation between a cop and a black girl in McKinney, Texas, renews an old debate about public pools. "The setting, on a Friday evening in suburban Dallas, was a community swimming pool. ... For decades, swimming pools in America have been sites of racial exclusion. Many of the fights to desegregate communities and public resources in the 1950s were waged over access to swimming pools. ... As public resources were desegregated in American cities, communities increasingly found ways to privatize them. ... Americans have replaced — or, rather, withdrawn from — many of the public spaces and shared resources that were prominent in communities decades ago. And so private schools take the place of public ones, individually owned cars replace mass transit, secluded yards supplant public parks." The Washington Post.

3. In case you missed it

President Obama will give a speech on health care Tuesday. "White House officials said that the speech’s timing was unrelated to the ruling, and that Mr. Obama was not seeking to sway the justices in a case that they probably decided shortly after it was argued in March. But the White House is clearly stating its case for the law before what could be a challenging period if the court invalidates subsidies for millions of people." Michael D. Shear in The New York Times.

Most states don't have a plan in case the Supreme Court guts Obamacare. "Millions of Americans could soon lose health insurance when the Supreme Court decides the latest challenge to the Affordable Care Act, but states have made few, if any, concrete plans to deal with the chaotic fallout potentially just weeks away. When the court rules later this month, the justices may eliminate insurance subsidies in as many as 37 states that use the federal HealthCare.gov marketplace established through the health law. A state could restore the aid if it runs its own marketplace, as California and 12 other states and the District of Columbia already do. Just two states whose residents are in jeopardy — Pennsylvania and Delaware — have outlined strategies for preserving subsidies, however." Noam N. Levey in The Los Angeles Times.

Also Tuesday, a court will rule on Chris Christie's pension reforms. "New Jersey's Supreme Court will release its decision on Tuesday on whether Governor Chris Christie, a likely 2016 presidential candidate, violated public pensioners' contract rights when he slashed $1.6 billion from the state's contribution to the retirement system for this year. ... A win for the governor in court could provide him with a substantial lift to his standing while a loss would provide ammunition to his detractors who argue that Christie’s often heavy-handed tactics have not yielded a long-awaited recovery in the state’s fiscal and economic fortunes." Megan Davies for Reuters.

Clinton is getting ready for a series of speeches on economic policy. "Hillary Clinton is planning about a dozen speeches and announcements in the coming months on social and economic policy, aides say, with topics that include college affordability, women's pay equity and Wall Street regulation. So far, Mrs. Clinton has been silent on several economic issues that animate many core Democratic voters and that her Democratic opponents are pressing from the left, but which don't win universal support inside the party. Sen. Bernie Sanders of Vermont and former Maryland Gov. Martin O’Malley , who are competing with Mrs. Clinton for the Democratic presidential nomination, both support setting the federal minimum wage at $15, for instance, and breaking up Wall Street banks. Mrs. Clinton has taken a cautious approach, embracing social issues that tend to unify her party, such as gay rights and liberalized immigration laws, but steering clear of several riskier economic issues." Laura Meckler in The Wall Street Journal.

Iceland is eliminating its capital controls. "For a country that the International Monetary Fund sees as having suffered the biggest banking failure in history relative to the size of an economy, this is big news. Iceland was the first country to be hit by the financial crisis—and it was hit hard. Small wonder: it had a massive exposure to the volatile world of global finance. By 2008, the combined assets of its three biggest banks—Glitnir, Kaupthing and Landsbanki—were 14 times larger than Iceland’s entire GDP. By way of comparison, when Lehman Brothers collapsed its assets were only worth about 5% of American GDP. ... These days, though, Iceland's economy is looking much stronger. It grew by 2% last year, and should expand even faster this year. The unemployment rate has fallen to 4.1% and last year real-wage growth hit 5.8%." The Economist.

An economist argues that quantitative easing worsened inequality. "'Monetary policy currently implemented by the Federal Reserve and other major central banks is not intended to benefit one segment of the population at the expense of another by redistributing income and wealth,' writes economist Makoto Nakajima [of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia]. 'However, it is probably impossible to avoid the redistributive consequences of monetary policy.' ... If lower interest rates boost employment and the poor have higher jobless rates, then a loose monetary policy can be seen as redistributive in the direction of lower-income earners. At the same time, QE has been seen as key driving force behind a sharp rally in the stock market, which benefits the wealth disproportionately." Pedro Nicolaci da Costa in The Wall Street Journal.