John Dimsdale

September 25, 2014

As the Affordable Care Act (ACA) reaches deeper into the daily lives of Americans, one impact is sure to hit home. The ACA encourages patients and providers to become more active partners in making the crucial strategic decisions over improving individual health. Three new videos, produced in partnership with Health Affairs and the Patient Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI), show how people all over the United States are learning that involving patients – teaching them, soliciting their input, and communicating with family-members and other caregivers right from the start – can result in better, more efficient health care outcomes.

There is growing evidence that patients, once engaged, take better care of themselves. They’re more likely to monitor their own health, take their medicines, and communicate more thoroughly with their care providers. They have a better understanding of the treatment strategy. And they are more likely to participate in clinical studies or other research to find better, more efficient treatments.

I was privileged to report on and host these videos on the new era of patient engagement. I interviewed nearly two dozen people across the country – patients, doctors, researchers, care-providers, academics and community activists – all of whom have inspiring stories to tell about the benefits of focusing on patient centered outcomes. Time constraints meant that many of their important points landed on the cutting-room floor during the video editing process. It’s another privilege to be able to offer some of those additional insights in this blog.

Patient Engagement

Patient Engagement is a more dramatic change than it might first appear. Parkinson’s patient Linda Morgan, interviewed for the videos, tells the story of meeting a prominent researcher at a recent World Parkinson’s Congress. The researcher asked her all sorts of questions about her symptoms until she apologized for taking up all his time. “Not a problem,” he told her, “I’ve never met a patient before.”

He’d spent years studying drugs and researching chemical reactions but had never met anyone who actually suffered from Parkinson’s. As Linda Morgan says, “I think it’s really important that the patient become engaged not only for their own care. There’s the big picture for people to be involved because of the benefits to the broader population.”

Developments in technology have opened the door to this important trend. Cell phones, which have connected many of us to the office 24/7, can also connect us more closely to our doctors. A prime example, which is featured in the videos, is the CareSmarts cell phone application for diabetes patients developed by Monica Peek at the University of Chicago. Internet search engines give patients new tools for keeping track of what research is going on, what clinical studies may be underway, and what drugs are being developed.

Social media outlets have also enabled patients to reach out to others with the same symptoms, such as Kelly Young’s immensely popular website for sufferers of rheumatoid arthritis. Websites can also disseminate innovative health care tools, such as Cristin Lind’s care map, described in the videos. Some physicians and pharmacists worry the Internet is a mixed blessing, since there’s so much erroneous information out there. But at least patients have access to more information so they can ask better questions.

Provider Engagement

The patient engagement movement isn’t just for patients. Profound changes are in store for care providers as well. They include finding a new way of communicating with patients. As Cristin Lind, the inventor of the care map, says, “How do we talk to each other about this when we’re no longer talking about health care as something that’s being done TO me, or FOR me, but WITH me?” This calls for a new relationship between patient and provider.

Patty Skolnick, who became a patient advocate after losing her son to brain surgery she believes was wrongly prescribed, now conducts training seminars at hospitals around the country. “We put health professionals in the patients’ shoes and say ‘how does it feel?'” she says. “When they’re in that gown and their behind is sticking out because the ties don’t tie on the gown and they’re wearing those silly socks, they feel pretty vulnerable. Then they realize they have a different role to play when that patient comes in and asks questions. They realize that a patient asking questions is so important for their care, the care they’re going to give them.”

Jonathan Welch, an emergency care physician at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston, learned the hard way that patients can sometimes feel helpless and ineffectual. His mother died from what he believes was a misdiagnosis of an infection. He felt confused, vulnerable and even helpless as his mother’s treatment went awry.

That experience changed the way he treats his own patients. Now, he says, “I’m much more mindful of family members that are in the room along with the patient because they may have independent concerns in addition to the patient. They may be offering additional information. They may be the caregivers that are providing treatments at home.”

Research for Minorities and Underserved Populations

Patient engagement advocates are also working to encourage more participation by minorities and underserved populations in research designed to find treatments and cures. Civil rights and church activists are taking up the crusade. Take for example Regina Greer-Smith’s S.T.A.R. (Strategically Targeting Appropriate Researchers) Initiative outside of Chicago. Greer-Smith says medical research recruiters in African-American neighborhoods have to overcome a history of harm in health-related research for vulnerable populations (see especially the Tuskegee Study when the government failed to treat hundreds of Alabama sharecroppers for syphilis, in order to track the infection’s progression).

Greer-Smith says she still has to convince African-American women that there are now federal protections for participants in breast cancer research before they are willing to volunteer. Her goal is to increase the participation rate of minorities in health research. She is training a hundred volunteers south of Chicago to become facilitators, to spread the word through speaking engagements, testimonials, videos, and websites, about the medical benefits of participating in research projects.

You can expect this trend toward patient centered outcomes to have financial impacts on the $3 trillion health care industry. As consumers get more of a say in how their health dollars are spent, whole new industries are jumping to provide innovative tools for patients who want to keep better track of their health. According to IHS Technology, a market research firm, the demand for consumer-oriented monitoring devices, wearable gadgets, and other home medical paraphernalia, will more than double over the next four years. The trend should become self-fulfilling. The increasing use of home care technology is likely to create exponential growth in the patient-generated data that are needed to improve outcomes.

This also means hospitals will have to adjust to some big changes. The ACA reinforces the home health-treatment trend by rewarding hospitals that keep patients at home and slapping penalties on those that readmit a higher share of their patients. Patient Engagement has been called “the blockbuster drug of the century.” For that potential to be realized, both sides must accommodate to new forces. Patients, their families and advocates will have to learn from the examples presented in these videos.

For the past few months, I talked to many highly motivated patients. When faced with medical hardship, they took charge and partnered with caregivers to fashion treatments and strategies that work best for them or their family members. I hope their stories will serve to motivate others. Many patients may think they have only a limited capacity to engage in such a complex endeavor. The medical decisions that must be navigated by patient and doctor are not easy. The diagnosis can be unclear and the side effects from the available treatments can be daunting.

But in the comments from all the inspirational people I spoke with, one theme stood out. Patients really are the experts in their own histories, tolerances, priorities and pains. The most effective caregivers value patient contributions. Indeed, they solicit patient input and use that expertise to everyone’s advantage. So recognition and mastery from the care provider side is just as important as the pressure from patients, who are newly armed with the knowledge, skills, and confidence to become full partners in their own health care.