All the alleged evils besetting Alabama were uncapped Monday night and permitted to fly around the room.

Payday loans. The Alabama version of Common Core, bringing a "system of education that would fit right in with Nazi Germany," as one man proclaimed. The outdated, bulky constitution. The inability to procure CBD oil to fight seizures. Taxation on government pensions. A failing mental health association.

And, oh yeah, cornbread.

AL.com Opinion About the writer

Mark McCarter began working with The Huntsville Times in 1998 and writes columns on local news for the Alabama Media Group. Reach him at mmccarter@al.com.

Mark McCarter began working with The Huntsville Times in 1998 and writes columns on local news for the Alabama Media Group. Reach him at mmccarter@al.com. Read more

• Mark McCarter

The annual Madison County Legislative Delegation Public Forum was held Monday night at Huntsville City Hall.

From left to right across the dais, that's Mac McCutcheon, Tim Melson, Laura Hall, Jim Patterson, Clay Scofield, Mike Ball, Bill Holtzclaw, Phil Williams, Anthony Daniels, Steve Livingston, Howard Sanderford and Paul Sanford. (Ritchie Whorton and Arthur Orr were not able to attend.) That's your lineup of state senators and representatives whose districts are wholly inside or at least partially cover chunks of Madison County.

If nothing else, the event is remarkable in that it's two hours with a dozen politicians in front of the room who for the most part sit as mute and stoic as Easter Island statues.

It's a listening exercise for the elected officials, and it's not always pleasant what they hear.

"My stomach was always in knots for three hours," said a veteran legislator of these forums.

More than three dozen citizens, allotted three minutes apiece, took their turns addressing the elected officials. The most prevalent topic was the Alabama College and Career Ready Standards, a euphemism, most suggested, for the controversial Common Core initiative.

There was a resounding "anti" sentiment for its implementation, with easily a third of the speakers going on the offensive against it. If there was a Common Core proponent in the room, they'd no sooner said so than they'd wear head-to-toe houndstooth to an Auburn pep rally.

Often redundant, occasionally hyperbolic, consistently passionate, the wave after wave of pleas for repeal compared it to fascism, cancer, socialism, communism and, worse yet, Obamacare. It's doubtful that Karl Marx has been quoted as often in one night in at City Hall than he was Monday.

There was a sense among the Common Core opponents that the Alabama School Board hoodwinked the legislature, whose members wouldn't support the measure and be red-blooded Americans, so charged one speaker, if they were only more educated on the matter.

But, now to cornbread.

House Joint Resolution 379 passed the house last year and moves on to the Senate.

The resolution proclaims cornbread as the Official Bread of Alabama.

It was the night's best metaphor.

"You can choke on cornbread like you can on Alabama politics," said Hannah Ellis, who began her talk by referring to HJR 379.

It's not an uncommon perception, albeit an inaccurate one, that the folks we're sending to Montgomery spend, as Ellis charged, an inordinate amount of time and energy on frivolity and not enough time on real issues. Said Ellis, "They've made cornbread a priority."

The matter she brought to light was a plea to decriminalize midwifery, to give prospective mothers the opportunity to choose a non-traditional birth experience. Alabama is one of only nine states prohibiting the practice.

Rep. Jim Patterson answered Ellis' concerns.

"Until we can get Blue Cross-Blue Shield and places like Huntsville Hospital on board, your chances are slim and none," Patterson told her.

"You've got your work cut out for you," he said.

From the audience, a rejoinder:

"No, you've got your work cut out for you."

More than a few "amens" were uttered.

That work starts in Montgomery next week.

And the to-do lists grew longer last night.

The Madison County delegation got itself reminded that there's a lot less cornbread and a lot more meat and potatoes to deal with in the coming months.

What should be the state legislature's most important issue(s) to address and solve this year? Let us know in the comments below or email the writer at mmccarter@al.com