The Affordable Care Act (ACA) requires that insurance companies cover all FDA-approved contraceptive methods without a co-pay or deductible, the Obama administration clarified today. That means your birth control — whether it's the pill or the IUD or the patch or the ring or the implant or a sterilization — should be free. And if your insurance company is charging you, they're breaking the law.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

That rule has been in place since Aug. 1, 2012, but a report by the National Women's Law Center (NWLC) found that insurance companies across the country were violating ACA rules and charging women for contraception that should have been available at no cost.

"Insurance companies have been breaking the law and, today, the Obama Administration underscored that it will not tolerate these violations," Gretchen Borchelt, NWLC vice president for health and reproductive rights, said in a statement. "It is now absolutely clear that all means all — all unique birth control methods for women must be covered. Under the Affordable Care Act, women are no longer supposed to be at the mercy of insurance companies. It is past time for insurers to adhere to the law and stop telling women that their chosen method isn't covered or that they must pay for it. We welcome the Administration's guidance and know it will go a long way to improve the health and economic well-being of women and their families."

Most Popular

The American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists also applauded the clarification.

"Obstetrician-gynecologists know first-hand that contraception is an essential preventive service," Mark S. DeFrancesco, M.D., president of the American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, said in a statement. "It helps to avoid unintended pregnancy and also allows patients to control existing conditions before becoming pregnant, which means healthier pregnancies. Moreover, birth control can have important medical benefits outside of contraception."

Follow Jill on Twitter.