Gulf State Park convention center and lodge -- Bentley said the state needs to rebuild a convention center and lodge in Gulf State Park which was destroyed by Hurricane Ivan in 2004. "We are going to get it built," Bentley said. "I'm tired of going over to Sandestin (Fla.) to talk to Alabama people who go there for a convention." Bentley said the money for the new facility was not "in-hand," but $85.5 million had been set aside for the project though the Natural Resource Damage Assessment (NRDA) money to be paid by BP as part of the Deepwater Horizon spill settlement. Of that money, Bentley said around $58 million would be set aside for the convention center itself, with the rest going to other improvements within the park. He said he hoped to at least be able to tour the completed convention center by the end of his second term.

Foley Beach Express and other beach transportation issues -- After joking that all transportation complaints should be sent to Orange Beach mayor Tony Kennon, who urged residents to call the governor about his city's traffic woes, Bentley addressed the transportation issues of Alabama's beach areas. Bentley reiterated his plans to extend the Foley Beach Express north to I-10, stating the highway needs to be limited access, without excessive red lights, even if it limits the business development opportunities along the route. Bentley said the expressway should not "be like Hwy 280 in Birmingham," with traffic lights and major developments along the thoroughfare. Bentley was less specific about other transportation initiatives in the area, saying he'd like to extend the Foley Beach Express all the way to I-65 and build a third bridge to the Gulf Shores/Orange Beach area, though offering no few details beyond that.

On prisoners: 'We're going to treat them like human beings' -- During the question and answer, Bentley addressed, unprompted, Alabama's prison issues of abuse and over-crowding.



"We're not going to allow those kinds of things," he said of the abuses uncovered at Julia Tutwiler Prison. "When we hear about them, we're going to take care of them. These are some bad people but even if they need to be punished, we're going to treat them like human beings." Bentley also addressed prison over-crowding with an interesting remark about drug offenders. "If we're going to house people for everything in the world, for every drug offense and all that, if we're going to do that, we're going to have to build some more prisons," Bentley said. Earlier this year, Bentley just said no to the possibility of legalizing marijuana for recreational of medicinal use.

Stays firm on Medicaid -- An audience member asked Bentley about his controversial decision to reject federal dollars to expand Medicaid in Alabama. Bentley stayed firm on his decision, as he did in January's State of the State address. He called the Affordable Care Act "unimplementable, if there is such a word," and added that Congress had lost its chance to fight the bill, so it was up to the governors of individual states to push back.