Advertisement



Response to the cover

Re “Strong-arming the budget” (Cover feature, by Dave Waddell, Feb. 27):

Ironically, such high salaries hurt the very people these “public servants” claim to serve. A public service salary cap appears necessary to prevent this current legal form of embezzlement. Chico State has a similar problem, and its employees need a salary cap as well. We could have excellent public servants and professors with a pay cap of $125,000.

Andrew Lee

Chico

These salaries and benefits for police and fire personnel are unconscionable. “Professionals” are expected to work overtime for their salary and benefits that are paid. Private sector employees haven’t had defined benefits pensions for more than a generation. Instead, we suffer the vagaries of the stock market. Retirement at 50 years old is a joke. These employees manipulate their final year of compensation to get it to a high level and then get 90 percent of that for life? These jobs can be filled by competent people for half the amount currently paid. We need to stop this madness!

Patrick O’Connell

Chico

It’s absolutely unbelievable that the Chico City Council would allow some city employees to have such high salaries in our town. What is the matter with you, Chico City Council? You are supposed to protect the public’s interest, not drain our tax money by making certain city employees rich.

I say let the entire Chico Fire Department go and organize a volunteer fire crew, like many other towns have. As far as the remainder of the city employees, put a cap on their pay, such as no more than $100,000 a year for everyone, all benefits included.

What really burns me up is that last year, dozens of city employees were laid off by the city manager due to “budget constraints,” yet the city continued to use tax money to maintain the extremely high salaries. It sure looks like they laid off the low-paid city employees in order to keep the richly paid employees in the money. This is reprehensible.

Sue Eissinger

Chico

I was reminded of an observation made of financial problems facing General Motors before the company’s “bailout” and restructuring. GM was a retirement and health-care provider which, as a sideline, makes cars.

Chico and most other cities and counties in California are the GMs of today. The size of Chico’s payroll is troubling, especially given the fact that the average compensation for a Chico city worker is $99,000-plus in a city where the median household income is $43,000. In addition to seemingly lavish salaries, an enormous percentage of governmental revenue is spent on liberal pension and health-care benefits for former employees.

While Dave Waddell and Melissa Daugherty single out the Police and Fire departments with some justice if these two essential departments do, in fact, consume more than 80 percent of Chico’s general fund, the solution must begin with all employees, from the city manager on down. The solution must include both current compensation and future retirement/health-care benefits.

Our political “leaders” and the representatives of our city’s workers must remember that Chico government is there to serve the citizens of Chico. Government is not just an employment agency but an institution created to provide services for the public.

Alex Aichinger

Paradise

Thank you, CN&R, for the article regarding city employee pay. Why are these personnel so special that they’re making 2 1/2 times more than the rest of us, doing the same jobs in the public sector as we do in the private sector? Why do the city manager, Chico State president and CUSD superintendent make so much more than the manager at Costco: $109,000?

The average Costco store budget is three times the city’s budget. The Costco manager gets fired if his store’s budget gets managed like the city’s or the school district’s. However, the city and other public sector entities get a raise or bonus, even when they perform poorly.

The hardworking private sector taxpayers in this country need to stand up, put a stop to public sector officials ripping us off, and hold them accountable. The public sector pay should be tied to private sector pay, so balance is maintained. Public sector workers are the true 1-percenters.

Kevin Milliken

Chico

The article regarding compensation for Chico’s public-safety employees left me fuming. A dentist and a proposal writer (Jones and Skelton) purport to know what constitutes unreasonable compensation for public-safety employees?

I can only speak to the demands placed upon police personnel, those who patrol Chico every hour of every day. They are regularly assaulted, frequently injured, and exposed repeatedly to things that would leave an average citizen sobbing and scarred. These officers shrug off the hazards in an occupation that is more technically demanding than any other job I know. Constantly changing statutory laws, case laws and department policies govern every decision they make. Those decisions are then scrutinized in the media and the courts by predatory lackeys who profit from doing so.

The officers face an ever-more-disrespectful population, a criminal justice system that seems to defy logic, jails that cannot hold those who need holding, and innumerable other challenges. These challenges take their toll. Divorces are the norm, surgeries are common to repair injuries, and those officers who do work until they’re 50 are often scarred by the experience.

A good city begins by being a safe place. Without quality police services, safety and all that comes with it are not possible.

Matt Wolfe

Oroville

Editor’s note: Mr. Wolfe, a retired Chico police officer, is an instructor at Butte College’s Law Enforcement Academy.

Chico Fire Capt. Dave Main’s $37.33 hourly wage after 25 years of service in the department is not outrageous. I pay a plumber $90 an hour to unstop my toilet. Firefighters are highly trained professionals operating complex, expensive apparatus in dangerous situations where response time is crucial. They work a 56-hour week before earning overtime.

By comparison, the city manager’s $217,000 annual salary computes to $104.33 hourly based on a 40-hour week. I’m sure the city manager works more than 40 hours a week, but the story implies the public-safety employees are the cause of the city’s budget crises. Lost revenues are a major factor in the budget problems. The city has primarily focused on cutting staff and benefits as a solution. I have heard nothing about raising revenue to close the debt.

Public-safety employees are working overtime to provide a needed level of service. Some years ago, the City Council decided not to fill fire vacancies because paying overtime was cheaper than full staffing. The solution now is to lay off city workers and reduce overtime. That may work well for the city, but not so well for the rest of us. Insurance companies rate public-safety capabilities. When staffing levels drop and response times exceed national standards, insurance premiums rise for businesses and individuals.

Robert Main

Chico

Editor’s note: Robert Main is Dave Main’s father.

I want to give kudos to the CN&R for the article on the Chico Fire Department’s overtime abuse of the system. My brother was a City Council member and I remember specifically asking him why there was so much overtime given to firefighters. His reply was it was cheaper than hiring extra employees.

Well, having owned several businesses and being part of the “real world,” his comment always got to me. I gave him the benefit of the doubt, but when I read that a fire captain averaged 14 1/2 hours of pay every single day in 2010, I had to cringe!

Why don’t we have them work eight-hour shifts like the majority of employees? Why do they have to respond to every minor call when we have ample EMT services? We need a backbone in the city. I, for one, thank new City Manager Brian Nakamura for putting a bandage on the problem. I would hope the City Council members would recognize they too have difficult decisions to make.

Don Walker

Chico

Editor’s note: Don Walker’s brother is Jim Walker.

The CN&R’s excellent reporting on excessive city employee compensation is not a new topic. It once again qualifies as a continuing and legitimate scandal. Sadly, the only way this abuse will ever end is by permanently removing any opportunity for it to happen.

Reducing the availability of overtime funds would be a start. This effort will take our city leaders down the uncomfortable path of realizing that they must do so through stronger contract negotiations. Amateurish, unprepared council administrative leadership will result in city officials being hoodwinked again into even higher compensation packages. They cannot ever claim to be victims of collective bargaining guidelines. Please, no excuses.

The recent Fire Department grant may prove to be a classic example of this “tail wagging the dog” approach to financing that will cost taxpayers even more in the long run.

Meanwhile, the city’s chief accomplishment will continue to be that of producing millionaire city employees on a four-year cycle. All other services will stay secondary to this priority. Streets will develop more potholes and parkland will remain restricted or closed due to the lack of funding.

This entire unsavory disgrace makes me want to go out to the Bidwell Golf Course and start drinking heavily.

Doug Laurie

Chico

Well, well, well! Lost in the translation of the what or how discussion on Chico’s overblown public employee’s wages and benefits is the far-left, the left, and all Democrats who voted D for dumb.

Let me spell it out for you: Democrats need the public-sector unions to win. Unions told Democrats holding or running for office to increase union members’ wages and benefits, never mind the public, screw them; and the unions would make sure their members’ votes kept them in office—a win-win, right?

Let’s see, there’s Detroit, Vallejo, San Jose, San Diego, Stockton, Chico—thousands of cities across the nation, all run Democratically controlled into—or like Chico’s case, damn near into—bankruptcy and buried in financial debt. No wonder Independents now lead the state and country over Democrats and Republicans in numbers; we’re the public you screwed!

Rick Clements

Paradise

Scrap the CAP

Re “Gas emissions” (Newslines, by Tom Gascoyne, Feb. 27):

The so-called “Climate Action Plan,” state mandate notwithstanding, constitutes commission of waste of public monies and gratuitous punishment of citizens for no wrongs done. It’s a breach of the supervisors’ fiduciary duty to the people of Butte County.

In violation of federal law, no cost-benefit analysis was done for monies to be expended. Think it will produce any benefits? Prove it! Let’s see some empirical evidence, not “climate models.”

Can anyone still believe the thoroughly disproven “theory” that carbon dioxide causes global warming, after the testimony Tuesday by Dr. Patrick Moore, co-founder of Greenpeace, before the Senate Energy and Environment Committee that there is no justification for attempts to combat climate change? Why didn’t the CN&R report on his testimony? Does the CN&R dispute Dr. Moore’s environmentalist credentials?

I, for one, will be watching to see what additional costs and burdens are imposed by this reprehensible exercise in futility and petty tyranny. In particular, there had better not be increases in utility or grocery bills, taxes or other costs for low-income people proceeding from this ill-conceived action by the supervisors.

Chad Wozniak

Chico

Connecting the dots

Re “Gas emissions” (Newslines, by Tom Gascoyne, Feb. 27) and “Fracked to the last drop” (EarthWatch, Feb. 27):

Last week’s issue included two closely linked stories. News of Butte County Board of Supervisor’s adopting an “encouraging” Climate Action Plan included an ordinance to reduce methane gas from the Neal Road landfill by instituting a 75 percent diversion rate by 2020. Meanwhile, an EarthWatch brief summarized a study that found fracking—a water-intensive method of oil and gas extraction—is utilized most often in drought-prone areas.

Methane releases are common occurrences with fossil fuel production. Butte County has 26 wells producing natural gas at present. Whether fracked or not, natural gas wells release methane. Fracking releases more methane, most of which escapes into the atmosphere.

Methane gas is an extremely potent greenhouse gas, up to 80 times more powerful than carbon dioxide in the first decade after release. Reducing methane as well as carbon emissions is essential to limit the adverse impacts of climate change.

The county Board of Supervisors must address drilling sources of methane in addition to the landfill’s methane. Butte County’s 260-plus inactive wells are prime candidates for fracking or acid stimulation, potentially releasing enough methane to derail Butte County’s Climate Action Plan.

Joni Stellar

Concow

‘An important resource’

Re “Shalom on the move” (Downstroke, Feb. 27):

So, downtown business owners are afraid that is the Shalom Free Clinic Thrift Store’s move will attract the wrong kind of people. Who would that be? Someone who needs free food? Someone who needs information about the clinic? Someone whose hair is unkempt? Someone whose clothes are dirty? The Shalom Thrift Store is packed to the rafters with offerings. The shop needs more space. The clinic continues to provide an important resource in this town: a place where people down on their luck can receive compassionate help.

Mary Hayden

Chico

No excuses

Re “Two views on school board” (Letters, by Jann Reed):

I read the letter to the editor from a former Chico Unified School District School Board member trying to convey how tough the position is. I was a school board member for four years in Southern California and agree that the job is very difficult.

While I empathize with the tremendous pressure and workloads of the school board, I have to also add that we can’t use that as an excuse. The board I served on failed badly, and we all took responsibility for it. We had declining enrollment, aging facilities, but that wasn’t what hurt us the most. We were too slow to react and we relied on an administration that didn’t have the background or skills to counter the district’s situation. A subsequent board brought in new people with vision and it made a huge difference.

The CUSD has struggled for a long time for a variety of reasons. I can only encourage the board to focus on what will help teachers the most, and that’s not patting yourselves on the back for building a new structure. That won’t change anything but appearance. The board must accept responsibility for what must be done. Make improvements. That’s the only way.

Nina Maclaren

Paradise

‘A wonderful program’

Re “Study hall of the wild” (Newslines, by Howard Hardee, Feb. 27):

What a wonderful program you are offering to incoming students at Chico State. Learning skills that apply to everyday student life in such a healthy and collaborative method is genius. Kudos to Daniel Lovik, Jenna Walker and Keith Crawford for making this happen. Now get the word out to high school students, counselors and parents!

Marty Lenzi

Lafayette

Thank you, veterinarians

Paws of Chico Spay and Neuter Program would like to thank Valley Oak Veterinary Center and All About Pets Veterinary Hospital for their generous donation to World Spay Day 2014. Both agencies provided their beautiful facilities and volunteer staff to spay/neuter dogs and cats.

Valley Oak Veterinary Center provided support for the event that spayed/neutered 73 cats. Dr. Suzanne Hanson coordinated the full-day event held on Feb. 22. Four veterinarians, as well as registered vet technicians, vet assistants, receptionists, students and managers all volunteered their time and expertise to make this a very successful event. Many of the cats involved were strays and rescues that would continue to reproduce without intervention.

This is the first year that dogs were included in our World Spay Day 2014 event. A low-cost clinic was held by All About Pets Veterinary Hospital on Feb. 23. AAP volunteered their facility and staff to spay/neuter 24 dogs. These dogs came from financially struggling families. Without this clinic, it would have been very difficult for these animals to get the surgery they needed to help stop dog overpopulation.

A huge thank you goes out to everyone involved in this important event!

Cynthia Gerrie

Chico

Speaker series continues

Please join the Chico Taxpayers Association next Sunday, March 9, to greet District 2 Supervisor Larry Wahl, who will be answering questions regarding issues before the Butte County Board of Supervisors.

This event is open to the public, so please invite any Butte County voters who might be interested.

Thanks to those of you who have supported this speaker series—the next speaker will be Assembly District 3 candidate Ryan Schohr, on March 30 at noon.

Juanita Sumner

Chico

Smoking stinks

As a fan of being outdoors with my family, I wanted to express my desire to make the no-smoking (within 20 feet of buildings) law more well-known. Many stores seem to not know about the law, or don’t care to enforce it.

I have been to many stores and businesses throughout Chico that have ashtrays at the entrance, and that have no signs about the smoking law. I have seen employees smoking right outside the doorway. Hopefully the law will be enforced soon.

I joined KLEAN—Kids Leading Everyone Against Nicotine—as a way to make a difference and get involved, and I’ve found that I genuinely care about and support KLEAN and would like to see our group have a positive effect on the community.

Kennan Seguine

Chico

Think before speaking

When Sen. Harry Reid called everyone a liar when they explained their problems with the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, it reminded me of the toothpaste tube example I heard in Sunday School and used as an adult when I was teaching classes.

Once the toothpaste is squeezed out of the tube, it cannot be put back in. This is true with your words. Once spoken, they can never be taken back. The best you can do is to apologize. It is always better to engage the brain before engaging your vocal tubes.

Senator Reid knows he is being mean-spirited and creating more divisiveness among Americans. We need to have leaders who bring us together, even when we disagree with others.

Nancy Henry

Chico