Topics: cuddling, Editor's Picks, Life stories, Love and Sex, Portland, Innovation News

Located alongside a tattoo parlor, a lingerie shop and a shiatsu massage studio on a gritty stretch of Burnside Avenue in Portland, Oregon, where the air often smells of marijuana, Cuddle Up To Me is one of a handful of cuddle shops that have opened in recent years around the country. Before I paid for cuddling, I had an idea about the kind of people who might do this sort of thing: single people, lonely people, people looking, perhaps, for a bit more than cuddling.

“I get touched a lot,” I told owner Samantha Hess during our initial consultation. It seemed important for me to emphasize that I have an affectionate husband and two small children at home, as though to underscore that I was not a “typical” client. Underlying my assumptions about who would pay for cuddling was the question of what exactly clients are paying for. What is professional cuddling, really?

Hess, 30, who is a certified personal trainer and has written a book on the benefits of touch, is firm on the point that it’s not sex. To protect cuddlers and clients, the four themed rooms at Cuddle Up To Me are monitored by video; clients must surrender a copy of their drivers license before their session and sit through a consultation with their cuddler, after which suspicious-seeming clients may be turned away; a bare minimum of shorts and a tank top must be worn during cuddle sessions and areas of the body covered by a bathing suit are completely off limits. Clients can protect additional areas of their bodies from any touch by shading in portions of a figure drawing on Hess’s intake form.

Still, it’s easy to understand why professional cuddling makes many people uncomfortable. Though the business is legal in Oregon, Hess had difficulty convincing potential landlords that she wasn’t running a brothel. The neatly made full-sized beds in each of her cuddle rooms, soft music and various displays of mood lighting may have added to that impression. Each of the rooms has a different vibe. In the ocean room, Hess informed me, she and her clients tend to laugh more; in the Zen room with its deep red walls, people often fall asleep. I chose the starry night room, which is dimly lit by a purple star-shaped chandelier and a projector light meant to resemble the Aurora Borealis, where Hess’s clients tend to experience more emotional release. I requested a furry blanket and chose to listen to a playlist of meditative music.

Hess contends that cuddling — like massage, yoga, or meditation — is a way for busy people to relax. This wasn’t my first time paying to be touched, and the connection between massage and cuddling seemed obvious to me. Intimate as the process of taking off all of my clothes, lying down on a table and asking a stranger to rub oil all over my body is, I recognize that massage allows for a certain degree of anonymity that cuddling does not. My body may be present for a massage, but my mind is not. In contrast, the tensions Hess claims to ease aren’t located in sore muscles: “It’s so hard for us in our culture, where we are always having to be the best, to put up all of these fronts and be all of these people, and we always feel that we’re not quite good enough. But I’m not here to judge you. That’s not what this is about. It’s about knowing that you’re respected, accepted and worthy of a connection.”

It’s hard to argue with the value of unconditional acceptance, though the notion that it can come from a stranger is difficult for many people to swallow. According to Hess, though, a stranger — who doesn’t know you and who isn’t in a position to judge you — is the best person to deliver this message. Beyond that, she explains, professional cuddling allows clients to be completely selfish, receiving what they need without having to give anything in return. It brings them back to being children: loved, accepted and completely taken care of.