Buy Photo An American flag waves near Casa Azafrán, where President Barack Obama spoke on immigration in December 2014. There are as many as 50,000 undocumented immigrants living in Nashville illegally. (Photo: Shelley Mays / File / The Tennessean)Buy Photo Story Highlights Employment growth has not kept up with population growth and new immigration.

Requiring the use of E-Verify would discourage employers from hiring undocumented workers.

While our state Senate recently made the right decision to stand up for U.S. law and not honor Nashville immigration activist Renata Soto's election as chair of the National Council of La Raza's board of directors, Tennessee should do more to demagnetize itself to illegal immigration, beginning with a mandatory E-Verify law.

The National Council of La Raza, of which Soto's organization Conexion Americas is a branch, has received hundreds of millions of our tax dollars to lobby for Latino illegal aliens and work against U.S. laws, law-enforcement efforts, and national security, public safety and border security measures. Soto and NCLR are on record as supporting illegal labor.

Latinos can think for themselves. Forty-seven percent of Arizona's Latino voters, including a relative of mine, voted for a 2004 citizens' initiative to protect Arizonans and state resources from illegal immigration. Arizona has a tough mandatory E-Verify law to prevent hiring of unauthorized workers.

Data from the federal Current Population Survey and Bureau of Labor Statistics show a long-term trend of immigrants being hired at a faster rate than U.S.-born workers. The Center for Immigration Studies, analyzing government data, reported in 2014 that "since 2000 all of the net increase in the number of working-age people holding a job in Tennessee has gone to immigrants (legal and illegal), though the native-born accounted for 60 percent of the growth in the state's total working-age population."

The Center for Immigration Studies reported in 2015 that census data show that 76 percent of immigrant-led households with children reported using at least one U.S. welfare program in 2012. This is much higher than use by the native-born.

Employment growth has not kept up with population growth and new immigration. Immigrants take jobs in every skill tier. Construction, my father's occupation, has been so hard-hit by immigration (worker displacement, wage depression/stagnation, contractors underbid by those employing lower-paid illegal aliens) that Americans are discouraged from working in construction.

The federal government's broader U-6 measure of national unemployment is 9.9 percent, the labor participation rate is still around a historic low and the number of long-term unemployed has changed little since June.

Tennessee should mandate that all employers, including the state, use the federal E-Verify system and also fix the "individual contractor" escape routes. E-Verify is not perfect, but requiring its use closes federal and state loopholes that allow employers to claim ignorance and skirt the law on illegal labor.

Some Tennessee bills to require E-Verify are in play this legislative session. Some would limit the mandate to employers with certain numbers of employees, letting many restaurants, landscaping companies, construction companies and others off the hook.

Don't let this happen. Don't let the business lobby destroy another E-Verify bill. Contact your state representative and state senator in the Tennessee General Assembly now and demand a tough, mandatory E-Verify law for all employers.

Donna Locke is an immigration-control advocate who lives in Columbia, Tennessee.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/210cdRO