Questions are being raised over whether Dr. Carlo Musso, a former lethal injection doctor for the Georgia Department of Corrections, received special treatment in purchasing a 700-bed prison for half of its estimated value. "How much state government assistance should a private citizen get in launching a private for-profit business?" Sara Totonchi, executive director of the Southern Center for Human Rights, told the AJC . "Carlo Musso has found a cash cow in Corrections."

A man on Sunday night was held up at gunpoint near the Krog Street Tunnel and had his jewelry, wallet, keys, and sunglasses stolen. Once he handed over his possessions, the suspect allegedly pistol whipped the victim and made death threats.

Authorities have identified two people who were shot and killed in a southeast Atlanta home invasion this past weekend. According to Atlanta Police, no witnesses were identified. APD's homicide unit is looking for alleged suspects involved in their deaths.

Cobb County commissioners may have been a tiny bit sneaky about holding private meetings about the Braves stadium, the AJC says. The same goes for Paulding County airport officials over the prospects of building another metro Atlanta landing strip.

U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius yesterday passed through Atlanta to drum up support for the Affordable Care Act. When asked about proposed Georgia bills that would limit the federal health-care law's rollout, she said that would lead to local taxpayers "picking up that cost."

Edward Snowden yesterday discussed the United States' mass surveillance practices, the use of encryption, the consequences of his disclosures as part of a highly-encrypted South By Southwest video discussion streamed from an undisclosed location in Russia. "We've actually had a tremendous intelligence failure because . . . we're monitoring everybody's communications instead of suspects' communications," he said.

Investigators are still searching for Malaysia Airlines jet that went disappeared mid-flight. It's unclear if the Boeing 777, which had 239 people aboard, crashed, exploded, or suffered another grim fate.