Paul Lagae rewards Buddy with a treat for sitting properly during a recent obedience class at the Longmont Humane Society. ( LEWIS GEYER )

Longmont Humane Society training classes What: Discounted group dog training classes in recognition of National Adopt a Shelter Pet Month for all LHS alumni When: through Oct. 31 Where: Longmont Humane Society, 9595 Nelson Road, Longmont Cost: $65 (50 percent discount applied to standard $130 charge per six dog-training classes) Information: Visit longmonthumane.org or call 303-772-1232.

LONGMONT -- Rhea Moriarity manages the Longmont Humane Society's training and behavior department, not a casino.

"But dogs are gamblers. They're opportunists. So, they're going to try to get that jackpot just in case you're too distracted or too tired to deliver information about their behavior," she said.

To encourage consistency in staff and volunteers, she posted a cheat sheet on American psychologist B.F. Skinner's Theory of Operant Conditioning -- his system of associating rewards and punishments with behaviors.

Her philosophy and this practice reflects the Cadillac model of behavioral modification services the humane society offers animals and the community's prospective animal adopters.

"Lots of people, though, when they think of a humane society, they think of the pound -- the dog catcher with the traps and the poles. They think of a location that is loud and smells bad, and that's really not what we are," she said.

Advertisement

Changing this perception is critical given the funding shortfalls that have caused Longmont Humane Society to face foreclosure if it cannot make its $772,227 payment due Nov. 30 to Wells Fargo, according to Director Liz Smokowski. In 2006, the humane society took out a $6,036,000 bond to expand, and today carries a $3.1 million debt. The shelter's Now and Forever Campaign has raised more than $467,000 as of the first week in October toward the November note.

Taking on hard cases

Cindy Buck works with her dog Sadie during an obedience class at the Longmont Humane Society. ( LEWIS GEYER )

Some dogs come in profoundly disordered -- intent on biting, barking, digging, zooming, etc. To rehabilitate them for adoption, staff begins by kenneling them in the recesses of the building. The white board hanging in the foyer lists each dog's name, the behavioral concern and handling instructions based on Skinner's system of rewards and punishments.

Some humane societies only use rewards in behavior modification programs, Moriarity noted.

"But some behaviors are dangerous, and we would rather tell the dogs, 'No.' Sometimes, we can't be successful, and I want to say that I tried everything, not just treats, if we have to put them down to keep the community safe," she said.

Super quiet dogs get extra attention, too.

Moriarity called this type of behaviorally challenged dog a "deficit puppy" -- an animal that grew up without the usual social attachment, engagement and learning.

"Deficit puppies are different than genetically shy dogs. They are shut down," Moriarity said.

Though less aggressive than the animals kept in the private kennel, these dogs live on the main floor in cages with a sign that reads: "I'm not available for adoption. Check back."

The shelter socializes them as much as possible through regular interaction and, in some cases, behavioral modification classes with a volunteer handler.

Ultimately, though, it takes a relationship with the new owner to bring the dog fully into its own, Moriarity said.

Such was the case for Yukon, the male, 4-year-old chow mix Karen and Jack Kinney of Longmont adopted in June 2012.

"We realized that most dogs, like people, have quirks," Karen Kinney, 64, said. "But (the shelter) had already done some behavior training, and I think that gives these dogs a step up. Still, our dog turned out to have so many fears when we got him home."

Turning on the television startled Yukon, and he lived in the basement for five days because he had no idea how to climb stairs.

To secure placements like this, the behavioral team follows up with in-house or on-site training.

Kinney said that within five minutes of Moriarity's house call, Yukon could climb stairs.

Sadie, who is owned by Cindy Buck, participates in an obedience class at the Longmont Humane Society. ( LEWIS GEYER )

"And once he could climb the stairs, he discovered there was a whole other level of the house. He now bounds up and down the steps two or three at a time," she said.

Finishing school for people and pets

Because of the intensive behavior training of both the pet and the prospective or new owner, most dogs graduate from the shelter.

Katie Mitchell, the humane society's public training program coordinator, credits the program's success to its emphasis on the trainer as much as on the training.

For instance, during a Saturday afternoon behavior class in September, she taught patience along with sitting and staying practice.

"If you notice that a full step back away from your dog is too much, and she breaks position, then take smaller steps back," she said. "...If you take the time, your pet can become a totally different dog between the first week of class and the sixth."

Moriarity said the humane society teaches handlers to train when they are in a good place.

"When we're frantic, it's very hard for our dog to listen to us," she said. "Never train a dog if you do not feel calm and in control. Otherwise, you might be more harsh than what the dog deserves. ... Take a deep breath, put that dog away, and come back when you're more settled."

Dogs trained this way learn boundaries and handler expectations, she said. They learn that they can look to the owner for information.

"But we don't teach a 'Look at me' command because we want that to be a default behavior. We want them to be checking in all the time, and that dog is going to be a more confident and better behaved member of society," she said. "Eye contact is the most rewardable behavior, because when your dog is looking at you, they're thinking about you, and you are relevant."

Well-behaved dogs still gamble with breaking the rules every now and again, she said.

"But it's always about our consistency, and we don't ever let the dog think that we'll just give up," Moriarity said.

Pam Mellskog can be reached at Mellskog@msn.com or 303-746-0942.