Early indications of President Obama's greatness aren't good. A new Pew Research Center survey said that less than four in 10 believe he will have a successful legacy.

"When it comes to Obama's long-term legacy, the public offers a mixed assessment. About as many say they think he will be a successful (37 percent) as unsuccessful (34 percent) president in the long run, while 26 percent say it is too early to tell," said the poll analysis.

Obama has a lot on his legacy plate. He is the first African American to hold the presidency, he made early moves to build up the auto and banking industry, his team killed Osama bin Laden and he passed Obamacare. But many of his successes are seen as failures by conservatives.

Stay abreast of the latest developments from nation's capital and beyond with curated News Alerts from the Washington Examiner news desk and delivered to your inbox. Sorry, there was a problem processing your email signup. Please try again later. Processing... Thank you for signing up for Washington Examiner News Alerts. You should receive your first alert soon!

As he enters his last year in office, Obama also has middling approval ratings. At a steady 46 percent approval and 48 percent disapproval, he is behind former Presidents Clinton and Reagan at this stage, but well ahead of former President George W. Bush.

Among Democrats, however, he is a hero, one indication why Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton is clinging to him and his agenda.

"Democrats view Obama's legacy in similar terms as they saw Clinton's in 1999," said Pew. "Nearly two-thirds (65 percent) say Obama will be a successful president; 63 percent said the same about Clinton in January 1999, they added.

Also from the Washington Examiner G7 warns Brexit would pose risk to global growth British Prime Minister David Cameron won the backing of some of the U.K.'s closest allies in the battle to persuade his country's voters to remain in the European Union. At their annual meeting, this year in Ise-Shima, Japan, G7 leaders issued a statement arguing that the "Brexit," or Britain's decision to exit the EU, would pose a "serious risk" to world growth. "There are potential shocks of a non-economic origin," the leaders said in a declaration issued during their summit. "A U.K. exit from the EU would reverse the trend toward greater global trade and investment, and the jobs they create, and is a further serious risk to growth." Members of the G7 include Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the U.K., and the

The poll found that the priorities of Americans has shifted from the budget deficit to improving the economy and fighting terrorism.