Photo

FANCY FARM, Ky. — A day after Congress ingloriously left Washington, leaving town for a summer break with few accomplishments, members shifted to their real focus this year: the midterm elections, specifically control of the Senate.

The center of the political universe on Saturday was a town in far western Kentucky, where a pivotal and closely followed Senate race was fought in a metal farm shed, on a brick stage with a white picket fence meant to suggest a rural front porch.

But instead of genial and civil banter, there was an exchange of low blows and political zingers as Senator Mitch McConnell, the Republican minority leader, and Alison Lundergan Grimes, a Democrat who is giving him one of the toughest races of his long Senate career, blasted each other at a church picnic.

The decades-long tradition of political speeches at the Fancy Farm picnic signals the beginning of Kentucky’s campaign season. This year, it also provided a starting gun for the nation’s sprint to Election Day. Organizers said the crowd, which was spilling out of the shed 15-deep, was the biggest ever.

Mr. McConnell seized on the nationalization of their race, with each side attracting money from around the country, to slam Ms. Grimes as a favorite of Hollywood and Eastern elites, who “make fun of us at cocktail parties.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

He also attacked the national news media assembled. “Obama and his liberal buddies coming to Kentucky is like foreign travel,” he said, a line that drew a big cheer from his supporters, who occupied one half of the shed, opposite Ms. Grimes’s supporters, like two sides of a wedding.

Ms. Grimes, who raised more money in the most recent quarter than any Senate candidate in the country, embraced the out-of-state attention, accusing Mr. McConnell of losing touch with Kentucky after 30 years in Washington.

“Senator, the women of Kentucky and nationally are here today to send you a message,” she said.

She repeatedly emphasized her youth and gender, while portraying Mr. McConnell as, well, old and stuck in the past.

His approval ratings, she joked, were lower than her age, which is 35. His views of equal pay for women are from a bygone era, she charged.

“If Mitch McConnell were a TV show, he’d be ‘Mad Men,’ ” she said.

Mr. McConnell, 72, zeroed in on Ms. Grimes’s lack of experience, comparing her brief political résumé as secretary of state in Kentucky to that of President Obama’s.

“He didn’t have any qualifications at all,” he said. “Sound familiar?”

“Every time he got in trouble, and his inexperience became obvious,” he added, “he called in Bill Clinton. Sound familiar?”

Photo

Mr. Clinton plans to campaign for Ms. Grimes in the coming days.

That the race is close — polls show the candidates in a statistical tie — is perhaps surprising, given Kentucky’s conservative tilt. Mr. Obama twice lost by landslides in Kentucky, and the state’s other senator is Rand Paul, a hero to libertarians and Tea Party supporters.

“The national image of Kentucky comes from the Congressional delegation, but the state is a lot different,” Gov. Steven L. Beshear, a Democrat, said in an interview. “We are one of the most progressive states in the nation.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Kentucky early on embraced the Common Core education standards, and it is the only Southern state with its own health care exchange under Mr. Obama’s health care law, championed by Mr. Beshear, which has brought health coverage to large numbers of the rural poor.

Ms. Grimes has shown no inclination to run as a liberal, though. She has dodged questions of whether she supports the Affordable Care Act, and was similarly evasive when asked recently if she supported Mr. Obama’s request for funds to ease the border immigration crisis.

Both candidates are running essentially a one-note campaign.

Ms. Grimes’s campaign has focused narrowly on the theme that Mr. McConnell has lost touch with Kentucky in his 30 years in Washington. “One of us represents the past, one of us represents the future,” Ms. Grimes shouted, pointing a finger behind her at Mr. McConnell.

The senator is running an equally narrow and safe campaign. He is doing his best to join Ms. Grimes to the hip of the unpopular president. His supporters in the boisterous crowd twirled signs with Mr. Obama’s face on one side and Ms. Grimes’s on the other. Others wore masks of Senator Harry Reid, Democrat of Nevada, the majority leader.

That message was driven home by Mr. Paul, who spoke on the Fancy Farm stage immediately after Mr. McConnell. Setting aside for the day the issues he has advanced as he moves toward a 2016 presidential run, Mr. Paul echoed the McConnell campaign’s talking points — delivered in the spirit of the day in the form of a verse. “Grimes’s real pledge is for Obama,” he said. “Her first vote is for Reid. As for Kentucky, it’s too bad indeed.”

Both campaigns tried to claim they would be better supporters of coal, an issue with deep cultural power in Kentucky, even as the industry diminishes in economic impact.

“Environmental extremists who are trying to kill Kentucky jobs are bankrolling the Grimes campaign,” Mr. Paul said. Ms. Grimes, who has denounced Mr. Obama’s effort to cut greenhouse gases from coal plants, announced on Saturday her endorsement by the United Mine Workers of America.

Mr. McConnell had the sharper zingers, arguably because he had better material, using recent stumbles by Ms. Grimes, including misidentifying Israel’s Iron Dome missile shield as a defense against Gaza tunnel-diggers. “This week she came up with her own plan to keep folks from streaming into our country: missile defense,” Mr. McConnell said.

But Ms. Grimes arguably gave the stronger speech, one of the best of her race so far. She was steely voiced and composed, rousing supporters with a rising refrain of “Mitch McConnell doesn’t care.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

At one point Mr. McConnell, a master of the political attack, looked on, agape.