LITTLE ROCK — Gov. Asa Hutchinson said last week he wants the state Legislature to move away from what has become a yearly debate over the so-called private option and take a longer view of health care reform.

Hutchinson proposed retaining the program for two more years, after which he said he wants the state to implement something new, based on the recommendations of a task force. If legislators go along, the private-option could be virtually a non-issue in the session that enters its third week Monday.

That is a big “if” for a Legislature that saw its last two sessions dominated by fights over the Medicaid expansion program. Appropriating another year of federal funding for the program will require a three-fourths majority vote in both chambers, a high bar to reach.

“Over the course of the past two years, our state has been wrapped around the political axle,” Hutchinson said Thursday in a speech at the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences in Little Rock. “The phrase ‘private option’ itself has become politically toxic, so much so that it’s almost impossible to have a constructive conversation about health care reform without passions rising and folks taking sides.”

The private option is Arkansas’ alternative to the Medicaid expansion that was envisioned in the federal Affordable Care Act. A group of Republican state legislators crafted a plan to use federal Medicaid money to subsidize private health insurance for people earning up to 135 percent of the federal poverty level, instead of adding them to the state Medicaid rolls as the Obama administration proposed.

By the end of November, 223,456 private-option applicants had been deemed eligible and 213,200 had completed enrollment, according to the state Department of Human Services.

The program has received solid support from Democratic legislators but has sharply divided Republican legislators, as Hutchinson noted. Some GOP legislators who have voted against the program in the past or campaigned on opposition to it say they are still reluctant to vote ‘yes.’

“I still feel the same as I did during my campaign,” said Sen. Scott Flippo, R-Bull Shoals, who campaigned against the private option. “I can appreciate the governor’s efforts on this issue, it’s a difficult issue and it has been a divisive issue. But because a good majority of the people in District 17 still do not support Medicaid expansion, I’m hesitant to vote to support it to go through 2016.”

Sen. Terry Rice, R-Waldron, who has voted against the program in the past, said, “You can’t tell me how many people are going to be on that thing at the end of 2016. Costs are still a factor. It’s harder to cut people off or scale back after they’ve been on there. … I’ve still got my ears open, but I don’t know of anything I’ve seen that’s changed my mind.”

Sen. Cecile Bledsoe, R-Rogers, who chairs the Senate Public Health, Welfare and Labor Committee and has voted against the private option in the past, said she is still interested in “repealing the private option as soon as possible.”

But some who have opposed the program in the past say Hutchinson’s plan has changed things.

“I am prepared to vote for it, seeing that we’ll have and end to it in 2016,” said Rep. Justin Harris, R-West Fork, who has voted against the private option in the past.

Rep. Joe Farrer, R-Austin, who has voted against the program in the past, said of Hutchinson’s plan, “I’ll support it. To me, it ends it.”

Rep. Stephen Meeks, R-Greenbrier, who voted against the private option in the past, said after Hutchinson’s speech, “I’ll just say I’m more open to it than I was yesterday. A lot of it will depend on the details that come forth.”

The House and Senate did not meet Friday, giving members a three-day weekend that some said they would use to get feedback from constituents.

Several groups have already weighed in, including the conservative Americans for Prosperity Arkansas, which complained that Hutchinson’s speech lacked a call for an enrollment freeze, a mechanism for moving people off the program and a “definitive end date.”

Hospitals and groups that advocate for children, families and the poor have lauded Hutchinson’s call to keep the private option going for the next two years.

“(Hutchinson’s) approach does two important things — it keeps affordable coverage for more than 200,000 newly insured Arkansans and it helps hospitals and providers plan for the near future,” said Chris Barber, president and CEO of St. Bernard’s Healthcare in Jonesboro.

“We commend Gov. Hutchinson for announcing that he will support continued funding for the private option in 2016, his recognition of the benefits in providing insurance to more than 200,000 Arkansans, the savings for hospitals, and providing federal budget aid in 2016 for the state government,” said Lee Powell, director of the Delta Grassroots Caucus.

Rich Huddleston, executive director of Arkansas Advocates for Children and Families, said the group applauded Hutchinson “for laying out a pragmatic way forward on the private option, guaranteeing Arkansans affordable coverage, giving hospitals and health care providers more certainty, and protecting the state budget in the process.”

————

Dale Ellis contributed to this report.