Vote Now:

Do You Support Tougher Regulations on Abortion Clinics?

Urgent:

How Do You Feel About Stronger Regulations on Abortion Clinics?

Vote Here:

Should Abortion Clinics Be Subject to Tougher Regulations?

Numerous laws have been passed, starting in 1976 with the Hyde Amendment, in attempts to prohibit public funding for abortion services. However, your tax dollars might continue to slip through the complex health care system to fund abortions. According to Town Hall, a CNN poll found that 61 percent of people do not approve of tax-funded abortions.Here are four ways public funds can pay for abortions:Health insurance exchanges developed through Obamacare provided participants with coverage at reduced or subsidized rates, but the plans were supposed to prohibit coverage for abortions. Those insured were required to use personal funds to pay for abortions instead of through the insurance plans.Yet a Government Accountability Office (GAO) review of 18 health insurance companies in the exchange programs showed they didn't actually follow through on this requirement, according to the National Review. Abortions were paid, often without any itemization of expenditures reported.Insurance companies doing business in 28 states were under set standards that covered abortion services, according to the National Review. Individuals who had coverage from them, whether they self-paid for abortions or the insurance companies covered the cost, were automatically paying a part of their premium to cover abortion services. In those states, there were no health insurance plans that did not cover abortions.Regulations for the national health care plan completed in 2013 required that every participant in an exchange plan pay an additional amount on top of the regular premium amount to fund elective abortions, regardless of age or gender, according to The Heritage Foundation The insurance company would then use those funds rather than federal funds to pay for abortions. There was no opt-out. If you participated in the plan, you would be paying for abortions.Obamacare regulations required health insurance providers include coverage for essential community providers for low-income participants, LifeNews.com reported Among these essential providers were those providing family planning funds, including Planned Parenthood clinics. Planned Parenthood provides more abortion services than any other organization in the U.S.