Politics

Democrats Rely on Hillary Clinton to Win 2014 Senatorial Race, Not On Obama

Hillary Clinton's announcement of her bid for the 2016 presidency is not until next year, but already the former Secretary of State is using her fundraising prowess and influence to boost electoral turnouts for conservative-leaning candidates. Meanwhile, President Barack Obama's approval ratings have plummeted to all-time low.



Like Us on Facebook

With just two months until Election Day, the first lady to former U.S. President Bill Clinton has been shoring up the candidacy for Democrats.



Of late, America's most powerful political couple has been campaigning for the candidates of Arkansas, where Bill Clinton sat as governor before winning the presidency.



Kentucky Democrat Alison Lundergan Grimes has also been forging an alliance with the Clintons, not Obama.



And Senator Michelle Nunn, although working closely with First Lady Michelle Obama to boost voter turnout among independents, women and minority voters in Georgia, has publicly criticized the president for his Obamacare.



So far, many Democrats have avoided President Obama in public.



Democratic strategist Donna Brazile, also a long-time adviser for the Clintons, said that at the moment Hillary is "a natural fit in any state."



The same thing, however, could not be said of the unpopular Obama, who has kept most of his fundraising campaigns off-camera, according to reports.



In critical states where the senatorial race could decide which party would control the Senate, President Obama is expected not to campaign. These include Louisiana, Arkansas, North Carolina and Alaska. The Republicans are vying to win in these conservative states, which Obama lost in the 2012 presidential elections.



On Tuesday, Hillary Clinton headed a fundraiser for the Democrats in her Washington home, before holding a reception for the Democratic governors in New York on Friday.



The Clintons are heading to Iowa on September 14 to headline an annual fundraiser called Harkin Steak Fry for the Democratic candidates.



According to interviews with Democratic leaders, the shift to the Clintons is not an accident. It comes in anticipation of the 2016 presidential race in which Hillary is a strong contender, and partly from Obama's low approval ratings.



©2016 Chinatopix All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission