Badgers tight end Sam Arneson celebrates a touchdown in the first half. Arneson finished with three catches for 63 yards. Credit: Rick Wood

SHARE Postgame Video Loading... Video Loading... Badgers Chat Monday, Sept. 22

UW FOOTBALL

Jeff Potrykus, beat writer

Read Transcript

PLAYER OF THE GAME

Saturday was the first time Bowling Green coach Dino Babers was able to see Wisconsin tailback Melvin Gordon up close and personal.

Babers loved what he saw, even if it came at the expense of his team as UW rolled to a 68-17 victory.

"There is no doubt about it," Babers said. "That's the best tailback I've seen in a long time. We helped him, no doubt about it. We missed a bunch of tackles, but you can't take anything away from that man.

"There's a shiftiness about him, then you see his breakaway speed and then, heck, I saw two or three stiff-arms."

Gordon entered the day with 178 rushing yards and a touchdown on 33 carries in two games.

In the first half Saturday, he rushed 11 times for 179 yards and four touchdowns — on runs of 2, 50, 3 and 21 yards. Gordon carried just twice in the second half, scoring on a 69-yard run and adding a 5-yard run before heading to the sideline.

Gordon finished with 253 yards and five touchdowns on 13 carries for an average of 19.5 yards per carry. That average smashed the school record (minimum of 10 carries) of 14.9 set by fullback Ken Starch in 1974 against Colorado.

Gordon became the sixth UW player to score five TDs in a game. He joined tailbacks Billy Marek, Anthony Davis, Brian Calhoun (twice), P.J. Hill and wide receiver Lee Evans.

The performance pushed Gordon's all-time per-carry average to 8.26, which tied the all-time mark of Army's Glenn Davis (1943-'46).

"Today was his day," UW coach Gary Andersen said. "It was great to see him having success."

OFFENSIVE PLAY OF THE GAME

How does a tailback elude four defenders on a touchdown run of a modest 21 yards?

If you're Gordon, you accelerate through a seam at the line of scrimmage, run through the arms of a defensive end, use quick feet to elude a safety, cut quickly to your left to avoid a cornerback and then shift into high gear to run away from a linebacker inside the 5.

Bowling Green defenders had a chance to bring Gordon down at the 18, 13 and 10 before he used his speed to run away from linebacker Gabe Martin near the goal line.

That touchdown run, Gordon's fourth of the half, helped UW take a 41-10 halftime lead.

"All we have to do as an offensive line is put bodies on guys," UW right tackle Rob Havenstein said. "Melvin will juke one guy, spin one guy and hurdle another and then go through one more guy and score a touchdown.

"That's the type of player he is."

DEFENSIVE PLAY OF THE GAME

UW linebacker Derek Landisch, who made plays all over the field Saturday, should have had a critical interception.

He missed his shot, but freshman safety Lubern Figaro had his back.

Figaro's interception came with UW holding a 21-10 lead early in the second quarter.

The Falcons drove from their 40 to the UW 8, but on third and goal quarterback James Knapke tried to force a pass into the end zone to wide receiver Ryan Burbrink.

Figaro caught the deflection and returned the interception to the UW 43. A penalty for sideline interference cost UW 5 yards, but the Badgers needed only three plays to score and never were threatened.

"He dropped back so I knew it was a pass," said Landisch, who recorded two sacks and 3½ tackles for loss. "I was reading his eyes.

"The ball went straight through my hands. I should have caught it but I turned around and Lubern was right there. That was a great sight."

SPECIAL TEAMS PLAY OF THE GAME

Gordon wasn't the only UW player to break out Saturday. Senior wide receiver Kenzel Doe did as well, on punt returns.

Doe entered the day with three returns for minus-1 yard and an average of minus-0.3 yards.

Doe's first return was 38 yards to the Bowling Green 24 and set up a touchdown. He added a 37-yard return in the second quarter to the Bowling Green 34 to set up the Badgers' third touchdown.

The first return was impressive and bolstered the confidence of Doe, who added a 38-yard kickoff return.

Doe fielded the 37-yard punt at the UW 38 and headed straight up the field along the right hash. He eluded two would-be tacklers at the Bowling Green 40 and cut toward the left sideline. Punter Joe Davidson made Doe slow up and he was tackled from behind at the Bowling Green 24 with 14:01 left in the quarter.

"The punt return was definitely a confidence booster for me," Doe said. "I knew just get vertical. Last (game) I went side to side. So I knew this week I had to just go.

"And I give it up to our punt-return team. It wasn't just me."

INSIDE THE HUDDLE

■ As expected, UW used a variety of defensive packages in an effort to counter Bowling Green's spread, no-huddle attack.

The Badgers played their base at times but liberally used a 2-4-5, with four cornerbacks, or three cornerbacks and two safeties.

UW went on defense first and had 17 players on the field waiting for the Bowling Green offense to come off the sideline. Once the UW coaches upstairs identified the personnel grouping, defensive coordinator Dave Aranda relayed a signal to defensive line coach Chad Kauha'aha'a, who signaled the call to the players.

After that, the players had to make sure they were on the field or on the sideline.

UW players appeared a bit confused during one first-half series and the Badgers had to burn a timeout when they had only 10 defenders on the field.

Overall, however, head coach Gary Andersen was pleased with the use of the sub packages.

■ Redshirt junior quarterback Joel Stave, who did not participate in warm-ups against Western Illinois, was back in the rotation Saturday. Stave went third in the rotation, behind Tanner McEvoy and Bart Houston, and appeared to throw the ball well.

QUOTABLE

"You can hit a wall once or twice and it might dent a little. But over the long haul that thing is going to stand up. It was obvious they were a lot more physical than us." — Dino Babers, Bowling Green coach

BY THE NUMBERS

756 Total yards for UW.

644 Rushing yards for UW.

158 Rushing yards by quarterback Tanner McEvoy.

62 Offensive plays for Bowling Green, 23 below its average.

8 Rushing TDs by UW, tying the school mark.

UP NEXT

South Florida (2-2) at UW (2-1), 11 a.m. Saturday

South Florida evened its record Friday night with an ugly 17-14 victory over visiting Connecticut. The Bulls have struggled to run the ball consistently. Based on how well the Badgers ran the ball against Bowling Green, they should defeat South Florida comfortably.