Democratic front-runner Hillary Clinton last week became the latest presidential candidate to offer a plan to trim college costs.

It’s serious stuff. Soon the political class will have settled all the important arguments over candidates’ hairstyles, eyeglasses, family trees, foibles, fumbles, feuds with news networks, and ability to deliver a one-liner. Then everyone can turn our attention to what specific changes each would-be leader of the nation actually wants to accomplish.

There’s no bigger domestic policy question than how to make higher education more accessible and effective for promising young people.

It’s big on a substantive level, and big on a political level. First, the substance.

A college education and degree can transform a life. Collectively, colleges and universities produce the nation’s next generations of innovators and leaders. If qualified students can’t take advantage of opportunities for higher education, they lose and America loses.

The trends are worrisome.

The United States, once No. 1 in the percentage of residents with college degrees, has slipped clear out of the top 10. Blame, in part, cost: Even if they succeed in graduating, students walk away with huge loan debts — reportedly, more than 40 million Americans are carrying a total of $1.2 trillion in college debt, an average of about $28,000. The figures skyrocketed, far beyond the general cost of living, as recession-ravaged states slashed spending on public colleges and universities and raised tuition and fees to make up for it.

Californians know this all too well. Although the average student-loan debt here, $20,340, is the second-lowest among U.S. states, the 12.7 percent loan default rate here is actually higher than the rate of more heavily burdened states.

It was in the state with the highest average student debt, first-in-the-nation primary state New Hampshire, that Clinton unveiled her proposal to fix things. Her “New College Compact” is a plan for the federal government to spend $350 billion over 10 years — using revenue raised from eliminating some tax deductions for high earners — to help states guarantee “no-loan” tuition at public universities and community colleges while also encouraging states to raise education spending and cost-cutting.

Clinton’s plan comes after Democratic rival Sen. Bernie Sanders introduced legislation aimed at eliminating tuition at public universities through higher Wall Street taxes, and Martin O’Malley proposed a loan-refinancing program and more federal financial aid.

Although the Clinton plan draws on ideas pushed by Republican lawmakers, the GOP presidential candidates have criticized the proposed tax hike and “top-down” federal influence. Marco Rubio called it “Obamacare for college.” (The issue was barely mentioned in the Aug. 6 GOP debates.)

Advertisement

So, second, the politics. While any of the liberals’ plans would be a long shot to pass a conservative Congress, it could be a political winner. The proposals are ways for the Democratic hopefuls to draw policy distinctions from each other, and a way for the party to separate itself from the GOP.

As both sides court the young voters who helped elect President Obama, any serious candidate must lay out a plan for helping young people fulfill their dreams. And young voters must press them on the issue.

Clinton’s proposal puts it front and center. Let the college-affordability debate begin.