All I did was go to Atlanta for a week to visit my younger sister, and, well, the world sort of went to heck.

In the short time I was out of Wisconsin, the Brewers unveiled a bratwurst guaranteed to send your cholesterol levels beyond the stratosphere, the entire universe threatened to implode and Ted “the president is the anti-Christ” Cruz went on Obamacare.

Talk about your March Madness.

First, the good news: If you head north to see the Brew Crew in action this season, you can consume an entire week’s worth of fat and sodium with one food order.

Meet the “Down Wisconsin Avenue” brat.

The blueprint: This “Ultimate Wisconsin Brat” is covered with french fries, gravy, cheese curds, sauerkraut, cheese sauce, fried jalapenos, sour cream and chives. They left out a kitchen sink only because it caused the bun to get too soggy.

All this — and it’s not even State Fair season yet!

But — as they say in the infomercials —

wait, there’s more!

The Brewers’ concessions team has also come up with “Inside the Park Nachos,” which are basically nachos-on-a-stick. Take some taco meat, cover it with a crushed Doritos “breading,” add cheese sauce and sour cream and you’re good to go.

Besides fulfilling the Wisconsin state law requiring sports teams and festivals to serve crazy foods, these new menu items serve a practical purpose, too. By the time you awaken from your cheese coma, the Packers will be playing and you’ll forget that the Brewers’ pitching was weak.

The end is near!

Now, the better news: You may as well indulge in these calorie bombs because the whole world is about to be destroyed.

That’s according to physicists who are reporting that our universe will soon stop expanding and collapse in on itself, obliterating all matter as we know it. Lucky for us, in science-speak, “imminent” means tens of billions of years, give or take.

So I guess we can go back to worrying about ISIS, student loans, Hillary’s emails, interest rates, Vladimir Putin and the Iran nuke talks.

Antonio Padilla at the University of Nottingham told Phys.org, “We are seeing dark energy now that could be taken as an indication of impending doom, and we are trying to look at the data to put some figures on the end date.”

Cheers!

Oh, and Ted Cruz? The junior senator from Texas turned GOP presidential candidate recently announced he is going on Obamacare now that his wife is taking an unpaid leave of absence from Goldman Sachs and is giving up her health insurance.

Apparently, Cruz — who has made repealing the Affordable Care Act the centerpiece of his political life — does not know the meaning of the word irony. Or maybe he’s counting on the universe imploding.

Have a comment? Email Liz at esnyder@kenoshanews.com or call her at 262-656-6271.

Final Four, baby!

How ’bout them Badgers, right?It’s Wisconsin Badgers in, Indiana Hoosiers out — for those of you keeping track of where basketball stands in my split Wisconsin/Indiana household. (Don’t ask me how I’m doing with my actual bracket, however …)In a funny twist, the Badgers defeated the Wildcats of Arizona to reach the Final Four — for the second consecutive year — and now face another pack of Wildcats, from the University of Kentucky.With apologies to all the crazy cat ladies I know, here’s hoping the Badgers know more than one way to skin a Wildcat.

Get out the vote

The terror group Boko Haram killed dozens of people — and scared off hundreds more from polling places — but, still, millions of people voted in Nigeria’s presidential election last weekend.Risking your life for the right to vote? Can you believe it?That’s a reminder to all of us to get off our duffs and vote on Tuesday.This election is expected to be the usual low-turnout non-presidential event. But wouldn’t it be great if it wasn’t? Locally, there’s a referendum on funding athletic facilities for the Kenosha Unified School District, plus school board and town board races. There’s also a statewide amendment that would change how the chief justice of the state’s Supreme Court is selected.Fortunately, we don’t have to risk our lives to vote, but that doesn’t mean we should take this right for granted. Go to the polls on Tuesday. And, if you want to vote ahead of time, the city clerk’s office will be open for early voting today and Friday from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m.Vote as if your life depended on it. Who knows? Someday it might.