Access Health CT Exceeds Enrollment Goal

"When the exchange launched in October, we said our goal was to enroll 100,000 Connecticut consumers by the end of open enrollment on March 31st," Access Health CT's CEO Kevin Counihan said in a statement.

Access Health CT, the exchange created by the Affordable Care Act, had 121,983 enrollees as of Sunday.

"We are thrilled to have reached that goal seven weeks early; however, our work does not end here. Our outreach and engagement efforts will be just as aggressive and active during the remaining open enrollment period so we can provide quality, more affordable health care coverage to as many Connecticut consumers as possible."

The enrollment figures include 50,665 who bought private insurance plans and 71,318 who were eligible for Medicaid, which is federally funded medical coverage for low-income individuals and families. That means about 41.5 percent bought private plans and 58.5 percent were eligible for Medicaid.

The tally includes 22,335 who signed up through the state Department of Social Services, not Access Health CT.

"They may have come through us, but they didn't sign up through us," said Peter Van Loon, chief operating officer for Access Health CT.

For example, some might have called the Access Health CT phone number, or seen an Access Health CT advertisement on television. It also could include the work of Access Health CT's community outreach workers, or navigaors, signing people up for coverage in hospitals or at one of the exchange's retail storefronts.

Those 22,335 people fall into a category called "Medicaid Organic" — people who qualified for immediate Medicaid coverage between Oct. 1 and Jan. 1. While 50,665 learned they would be eligible for Medicaid starting Jan. 1, an additional 22,335 were enrolled in Medicaid before Jan. 1 and they did not necessarily have direct contact with Access Health CT, said Peter Van Loon, chief operating officer for Access Health CT.

"They may have come through us, but they didn't sign up through us," Van Loon said.

"The idea is that we've always been about integrated eligibility with Medicaid," Van Loon said, adding later, "We think we actually had a lot of impact in that number with all the various advertising and stuff we were doing, we got people thinking and calling. And, so, we, like other states, are looking at that as part of the overall effect of us implementing the ACA [Affordable Care Act]."

More details about Access Health CT enrollment will be available Feb. 20 during the exchange's regular board meeting. At its meetings, Access Health CT typically breaks down enrollment by age and also explains how many of the people who bought private health plans qualified for a tax credit, which is to say, a federal subsidy.

The latest enrollment figures were announced Monday by Gov. Dannel P. Malloy during an event in New Haven.

"For too long we've talked about the problem of people being unable to afford quality health care, and now, Connecticut has finally done something about it," Malloy said in a statement.