Man fatally shoots girlfriend's ex in Brighton Heights, Pittsburgh police say

Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

A woman's boyfriend fatally shot the armed ex-boyfriend who attacked her in her Brighton Heights home early Sunday, Pittsburgh police said.

The Allegheny County Medical's Examiner's Office identified the dead man as Curtis Edmonds, 37, of Brighton Heights. Police did not identify the shooter or the woman. The shooter, a 39-year-old man from Penn Hills, was not charged.

The owner of the home, Shoniece Hall, declined to comment.

Police spokeswoman Diane Richard gave this account:

At 3:14 a.m., police responded to a call from a man who said he had just shot his girlfriend's ex-boyfriend at her home on Fleming Avenue. Police arrived to find the body of Edmonds in the hallway next to the stairwell. Edmonds had kept coming to the house and confronting his ex-girlfriend, 39, even though she told him not to come, Richard reported.

Online court records did not show any protection from abuse orders filed against Edmonds. He had convictions on his record related to drugs and possessing a firearm despite previous felonies.

He arrived early Sunday, confronted her and forced his way in. He punched her in the face and struck her with his pistol. He then went upstairs and pointed his gun at the boyfriend, who shot him in the torso.

The boyfriend called 911 to report the shooting and laid his weapon on the ground outside the house at the dispatcher's request. Police recovered that weapon, which the shooter had a permit to carry, and a gun still being held by Edmonds, Richard said.

No one was home at the three-story brick home on Sunday afternoon. Neighbors had heard little of the incident and didn't know much about Edmonds' relationship to the female victim.

Two of the woman's children, ages 15 and 10, were home but unharmed. The mother and children were taken to police headquarters for questioning. Police interviewed the shooter and released him, pending investigation by the district attorney's office.