SALT LAKE CITY — A Republican lawmaker from Bountiful hopes to pass Medicaid expansion legislation this year to provide health care to anyone at or below 138 percent of the federal poverty level.

Rep. Ray Ward said HB302 would extend coverage to an estimated 50,000 individuals and would be funded through two taxes – one on hospitals and the other on e-cigarettes.

“Getting people coverage is very important. Bad things happen to people when they don't have access to basic health care,” Ward said, pointing to financial calamities people encounter when they get so sick they end up in the hospital.

A family physician by profession, Ward also decried the challenges which befall people when they can't routinely see a doctor.

“Things go wrong when they don't get treated and then they have terrible complications later, or their mental illness goes untreated so they can't take care of their children,” Ward said. “Or, their substance abuse doesn't get treated so they're back in jail.”

RELATED: Medicaid gap: Hitting people at home in Ogden

His bill is similar to the hotly disputed Healthy Utah plan backed by Gov. Gary Herbert in 2015.

The hospital assessment is structured so those facilities come out ahead financially, Ward said.

“There's the $25 million assessment, but they'll make $50 million if we do this. So they're willing partners in this process,” Ward said, reasoning that hospitals already have to take care of the uninsured by law, and those costs often are written off as bad debt or get passed on to the broader patient pool in terms of higher costs.

“If this were to go through, they'd still be caring for the same people and they'd be making $50 million more,” Ward said. “This would tax them $25 million of those dollars but they'd keep $25 million without doing any extra work.”

The levy on e-cigarettes would tax those products at the same rate as tobacco products, Ward said, noting that vaping among Utah teens has doubled in the past five years.

Under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA), the federal government currently pays more than 90 percent of the cost of Medicaid expansion. By 2021, that federal match will decrease to 90 percent and remain there until Congress decides to change the law, Ward said.

So the state is on the hook for 10 percent of the cost, but many lawmakers previously voiced mistrust about how long the feds would hold up their end of the deal and voted against Medicaid expansion last year.

Reached Tuesday, Aaron Frazier, executive director of the Utah Smoke-Free Association, spoke against the e-cigarette tax Ward has in mind. Frazier's organization represents many of the smaller mom-and-pop vaping shops in Utah.

“We are fully opposed to (Ward's) bill and any attempt to tax the (vaping) industry. We see this as yet another regressive tax which is not good for consumers. It picks on a certain economic status which we don't feel is good business for the state,” Frazier said.

About 800 people in Utah are employed by the e-cigarette industry, and a tax would directly impact their jobs, Frazier said.

“Any taxation of this type of product would have a devastating impact on small business owners. We've seen it happen throughout the country and it forces those businesses to shut down because they're unable to compete in the global market on the Internet,” Frazier said.

Frazier cited a Washington D.C. e-cigarette tax similar to what Ward is proposing.

“Within six months, over half of the retail operations had to close their doors, file bankruptcy or move out of the area,” Frazier said.

Greg Bell, president of the Utah Hospital Association, said Ward had not yet contacted his organization about HB302.

“We've been roughly aware his bill is out there,” Bell said, noting that Rep. Jim Dunnigan, R-Taylorsville, also has a Medicaid measure that the Association prefers. Dunnigan's measure is still unnumbered, but Bell said Dunnigan had contacted them about its details.

“He would want to pay hospitals traditional insurance rates – which are higher than Medicaid rates – therefore he'd want us to pay a share,” Bell said. “I don't understand Ward's plan yet, we haven't discussed it and are not aware of what it is.”

In 2015, the Utah Hospital Association lobbied for Gov. Herbert's Healthy Utah plan. The resulting Medicaid battle proved exhausting.

RELATED: Health advocacy organizations make 'PUSH' for Utah's uninsured

“Everybody gave up after last year's bills.They all have fatigue,” Bell said. “Last year we went whole hog to try to get Healthy Utah adopted. This year all we've done is answer the phone. Jim Dunnigan has called us to see what we think.”

Sen. Gene Davis, D-Salt Lake City is also sponsoring a streamlined Medicaid expansion bill, SB77, that would expand Medicaid eligibility in compliance with the PPACA that many call Obamacare.

Ward expects all three measures to be scheduled for committee discussions around the same time.

“I'll be supportive of any bill that gets more coverage to more people, but the ultimate goal ought to be basic coverage for everybody below the poverty level,” Ward said. “I don't mean for it to be 'Cadillac' treatment, I don't mean for it to be fancy, but just basic coverage ought to be available to people.”

What is the federal poverty level?

Federal poverty level is a measure of income issued annually by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

Federal poverty levels are used to determine eligibility for certain programs and benefits. These are the FPL amounts currently used by the Marketplace for 2016:

$11,880 for individuals

$16,020 for a family of 2

$20,160 for a family of 3

$24,300 for a family of 4

$28,440 for a family of 5

$32,580 for a family of 6

$36,730 for a family of 7

$40,890 for a family of 8

Contact reporter Cathy McKitrick at 801-625-4214 or cmckitrick@standard.net. Follow her on Twitter at @catmck