In 1902, Thomas Edison predicted: "The doctor of the future will give no medicine but will interest his patients in the care of the human frame, in diet and in the cause and prevention of disease."

That future is now. But rather than focus on preventing diseases, modern medicine has evolved to treat symptoms.

Over the last century, the health care industry transformed by dramatic advances in science and technology. During that journey, the American diet has swung like a pendulum from the simple, un-processed nutrition of our pre-industrial days to highly processed, high-fat, sugar-infused dependencies. As the fast food generations grew up, health care costs rose and treatments were developed to address diet-related illnesses. Today, the pendulum is swinging back. Fresh food is trendy and the appetite for eating well is growing.

It's an ideal time for hospitals and health centers to leverage healthy dining trends to bring health care costs down. In fact, a 2013 Union of Concerned Scientists report found that the cost of treating cardiovascular disease could fall by $17 billion a year if Americans ate the USDA recommended daily amount of fruits and vegetables.

As we find ourselves confronting the role of hospitals in our future, we should once again consider Edison's wisdom and be grateful that in 2015 more and more hospitals are finding that fresh food is good medicine and good business.

The Nutrition Prescription

Nutrition and food are absolutely critical to the healing process and one of the most efficient contributors to reduced hospital readmissions. In our work with hospitals around the country we are finding the most effective education process involves both patients and health care providers. Registered dietitians and nutritionists are collaborating with nurses and physicians to change the conversations from what patients cannot eat to discussions about what they can eat while in the hospital and, importantly, when they are discharged.

[SPECIAL REPORT: Healthcare of Tomorrow [News]]

A truly patient-centered care model empowers patients to make their own menu selections and provides individualized nutrition education. At Griffin Hospital, a Planetree designated hospital in Derby, Connecticut, we found the extensive list of specialized diets created confusion for prescribing physicians and patients alike. Restrictive heart-healthy diets were being ordered more than 25 percent of the time, and in many cases were unnecessary. But when physicians were educated about the nutritional content of the standard fresh food menu being served in relation to the American Heart Association heart healthy diet guidelines, they agreed to liberalize sodium levels, saturated fat and caffeine. The results: Strong positive trends in patient satisfaction numbers and enhanced patient education in support of the hospital's goals to reduced readmissions.

It's important to teach patients while they are in the hospital that eating healthy and having food taste delicious actually go together. This is helpful in combatting both obesity and malnutrition, since one third of patients admitted to the hospital are malnourished. Prescribing an appetizing, healthy diet during a hospital stay plays a significant role in the speed of discharge and improved health in the future.

The Population Health Halo Effect

Hospitals are also becoming a critical delivery system for improving population health. The Affordable Care Act has lessened the need for hospitals to provide subsidized care and raised community outreach expectations with the Community Health Needs Assessment – creating an opportunity for increased focus on initiatives that promote prevention.