SAN ANTONIO —

In Texas, where football is the state religion and legends grow as big as Earl Campbell, maybe Colorado State beating winless Texas-San Antonio 33-31 will quickly fade from memory.

Just don’t tell that to star Rams receiver Rashard Higgins, who grew up in Texas.

“Got the dub at home!” Higgins shouted Saturday, as he danced and grinned all the way to the locker room after CSU reminded us it can win a close one. “Got a dub at home!”

The beauty of any W is definitely in the eye of the beholder. After disheartening overtime losses to Minnesota and Colorado, this W was gorgeous to the Rams because they fell behind early to the Roadrunners but found a way to get out of deep beep-beep.

What was the real value of this victory?

“To conquer some demons,” CSU coach Mike Bobo said.

The first real in-game crisis of the nascent Bobo era landed on the Rams with the ugly thud of a blocked punt early in the second quarter.

With the offense struggling to find a rhythm, as the ground attack missed injured Dalyn Dawkins and starting quarterback Nick Stevens found frustration more often than star receiver Rashard Higgins, Bobo decided to give an offensive series to freshman QB Coleman Key when CSU took possession with 13 minutes, 21 seconds remaining until halftime.

After the drive stalled within the 30-yard line, CSU’s Hayden Hunt took the long snap and rolled right for a rugby punt. Bad idea. Hunt rolled straight into trouble, kicking the football into UTSA defender Justin Chavez at point-blank range. The Roadrunners cashed in that turnover for a cheap touchdown two plays later on an 11-yard pass from Blake Bogenschutz to David Morgan.

With 10 minutes remaining before intermission, the underdog Roadrunners had a 17-9 lead. And the Rams? They were doing their Wile E. Coyote impression. CSU was in deep beep-beep.

Trailing by eight points on the road to a UTSA team playing only the 50th game in program history? Something was in the air, and it wasn’t the scent of brisket slow cooking over hickory. This smelled like trouble.

This is where the Rams, who had their hearts broken in back-to-back overtime losses, were at risk of having their spirit stomped on before play in the Mountain West could even begin.

This appeared to be a quarterback controversy waiting to happen, with the heady Stevens in danger of losing favor to the less experienced but more physically gifted Key.

This was the first real test of a first-time head coach. Yes, Bobo brings Southeastern Conference street cred from Georgia and a positive intensity that’s infectious. But a catchy mantra like “Never Satisfied!” quickly begins to ring hollow if a rookie coach begins to make a habit of never finding a way to win the close ones.

“Sometimes we all tend to question what we’re doing and what we’re about,” Bobo admitted.

The Rams rallied because Stevens began to find his bearings by rediscovering Higgins as a useful target. Perfect anticipation by CSU cornerback DeAndre Elliott created a crucial interception in the red zone. The Rams reeled off 21 consecutive points, and when Higgins ran past the Roadrunners’ secondary to haul in a 38-yard touchdown pass, it seemed as if Colorado State was home free, leading 30-17 with 6:20 remaining in the third quarter.

Texas-San Antonio, however, refused to surrender. When Jarveon Williams dashed 85 yards for a touchdown to pull the Roadrunners to within 33-31 early in the fourth period, it ensured the final 10:28 of the contest would be a test of will as much as skill for the Rams.

“It was great to see the guys keep believing, keep fighting and sticking to the plan,” said Bobo, especially pleased with the 143 yards rushing Jasen Oden provided with Dawkins watching from the sideline.

In the first month of games under Bobo, the imprint of former coach Jim McElwain began to fade and the inevitable mistakes associated with a football program developing a new personality were made.

What have the Rams learned about themselves?

“I think we know how to fight,” Bobo said.

This CSU team won’t sniff 10 victories or make any run at a national ranking. Their conference schedule front-loaded with trouble, there figure to be some trying Saturdays in October.

But earning a berth in a bowl game? That’s a realistic goal for the Rams.

Mark Kiszla: mkiszla@denverpost.com or @markkiszla