Our friend Gretchen Hamel, Executive Director of spending-hawk nonprofit Public Notice, has a great project going called “Bankrupting America.”

Or more correctly, “Bankrupting America” is the project of President Obama and the establishment Democrats and Republicans in Congress, telling the American people about it, and how to stop it, is Hamel’s project.

To that end, Bankrupting America has made a six-figure online ad buy slamming Congress’ Obamacare exemption, concluding that lawmakers are “just like you, unless it’s inconvenient.”

The national online ad campaign, titled “Inconvenient,” (the video appears at the top right of this page) argues that Congress “should live with the laws it passes.”

According to Sarah Hurtubise, reporting for The Daily Caller, Hamel, said “we elected our leaders in Washington to represent us and our best interests, but right now it appears they’re only concerned about their own pocketbooks.”

Hurtubise also reminded us that Louisiana Republican Sen. David Vitter has proposed an amendment to an unrelated energy bill that would end the subsidies for lawmakers and their staffers. Members of Congress and Hill staffers were forced to participate in the Obamacare exchanges in the first place by an amendment to the Affordable Care Act by Iowa Republican Sen. Chuck Grassley.

Many of the people affected by the amendment make too much money to receive subsidies already available under Obamacare, so their costs would have risen compared to their previous coverage. The White House Office of Personnel Management ruled members of Congress and their staff would receive their own subsidies after Congress began to panic about a “brain drain” of staffer resources as a result.

The “brain drain” argument is a lot of baloney – with unemployment still at record levels and huge numbers of recent college grads – let alone the mature professionals most Americans would like to see running government offices – finding replacements should be no problem.

Naturally, Vitter has had to fight just to get a vote on his proposal.

Meanwhile, Democrats have offered several vindictive counter-amendments, including one banning the subsidies to any member found to have visited a prostitute — a jab at Vitter’s 2007 D.C. madam controversy — or to anyone who votes for Vitter’s amendment, even if it fails.

This is typical of how the “thugocracy” running Washington works; they no longer even bother to try to make the argument for their position, they just threaten and intimidate to get what they want.

Public Notice has an antidote for this – casting as much sunshine as possible on the activities of Capitol Hill’s insiders and their culture of legalized corruption. says it is launching its advertising campaign because it just wants Congress subjected to the same laws as the rest of us. “Americans will pay the price for this ill-conceived law and deserve to know whether their representatives will as well,” Hamel said.

“Inconvenient” will begin to run soon as a “pre-roll” ad (those annoying ads that run before what you really want to see plays) on YouTube, Facebook, Pandora and other sites. A clip should be up soon on the Public Notice website.