Republican Party

Summer break is over, and the students in Washington County have just completed their first week back to school. The fun, spontaneous summer days have been replaced by schedule and routine in my household.

The mornings have felt a little cooler recently, bags of candy corns are already being prominently displayed at Wal-Mart, and there are piles of sweaty football practice uniforms in the laundry room. These are signs that fall is just around the corner. This is also the time of year when political junkies such as myself start looking ahead to the election season.

If politics and elections are not the first thing on your mind right now, you are normal. But Nov. 4 will be here before we know it, and the outcome of this upcoming election could result in some big changes, so here's a brief preview.

During this midterm election year, 36 of the 100 seats in the U.S. Senate will be up for election. Three of these seats are special elections to fill vacancies; the other 33 are part of the normal process that has one-third of the Senate seats up for election every two years, as defined in the U.S. Constitution.

Utah Sens. Mike Lee and Orrin Hatch are not up for re-election until 2016 and 2018, respectively, but many key states may see a turnover in their senators this year, which could change the political landscape for the entire country.

Currently, Democrats outnumber Republicans in the Senate 53 to 45, with two Independents in the mix. Democrats have controlled the Senate since 2007, which means they have controlled the agenda and committee chairmanships.

Of the 36 seats up for a vote during this midterm, 22 are held by Democrats and 14 are held by Republicans. In order to gain control of the Senate, Republicans would need to retain their 14 seats and win 6 of the seats held by Democrats. Republicans have a shot, especially as backlash against the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare) continues to be a major issue with voters.

Senate races in Alaska, Arkansas, Colorado, Iowa, Louisiana and North Carolina are shaping up to be the ones to watch.

As far as local races go, two County Commission seats are up for election with Zach Renstrom and Victor Iverson running on the Republican ticket against Chris White and Paul Van Dam, respectively, on the Democratic ticket. Also, all four of the Utah House seats that cover Washington County have contested races. Republican Don Ipson faces Democrat Cheryl Hawker and Independent American Nihla Judd. Republican Brad Last faces Democrat Kenneth Anderson. Republican Lowry Snow faces Democrat Dorothy Engelman. And Republican Jon Stanard faces Democrat Shirley Nelson.

Keep an eye on our website — Washingtoncountyrepublicans.com — for information about when and where you can meet local candidates. As the Southern Utah heat begins to dissipate, the election season will heat up.

Lisa Thorpe is the communications chair for the Washington County Republican Party and a resident of Santa Clara.

Read or Share this story: http://www.thespectrum.com/story/opinion/columnists/2014/08/15/fall-means-elections-drawing-near/14140825/