Brookings, SD

On display in the heart of the Big Apple is a huge digital billboard that allows people to share their "love moment" photos for a chance to have them appear on the big screen.

The electronic billboard is the latest project unveiled by Daktronics of Brookings. But the South Dakota based company has already left its mark all over the world.

The two-sided interactive display in Times Square is 36-feet high and 85-feet wide. It's one of the latest LED high resolution electronic billboards built by Daktronics.

One is owned by Revlon Cosmetics, but it also allows anyone visiting the Times Square to become a big attraction on the kiss cam.

"They have a small camera mounted on the bottom of the display and at different times during the day, they actually go to live footage during the day and people can stand in a designated spot and their picture will come up on the large display and will have a heart around it," National Sales Manager Spectacular Projects, Jim Vasgaard said.

Vasgaard thinks the giant display will provide the perfect backdrop for romantics looking to pop the question.

"I haven't seen anything yet, I'm waiting for somebody to propose on screen, I got to figure it's coming, but it hasn't happened yet," Vasgaard said.

As impressive as that display is, Daktronics has been building electronic billboards and scoreboards for over 40 years.

In fact, it all started in a small garage in Brookings where Al Kurtenbach and Duane Sander, professors of electrical engineering at South Dakota State University in Brookings had the bright idea of first building matside scoreboards for wrestling teams.

Daktronics may have started from humble beginnings, but it now has a footprint worldwide with products in over 120 countries.

A lot of their products are giant stadium scoreboards that are built and designed to not only keep fans informed, but also entertained with their flashy displays.

But a lot of people don't see all the hard work that goes into building one of the scoreboards.

Each one starts the same. LED lights arranged on small 14 inch by 14 inch panels that are fitted into another 8 foot by 4 foot panel. It's an engineer design that sets Daktronics and its LED high definition screens apart from the rest of the competition.

"We're not buying large components or modules, we build all of that ourselves here and our three factories," Vasgaard said.

A lot of the work is done by college students from SDSU.

"Students are really a big part of our success and our growth, they get a chance to get familiar with Daktronics, it's a great opportunity and it allows students to stay in state rather than have to move off to other areas to find jobs," Vasgaard said.

Jobs that build a strong reputation in pro-sports.

"You know we've got 27 NFL franchises out there, 24 major league baseball teams, 20 NBA and 23 hockey," Vasgaard said.

Daktronics did eight major installations this year; highlighted by the Jacksonville Jaquars football stadium, which is the largest LED video display at any professional venue in the world with over 23 thousand square feet of video.

But even more impressive, there are two of them.

"So if you can imagine one on each side of the stadium, literally each display is a little bit longer than the field itself," Vasgaard said.

Daktronics has also done many local projects, including the big screen in front of the Denny Sanford Premier Center.

"We really believe this type of visual display on people who are coming into the building, really psyches people up and gets the energy going," city project coordinator Kendra Simmonsma said.

From Sioux Falls to New York to other major cities, when it comes to giant video displays Daktronics captures about 80 percent of the market; just in case you're keeping score.

With the Revlon billboard, Daktronics now has 30 products on display in New York City. Daktronics will be also putting in a bid to build the scoreboards for the new Vikings stadium.