Battle for Tikrit

Iraqi troops, Shiite militias and Sunni tribes battled ISIS today for a third day on the outskirts of militant-held Tikrit, unable to advance farther on Saddam Hussein's hometown as roadside mines and suicide attacks slowed their progress. CBS News correspondent Holly Williams says nearly 30,000 troops and allied militia members are on the ground, according to officials -- the biggest offensive since ISIS swept across northern Iraq last year. How much, if any role the U.S. will play is in question.

Opening statements

Two dramatically different portraits of Boston Marathon bombings suspect Dzhokhar Tsarnaev are expected to emerge when prosecutors and Tsarnaev's lawyers give their opening statements at his federal death penalty trial. CBS News correspondent Elaine Quijano reports the trial, which begins today, is expected to be one of the most closely watched terror cases ever.

"IRS" phone scam

There's a new alert about a massive scam involving criminals posing as IRS agents. The people behind the scam are calling at least 10,000 Americans every week, and federal investigators say they are absolutely ruthless. CBS News correspondent Chip Reid investigates the plot that's unfolding on your phone, only on "CBS This Morning."

Ferguson report

Even before Michael Brown was shot, the minority community of Ferguson, Missouri complained that they were racially profiled and harassed by local police. So for them, a Department of Justice review whose results are expected out today is vindication, reports CBS News correspondent Mark Strassmann. The DOJ investigation examined 35,000 pages of records from 2012 to 2014-- and the numbers are stark.

Ultrasound controversy

There may be no greater thrill than seeing your baby for the first time. Improving technology is giving people a much sharper view of a fetus, but as the images get clearer and 3-D, more and more women are going for so-called keepsake ultrasounds. Dr. Tara Narula reports on why that has some doctors and the FDA waving warning flags.

Obamacare in court

Should the Supreme Court decide to throw out the Affordable Care Act's system of subsidies, it would be "not just absurd, but catastrophic" for health care in the U.S., Sen. Jeff Merkley, a Democrat from Oregon, warned. Obamacare supporters have not hesitated to predict the drastic consequences that could come from King v. Burwell, the case the Supreme Court considers today. Here are some of the possible outcomes.

Affording retirement

Americans are anxious about their ability to live out their Golden Years with a measure of financial security. Those fears, unfortunately, are more than justified. With about 10,000 Americans retiring each day, a growing number are leaving the workforce without pensions, with modest Social Security benefits or inadequate individual account balances. Factor in skyrocketing healthcare costs and the picture becomes even more alarming. But that is just the beginning.

Hyper "seeing"

Methane leaks are bad for the environment. They're also bad for business -- unless your job is to find them. The colorless gas leaks are often hard to find, but now a high tech device originally used on microscopes is finding chemicals in the air just by "looking."

Fighting tweeters

Former star pitcher Curt Schilling is considering taking legal action against people who tweeted vulgar comments about his daughter. It started last week when Schilling, a proud father, sent a tweet congratulating his daughter on being accepted to Salve Regina University, where she'll play softball. Then that tweet got unexpected reactions.

Better pizza?

Restaurateur Danny Meyer has been re-inventing foods Americans know and love for more than 30 years. He recently went public with his burger joint, Shake Shack and now, CBS News correspondent Jim Axelrod reports, Meyer has turned his attention to pizza at Marta, taking the humble pie to a whole new level.

Top News

World

How will Netanyahu's speech play in Israel?

Report: #TheDress creator faced child labor allegations

India orders TV stations not to give gang rapist a platform

The most endangered animal you've never heard of

Politics

Alabama Supreme Court halts same-sex marriage

House votes to fund DHS through September

U.S.

Heroin killing new types of victims

Suspect held in shootings near NSA

Jury at impasse on Jodi Arias sentence; judge says keep going

MoneyWatch

The top 5 overseas retirement havens for Americans

Asiana plane crash victims reach settlements

Health

Simple tips to help you "spring forward" smoothly to daylight saving time

"Am I normal?" New study on penis size has answers for men

Boston Babies buzzing on coffee