Study: Hospital readmissions up costs for taxpayers, health care providers

Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

Patients who keep returning to the hospital are racking up outsized expenses and inflating costs for taxpayers and health care providers, according to a statewide study released Thursday.

Three percent of Pennsylvania hospital patients had five or more admissions in fiscal year 2014, but the group accounted for 14 percent of Medicare fee-for-service payments for inpatient stays, the Pennsylvania Health Care Cost Containment Council found.

The council said the same “super-utilizer” demographic drew 17 percent of similar Medicaid payments, pushing the group's combined bill to more than $760 million for the federal medical assistance programs.

Such large numbers show the health care sector should focus on better-tailored care and prevent expensive hospitalization of chronically ill patients who could avoid repeated trips, said Joe Martin, executive director at the independent state health agency. He said the health care industry needs to “get patients the right care at the right time and in the right setting — and in the most productive and cost-efficient way.”

“Our health care delivery system isn't much of a system at all. It's a series of chaotic events where patients are seen in a silo fashion, and there often isn't good communication between providers,” Martin said.

He stressed the council's study did not include emergency room visits, patients younger than 18 or out-of-state residents. It centered on inpatient stays, finding that super-utilizers accounted for about 7 percent of patients covered under commercial insurance.

The federal government punishes hospitals when they readmit too many patients within 30 days of discharge, a penalty that can trim reimbursements from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services by $100,000 a year or more. Designed to keep readmission rates at or below national averages, the rule is part of the Affordable Care Act that President Obama signed in March 2010.

Since then, hospitals in Western Pennsylvania have made strides to slash readmissions and make patients more involved in their care, said Jane Montgomery, vice president for clinical services and quality at the Hospital Council of Western Pennsylvania. She did not have figures available.

“No one wants to have a patient be deemed a super-utilizer. That's not the best thing or the right thing for the patient or the hospital. We want them to have the best care possible,” Montgomery said.

She said mental health patients present a challenge. Many tend not to follow medication regimens, leading them back to hospitals in a statewide trend that has mental health among the most frequent reasons for readmissions.

“We need a much stronger safety net” for those patients, said Dr. Keith Kanel, chief medical officer at the Pittsburgh Regional Health Initiative, Downtown. He said some have poor support systems, while others face failures of the medical system.

“That's on us to fix,” Kanel said.

He leads a federally funded research project, the Primary Care Resource Center, to help primary care physicians treat labor-intensive patients. About a year in, readmissions have fallen by as much as 20 percent at seven participating hospitals in Western Pennsylvania and northern West Virginia, Kanel said.

Executives at the region's biggest hospital systems, UPMC and Allegheny Health Network, said they are testing programs that should streamline care and reduce repeat visits. At AHN-owned Allegheny General Hospital in the North Side, a transition program for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease tries to make sure they receive prescriptions and other post-hospitalization care.

Readmission rates among targeted COPD patients have fallen from about 33 percent to about 12 percent since the program began in August, organizers said.

“What works is getting them in to see their pulmonologist and making sure they keep their appointments. That's huge,” said Joseph Gordon, the program coordinator. He has shepherded, tracked and followed up on 275 patients with COPD and other respiratory ailments.

One of his first stops Wednesday morning was the room of Tom Duttine, 65, of Castle Shannon, who was admitted this week with a viral infection. He expects to head home Thursday or Friday.

“It helps you to know that when you have a problem, you have to call somebody. You don't have to ride it out” on your own, Duttine said.

Adam Smeltz is a staff writer for Trib Total Media. He can be reached at 412-380-5676 or asmeltz@tribweb.com.