Name: Matthew McCall

Office sought: 13th District

Party affiliation: Republican

Lives in: Mooresville

Contact: http://mattmccallforcongress.nationbuilder.com

Age: 31

Profession: Register of Deeds

Highest degree earned: Bachelors

Leadership experience: Former chairman and vice chairman of the Iredell Republican Party; fellow, E.A. Morris Fellowship for Emerging Leader, Class of 2010

QUESTIONS

What is the value of prior elected experience? If you have none, how will you overcome the lack of experience to be a successful member of Congress?: I've reduced spending in my department every year I've been in office, saving taxpayers in Iredell County over $3 million by reducing our annual budget 46 percent. I would like to apply the same common sense approach to our federal government, which hasn't been well run for decades.

Give an example of how you have worked with someone from another political party to accomplish a goal? Or, if you haven’t held elected office, how will you do this?: I have a good professional relationship with my counterpart in Buncombe County. We've worked collaboratively on software and common-sense legislative, business issues.

Would you support an independent commission for redistricting? Why or why not?: Yes. Both sides have seen the sweeping changes that result from gerrymandering. I hope my party will do the right thing while we are able.

How would you change federal health care?: The cost of health care insurance and services keep rising despite the promises of the Obama administration. We must first repeal Obamacare (Affordable Care Act) and then expand access to insurance markets across state lines. I also support much broader price and billing transparency from health care providers.

What would you do to reduce illegal immigration? What would you do about the illegal immigrants that are currently in the country?: I am opposed to all forms of amnesty. We must secure our border. Payroll and income tax simplification/elimination is needed to close the underground economy that encourages illegal immigration. Reforms are needed to help those who have applied through legal channels to become residents.

Should there be a federally mandated minimum wage? Why or why not?: No. Some jobs shouldn't be expected to pay a wage to support a family.

What do you think the federal government should do to balance gun rights and safety?: Improve mental health service and care. The constitutional right to bear arms must be defended.

How should the U.S. handle North Korea's expansion of its nuclear program?: We must support our allies in the region and not cut nuclear deals like we have with Iran.

How would you change the process for allowing refugees to relocate to the U.S. and the number allowed to do so each year?: Allow individual states to decide who and from where they'll accept refugees, if at all. Those individual states will be responsible for their safekeeping and care.

What will you do to reduce the deficit?: Cut spending and reduce waste. Convert welfare into a public works program. Require drug testing for EBT. Stop funding Common Core. Fire all federal employees that owe delinquent taxes. Repeal Obamacare. I reduced my department's annual budget by 46 percent. I would like to apply the same common sense approach to our federal government.