Presidential hopeful rallies at Colorado State University

Bernie Sanders raises a fist and marches around after speaking during a rally at Colorado State University's Moby Arena on Sunday. ( AAron Ontiveroz / THE DENVER POST )

FORT COLLINS — Dave Neubert of Fort Collins rallied for presidential hopeful Bernie Sanders because, "I'm so disgusted with all the corporate money in politics, and Bernie, for me, is a chance for the common man to have a voice."

Sanders, a senator from Vermont who is seeking the Democratic nomination, used that voice to fire up thousands at a rally at Colorado State University on Sunday by calling for the end of corporate America controlling the country, by urging residents to "stand up and fight back" for living wages, for education without debt, for equal rights for all races, genders, ages and sexual orientation.

"No president, no matter how smart or well intentioned, can do what needs to be done for the middle class of this country unless millions of middle class at home engage in the political process," Sanders said to cheers that nearly raised the roof at Moby Arena.

"We need a political, cultural transformation. If you want to transform America, the middle class has got to stand up and fight back."

His words resonated with the crowds —- who cheered so loud their candidate frequently had to pause during his remarks and repeatedly yelled, We love you."

When he spoke, Sanders touched on an array of topics, including the need for education over incarceration, the reform of a rigged economy that favors the wealthy and higher minimum wage.

Advertisement

"One thing my campaign has been doing is listening to the American people," Sanders said. "We listen to the working people who are telling me, 'Bernie, I can't make it on eight, nine 10 bucks an hour."

"We can't," answered a voice from the crowd.

Thomas Redding and his 14-year-old daughter, Kendra, drove to Fort Collins from Cheyenne to listen to Sanders because they believe in the future he represents if elected. Neither could choose one message that resonated most.

Bernie Sanders takes a selfie with a young supporter during a rally at Colorado State University's Moby Arena on Sunday. (AAron Ontiveroz / THE DENVER POST)

"All of it," said the elder Redding. "It was awesome."

CSU student Kacie Couch agreed that the entire message was relevant to the crowd and had meaning. However, what struck her most was his call for tuition-free college and for reproductive rights for women.

At one point, he called for three-month family leave after a new birth, and he espoused affordable health care.

"It was incredible," said Couch who walked three miles from work to attend the rally on the CSU campus.

"I had to see Bernie Sanders," she said.

And she wasn't disappointed. Neither were many others who filed out with thumbs up, smiles and renewed energy, who said Sanders' message hit home.

A big part of that message, which drew thunderous applause, was when he urged Americans to demand and fight for better, to vote and make sure candidates, jobs, health care, education and retirement are not bought and paid for by the corporations and candidates with the deepest pockets.

"Our job is to create an economy that works for all of us not just a handful at a time," Sanders said during a speech that urged residents to take back control.

"Real change," Sanders said, "real change never occurs from the top on down it always occurs from the bottom on up."

Pamela Johnson: 970-669-5050, ext. 526, johnsonp@reporter-herald.com, www.twitter.com/RHPamelaJ.