I was immediately impressed by Pentatonix's performance at Cain's Ballroom on Wednesday evening. The a cappella group won me over quickly with their incredible talent and skills.

Then the beatbox guy broke out the cello to beatbox while playing a song the Yale graduate had composed himself.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

My jaw spent the rest of the night on the Cain's dance floor.

Pentatonix, winners of season three of the NBC a cappella competition "The Sing-Off," kicked off their tour this week, their second stop being Cain's on Wednesday. The group became a sensation on the TV show and since then for their arrangements of pop songs utilizing complex harmonies and a beat provided by one of the members.

Wednesday's show was sold out months ago and it became obvious why right off the bat.

The group's take on the electronic duo Daft Punk was a YouTube sensation. They kicked off the show with the Daft Punk medley, taking those sounds Daft Punk made with computers and replicating them with only their own voices in such a flawless way that it seemed impossible that these five humans could be making that sound.

Singing in such delicate harmonies is difficult and impressive enough, but doing it with the speed and accuracy that Pentatonix has put the group on a new level. The bar for a cappella is sky high now.

And they all seemed genuinely nice and funny. Most of the group members are in their early to mid 20s. The lone female of the group, Kirstie Maldonado, actually has some ties to Oklahoma, majoring in theater at the University of Oklahoma before joining Pentatonix.

Most of the performances had choreography, so not only were they all nailing their harmonies and beats, they were also moving in harmony. I guess five people standing and singing in one place for two hours would be boring, but I would have watched Pentatonix do just that. It was simply stunning.

Each of the members has incredible range, but together their range is nearly the entire musical scale that's humanly possible (maybe some fringes that aren't), and they take advantage of each note. Trying to dissect the sound as a listener is difficult, which is what it should be. It blends all so well that harmony takes on a new meaning.

The performance had such a high energy, fueled by a jovial packed house, that when things slowed down near the end, particularly around the audience participation section, the show dragged. It felt like they were pumping the brakes a bit, giving themselves a needed rest, but attention just started to wane before they picked back up.

Beatbox guy Kevin Olusola deserves a special shout-out for the incredible performance on the cello. Pentatonix sings a lot of pop music, like Lady Gaga, Beyonce and Macklemore, but they also have strong roots in good music theory and an appreciation for all genres.

Pentatonix just released a second album, including more original songs this time and showed off those original compositions during Wednesday's show.

With the popularity of choral singing growing in pop culture with TV and film, Pentatonix proved Wednesday it's leading that trend and is miles ahead.