$4M project would turn office building into transitional housing

From left, Ken Olson, Campbell Haven and Jay Young work in the tree and flower beds April 23 outside the Boulder Municipal Building as part of Bridge House's Ready-to-Work program. Bridge House is purchasing a south Boulder building in hopes of converting into transitional housing for the program. ( Paul Aiken / Daily Camera )

An anonymous donor who had already pledged $500,000 toward Bridge House's new transitional housing project will donate another $1 million if the social service agency and day shelter for the homeless can raise half that much before it closes on a former office building in south Boulder.

Bridge House hopes to turn 4747 Table Mesa Drive into dormitory-style living for 48 people in its Ready-to-Work program, which provides homeless people with market-rate jobs, job training and other support to change their situation.

The 14,000-square-foot building is already zoned residential but would require significant renovation to turn it into living quarters with a dining area, common space, computer lab and garden.

Some participants in the Ready-to-Work program live in the Boulder Shelter for the Homeless' transitional housing program, but there isn't enough space for everyone, said Isabel McDevitt, executive director of Bridge House. Some participants camp out or sleep in their cars, which is illegal and makes it harder for them to stick with the program.

How to help To donate to Bridge House's transitional program, send checks to Bridge House, P.O. Box 626, Boulder, CO 80306 and write "capital campaign" in the memo field.

Bridge House wants to be able to offer housing along with work in a supportive environment. The facility will be dry, with no alcohol allowed and have staff on site 24/7, McDevitt said.

Advertisement

Bridge House has been under contract to buy the building since March. A close date has now been set for Sept. 2, with a purchase price of $2.5 million, McDevitt said.

The organization has completed its due diligence process, and the board voted June 3 to proceed with the project.

With the necessary renovations, the total project cost is estimated to be $4 million, McDevitt said.

Bridge House has been promised $1.2 million from the city's affordable housing fund and another $510,000 in state affordable housing money.

Bridge House has also secured pledges worth $1.1 million, some of them to be paid over the course of the next three years, from community members, McDevitt said.

"It's not a secret that people are concerned about homelessness as an issue and want to see positive solutions," she said. "Ready-to-Work not only offers a very positive, concrete solution to people in the program, but it's also very entrepreneurial and has the potential to be sustainable. Because this project couples work with the housing and support systems, it's a very comprehensive project that people can support."

On Friday, the largest of those private donors significantly increased his pledge, provided other people in the community also step up.

McDevitt said the donor, who wishes to remain anonymous, is a big believer in the Ready-to-Work model and wants to draw community attention and support to the project.

She said the donor will give an additional $1 million, on top of $500,000 he has already promised, if Bridge House can raise $500,000 in cash donations before it closes on the building.

McDevitt said that if the campaign is successful, it would allow Bridge House to complete the project without taking on any debt.