Gov. Bobby Jindal organizing national fundraising

Gov. Bobby Jindal organizing national fundraising

— Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal sometimes likes to wear cowboy boots, but that’s not the reason he’s well equipped to operate in what one watchdog group calls the Wild West of campaign financing heading into the 2016 presidential election.

If, as many expect, Jindal decides to make a run for the White House, he can count on the support of the Believe Again political action committee, a super PAC organized earlier this year to boost his candidacy. In early 2014, his team established the Stand Up to Washington PAC, another financing arm similar to the leadership PACs affiliated with federal officeholders and declared candidates. And a third Jindal-affiliated group, the nonprofit America Next, also could play a role in advancing his cause.

Jindal is not alone among the all-but-declared Republican presidential candidates benefiting from fundraising vehicles springing up in the campaign. Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush can look for help from a super PAC and from another a leadership-type PAC, both named Right to Rise, formed a few weeks ago. And New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie also can lean on a newly formed leadership-type PAC, Leadership Matters for America.

Members of Congress such as U.S. Sens. Ted Cruz, of Texas, Rand Paul, of Kentucky, and Marco Rubio, of Florida, already operate leadership PACs and have run major federal campaigns before. And the National Draft Ben Carson for President super PAC was organized in 2013.

“Every major candidate is going to have a super PAC created for their election, and it’s probably going to be run by a close friend or family member of the candidate and its fundraising activities will likely be closely related to the candidate,” said Paul S. Ryan, of the nonprofit Campaign Legal Center in Washington, which tracks campaign-finance law.

The treasurer of the avowedly pro-Jindal Believe Again super PAC is Rolfe McCollister, a Baton Rouge publisher and longtime Jindal associate who was finance director for Jindal’s 2007 gubernatorial campaign and was appointed by Jindal to the LSU Board of Supervisors. He’s also the treasurer of Stand Up to Washington.

Federal Election Commission rules say super PACs may not contribute directly to a candidate’s official campaign committee and may not coordinate their activities with the candidate or his campaign. The candidate may not ask for a contribution of more than $5,000 to the super PAC — but he’s free to appear at a super PAC fundraising rally and introduce its treasurer (or anyone else) soliciting unlimited donations.

“A lot of things that you and I, in common-sense language, would describe as coordination aren’t considered coordination under the law,” said Daniel Tokaji, a law professor at Ohio State University who has written a book about the brave new world of campaign finance.

“The notion that these super PACs are independent of candidates is ridiculous,” Ryan said. “They’re not. They are joined at the hip to these candidates.”

There were no super PACs before 2010. That was the year that decisions in two legal cases — Citizens United, in the U.S. Supreme Court, and Speechnow, in a federal district court — completely altered the campaign-finance landscape.

Before 2010, political action committees couldn’t accept contributions of more than $5,000 a year from any one individual — and they couldn’t take money from corporations or unions at all. The court rulings that year legalized super PACs, which can accept unlimited contributions from any source and spend the money to influence elections — as long as they don’t work in concert with candidates. Super PACs must file reports with the FEC documenting the contributions they receive.

“The court basically said, yes, we’re going to allow a flood of unlimited money into our elections, but don’t worry, America, this money will be independent and it will be fully disclosed,” Ryan said.

David Keating, president of the nonprofit Center for Competitive Politics in northern Virginia and a plaintiff on the winning side of the Speechnow case, thinks the courts were right to rule in favor of the freedom-of-speech guarantee in the First Amendment, which he calls “probably the best invention ever.”

As a result of the 2010 decisions, Keating said, “There’s more speech, so there’s more controversy, which I think tends to attract more turnout — and the elections have definitely been more competitive.”

Spending by super PACs has exploded, reaching $609 million in the 2012 presidential election year, with $269 million spent by single-candidate super PACs like Believe Again. Those totals are not expected to decrease in 2016.

“We’re obviously going to see a lot of money,” said Viveca Novak, of the nonprofit Center for Responsive Politics in Washington. “There are so many vehicles now for donors to dump huge amounts of money into, at the request of politicians.

“If you want to give money, there are ways to do it,” she said. “If you want to give a lot of money, there are many ways to do it.”

The center, which runs the OpenSecrets.org website, focuses not on campaign finance laws but on transparency in political getting and spending.

“We believe that donors should be disclosed,” Novak said, “because going back to early campaign finance laws, the principle that the American public should know where politicians are getting their money is fundamental.”

Like super PACs, leadership PACs must disclose their contributors and contributions, and so must official campaign committees. Presidential campaign committees are subject to a different set of limits on donations received: a maximum of $2,600 from an individual before the nominating conventions, and then another $2,600 if the candidate goes on to the general election.

Leadership PACs and their relatives are subject to the old $5,000 limit on individual contributions received. And up to a maximum of $5,000 per candidate, they can contribute directly to campaigns — as super PACs cannot — and often do so. But in practice, Ryan said, many have evolved into “slush funds” for the politicians who control them: Candidates “save” their official campaign funds to pay for explicit campaign activity, such as advertising, yard signs and campaign-staff salaries, while tapping their leadership PACs for travel, meals and other expenses.

Stand Up to Washington (which is changing its name to Believe Again, to match the super PAC) took in $250,000 in 2014. It gave about a fourth of that to federal campaigns — including to four candidates for Congress in Iowa and two in New Hampshire, the sites of the first two rounds in the presidential nominating process. The PAC also spent some money on air travel, according to FEC reports.

But from the disclosure perspective, what may be the biggest worry for campaign-finance monitors are the so-called “dark money” groups — groups such as America Next.

America Next is not a PAC: Organized in 2014, it’s a nonprofit “social welfare” organization, under the rubric of the 501(c)4 section of the Internal Revenue Code, although it can engage in advertising and other political activity so long as it is “primarily” promoting social welfare. It declares on its website that it “anticipates that 100 percent of all donations will be allocable to direct or grassroots lobbying activities.”

So far, America Next has functioned most visibly as a platform for policies on national defense, energy and health care and their promulgation in speeches around the country by Jindal, who is the organization’s “honorary chairman.” It has links to Timmy Teepell, a key political adviser to Jindal and his former chief of staff in Baton Rouge, and it’s based in Alexandria, Virginia, as is OnMessage, the media shop Jindal uses and where Teepell is employed. The executive director of America Next is Jill Neunaber, who managed the 2012 campaign in Iowa of Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney and was deputy manager of his New Hampshire primary effort.

Although America Next has yet to file its first IRS return, which is subject to public disclosure, it reportedly raised $3.1 million in its first year, with Jindal traveling to different states to solicit donations in person.

The reason America Next’s money is dark is that the identities of its donors and amounts of individual donations need not be disclosed — and it can accept unlimited donations from any source. What’s particularly worrisome to Novak and others is that the operators of America Next could decide to contribute to a super PAC — say, Believe Again — and the source of the contribution would be identified only as America Next, with no clue as to who actually put up the money in the first place.

The little light that is shed on 501(c)4 organizations now seems likely to dim even further, Ryan and Tokaji say.

Under the best of circumstances, the standards on “primarily” and “social welfare” were squishy and hard to enforce. The political groups claim that the “issue ads” they run are part of their educational mission. So Americans for Prosperity — the conservative 501(c)4 bankrolled by the billionaire Koch brothers — could count toward its social welfare quota a January 2014 commercial featuring “keep your current plan” endorsements of the unpopular Affordable Care Act by then-U.S. Sen. Mary Landrieu, a Democrat who would ultimately lose her bid for re-election later that year. In another campaign-financing wrinkle, spending on such issue ads well in advance of an election does not have to be reported to the FEC, so long as the ads do not explicitly advocate the victory or defeat of a candidate.

Worried about abuse of the 501(c)4 rules, several Democratic senators pushed for tighter IRS regulation of the groups. But the resulting attempted crackdown was at best clumsy and at worst malicious, and it blew up in 2013 into the IRS-tea party scandal that made Lois Lerner a notorious household name. One predicted effect is the chilling of any additional effort by the agency.

“The IRS has taken a lot of heat for some inappropriate targeting of conservative groups,” Ryan said. “I would expect we would see very, very little enforcement by the IRS in this 2016 presidential election cycle.”

Follow Gregory Roberts, of The Advocate Washington bureau, on Twitter, @GregRobertsDC.