Topics: Atheism, Ayn Rand, Barbara Ehrenreich, Books, Christopher Hitchens, Editor's Picks, Living with a wild god, Religion, Richard Dawkins, Thomas Frank, Tom Frank, Life News

I’ve been a devoted fan of Barbara Ehrenreich’s writing ever since I discovered Fear of Falling, her book about middle-class dreams, during a summer vacation when I was in graduate school. Reading it on a beach somewhere, I felt a light went on in my head; she was describing the culture of our times in a way that was both persuasive and accessible, and yet that I had come across nowhere else, not even in academia. For her 2001 book, the massive best-seller Nickel and Dimed, she took a series of service jobs incognito and told the world what the experience was like. Bright-Sided, which she published in 2009, saw her turn her painstaking scrutiny on the quasi-religious industry of positive thinking.

Somewhere along the line, I became Barbara’s friend, and it occurred to me that the factor that makes each of her books so completely unique in American intellectual life is her persistent sensitivity to matters of social class. She can always see through the smokescreen, the cloud of fibs we generate to make ourselves feel better about a world where the work of the many subsidizes the opulent lifestyles of the few. That, plus the fact that she writes damned well. Better than almost anyone out there, in fact.

But now, in Living With a Wild God, she takes us in a radically new direction. Instead of telling us about some fatuity in the world around us, she recalls her own youth in the ’50s and ’60s and her search for the grand philosophical truths about life itself. That childhood quest, as she tells it, culminates in a shattering, mystical experience which she has only lately decided to embrace and explore. Which she does, of course, with the profound rhetorical clarity we have come to expect from Barbara Ehrenreich.

I got her on the phone a few days ago to talk it over. Here is our conversation, lightly edited.

This book is a pretty big switch for you. It’s a memoir, but a memoir without nostalgia.

That’s right. It’s a memoir about one particular theme, one particular long-running concern.

It’s an intellectual memoir too.

Intellectual, philosophical.

It’s also a memoir with a point, which you don’t often encounter.

I first of all think there is a great deal of vanity in the very notion of a memoir. The subtitle in the U.S. edition was “A Memoir” before, and we changed that to “An Unbeliever’s Search For the Truth About Everything.”

I was able to figure that out because I got the galleys…It’s kind of an intimidating memoir, intellectually speaking. The teenaged you, and I guess the adult you too, are pretty relentless in following this quest wherever it takes you. It’s scary.

Really?

That was my opinion. In some ways. Because there’s no soft landing here.

No.

You don’t give us a way out.

No. And I don’t grow out of it either. What I was very conscious in the back of my mind was the standard coming-of-age narrative and putting away childish things and the idea that you can, in your youth, be a little bit crazy and think big thoughts, but you then grow up. I hate that.

That’s in Corinthians in the Bible, putting away childish things.

Well, you know your Bible better than I do.

I know because I quoted the passage in my column a few weeks ago and there is another part in that same passage, “For now we see through a glass, darkly; but then face to face.” And that’s sort of what happened to you.

Yeah. I haven’t read enough of the Bible. You know, I’m saving the Bible for if I ever get imprisoned and the only reading material was the Bible.

Yeah, when you’re imprisoned in a motel. It happens to me all the time. Gideon’s Bible…

Winnie Mandela was imprisoned and all there was to read was the Bible and that made a big impression on me. I thought, okay, I better save the best part.

Speaking of that, in South Africa, religion had a big role in the apartheid state. The Dutch Reformed Church.

Yeah.

You have been very hostile to religion over the years.

Uh-huh.

You can’t just say, uh-huh!

Oh yeah. No, I haven’t seen much socially redeeming about religion. I’m an atheist. I don’t here want to get into the Hitchens or Dawkins style attack on religion. I was raised on that. It’s boring.

The Tom Paine style?

Robert Ingersoll.

Robert Ingersoll. He was not a marginal figure in American life. He was a great orator. He gave the nominating speech for James G. Blaine in 1876. One of my all time favorite speeches for silly bluster. He’s the one who called Blaine the “plumèd knight.” Blaine “threw his shining lance full and fair against the brazen forehead of every defamer of his country.” This sort of outrageous rhetoric. That was Ingersoll.

You see, he was very, very popular with middle class audiences. There was also this strain in American working class culture, native born. Well, no. There were plenty of atheist immigrants too—Swedes and Germans, and so on. There was something called “free thought” in the 19th century and I think that’s what may have had an influence on my ancestors who were blue collar working class and were in some cases small farmers. But they were more concerned with reading and learning.

From my own reading of Populist newspapers in the 1890s, I know there was a lot more going on in working-class culture back then than we give them credit for today, or rather than we would expect today. People read all kinds of stuff.

Yeah. It amazes me when you would see an occasional letter written by, say, my paternal grandfather, how extremely articulate and grammatically correct and everything. This was a man who didn’t go to school.

But he probably read a lot.

That’s right.

Here (in Living With a Wild God) we see a very different Barbara. This is you spending your life contemplating metaphysics. And chemistry. That’s also new. I didn’t know you had a PhD—is it in chemistry or biology?

The final PhD was in cell biology.

I’ve read a lot of your writing and I didn’t know you had studied science until you told me that one day.

Yeah, no, I’m a secret scientist.

There it is.

You’re like me. You have many different channels going on in your mind at once. Mine just happen to be very different from each other. Minimum wage, the universe, etc.

The method’s the same in this book as in your others: to look relentlessly beneath the surface. You’ve done this with social class, with gender relations, with war, and now you’ve taken on the biggest subject of them all.

Yeah. I’m an obsessive. When I get a problem, a question in my mind it can take me over. And this metaphysical stuff was the longest running of that.

To continue with the religion stuff, in Nickel and Dimed, you said you could always tell if somebody was going to be a lousy tipper if they wore one of those WWJD bracelets.

People would come in on Sunday after services. You’d serve the whole table and get a dollar tip. And I was criticized for saying that in Nickel and Dimed, that that was straight-up prejudice. But I’ve seen, I’ve come across recently, articles asking what’s wrong with Christians? Why don’t they tip better?

Really? That would have never occurred to me.

It wouldn’t have occurred to me either. But that’s what Nickel and Dimed got a lot of heat for, being anti-Christian, when in fact it was the other way around.

The Christians were anti-you.

(laughs) Well no. The book was sort of pro-Jesus.

We’ll get to that in a second. And the same with your book Bright-Sided. Bright-Sided I thought [was a] fantastic book and it had a very sharp attack on the prosperity gospel.

Right, but I stopped short in Bright-Sided. And I knew I was stopping short, saying that the ultimate in bright-siding would be to believe in a benevolent God.

How so?

What could be nicer? Everything is going to be okay. That’s the worst. And I stopped short of taking that on in Bright-Sided. I said, “No, that’s another book.”

And this is that?

Yeah.

So Jesus. You do have kind words for Jesus.

I think I have very kind words for Jesus. And that all comes out in the section about going to a tent revival.

But not his followers.

No. I’m not interviewing the followers in the tent revival or anything.

I mean, the later books of the New Testament.

No. What happens is, here you have this amazing, charismatic, madly generous Jesus, who says that when someone asks for your coat, give him not just your coat but your cloak also. Someone sues you in the court of law, give him everything. Then he turns into God, or the Son of God, and becomes the risen Christ. Now everything changes. Because now there is a personal selfish goal to be achieved in following this faith. To get into heaven. To get into heaven.

Is it like getting into Harvard?

What bothers me about that is it seems to me that what Jesus would say is you must give up your space in heaven to some poor sinner. Give it all away. So it’s kind of an inverse Jesus. Everybody’s out in their own little careerist scheme to get into heaven.

It sounds like they should have cosmic SATs.

Yeah.

To get back to the book. The kind of stuff you were reading in high school. I think it’s fair to say that not many high schoolers read those kind of books anymore. Was that common back then? Tell the readers what you were reading first.

To me, looking back, it looks like a pretty standard reading list for an alienated nerdy kid. Dostoyevsky, Conrad, Camus, a touch of Sartre.

You also said Kant, Hegel.

I didn’t read Kant. There was no sort of order to these things except for the way they were arranged in the library shelves.

I loved that scene in the Lowell library, Lowell, Mass., where you say Jack Kerouac spent all that time.

Yes. Which I only found out recently of course. So I had no system. I probably got to Hegel before Kant because he’s ahead of him in the alphabet.

And Descartes. You were very struck by Descartes. You think Descartes was a cop out.

I thought he was silly.

His nerve failed.

Well, now I have slightly more respect for his radical skepticism. But at the time I thought, “I think therefore I am”? Well, how could you think if you weren’t? How could you even put those words together? I thought it was sort of a tautology.

A lot of Nietzsche too.

A lot of Nietzsche? Yes. yes. (laughs)

So we come to the central experience in the book…the epiphany in Lone Pine, Calif. For something that has fascinated you your entire life, it takes up very little space in the book, about a page and a half.

Yup.

You have to say what happened for our readers because I’m not even going to try.

Well, the circumstances were a bit unusual. I had gone on a skiing trip with my brother and a high school friend. My brother was 13. I was 17. And I don’t know whose car it was or what the deal was. And my uncle lived not too far from the Mammoth Mountain Ski area in Northern California. So we were all going to stay with my uncle and then spend a day skiing. After that day of skiing, for reasons which are investigated in the book but I didn’t understand at the time, we did not go straight back to LA, but slept in the car in Lone Pine. Meaning, [we] pretty much didn’t sleep. The conditions, the physiological conditions for a Plains Indians vision quest, I realized, were all in place. Sleep deprivation, probably hypoglycemia, exhaustion, physical exhaustion. And after that night in the car, I got up before the others and just started walking down the street, probably looking for a restroom. And that’s what happened, where it happened. The only kind of words I could find, the only kind of imagery after all these years is to say the world flamed into life. Everything was coming at me. I was flowing out into it. It was exhilarating and kind of terrifying.

You described it as kind of an encounter with something living.

Well, that’s how it felt. Then, after reflection for a couple of months, I decided no, it can’t be an encounter because, what am I talking about? What’s to encounter? The world is dead. That’s what I know from science. So it must be mental illness. It must have been some kind of breakdown. And that’s how I filed it away as much as I could for years.

You call it dissociation.

Well, I think there’s a series of little strange things that happened there. First when I was 13 I started having these, what I now found out now are called, dissociative episodes which — suddenly the layer of language and associations and significance peels off the world, and you just see what’s underneath.

It’s fascinating, especially since I’ve never had an experience like that. I think most people probably haven’t.

Well, I am now impressed by how many have. I couldn’t have written this book, I wouldn’t have had the confidence, if I didn’t begin to figure out, in the last couple decades, that some people seem to have had similar experiences, but they generally framed them in religious language or in some other way that completely turned me off.

Drugs, that’s a common one.

Well, drugs is different. I have never taken LSD or anything like that, because I’m afraid to. But from what I can tell, that is different sort of experience — that things get kind of lurid and wriggly and multicolored and there is a real change in the nature of the world. And I never saw anything happen that seemed to break the laws of physics.

Do you think there’s something about, that you were so philosophical as a child that it set you up for something like this? Could something like that just happen to someone who hadn’t done all the reading and studying and thinking that you had done?

I think so. Here’s what I’ve read on the dissociation front. There is a website, a support group, for people who suffer from such things and they don’t seem to be like major philosophical thinkers. In fact, they seem to hate the experience. They’re terrified. They want to get “better.” And I didn’t see it like that. I thought, “Wow, isn’t this interesting.” You know, because the dissociative episodes are the first thing that challenged, for me, the nature of this consensual reality we are all supposed to sign on to. Know what I mean?

Yes.

It’s just so strange to me to read these people saying, “Oh, I can’t get better. I’ve tried drugs. I’ve tried therapy.”

Maybe it’s very unpleasant. Does this still happen to you?

Yeah, but I’m more likely to shut it off. I can’t control whether it’s going to happen or not but I can generally say, “All right, enough. Come on! You’re driving a car.” (laughs)

Really? Do you know how to turn it on?

No. That’s the trouble. I’d probably spend a lot more time there.

Yeah, I was going to say, if you can turn it on whenever you want, I’d like to have a shot at it. If you could just tell me what the steps are, what the procedure is.

People often think that the route to such uncanny experiences must be through some kind of discipline, meditation, et cetera. Not in my experience.

Well you said, hypoglycemia and sleeplessness. One of the things that really intrigued me about the book was how you intertwine biology and metaphysics all the time. I like that … I want to get you to talk about that.