WASHINGTON — With rising Medicaid costs squeezing what they can spend on education, highways and many other things, states are interested in containing the cost of health care.

Texas has capped awards for malpractice claims and put all Medicaid patients into managed-care plans. Maryland caps hospital revenues. Massachusetts sets a statewide goal for health care spending, and providers are expected to live under it.

A recent health care cost containment report sponsored by the University of Virginia argues that the need for such actions is urgent and that states have to do a much better job of leading the way.

“Unlike some policy issues where we know what to do but lack the political will to do it, health care reform is in its infancy. We are in a period of experimentation,” said former Virginia Gov. Gerald Baliles, director of the university’s Miller Center.

“In health care, most of the key policy leaders belong to the states. … States have to take the lead in health care cost containment.”

Tipping point

The report, “Cracking the Code on Health Care Costs,” argues that national health expenditures are so high that they have reached a tipping point. The states spent $191 billion on Medicaid in 2013, and that is expected to rise to $317 billion by 2021. Some of this is because Medicaid coverage is expanding in many states under the 2010 Affordable Care Act. But it is also because of relentless inflation.

Texas chose not to expand Medicaid, and the state’s health care spending has been below the national average. Regions like Dallas and Houston are sharply higher spenders, however, under Medicare and private insurance plans.

Nationwide, health insurance premiums absorb 23 percent of a family’s income. Under current projections, that will rise to 31 percent in eight years.

The amount the nation spent on health care in 1960 was $147 per person. In 2012, it averaged $8,915. The way things are going, it will hit $14,103 in 2021.

Medical inflation

Cost increases have slowed in the past four years. The Obama administration argues that’s due in large measure to the Affordable Care Act. But medical inflation has slowed in the wake of recessions before, and actuaries with the federal Health and Human Services Department said last week there’s not much evidence yet to show this time is different.

Former Colorado Gov. Bill Ritter, co-chair of the cost containment commission, said the most important change states should encourage is a break with the fee-for-service payment model that’s still widely used.

“There are no silver bullets,” he said, “but the most important step is to transform the delivery system from fee-for-service to a comprehensive focus on value and quality.”

Under fee-for-service, for every visit, test or treatment, there’s a charge. Medicare caps what the federal insurance program pays for those services, and most health insurers base their payments on the Medicare fee schedule. But this approach to cost containment encourages providers to do more tests and treatments than needed, focusing on volume rather than value.

Shift to doctors

The managed-care plans of the 1990s tried to break the fee-for-service model’s dominance. Consumers rebelled. The new approaches try to shift the responsibility for organizing and coordinating care from insurers to primary care physicians.

Former Utah Gov. Mike Leavitt, who also headed Health and Human Services under former President George W. Bush, said market-based reforms could speed the transition. Insurers and federal agencies should encourage providers to work together under one umbrella payment by providing rewards for savings. That’s the idea behind Accountable Care Organizations, several of which are underway in North Texas.

Mark McClellan, a health economist with the Brookings Institution who also worked in the Bush administration, said Texas could also join other states in getting more information to consumers about what physicians and hospitals charge for their care.

“That kind of information needs to be public,” he said. “That’s really important to Texas, especially if they want market-based leadership in health care reform.”

Follow Jim Landers on Twitter at @landersjim.