Christo: "Today, we took a very significant and important step forward in realizing Over The River."

Artist Christo is pictured in front of his proposed "Over the River" project at the Metropolitan State University Center for Visual Art in Denver. Christo says opposition to his planned "Over the River" project on the Arkansas River is part of the art. ( Brennan Linsley / AP )

Click photo to enlarge «

1

2

3

4

5

» Artist Christo, 79, front center, rafts the Arkansas River from Spike Buck to Parkdale in August. With him are Jonita and Vince Davenport of the OTR team, front; Ted Katauskas, editor for Vail-Beaver Creek Magazine, rear left; Andy Neinas of Echo Canyon River Expeditions, rear center; and Steve Coffin of the OTR team, rear right. (Carie Canterbury / Daily Record)

Some good news for the Over The River team has started the new year out on a positive note for internationally-renowned artist Christo.

United States District Judge William Martínez on Friday issued a ruling that the Bureau of Land Management's approval of the project was not arbitrary and capricious, and that BLM did not violate the National Environmental Policy Act and the Federal Land Policy Management Act.

In a statement released Saturday by the Over The River team, Christo said he is pleased with the court's decision to uphold the BLM Management's decision to approve the OTR project.

"I was always confident that the court would uphold the BLM's actions because the Environmental Impact Statement conducted by the BLM was thorough and comprehensive," he stated. "We have one law suit in state court still outstanding, but today, we took a very significant and important step forward in realizing Over The River."

The OTR project calls for silvery, luminous fabric panels suspended horizontally a total of 5.9 miles along a 42-mile stretch of the river, at eight different locations between Cañon City and Salida. The project received federal approval to move forward in November 2011.

The project has since been delayed because of legal challenges brought on by the OTR opposition group Rags Over the Arkansas River and the Quiet Use Coalition.

A challenge before the Interior Board of Land Appeals was ruled in favor of the government's decision to approve the use of federal lands. Another was filed against Colorado State Parks for allowing Christo to use portions of the Arkansas Headwaters Recreation Area for OTR. That also was ruled in favor of the state but is on appeal.

A statement released Saturday by ROAR said the group is disappointed in the court's decision and the group is "reviewing the judicial opinion and considering other steps to prevent the OTR project from ever being allowed to happen, including the possibility of an appeal."

ROAR feels that while the Court found that BLM 'technically' complied with NEPA and FLPMA, "in no way does the court dismiss the destructive nature of the Over the River project."

"Ultimately ROAR knew it would be an uphill battle to stop Christo's behemoth OTR project," ROAR stated. "But ROAR's members know firsthand the incomparable values of the Arkansas River and the sensitive Bighorn Sheep Canyon, they call home. They, better than any others, know it is worth fighting even a massive Washington D.C. bureaucracy and a famous artist who does not care one bit about how his project will hurt people, wildlife, the land and the river.

"ROAR will continue to work to prevent the OTR project from ever being realized."

Miles Graham of the OTR team said more information on the project and on Friday's ruling will be released Monday.

Carie Canterbury: 719-276-7643, canterburyc@canoncitydailyrecord.com