A pair of former prep football stalwarts from Maury County will be playing against their second consecutive Southeastern Conference opponent on Saturday.

Former Mt. Pleasant standout Preston Gilbreath and Spring Hill stalwart Nathan Sanders are key players for Austin Peay State University, who will play at Vanderbilt at 6:30 p.m. Saturday on CSS-TV.

Just last Saturday, the Governors played in Knoxville and lost 45-0 to the Tennessee Volunteers. Sanders, a 6-4, 315-pound Sanders, is the starting left guard for the Govenors, while the 6-foot-5, 250-pound Gilbreath recorded one tackle and an assist against Tennessee.

Gilbreath, a senior defensive end, is again expected to be part interior defense rotation in 2013. Despite an assortment of injuries, Gilbreath played in seven games in 2012 as he was shifted to defensive tackle to take advantage of quickness and explosiveness.

The hearing-impaired Gilbreath was named the National Football Foundation Middle Tennessee Chapter’s 2012 Bonnie Sloan Courage Award, named after former Austin Peay great Bonnie Sloan.

Gilbreath played in the first four game of 2011, including a two-tackle game and a hurry against Cincinnati. He missed six games, then returned against Tennessee State.

In his 2010 freshman season, Glbreath enjoyed a solid first season, appearing in 11 games and was listed No. 1 on depth chart through season’s first six games. He proved to be strong coming off edge, making 23 tackles including 10 solo stops.

Gilbreath, a criminal justice/homeland major, had season-high four tackles (twice), including the Wisconsin game.

A defensive lineman for coach Walt Smith at Mt. Pleasant, Gilbreath was named Class A Mr. Football Lineman and was a first-team All-State selection by multiple services. He was selected to play in East-West All-Star game.

The 22-year-old Gilbreath is the son of Constance Gilbreath, and the brother of Dont’a Hightower, former Alabama star linebacker who is now with New England Patriots.

Sanders completed the 2012 season as starting the left guard. He started four of the eight games in which he played.

Sanders, a redshirt in 2010, offers size up front. His added bulk to his frame, helping his productivity in the spring.

A four-year letterman as offensive lineman for Jason Scharsh at Spring Hill High School, Sanders was voted all-district as junior and senior, also earning all-academic as junior and senior.

The 21-year-old Sanders, a history major, is the son of Jeff and Mariann Sanders.

— Other area players on the Austin Peay roster include junior offensive lineman Zak Amis, Lewisburg; junior wide receiver Hunter Branch, freshman wide receiver Deondre Moore and freshman defensive back Julian Franklin, all of Fairview.