Durango, Mexico, native Francisco Galarza, 71, came to Longmont from Chicago about 15 years ago. He has gradually become part of the community while taking care of his wife, Maria. ( Lewis Geyer / Staff Photographer )

If you are lucky enough to meet Francisco Galarza, chances are he will break out his camera and take your photo in the black, gold-lined sombrero he keeps in his closet.

Or several photos which he stores on two small digital cameras. He'll probably show you a slide show of previous subjects.

Galarza, 71, was born in the city of Durango in the Mexican state of Durango. He came to Longmont in 2002 with his wife, Maria, after a short stint in Chicago. The couple waited 15 years to obtain permanent residency before immigrating to the United States.

"We went to the embassy and took a medical test," Galarza said. "Luckily, we both passed."

Francisco Galarza Age: 71 Occupation: Retired construction worker Years in St. Vrain Valley: 13

Galarza spoke to the Times-Call through an interpreter. He speaks English but felt more comfortable conducting the interview in Spanish.

Francisco and Maria first traveled to Chicago to meet up with Maria's brothers, who had already immigrated. He began working construction jobs, but the two had to return to Durango when tragedy struck the family.

"I was in Chicago working when one of my sons died," Galarza said. "I had to go back to Durango."

Galarza said his son, Rene, was one month away from graduating from college with a degree in psychology and planned on moving on to graduate school to study criminology.

Rene worked as a security guard at his school and was working alone at a campus party one night when he asked a group of drug dealers who had crashed the party to leave.

"They shot him in the back," Galarza said.

Galarza got permission from his employer to head back to Durango, but he ended up staying longer than he had planned. His employer hadn't saved Galarza's job, so he found himself unemployed.

Rather than go back to Chicago, Galarza chose Colorado. He and his wife didn't know anyone in the state but decided to give it a shot, landing in Longmont, where they have remained ever since.

"I had heard good things about Colorado from people I worked with in Chicago," he said.

Once in Longmont, Galarza resumed construction work, sweeping up at work sites. A skilled bricklayer, he eventually worked his way up installing tile in area homes.

Galarza injured himself a few times, and it forced him to retire about 10 years ago. He and Maria now make their home in a small apartment at Longmont senior housing.

Maria suffers from Alzheimer's disease, so Galarza wakes up every day at 4 a.m. to take care of her, with help from professionals. She has a tendency to wander off, so he often sleeps in front of the door to keep her inside and safe.

The two have been married 50 years. Galarza knows his wife's health is failing and he says that he "just wants another year with her."

Galarza spends a lot of his time at the Longmont Senior Center and sings Rancheras — such "Cielito Lindo" — in a chorale. A group of women also do Mexican folk dancing as part of the group.

"We are like a family," he said, referring to his group of friends at the senior center. "We help each other out."

He has made many friends locally and even gotten help from the Boulder County District Attorney's Office Consumer Protection Division. A bill collector had been harassing him for someone else's debt, and the division helped him write a cease and desist letter.

Galarza said that wants people in Longmont to know that, although he is from Mexico, he considers the city his home.

"Me encanta Longmont (I'm enchanted by Longmont)," he said in Spanish. "A mi gusto."

John Bear: 303-684-5212, bearj@times-call.com or twitter.com/johnbearwithme