Canada, the quiet northern neighbor of America, has been receiving plenty of publicity of late all thanks to presidential hopeful and billionaire reality star Donald Trump. Rob Calabrese, a Canadian radio DJ, recently launched a website called Cape Breton if Donald Trump Wins which jokingly advertises the sleepy, rustic, and beautiful island community of Cape Breton, Nova Scotia, on Canada’s east coast, as a haven for Americans serious about fleeing America if Trump becomes president. And it appears that they are — Google searches have skyrocketed for "how to move to Canada" since Trump's big wins on Super Tuesday.

The only walls you’ll find here, the website jokes, “are holding up the roofs of our extremely affordable houses." A pithy shot at Trump’s questionable immigration policies, and his plan to build a wall on the Mexican-American border. Though “Cape Breton if Donald Trump Wins,” was created as a joke, the possibility of Trump becoming the next leader of the free world is not, and some Americans say they’re serious about taking the Canadian plunge.

In case you’ve never visited the Great White North, here are 7 things you should know, and will probably love, about Canada if you decide to move there.

1) Healthcare

Forget Obamacare, the premiums, and the paperwork. Healthcare in Canada is free and simpler than in the U.S. To Canadians, their healthcare system is dear to their hearts and a symbol of national pride — and it even has a Hollywood twist: Actor Kiefer Sutherland’s grandfather, Tommy Douglas, a Canadian politician, was largely responsible for building Canada’s healthcare system.

2) Justin Trudeau

He’s young, he’s handsome, and he’s a former snowboarding instructor. Trudeau is Canada's newest Prime Minister, and some have likened him to a Canadian version of John F. Kennedy Jr. Trudeau is a self-proclaimed feminist and will also be the first PM to attend Toronto's Pride parade. Trudeau’s father, Pierre, was one of Canada’s most enduring and outspoken leaders and a bleeding-heart liberal who mingled in the Hollywood limelight, once even dating Barbara Streisand.

3) Fewer Guns

Guns are legal in Canada, but it’s a lot more difficult — and in some cases illegal — to purchase pistols and automatic firearms. In America, deaths by shooting rose to 13,397 in 2015 according to the Gun Violence Archive. By comparison, Canada recorded just 172 firearm-related homicides in 2012 (the most recent statistics available).

4) Vancouver Island

Situated off the coast of Vancouver, this densely forested island is Cape Breton’s warmer, more temperate, western cousin. Although there has been a lot of buzz about Americans moving to Cape Breton, Vancouver Island is arguably a much more livable place — at least climate-wise. Cape Breton is beautiful, but it’s a frigid place in winter. Similar to Seattle’s climate, Vancouver Island stays warm, albeit rainy, year-round. Plus, you’ve got orcas, wild salmon, and the mountains. In other words: bliss.

5) French Culture

Most Americans who visit Canada come to Montreal — and braver tourists will tackle the more authentically French Quebec City — but most don’t know about St. Pierre and Miquelon, an island off the south coast of Newfoundland that is actually owned by France. Although not technically a part of Canada, St. Pierre and Miquelon are literally in the nation’s backyard, and just short a ferry-ride away. But don’t forget to bring your Euros.

6) Saskatoon Berries

Canada’s take on the blueberry and more of a Western Canadian prairie delicacy, this fruit is one of the country’s best-kept secrets. They’re bright purple, packed with vitamin C, and a tiny delicious super fruit. And they're a lot of fun to say. The fruit’s name is derived from the Indigenous Cree word Mis-sask-quah-too-mina, which simply means, “berry.”

7) Honorary Newfoundlander

Newfoundland and Labrador, the most dialectically distinct region of Canada, next to French-speaking Quebec, will swear you in as an honorary citizen, or a “Newfie,” as the locals say, in what’s known as a “Screeching Ceremony”. But there’s a catch: you have to kiss a dead cod fish. Gross, but it might be worth it depending on how this election goes.