Buy Photo Green Bay Packers legend Bart Starr smiles as he looks at the crowd at Lambeau Field. (Photo: File/Press-Gazette Media )Buy Photo

Too often we wait to show our appreciation for someone until it's too late. Then we regret not having said something sooner.

With former Green Bay Packers quarterback Bart Starr, that's not going to happen.

Press-Gazette Media sent Packers reporter Pete Dougherty and photographer Evan Siegle to Alabama last month to talk to Starr and reminisce about growing up and his early days as a high school quarterback in Montgomery.

It was an opportunity to see where a legend got his start.

Starr is that legend. He achieved more in his football career than many other Pro Football Hall of Famers combined, yet Starr remained humble and continued to display the integrity and dedication that made him a fan favorite in Green Bay and throughout Wisconsin.

The most iconic image people have of Starr is the one of No. 15 diving into the end zone on a quarterback sneak that won the Ice Bowl in 1967. The touchdown beat the Dallas Cowboys and sent the Packers to their second Super Bowl.

The play was also emblematic of his career — simple but smart, highly effective, gutsy, clutch. The Packers trailed the Cowboys 17-14 with 16 seconds left and no timeouts. There was time for maybe two pass plays but only one running play. You miss on this and your season is over.

But Starr didn't miss much, and with the season on the line, he came through.

After his playing and coaching days, Starr and his wife, Cherry, have stayed connected with Green Bay and Wisconsin, giving back to both, most notably with the Rawhide Boys Ranch for at-risk youth in New London that he co-founded back in the 1960s.

He and Cherry were also honorary co-chairpersons of the Vince Lombardi Classic for 44 years, helping to raise more than $15 million.

He returns for old-timer weekends with the Packers and remains loyal to the Packers and the area.

And perhaps that's why Starr struck a chord with Packers fans and Wisconsinites. He was the perfect player for the perfect city — both underdogs in the world of bigger markets and even bigger egos.

Whereas most underdogs flash and quickly burn out, Starr and the Packers have endured, setting the tone for excellence with an unlikely hero in an unlikely location.

It's hard to imagine him even getting a shot in the NFL today. In the first place, he was a 17th-round draft pick in 1956. The NFL draft doesn't even go that deep anymore; there was seven rounds in the 2014.

Second, he struggled in his early years. What team today would have held onto a 17th-round pick who threw more interceptions (41) than touchdowns (23) in his first five years?

But with the right coach, Vince Lombardi, and with his drive, determination and football savvy, Starr shined and led the team to five NFL championships, including three in a row. He was named the MVP of the first two Super Bowls. Because of that, he's forever in the discussion of the greatest NFL quarterbacks of all time.

He's somebody you root for, not just because of his success, though that goes a long way with football fans, but because of the way he has carried himself, in public and on the football field; the way he excelled not at the expense of his team or teammates, not so he could inflate his ego, but in a way that made everyone around him better.

The Packers are a better team and the city of Green Bay is a better place for having someone like Bart Starr as part of their history.

We appreciate everything he's done for Green Bay and Wisconsin and we look forward to seeing him join Brett Favre and Aaron Rodgers when Favre's jersey is retired at Lambeau Field in 2015.

Read or Share this story: http://gbpg.net/1ochMd3