High rates of errors and infections will cause 23 hospitals in New Jersey to lose a slice of their Medicare payments from the federal government this year.



The penalized facilities range from prominent regional health centers such as Hackensack University Medical Center, Robert Wood Johnson University Hospitals in New Brunswick, Somerville and Hamilton and the University Hospital in Newark, to local facilities such as Southern Ocean Medical Center in Manahawkin, according to data from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.



Under the Affordable Care Act, HHS for the first time began assessing a penalty of 1 percent of a hospital’s annual Medicare payment if it had higher rates of hospital acquired conditions relative to other facilities.



More than 700 hospitals across the country will lose the funding for the fiscal year that began Oct. 1, according to an HHS report released Thursday. In all, the federal government estimated the penalties would total $373 million.



HHS assessed 63 hospitals in New Jersey. A complete list can be found at the HHS Hospital Compare website, www.medicare.gov/hospitalcompare.



Capital Health Medical Center in Hopewell was the only New Jersey facility to hit the lowest possible score of 10.



Spokeswoman Jayne O’Connor said that despite CMS’ accounting for hospitals that take on the sickest patients, such measurements of quality are going to fall hardest on places like Capital Health.



“It is important to note that the hospitals receiving penalties are those, like Capital Health, that provide tertiary level care to the sickest of patients — those who require the most intensive care,” she said.



O’Connor said Capital Health has been aware of the threat of the 1 percent penalty, which will cost it about $500,000. The financial hit will be “difficult,” she said, adding that Capital Health already has undertaken safety initiatives that have demonstrated significant improvement.



Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital officials did not say how much it would be penalized, but that it would not cut services.



The network has taken steps to improve, and results show in a reduction of more than 40 percent in central line infections at the New Brunswick campus and enhanced safety measures for catheters and intravenous lines at Somerset, said spokesman Peter Haigney.



“We do support efforts like this to increase transparency,” he added.



Next-to-last on the list of penalized facilities was University Hospital in Newark, with a score of 9.675. A representative declined to comment.



Overlook Medical Center in Summit scored 8.7 and was penalized, but other measures showed it performing at a high level, noted spokeswoman Janina Hecht. She cited its award as a U.S. News and World Report top regional performer in four specialties.



“We remain steadfast in our commitment to providing the highest level of safety and quality to every patient at our medical center,” said Hecht.



Atlantic Health System, which operates Overlook, also saw its Chilton Medical Center in Pompton Plains penalized. Two other Atlantic Health facilities, Morristown Medical Center and Newton Medical Center, were not.



Other hospitals contacted by NJ Advance Media did not respond to questions about the penalties or declined to comment.



To calculate the penalties, the U.S. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services looked at a facility’s rate of infections involving catheters inserted into veins or bladders and eight quality measurements including post-operative hip fractures, pulmonary embolisms and serious blood clots in the legs. It then combined the weighted scores and penalized those in the lowest quarter.



State and national hospital representatives said CMS’ methodology was flawed.



“A hospital can make big strides in reducing hospital acquired conditions, as our hospitals in New Jersey have, and still be penalized under this methodology,” said Kerry McKean Kelly, vice president of communications and member services for the New Jersey Hospital Association.



On Thursday, the American Hospital Association wrote CMS, making the same argument.



For example, the association contends hospitals should be scored on their total population at risk for infection, as opposed to the volume of central lines or catheters, because many hospital infection reduction efforts “correctly focus on reducing the use of unnecessary central lines and urinary catheters,” wrote Linda E. Fishman senior vice president.



By not considering the reduction in the use of catheters, a hospital’s infection rates could appear to remain steady because the number of days patients are on central lines and catheters falls too, she said.



Even with the penalties on 722 hospitals, the federal government says the industry is doing a better job at keeping patients safer while they’re admitted.



In a research brief released earlier this month, the U.S. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality – a separate division of the department that issued the penalties – said hospital care is getting safer.



According to the agency, the estimated rate of “harms” experienced by in-patients fell by 17 percent between 2010 and 2013. That saved about 50,000 lives and nearly $12 billion in health care costs, the agency said.



This is not the only effort under Obamacare to curb health care spending by penalizing errors. HHS cut payments to more than 2,100 hospitals nationwide this year that had too many patients readmitted within a month after their discharge from a hospital.



That program, in its third year, cost hospitals a total of $428 million, according to Kaiser Health News.





Tim Darragh may be reached at tdarragh@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @timdarragh. Find NJ.com on Facebook.