Thursday, 17 July 2014

By Ralph Wuebker, MD, MBA

Page 1 of 2

In a June 19 article I wrote for RACmonitor titled “Four Myths about IPPS Best Practices – And Why You Shouldn’t Believe Them,” I noted that one of the most common misconceptions in our industry is that there will be no more audits until April 1, 2015 at the earliest – or, as some are even thinking, that audits are gone for good.

This certainly is not the case, as Medicare Administrative Contractors (MACs) have been keeping more than busy with their probe-and-educate audits, which have produced an average denial rate of approximately 65 percent.

But probe-and-educate audits are merely the tip of the iceberg. Regardless of whether the Medicare Recovery Auditors (RACs) come back in full force or as a new-and-improved version of their current makeup, hospitals need to keep a close eye out for a number of other auditors that have been cruising below the radar and conducting their audits without delays.

This article will address some of the lesser-known auditors operating in today’s healthcare landscape and where they are going to focus their efforts.

RAC Activity Associated with Outpatient Claims



The RACs may have slowed (albeit temporarily) their activities in inpatient short stay review as well as scrutiny of claims related to critical access hospitals for admission dates after Oct. 1, 2013, but there are still many Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS)-approved issues related to outpatient claims for which the RACs are free to continue auditing.

One of the hottest topics among all RACs in the last year has been the auditing of outpatient therapy claims above the $3,700 threshold. CMS has given the green light for all RACs to not only audit outpatient hospital claims with values greater than that figure, but also claims from comprehensive outpatient rehabilitation facilities, outpatient rehabilitation facilities, and home health and skilled nursing facilities (SNFs).

Following a 2012 audit by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Office of Inspector General (HHS OIG), CMS and its contractors started paying close attention to SNF claims, and in particular higher-paying resource utilization groups (RUGs). Basically, the OIG believes a pattern exists in which SNFs place patients into higher-therapy RUGS for greater reimbursement. CMS has permitted RACs to review SNF coding validation for claims, SNF medical necessity of claims, as well as manual medical components of outpatient hospital claims that surpass the $3,700 threshold.

On April 1, 2014, Congress extended the therapy caps exception process and related manual medical review (MMR) process for outpatient therapy claims through March 31, 2015. Although CMS currently has paused the review of MMRs, beginning immediately, facilities should be prepared to respond to additional development requests (ADRs) for all therapy services furnished beyond the $3,700 threshold, because the “pause” began in February. CMS has indicted that it expects RACs to conduct post-payment review on these claims once the MMRs resume.

Other more recent and widely approved audit issues among the RACs include review of critical access hospital and outpatient hospital claims for blepharoplasty procedures and intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) procedures; outpatient hospital claims for cataract surgery; administration of Herceptin and Rituximab; inappropriate use of modifier 74; drug and biological administration in excessive frequency; drug and biological administration in excess of prescribed duration; polysomnography procedures billed with incorrect diagnosis codes; and cardiac rehabilitation.

Sticking with the Plan



In December 2006, the Tax Relief and Health Care Act of 2006 was enacted, with Section 302(a) establishing a permanent Medicare RAC program. A new paragraph was added to section 1893 of the act, requiring the establishment of a national RAC program for Medicare Part A and Part B. The national Medicare Fee-For-Service (FFS) Recovery Auditor program was established on Jan. 1, 2010.

Section 6411(b) of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act amended section 1893(h)(1) of the act by requiring the establishment of RAC programs for Medicare Parts C and D as well.

CMS expects to award contacts to Part C RACs by the end of the 2014 fiscal year, and the agency likely will require several months for implementation. In the meantime, health plans are performing internal audits, often subcontracting them out to RAC-like entities such as HDI.

Blue Cross Blue Shield (BCBS) contracts with HDI to conduct its audits in a number of states, including Florida, Idaho, and Michigan. BCBS of Ohio is beginning to start the audit process, so it is possible that it could contract with HDI to perform these audits as well.

Medicaid RACs

Following the success of the Medicare RAC program, CMS added a Medicaid RAC program as part of health reform regulations passed in 2010. CMS received such a high volume of responses to the proposed rule that it delayed the deadline for states to start their own programs.

The final rule for the Medicaid RAC program was issued in September 2011, but it allowed states to request extensions. Some states took advantage of this option, and to date there are still a handful of states that have not even taken the initial steps in developing a Medicaid RAC program. For this reason, states are at many different stages of initiation and implementation of their respective programs.

Vermont, for example, is one of the few states that doesn’t currently maintain a contract signed with a RAC. Other states, such as California, have assigned a RAC to perform their audits but are only in the first phase of data analysis and have not yet sent the first round of determination letters.

Still other states have started reviewing cases but have kept the scope of audits and reviews extremely limited. Missouri, for example, has limited the Medicaid RAC audits to claims associated with pharmacy services, durable medical equipment (DME), and behavioral health. Alaska has a fully operational Medicaid RAC program, although it is very conservative in what it chooses to review, and as a result it maintains a low audit volume.