BY CHRIS WOODKA The Pueblo Chieftain

The local response to hunger has grown exponentially.

One in every five Pueblo County residents received federal food assistance last year, representing a fivefold increase in the past 10 years.

Part of that may be from the area’s economic struggles or the perceived influx of marijuana immigrants.

More likely it’s a reflection in changes brought on by the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare) and increased ease of access to food stamps and other assistance programs locally, officials here say.

Last year, 10,807 households with 32,749 people in Pueblo County received benefits from the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program in 2014. That’s a jump from 1,900 households with 6,504 people in 2005. The total cost of the program in 2014 was $55.2 million.

“There’s not an agency in Pueblo that touches more lives than we do,” said Tim Hart, director of Pueblo County Social Services. “At least a third of the people in Pueblo County come through our door.”

A moving door lately.

The agency relocated during its busiest year ever to the Wells Fargo building after its former offices near the Pueblo County Courthouse were closed because of structural problems. The reason for the boom in food stamps, as well as other services, can be traced to changes in guidelines that were put in place with Obamacare.

One of the changes was to increase access to Medicaid, which began to expand in 2012. In 2013, the guidelines for income eligibility for food stamps increased from 10 percent of poverty level ($92/month for an adult) to 138 percent ($1,265/month).

Benefits can be as high as $200 per month for one adult, but usually aren’t at the upper limit after deductions for other sources of income are deducted.

Not everyone on food stamps received them for all 12 months of the year.

At the same time, portals for health insurance programs increased awareness for the SNAP program as well as other forms of assistance.

So growth in the food stamp program, which had nearly doubled in terms of households served from 2005-11, exploded from 2012-14.

Some in the community have attributed growth in the need for services to an influx of families drawn here by publicity for marijuana. Hart doesn’t know if that’s the case.

“I have been asked about that, but our system doesn’t track it. There’s no way to say they moved here for marijuana,” Hart said.

More likely, the lower cost of living and wage structure in Pueblo has created a situation where more people are eligible for benefits. Family size also matters. The income cutoff for a family of eight is $4,344 a month.

What’s likely to happen in the future?

“We feel like everyone who is eligible is on, but then there could be more when there is a big layoff at the mill or at Vestas,” said Tammy Torres, administrator for adult services.

Social Services tries to sort out the short-term needs from long-term assistance.

“When those things (layoffs) happen, we’re seeing more young working parents, so it might mean more children in the household,” said Karen Garcia, family services center administrator. “Our goal is to help them, but try to get them off the program.”

Hart said the answer is something his department has no control over.

“We need better-paying jobs in the community,” he said.

cwoodka@chieftain.com