IT MAY BE the season of mists and mellow fruitfulness, but autumn is also the perfect time for a deliciously warming tipple, perked up with a dash of seasonal apple.

The fruit, in its most commercial form, makes an easy mixer. But if you're looking to spice things up, take a cue from mixologists around Europe, who are bringing out the apple's zesty flavor in drinks made with fresh crushed fruit and special infusions.

ENLARGE Delicious Sour Alys Tomlinson at Difford

At T Bar at the Grand Hotel Tremezzo on Lake Como, the new season cocktail, the Autumn Fusion, is made by crushing half a green apple and adding gomme syrup, Thai pepper and lime to vodka. It is topped with a slice of fresh apple.

"This cocktail is the perfect combination of autumnal flavors and colors from Lake Como and the surrounding mountains," says barman Max Chinaglia. "The fresh green apples—grown in the Valtellina valley, just north of Lake Como—combined with the triple-distilled vodka from Russia, create a very special sweet and sour flavor."

The final touch, grinding a bit of Thai pepper on the top of the cocktail, adds some shine to the freshly squeezed apples.

‘Using infusions or apple-based distillates, the apple flavor can add warmth and roundness to a drink.’

True apple addicts should head to the Park Hyatt Hamburg, where Apples Bar has an entire menu dedicated to, well, the apple. Made with freshly squeezed juice, the 12 signature drinks—with names like Applestini and Applesrinha—will make sure you don't fall too far from the tree. For a little heat, try the Hot Jalisco, a mix of Tequila, vanilla, lime, apples and chili.

At Nightjar in London, the Delicious Sour is made with a crab apple infusion, instead of the traditional Applejack. "By using a crab apple infusion, we are able to preserve the more delicate flavors of Hennessy Fine de Cognac, whilst bringing a fresh and slightly tarter apple flavor to the drink," says Nightjar owner Edmund Weil. "The cocktail is a perfect autumnal treat."

According to Mr. Weil, the apple flavor itself can perform many functions. Apple juice adds bite and freshness—particularly when combined with herbal flavors like Zubrówka or more tropical, like passion fruit. "In our case, however, using infusions or apple-based distillates, the apple flavor can add warmth and roundness to a drink," he says. "A little like the difference between biting into an apple fresh off the tree and tucking into a warm apple pie."

DELICIOUS SOUR

From Nightjar, London

Ingredients

30 mL Hennessy Fine de Cognac, infused with dehydrated crab apples

30 mL Umeshu

Bee pollen syrup

Juice of half a lime

Combine the ingredients together in a cocktail shaker and shake. Top with buttered oolong tea foam, made with oolong tea, butter, sugar. Garnish with a toffee-coated crab apple.

AUTUMN FUSION

From T Bar at the Grand Hotel Tremezzo

Ingredients

40g Vodka

5g gomme syrup

Half of a green apple, squeezed

10g lime juice, fresh squeezed

Thai pepper

Squeeze the fresh green apple and strain it into a cocktail glass. Add the other ingredients and shake. Decorate with Thai pepper and a slice of green apple

HOT JALISCO

From Apples Bar at the Park Hyatt Hamburg

Ingredients

4 cL Olmeca Tequila

2 cL sour apple liqueur

1 cL vanilla syrup

2 cL fresh lime juice

4 cL fresh apple juice

1 cm fresh chili

Combine ingredients in a cocktail shaker with ice cubes. Shake vigorously. Strain into a Martini glass and serve with a slice of apple and chili pepper. Optional: aromatize the glass with Licor 43 or vanilla syrup.