After the 2008 elections, you could understand why Democrats got cocky about their hold on the millennial generation. After all, Barack Obama had slaughtered John McCain among the under-30 presidential vote by a historic 66 percent to 32 percent, accounting for 7 million out of Obama's 9 million vote margin of victory. Even more impressive for Democrats—and ominous for Republicans—young people maintained that enthusiasm in down-ballot races, favoring Team Blue over Team Red for Congress by 63-34 percent.

"It's Official: Millennials Realigned American Politics in 2008," crowed the headline on a post-election analysis by New Democratic Network fellows Michael Hais and Morley Winograd, published at The Huffington Post. "Contrary to the hopes of many Republicans, the Millennial Generation's support for Barack Obama is not a one-time phenomenon. Millennials are every bit as supportive of the Democratic Party as they are of Obama personally," Hais and Winograd wrote. "As with previous civic generations, they are likely to vote a straight ticket for their preferred party for the rest of their lives. The Millennial Generation is ready to take its place as America's next great Democratic civic generation, just as their GI Generation great grandparents did nearly 80 years ago. Welcome to the Millennial Era."

What a difference six years makes. Obama's unprecedented 34-point youth-vote victory dropped to a still-impressive 23-point win against Mitt Romney in 2012 (albeit with weaker turnout), but then the news cycle started messing up the tidy generation gap narrative. First came the March 2013 filibuster by Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) over the administration's legal rationale for potentially droning American citizens to death, an act that attracted support from a variety of groups not normally inclined toward Republicans. Then former National Security Agency (NSA) contractor Edward Snowden began issuing a series of spectacular revelations about a surveillance state that had grown far more powerful than Obama or his chieftains had ever hinted. With youth unemployment and student loan obligations maintaining their record highs, the president's bedrock support among young voters began to crumble: An Economist/YouGov poll in August 2013 showed a 14-point drop among 18- to 29-year-olds just in the first two months after the Snowden leaks.

This overnight plunge in youth enthusiasm for Democrats has set off a mad scramble. D.C. has played host to a constant stream of millennial-themed events, culminating in an inaugural "Millennials Week" throughout the Beltway in June 2014. The House Republican Conference held a "millennial meet-up" that asked young people to get to know Republican candidates. The Center for American Progress has sought to keep kids on the left with events such as "The Obama Coalition in 2012 and Beyond." The Huffington Post started looking for a millennial outreach director (as did the Reason Foundation, the nonprofit that publishes reason). Prominent Republicans such as Rand Paul have gone on college barnstorming tours, stressing civil liberties and criminal justice reform. Democratic champions like Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D-Mass.) talk constantly about forgiving student loans.

(Article continues below)

The White House, desperate to shore up support for the Affordable Care Act among a skeptical generation whose enrollment the law relies on, has circulated a series of mostly groan-inducing Internet memes, and dispatched the president himself to Zach Galifianakis' surrealist Web talk show Between Two Ferns, a twentysomething favorite. New groups on the right, such as Generation Opportunity, have countered with youth-oriented videos showing creepy Uncle Sam getting up close and personal-between a young woman's legs, in fact-in the name of the intrusive health law.

Both sides have begun to realize that just because Instagramming, beard-growing, petition-signing millennials have been good to the Democrats, that does not make them good Democrats. Underneath their liberal exterior (which is based mostly on social issues; see "Generation Independent," page 22), millennials are loyal neither to brands nor political parties. A majority of them now identify as political independents, up from 34 percent a decade ago, according to the Pew Research Center in a March 2014 report. They are more socially liberal than the Democratic Party, but also more economically centrist. And their concern for civil liberties has slammed face-first against a president who has betrayed most of his 2008 campaign promises to reverse the executive-branch expansion of George W. Bush.

"All we are seeing is these epic fails, left and right," says Jackie Bodnar, a millennial and the communications director at the Tea Party-affiliated FreedomWorks, which has been moving aggressively into youth-oriented issues such as Internet privacy. "Skepticism is a great opening for people like us to come in and talk about principals and the actual role of government."

Republicans see millennials not only as a bloc with a political upside, but as an ideologically distinct group whose values can help guide the party out of a demographic death spiral. "Young people are increasingly libertarian in their views," says 34-year-old Rep. Justin Amash (R-Mich.), often referred to as Ron Paul's heir apparent in the House of Representatives. And "young Republicans are overwhelmingly libertarian. It's important that we speak to this next generation of voters, who will make up a significant proportion of our party."

If the 2010 midterm elections are any guide, then millennial turnout this November will be lackluster and Republicans will do better than forecasted. But the more intriguing long-term question is whether any party or ideological group will be able to lay claim to the unclaimed generation.

From Obamamania to the Tea Party?

Obamamania among the young was truly something new, and cannot be reversed simply by a season or two of bad headlines. After all, the youth-vote spread was only nine percentage points in favor of Democrat John Kerry in 2004, and in 2000, George W. Bush and Al Gore essentially split it. Bill Clinton won the kids in both his elections, but so did Ronald Reagan.

And votes weren't the only way young people helped Obama, either. The 2008 campaign energized college students in a way not seen since the 1960s. Students formed a vital backbone of Obama for America, registering voters, packing rallies and events, and maximizing the campaign's use of social media. But there was a libertarian rumbling underneath the "Yes We Can" avalanche.

"Obama obviously had a huge appeal to younger voters," says W. James Antle III of The Daily Caller News Foundation. "On the other side, so did Ron Paul."

The Ron Paul "rEVOLution" was an utterly unpredicted hit on college campuses, where the septuagenarian Republican drew overflow crowds with his message of radically smaller government, opposition to the Federal Reserve, and an end to the Iraq War. "We are now spending nearly a trillion dollars a year to maintain an empire," Paul said at a typical University of Michigan rally in October 2007, in front of thousands of students. "Bring the troops home!" The crowd erupted in applause.

Paul's 2008 presidential campaign gave rise to two thriving campus groups: Young Americans for Liberty (YAL), which is officially affiliated with Ron Paul, and Students for Liberty (SFL), which is not. Since its founding, YAL has added 527 chapters at campuses across the nation and now boasts a network of more than 160,000 activists. SFL's annual conference grew from an initial gathering of just 100 students in blizzard conditions at Columbia University in 2008 to a premiere event that now features 1,300 students from literally all corners of the globe. (SFL has chapters in Africa and South America.)

While the infrastructure for campus libertarianism was taking hold, the millennial lack of interest in the 2010 midterm elections helped to paradoxically make a more millennially attractive, libertarian-flavored politics possible. With Obama's core supporters sitting on their hands, a new crop of Tea Party Republicans arrived on Capitol Hill. While these new legislators were more fiscally conservative than either millennials or even the mainstream GOP, they were also considerably younger, and some had views on civil liberties and foreign policy that leaned much more in the direction of Ron Paul. Prominent among them were Justin Amash, Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Fla.), and Rand Paul.

Elected in a wave of popular revulsion against government spending, bailouts, and Obamacare, the Tea Party generation (and its "Liberty Movement" subset) has also been on the leading edge of such not-your-grandfather's-GOP issues as criminal justice reform, relaxation of federal marijuana laws, and rolling back the surveillance state. As millennials have become less enthusiastic about the Democratic Party, the Republican Party has become more open to the social issues millennials care about.