Germantown's Maxwell Keefe (center) goes up for a basket over Homestead's Jacob Urban (left) and Josh Mueller (right). Credit: John Klein

By of the

Germantown — When Germantown needed some buckets, coach Steve Showalter turned to his No. 1 option.

Juwan McCloud not only wears jersey No. 1, the junior point guard has emerged as the Warhawks' go-to scorer this season. Earlier this week, he put together a stellar second half to jump-start his team in a 22-point victory at Brookfield Central.

Friday he once again showed impeccable timing with 22 well-placed points in a 67-63 victory over Homestead in front of a packed, noisy crowd on senior night. Thirteen came in the fourth quarter after he felt the game starting to slip away and decided to make something happen.

"He's a special player," Showalter said. "Those guys are big inside and they're long. We were having trouble scoring around the basket and so we had to figure out some other things to do and we were calling his number. He had the green light to either shoot or pass. He did a pretty good job with it."

At that stage of the game, McCloud mostly shot and sank dagger after dagger to kill any chance Homestead had of scoring an upset and handing the Warhawks (21-0, 13-0) their first loss of the season.

Homestead (11-8, 10-3) rallied from a 39-29 deficit early in the second half to lead, 51-47, with 7½ minutes left. That's when McCloud went off.

He hit a three-pointer in the corner to make it 51-50, then buried a three at the top of the key and was fouled for a four-point play that gave Germantown a 54-51 lead with 5 minutes 41 seconds to play.

Two possessions later, he hit back-to-back threes again. The second gave the Warhawks a 62-55 lead with 3:39 left. In all he scored 13 in a 15-4 run that put the exclamation point on a night in which the team's six-man senior class was honored.

"They've been the guys who have been on the scout team in the past and they've just worked really hard and gotten to the point where it's their turn," Showalter said of the seniors. "I couldn't be more proud of the guys we have. We don't have superstars like we've had in the past, but we have a bunch of guys who want to have fun ... and win some ballgames."

Senior forward Dwayne Lawhorn Jr. and Thomas Schnoor and junior forward Max Keefe added 10 points each for the Warhawks, who are ranked second in the area by the Journal Sentinel and second in the Associated Press Division 1 state poll but No. 1 in Division 1 in the wissports.net coaches poll.

Homestead, which got 26 points from Northern Illinois recruit Jaylen Key, suffered its third-straight close loss to the Warhawks. It lost 65-58 Jan. 9 and 58-56 late last season.

The Highlanders pulled as close as three points on two occasions in the final 2 minutes, but each time Germantown had an answer.

After junior forward Jacob Urban's putback made it 64-61 with 1:37 left, Keefe sank both ends of a 1-and-1 to push the lead back to five. And after Key hit a layup with 21 seconds left to pull his team to within three again, Lawhorn made the first of two free throws with 19 seconds left to give Germantown its final margin.

Another outright North Shore title was in the books.

"This is our first goal and this is why we play the game," Showalter said. "This is why these guys want to be Germantown Warhawks because of a night like this. You walk in here. For high school basketball, you can't beat an atmosphere like this."