Lost in all the mixed messages over when women should start getting mammograms, is the threshold question of whether insurance covers it.

It’s a timely question considering millions of Americans are now shopping for coverage on the federal marketplace, HealthCare.Gov. And the good news is the answer is pretty straightforward—at least, for now.

Bottom line: The Affordable Care Act (ACA) requires insurers to pay for annual mammograms starting at age 40, with no deductibles or co-insurance. A small number of grandfathered health plans sold prior to 2010 are the sole exception. “But the vast majority of insurers cover it. We cover it,” says Russell Vinik, M.D., Chief Medical Officer of University Health Plans. “Insurance isn’t going to jump into the debate. It’s really an individualized decision.”

Some experts, however, fear this could change. The ACA’s coverage mandates are tied to recommendations by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, which in 2009 gave a poor grade to mammography before the age of 50. Congress intervened with an amendment to the ACA protecting breast cancer screening coverage for women in their forties, according to The New York Times, which, in the wake of the screening guidelines from the American Cancer Society, editorialized in favor of continuing the coverage. The society’s guidelines aren’t legally binding, but added confusion to debate over when to start screening (at 40 versus 50) by recommending that women with average risk start screening at age 45.

Putting aside the uncertain future of mammogram coverage, there’s another financial consideration for women: Paying for diagnostic services when women are called back for further testing. Generally, if a doctor orders an ultrasound or biopsy to follow-up on an abnormal mammogram, the procedure is considered a treatment, not a preventive benefit, and is therefore not covered at 100 percent, says Vinik. “So there would normally be a copay. And if a woman hasn’t met her deductible, she could be on the hook for some or all of the cost.”

This is an increasingly common reality for consumers given the rise of high deductible health plans, and it puts the risk calculus of whether to get a mammogram in the first place squarely in the consumer’s lap, Vinik says. In 2014, almost half (48 percent) of the nation’s employers offered health benefits with high deductibles, up from 38 percent in 2013, a recent survey showed. And about 10 percent of mammograms result in the need for additional testing, says Vinik.

“[High deductible] plans are designed to make consumers think twice about how they spend their health care dollars. But probably a lot of women get screened for breast cancer without taking into consideration the possibility that they’ll need a biopsy, or that they might have to pay for it because they haven’t met their deductible,” Vinik said. According to Healthcare Bluebook, the going rate for a surgical biopsy is $3,100 and for a needle biopsy, $500—and some deductibles are as high as $2,500 or even $7,000.

Of course, finances are only one factor in making health decisions. Vinik says, nine out of 10 times, after additional diagnostic testing breast lesions are found to be benign. False positives can be stressful to a woman and importantly false positives are more common in younger women, which is what makes the debate so complicated, he says.

That’s why it’s important for women to make these decisions with their doctor, and taking into account their family histories, symptoms and personal health profiles and goals, Vinik concludes. “No insurer wants to dissuade women from appropriate screening. Women should take time to fully inform themselves of the benefits and risks associated with screening.”

About the author:

Kirsten Stewart is a Communications Specialist in the Office of Public Relations. Follow her on Twitter @KStewartUtah.

Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.

Disqus