Know your audience, they always say. On this July weekend, the quest to understand mine comes down to this:

Do you remember Erik Sten?

You do or you don't. There's no middle ground. You just flashed back – with nostalgia or nausea – to his gap-toothed grin, or you drew a blank. You are part of the story or you aren't.

Erik Sten. Wonder Boy. The Water Bureau blunderbuss. The righteous thorn in PGE's side. The smartest guy in the room, for better or worse, and a rarity in local politics: He was a story. He still is. Several stories, fighting for your attention.

One story is powered by ego and bravado, and ends in a mystery. It's anchored in a different, younger Portland than the one you're drinking in this morning.

The second is illuminated by the essential, heartfelt question Sten, now 47, carried with him into the thereafter of middle age: "Can you make money doing something interesting that's good for people?"

It's the more important story, I think, and it ends with a twist. Before I share it, though, I need to make sure we're all on the same page.

A page dated January 2008. A page headlined by the news that the best politician of his generation is calling it quits.

Seven years ago, Sten threw Portland for a loop when he announced he was leaving the City Council. It was a long time coming, apparently, but it made no sense.

Sten was City Hall's liberal edge, its aggravating ambition, its unapologetic provocateur. Sten was the Northeast Portland kid who wouldn't give up the fight for affordable housing, the Stanford grad who could outflank the hustlers at Enron and Texas Pacific Group.

He was so engaged in the theater of politics that neither his fans nor his detractors could imagine him, the house lights turned down, on a lonelier stage.

"Erik was always the guy who was connected. He was doing 28 things at once," says Deborah Kafoury, the Multnomah County chair and a fellow Grant High alum. "He was making deals. He was talking to the press. He had his finger in every pot."

He was young, whip-smart, and relentlessly inventive. As the chief of staff for Gretchen Kafoury – Deborah's mother – in the early '90s, Sten designed a nonprofit corporation that rescued 352 Portland homes from the creditors of a bankrupt lender.

First elected to the council in 1996, at the age of 28, he so dominated the room on housing issues that he forced the Portland Development Commission to double the urban renewal dollars it committed to city-subsidized housing units.

He sought regional ownership of the Bull Run watershed. He championed public ownership of Portland General Electric, even as Neil Goldschmidt and Tom Walsh, a TriMet commissar, begged the Oregon Public Utility Commission to approve the sale of Enron's cash cow to a private equity group.

Sten didn't care that the old boys' club in Portland politics rallied so pathetically to support a sweet deal for Texas Pacific, not PGE ratepayers. He wasn't looking for the soft berth when he ran out of energy and ideas.

"A lot of those guys deluded themselves that self-interest is in the public interest," he says. "They'd probably pass a polygraph."

What's more, he wasn't unnerved by the prospect of failure, taking his lumps for his role in the $40 million Water Bureau billing disaster and the unraveling of publicly financed elections.

"You're going to fail a lot if you try to do big things," Sten says. "I thought that was the whole point of the job. Unless you're trying to find places where change is possible – and, hopefully, meaningful change – there's no point in showing up."

By 2006, showing up was clearly wearing on him. He only ran for re-election because the Portland Business Alliance, infuriated by his play for PGE, threw state Sen. Ginny Burdick at his council seat.

"I'm from Northeast. I'm from Grant. I couldn't not respond," Sten says. "I thought I was doing something honorable, even if I knew I was done."

Done with politics. Undone by the demands of ego and bravado. Exhausted by the council's tendency to play small ball, tinkering at the edges of the city's structural problems. Distracted by the 2005 death of his father, a consumer protection lawyer, and the vibrancy of his 4-year-old son.

"I was getting worn out, regardless of whether things succeeded or failed," says Sten. "I was ready for a different lifestyle. You can make a difference in public office. I think I did. The question is whether you can do that in the private sector without all the strains of public life. The opportunity cost of public life is really high. It's intense. You can't ever turn if off. You're constantly running for re-election.

"It's the rare person who can perform at peak level for more than 10 years. It's not a well-rounded life."

So, he quit. And then?

He didn't cash out at the Port of Portland. He didn't enlist as the fawning lobbyist for a cowed governor. He didn't suit up with the nearest utility or volunteer for self-aggrandizing political commentary at the local TV studio.

He took the road less traveled. He disappeared.

For Bend. For breathing room. For a sustained reunion with his wife, Marnie, and son, and a home far from the madding crowd.

A home in the high desert, Sten soon realized, where seemingly half the mortgages were under water, drowning in the subprime mortgage crisis.

A housing issue? His wheelhouse, you might say.

"Can you make money doing something interesting that's good for people?"

Yeah, you can. Over the last five years, Sten has made life far more interesting for 181 Oregon families, most of them in Deschutes County. He helped to save their homes. He designed a loan refinance program to pull those homes out of foreclosure, using $12 million from the federal Hardest Hit Fund.

And no less than Mark McArdle, chief of the Homeownership Preservation Office at the U.S. Department of Treasury, sings its praises.

"This is exactly why the Hardest Hit Fund was conceived, to let states create innovative programs specific to their individual state needs," McArdle says. "This was the first HIF-funded refinance program out of the gate. It was also the first program to revolve funds, and it has revolved funds not once but twice."

That means it makes money. For Sten and the state of Oregon.

It's a good story -- heck, 181 epic stories -- but a tale with a twist. As uniquely successful as this program has been, the state doesn't care to expand it.

"We don't have the climate (in Oregon) to push the envelope," Sten says. He pitched the state housing agency – Oregon Housing and Community Services – on dramatically expanding the program and, he says, "The state wasn't interested. I see more potential in putting together something in Seattle."

What? Erik Sten is leaving again? For Seattle?

I'll be back with that story next week.

-- Steve Duin

sduin@oregonian.com

503-221-8597; @SteveDuin