Most Americans today are their own boss working as independent contractors and freelancers. Some are doing part-time jobs, while others are retired and choose to continue to work as an entrepreneur. For many self-employed workers or freelancers, finding a health insurance plan will not be an easy feat. However, the new Affordable Care Act is now in play to tackle this problem. If you are under 65, you can purchase an insurance policy and if you have a pre-existing health condition, you can still land a good health insurance plan.

When it comes to pre-existing conditions, most policies don’t include them in the coverage, but with the new law, anyone with such conditions should not be denied a health insurance plan. Very young freelancers and part-timers may not think about such things because they assume they are too young to have pre-existing conditions. However, pre-existing conditions are not limited to serious illnesses like cancer or hypertension; it can include allergies, depression, and asthma to name a few – conditions that may be common among young people.

While the new law may cover pre-existing conditions, you can’t expect a full coverage. The truth is, freelancers may have a hard time getting a good deal when it comes to health insurance, but there are some options that these workers can still take advantage of.

Freelancers Union

Health insurance policies can be offered by the Freelancers Union in different states. Though the insurance policies offered might not be that comprehensive, it is something worth considering. Keep in mind that the plans may vary from one state to another.

Go for Independent Agents

You can choose to find independent insurance providers and obtain quotes on their policies. You can consult agents in your area or perhaps, you can use the internet to search for insurance providers who can provide you with quotes. Searching for options on the internet gives you the opportunity to assess different policies at once.

Using Your Spouse’s Plan

If you have an insured spouse, you may take advantage of your partner’s coverage provided that their employer offers the family coverage. This could mean higher premiums to pay, but it is more affordable compared to individual policies.

Despite the new law on health insurance, many self-employed workers and freelancers still find it difficult to land a decent insurance policy. Whatever decision you may have, there are several options to choose from and there are companies that can still help you land a good plan. This is now where time should be spent in researching for the right insurance provider to offer you the best policy you need