This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.

... I ... the ... the the real party six enrollees signed up for Obamacare on its first day thanks to new documents from the House ... oversight Committee and Intel some more about this week for Obamacare is our ... Declarations columnist Peggy and pray that you thanks for being here alone chains ... so well last week tour of the head of the curve you said this is not I guess this is not a temporary setback to the Obamacare rollout is a political disaster for the president so ... what we seen this week ... I think is each day goes on I ... mean more and more understand ... it essentially the administration had three half years to do a Manhattan project in a very big very important very keen saying ... and after three at the end of three half years you realize that giving didn't ... make the bomb ... they they didn't do the work they said they would do but they didn't send off of AMR and I'm fortunately that mom no work but it doesn't matter because the bomb didn't work ... I ... the what this looks like it sounds as though I am handing the animal it's a historic ... mass not a small daily ... over the gaffe of ... of that twenty thirteen mess it's huge ... we now have along with the technological maps from the sale to deliver the product is that was promised ... in terms of the website this we wanna focus on cancellations of policies ... the president of throughout the week in Boston ... in other places spent a lot of words explaining why actually ... you can keep your insurance policy even if you like it you think he made any progress there ... I don't ... I must tell you I listen to him twice a month and I couldn't always apprehend his meaning ... Amy ... was slicing and icing it soak them ... look I think this is a lawyer who ... had been ... more years in the administration to follow Baumohl White House is our ... Loi euro ... this ACAD The today lawyer up its interpretation and they had some meeting on Roosevelt Island told the president maybe three years ago yes it's sort of hand saying this ... you know any thoughtful in your lawyer she would go on a liar I would know then I will say that ... his lack of curiosity about the truthfulness of his own ... central statement ... is ... sparkling ... ok but disaster politically for the president though we saw the hearings this week the ... Secretary of HHS civilians sun not a great week for her obviously but ... how about though the Republicans you and warned them this week on our website ... not to webbing ball hearts not to be grandstanding fools The think they took your advice ... oh I think probably yes I mean I've no idea if they took my advice but I think look to some of them were just ... trying to get answers and trying to find out what happened and what is true ... the Greek struggle with this White House is finding out what is true ... there is ... there something that I just thinks become apparent finale and it is that good when ... it's this amazing thing with the president has repeatedly promised ... to be had the most transparent administration ... in our in modern history ... and yet on every central question IRS there is no transparency there is still stonewalling band Ozzie ... the same ... this big mess with Obamacare and the same ... it's not good in people compelling in America thoughtful policy intellectuals but it's full of normal human to keep seen on TV ... the inability to get a straight answer to something ... and the tendency of the administration to one everybody in circles ... it's good for the administration does also my good period ... and I think are related to trust and transparency related to the we just compare this IRS scandal is that seem like a new issue this week getting more focuses what's people actually get their information into this website assuming it works at some point ... what exactly is the government can do with that info and a ... and the andthe how secure is Econa via of we've we got it ... to give Bridger will be right back door way I think of this seems like another new issue on top of the ... the ones we've been telling you mean security of your most private and intimate information ... why yes that is an open question just that I can feel good ... the ... need for repeat the it's not creepy right now in the year twenty eighteen or knew been one of the people can hack into your private information ... and know anything about you ... I think you