Signing off...The hopes of tea partiers to brand Rep. Bob Robson as a thief and vandal ended with a whimper, as the Maricopa County Attorney's Office declined to prosecute the Chandler Republican.

There was much hubbub the week before the Aug. 26 primary election, when some Chandler residents persuaded the Maricopa County Sheriff's Office that Robson had tampered with campaign signs, a violation of state law. Deputies hit him with two misdemeanor charges. Chandler police had earlier declined to cite the lawmaker, saying they lacked sufficient evidence.

Conservative groups are targeting moderate Republicans in the upcoming primary by tying them on campaign signs to President Obama. This discarded anti-Obamacare sign is in Tempe on the corner of Warner and Rural roads, on Thursday, Aug. 7, 2014. (Photo: Charlie Leight)

Last week, Bill Montgomery's office said there was nothing to prosecute. That's because the signs Robson is alleged to have stolen were not campaign signs, but rather placards printed with an arrow and the words "Voted for Obamacare." The placards were placed in front of the campaign signs of state lawmakers, including Robson, who voted to expand the state's Medicaid program. Montgomery's spokesman, Jerry Cobb, said they didn't meet the definition of a campaign sign because they didn't advocate for a candidate or ballot issue.

Sign-gate failed to oust Robson, who won one of two GOP nominations for the Arizona House and advances to the general election.

You talkin' to me?....Just who is Frank Cuccia and why is the Republican Governors Association Arizona PAC spending more than a half-million dollars to unseat him? That's the mystery in north-central Arizona, where the little known Democrat is apparently in the crosshairs of the political-action committee.

Really? Cuccia, a Prescott resident, said when asked if he had felt the full force of RGA's well-funded fury. He's not heard a peep. Besides, he said, with all due respect to his own campaign, it's a long shot effort for a Democrat to win in the heavily GOP Legislative District 1.

Perhaps the $533,885 the PAC reported spending to buy television ads opposing Cuccia is a typo. Or perhaps it was intended for another northern Arizona Democrat. U.S. Rep. Ann Kirkpatrick comes to mind. The RGA has not returned calls seeking an explanation.

That's all you've got? ... Apparently there were way too many bored politicos this week.

The Arizona Democratic Party took to mocking Republican and former Cold Stone Creamery exec Doug Ducey using his favorite topic -- ice cream. They sent daily ice cream flavor names intended to mock Ducey's tenure with the company. There was Pistachio Ponzi Scheme, Corporate Welfare Crunch and Hush-money Hazelnut, among others.

Meanwhile, the Arizona Republican Party issued a news release accusing Democrat Fred DuVal of donating to the campaigns of (gasp!) Democrats.

Aren't there actual issues to talk about? May Insider suggest the parties spend more time helping their own candidates come up with some ideas to solve a looming state budget deficit that awaits the winner of the race.

Shhh, you have a new senator ... With nary a public peep from Senate leadership, Alice Crandell was sworn in behind the closed doors of Senate President Andy Biggs' office last week to serve out the final few months of her husband's term. Sen. Chester Crandell, R-Heber, died in early August when he was bucked from a horse during a ride.

It's little surprise that Crandell's widow would be appointed to temporarily fill his seat. She follows in the footsteps of Maria De La Luz Garcia, who in 2010 finished the term of Sen. Jorge Luis Garcia; and Polly Rosenbaum, who in 1949 was appointed toWilliam Rosenbaum's seat after his death - and went on to serve for more than 40 years.

What is unusual is the lack of public notice. New senators are typically sworn in on the Senate floor during an event open to the public, and the public is notified that they now have a new representative. While her reluctance for attention is understandable given the circumstances, she is now a public official - with a taxpayer-funded salary.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/Yw2I3g