The pace of healthcare reform over the past few years has been relentless, with plenty of new information and government programs that the design community has had to understand in order to better serve providers and patients. And now there’s another new federal healthcare initiative to consider: the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services’ (CMS) Hospital-Acquired Condition Reduction Program, a reimbursement initiative that went into effect on Oct. 1 and is tied to quality outcomes and mandated by the Affordable Care Act.

In order for the healthcare design community to better navigate this next reform hurdle and offer tools that will help providers be successful, it’s important to understand hospital-acquired conditions (HACs) and the legislation and regulations designed to reduce them.

Defining HACs

Fifteen years ago, the Institute of Medicine published the report “To Err is Human,” which revealed that almost 100,000 Americans die each year because of medical errors that occur in hospitals. As awful as these statistics are, most patient safety experts believe that this data under represents what have been termed “never events,” or those medical errors that are unambiguous, serious, and usually preventable. In 1999, the National Quality Forum (NQF), a not-for-profit, nonpartisan, membership-based organization that works to catalyze improvements in healthcare, was founded and eventually created a list of 27 serious reportable events (SRE). Using a consensus process, NQF defined each event that results in patient injury or death (for example, a medication error, surgery performed on the wrong site or the wrong patient, or severe pressure ulcers acquired after admission). The group specified the metrics that would be used to identify and measure each SRE. It's this work that informed informs the legislation and regulations that now target HACs.

Never events and healthcare-associated infections (HAIs) fall under the HAC umbrella, as does patient falls with injury. A systems-based approach is often used to eliminate HACs. In 2013, the Institute of Medicine and National Academy of Engineering published a paper, "Bringing a Systems Approach to Care," in which the authors recommend “considering the multiple elements involved in caring for patients and the multiple factors influencing health.” Understanding the individual components of healthcare, how they operate, and how they interact can help organizations promote better care by integrating people, processes, policies, and place.

The built environment is an often unrecognized element, but in this approach, designers have an important role to play by offering evidence-based environmental features that help reduce harm. To do so effectively, designers will need to understand what’s being targeted for improvement and how CMS reimbursements are affected.