LOUISVILLE, Ky., Jan. 8, 2014 /PRNewswire-USNewswire/ -- Members of Kentucky Health Cooperative, Inc. who enrolled in one of the issuer's health insurance plans prior to Dec. 23 have been granted an extension to pay their first month's premium. The new deadline for submitting payment has been moved to Jan. 22, with plan benefits retroactively effective on Jan. 1.

(Logo: http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20130903/DC73073LOGO)

A health consumer becomes a member after payment has been posted to the enrollee's account/policy.

"The fastest way to make a one-time premium payment is to visit the Member Portal (https://portal.mykyhc.org)," said Susan Dunlap, director of communications. Click on Register Here as a New Member User."

She notes, "Only the person enrolling in the plan – called the subscriber – will be able to make a payment."

Once someone becomes a member:

An ID card is mailed within 5 calendar days.

A welcome kit follows by mail within 5 calendar days after the ID card is issued.

"Our Member Services area is getting a lot of calls, asking what to do until a Member ID card shows up," Dunlap said. "Health insurance works like many other types of insurance, such as auto. Although you may be an enrolled member, a few days might need to pass before your ID card shows up in the mail. You might need proof of enrollment before your card arrives, though. No need to worry. You can prove you are a Kentucky Health Cooperative plan member by providing your member ID."

Providers may verify eligibility by calling 1-855-OUR-KYHC (855-687-5942).

Member assistance is available at this same number, 1-855-687-5942. Please note that call volume is heavy and that wait times are long. If the decision is made to call, enrollees should have their member ID handy, if known. This information is referenced in Kentucky Health Cooperative Acknowledgement Letter or premium invoice.

Due to heavy call volume, Member Services will continue to work on an expanded schedule through Friday, Jan. 10, 8 a.m.-8 p.m. Eastern Time.

Consumers who have not yet enrolled in a Kentucky Health Cooperative plan may call 1-877-334-1726 to speak with a licensed agent who can assist with selection of one of the issuer's Affordable Care Act-qualified health plans. March 31, 2014 is the deadline for signing up for coverage without being subject to a penalty.

Visit www.mykyhc.org for information about additional payment options.

Kentucky Health Cooperative

Kentucky Health Cooperative, based in Louisville, is dedicated to improving health outcomes by providing member-focused, accessible, cost-effective and quality-focused health care coverage to individuals and small groups living in the Commonwealth of Kentucky. Kentucky Health Cooperative was identified by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) to receive loans to create and operate a Consumer Oriented and Operated Plan, or CO-OP. CO-OPs are nonprofit health insurance companies that will be member-governed in 2015. Kentucky Health Cooperative gained approval in March 2013 from the Kentucky Department of Insurance to operate as an insurer in the Commonwealth. Kentucky Health Cooperative began offering health plan benefits on Jan. 1, 2014.

More information: www.mykyhc.org or on Facebook.

CONTACT: Susan Dunlap, Kentucky Health Cooperative: (502) 498-5539

SOURCE Kentucky Health Cooperative