Oakland, MD: Southern Garrett High School seniors Josh Upole, left, and Michael McEwen, second from left, in class working on iPads with other students as Teacher Lisa Bender teaches financial literacy and advanced business management at Southern Garrett High School in Oakland, Md. (Photo: Jack Gruber USAT)

In an environment where higher-education costs are continually rising, teens may need to become financially competent before setting foot on a college campus.

A recent study by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development found that the United States ranked No. 9 out of 18 countries in teen financial literacy among 15-year-old students, scoring eight points below the overall average.

The study results prompted Education Secretary Arne Duncan to host a discussion about starting youth financial education earlier and reemphasizing the basics of savings and debt among teens, according to an Education Department press release.

STORY: In financial literacy, U.S. teens score below Latvia

When it comes to teens, it's important to abide by a "walk before you run" principle, said Power Financial Credit Union CEO Allan Prindle.

Start small. Open up a savings and checking account with your teen as early as age 13. Parents may want to give their teens an allowance or encourage them to take up an after-school job so they have some money to deposit.

"Teens should feel comfortable with the act of withdrawing from and depositing to a bank account," Prindle said. "Register any accounts online so that your teen can manage those finances."

Sixteen-year-old Power Financial Credit Union member Nikolay Lendman said that since opening a checking account, he started to track his spending behavior online and "learned how to budget properly." Lendman said financial management has taught him how to be more responsible and disciplined with his time and money.

If you feel confident your teen is ready for the next step, "pick up the pace from a walk," said Prindle. "Pick up a credit card to explain how credit works. It's important for teens to get the feel of a loan."

Credit cards often get a bad reputation because people want to avoid debt and extra fees, said John Ganotis, founder of creditcardinsider.com

It requires meticulous maintenance to establish a healthy line of credit. And credit cards can often be a double-edged sword. If teens are able to make payments on time, having a shining credit rating can "be a very good foundation for after college," Ganotis said.

But if misused, teens with bad credit can lead to difficulty applying for mortgage or additional loans after college, Ganotis said.

Identity theft protection can add an extra layer of defense to a teen's accounts and personal credit line.

There are many services available.

One thing not to forget: Student loans are a form of credit.

A teen entering college should know that paying off student loans is an effective way to establish credit history, Ganotis said.

If you decide to apply for a credit card with your teen, go to annualcreditreport.com to receive a free federally authorized credit report. A detailed credit report will let your teen stay on top of their finances and let them know their standing, Ganotis said

Teens require a "level of financial literacy that 20 or 30, 40 years ago, maybe wasn't applied. But today it's an absolute necessity," Education Secretary Duncan told reporters on July 9.

Contributing: Jennifer C. Kerr, The Associated Press

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1mPepa8