Ryan and the revolving door

With help from Jesse Rifkin, Emily Kopp and Daniel Lippman

GLASS HOUSES: Pulse was first to draw the connection on Speaker Paul Ryan's veiled shot at Marilyn Tavenner, the former CMS administrator and new president of America's Health Insurance Plans. Talking about the relationship between business and government in his big policy speech yesterday, Ryan said, "If the insurance industry does not understand how Obamacare works, why not hire the person who ran it? This works out great for them. ... That's how today's experts become tomorrow's cronies." It did not go unnoticed downtown.

Story Continued Below

The revolving door is a perennial political punching bag, but Ryan's staff is not immune. His communications director, Brendan Buck, worked in AHIP's communications shop in 2014 between Hill jobs. (He didn't immediately respond to a request for comment.) And Ryan's new chief of staff, Dave Hoppe, was a lobbyist at Squire Patton Boggs.

SPEAKING OF AHIP ... Pro's Paul Demko just had the scoop that Mary Beth Donahue, executive vice president at the organization for a decade, and Dan Durham, who served as interim CEO earlier this year, are both departing. There was no immediate word on their future plans.

STATE WATCH: California's Fair Political Practices Commission held a public hearing yesterday about a proposal for more lobbying disclosures. The new rule would require itemized reporting of spending on ads, grassroots and other activities meant to influence the government, directly or indirectly. Not many people spoke, but there seemed be an unusually big audience listening in (based on the number of hang-up beeps at the end of the call). The commission will take comments before voting in January. “Chair Jodi Remke [who took over when Ann Ravel went to the FEC] is hoping to guide and set policy that other states might follow, as well as to encourage efforts at the federal level to promote disclosure,” spokesman Jay Wierenga said.

— This morning, Ravel headlined a briefing on a new corporate spending report from the Conference Board.

T

G

I

F

So many parties ... Is this gonna be forever? Tips to iarnsdorf@politico.com.

FIRST IN PI ... BRT BOARD: Marillyn A. Hewson, chairman, president and CEO of Lockheed Martin, has been elected as a vice chair of Business Roundtable, joining incoming chairman Doug Oberhelman, chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Caterpillar. Ursula M. Burns of Xerox, David M. Cote of Honeywell and Andrew N. Liveris of Dow Chemical were reaffirmed as vice chairs.

ISLANDERS: LEVICK Communications hosted St. Kitts and Nevis Prime Minister Timothy Harris for a discussion of investment opportunities. He noted that the island banned Syrians from its citizenship by investment program. Members of the diplomatic corps, including Ambassador H. John Charles of Dominica, wealth management professionals and Caribbean business leaders attended. Former White House counsel and executive vice president at LEVICK Lanny Davis, former Ambassador to Sweden Thomas Siebert and U.K. citizenship solutions firm global managing director Micha Emmett spoke.

ON-DEMAND: Travel Tech yesterday hosted its second Peer-to-Peer Public Policy Summit on rideshare and short-term rentals, including representatives from Lyft, Uber, Airbnb, HomeAway, Expedia, the Internet Association, NetChoice, NCSL, League of Cities, the International Municipal Lawyers Association, the National Association of Attorneys General and R Street. Rep. Michael Burgess discused the Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing and Trade's work on the “Disruptors” series of hearings.

** A Message from Pandora: Over 1,600 voters were asked about streaming music. The results show overwhelmingly that: 1) voters have used streaming services, 2) they believe legal access to music should be widely available, and 3) free-to-the-listener music services are important to consumers. Learn more: http://bit.ly/1T1uk6U **

BRIEFCASE

George Ross Parman left NOBODY for kglobal, focusing on crisis communications.

The Brimley Group hired Liliana Coronado as vice president & counsel, focusing on criminal justice, reentry and law enforcement practice. She was a supervising deputy federal public defender with the Office of the Federal Public Defender for the Central District of California in Los Angeles, and previously was counsel to the House Judiciary Committee. "During the two years she served on my Crime Subcommittee staff while I was Chairman and Ranking Member, I was consistently impressed with Liliana’s judgment, attention to detail, and overall policy knowledge,” Rep. Bobby Scott said. "It’s great to have her back in our nation’s capital in this new role where I know she will continue her career long efforts to fix our broken criminal justice system."

Amplify Relations hired Republican campaign consultant Patrick Murphy in Reno. His recent clients include Reps. Larry Bucshon and Rob Wittman.

Chris Ortman, recently from CreativeFuture and previously at DHS and the Democratic National Campaign Committee, is the MPAA's new chief spokesman, taking over for Kate Bedingfield, who became comms director for Joe Biden.

National Association of Manufacturers President and CEO Jay Timmons will be honored as the AssociationTRENDS 2016 Association Executive of the Year.

CareCentrix appointed Gary Jacobs as executive vice president, responsible for overseeing strategic partnerships. He was managing director in the Heath Industries Advisory Practice at PricewaterhouseCoopers.

PARTYIN', PARTYIN', YEAH!

Shaquille O’Neal posed for selfies and cracked jokes at the Foundation for Advancing Alcohol Responsibility's luncheon at the Capitol yesterday. Spotted: Reps. Darrell Issa, Richard Nolan, Andre Carson and Brad Sherman; Melissa Fitzgerald (Carol from "The West Wing") and now senior director of Justice for Vets; Berry Gordy, founder of Motown.

At the MPAA's party at Hank's on the Hill: MPAA's Chris Dodd, Patrick Kilcur, Joanna McIntosh, Neil Fried, Ben Staub; Jon Gans, Glover Park Groups; Bill Bailey and Mike Castellano from Disney; Phil Tahtakran from NBC Universal; Josh Hurvitz from Time Warner; and Marla Grossman from American Continental Group.

A tech- and telecom-heavy crowd came to party and taste bourbon at TwinLogic Strategies' newly expanded offices, including Gary Shapiro and Michael Petricone of CTA, Steve Berry and Tim Donovan of CCA, Phyllis Cuttino and Geoff Brown of Pew Charitable Trusts, Margaret Nagle and Nicole Mortier of Yahoo, Katie Peters and Dave Grimaldi of Pandora, Bill Barloon of Sprint, Tom Nagle of Accenture, Paul Thornell of Citigroup and Sarah Hudgins of Amazon, Christian Dawson and David Snead of i2coalition and members of the MIC Coalition. Reps. Will Hurd and Billy Long and his wife, Barbara, also stopped by.

Spotted at the Bluebonnet Fundraising Tree Lighting Celebration: owner Caroline Wren putting the finishing touches on a nine-foot Fraser fir; RNC operative Alex Stroman; former Gov. Scott Walker aide Ted Kwong; EEOC Judge Kevin McEvoy; Martina Egerer from the Independent Community Bankers of America; Mark McNulty with the Republican Jewish Coalition.

POLITICO Caucus: Economy and the Election in New Hampshire Join us as we bring POLITICO's New Hampshire Caucus members together for the first time for a deep-dive discussion, featuring a variety of perspectives, about the economic policy issues facing the next president. Speakers include Radio Host Arnie Arnesen; Jared Bernstein, Center on Budget and Policy Priorities; Heather Boushey, Center for American Progress; Raymond Buckley, New Hampshire Democratic Party Chair; David Gergen, Harvard Kennedy School; Douglas Holtz-Eakin, American Action Forum; Jennifer Horn, New Hampshire Republican Party Chair; Kevin Madden, Hamilton Place Strategies; James Pethokoukis, American Enterprise Institute Dec. 7, 6 pm – New Hampshire Institute of Politics at Saint Anselm College RSVP: http://bit.ly/1leFwSK Livestream: POLITICO.com/live

ELSEWHERE IN THE INFLUENCE WORLD:

PARTY LIKE IT’S 1787: Common Cause is raising an alarm about a push to invoke Article V of the Constitution for the first time ever, proposing an amendment through two-thirds of state legislatures. The effort, backed by American Legislative Exchange Council (ALEC), is just seven states away. “This is a national train wreck that must be stopped,” Common Cause President Miles Rapoport said. http://bit.ly/1Nw8KTJ

DOCTORS SEEK GUN RESEARCH: Hours before the tragedy in San Bernardino Wednesday, several medical and health professional associations and advocacy groups delivered a petition to Capitol Hill demanding Congress pass a law that would allow the Centers for Disease Prevention and Control to study mass shootings as a public health issue, CBS News reports. A 1996 provision championed by the National Rifle Association halted the agency’s gun violence research. http://cbsn.ws/1YKqp2j

AGA DEALS GOP SURVEY: Ahead of the Republican debate at Sheldon Adelson's Venetian, the American Gaming Association sent the candidates a 10-page survey about their positions on issues like fantasy sports and proposed changes to how the IRS monitors casino customers, writes Howard Stutz in the Las Vegas Review-Journal. The organization will then release a voter's guide. http://bit.ly/1N7QIbk

NEW PAC REGISTRATIONS (Type of PAC)

Fund the Bern (Non-Qualified Non-Party, Unauthorized)

Moving America’s Republicans Into Number One PAC (Non-Qualified Non-Party, Leadership PAC)

NEW JOINT FUNDRAISING COMMITTEES

None

NEW LOBBYING REGISTRATIONS (Firm: Client)

Fox Rothschild LLP: Ash Grove Cement Company

Fox Rothschild LLP: Cone Health Systems

Fox Rothschild LLP: ex2 Technology

Fox Rothschild LLP: Firetrace International

Fox Rothschild LLP: Gulf Coast Waste Disposal Authority

Franklin Square Group, LLC: Financial Innovation Now

Monument Policy Group, LLC: Victims of Terrorism – East Africa

Nossaman LLP: Trenergi Corporation

NEW LOBBYING TERMINATIONS: (Firm: Client (Type of Termination)

Liebman & Associates, Inc.: Efficient Fuel Solutions, LLC

** A Message from Pandora: Voters love streaming music, believe legal access to music should be widely available, and free-to-the-listener music services are important to consumers. At Pandora, we believe access to music is essential. Every day we connect 80 million active listeners to 150 thousand artists -- creating an engine paying over almost $1.5 Billion in royalties to rightsholders. Pandora will continue on our relentless mission to unlock music by enabling nearly limitless connections between listeners and the music they love. Learn more: http://bit.ly/1T1uk6U **

** A message from the National Retail Federation: Retail is more than great products, or the sound of a cash register. More than a storefront, or a website. It’s working together as a community, creating the things people want, today. It’s the smile at the end of every transaction and the effort and innovation that customers don’t see. It’s a shop on your street that feels like family, and a store on the other side of the world that you can reach from your phone. It’s a lifetime of opportunities, from first jobs to lasting careers. It’s every person, every product, every exchange, and everything that consumers need. Retail impacts everyone, everywhere, every single day. And when retail thrives, communities across America thrive. Video: http://bit.ly/this_is_retail #thisisretail **