Three boys teams in action Saturday, all on road

Senior Blake Repshire during the Cañon City Tigers' wrestling dual against the Harrison Panthers earlier this year in the Tiger Dome. ( Brandon Hopper / Daily Record )

Tigers freshman Zac Hanenberg during the Canon City-Pueblo South wrestling dual earlier this year in the Tiger Dome. The Tigers will visit Pueblo South's tournament today. (Brandon Hopper / Daily Record)

More of the same as the Tigers wrestling team heads to Pueblo South on Saturday — they'll see tough competition.

So far this year, the Tigers have been faring well when they step on the mat against some of the state's top teams. One highlight, head coach Duff Seaney's squad upset the fourth-ranked Colts earlier this year in a non-league dual.

"We've wrestled pretty well against (top teams)," he said Thursday as his team prepares to compete in a 16-team Pueblo South Invite. "... I think we'll continue that this weekend at South. I'm looking forward to seeing how we come off the break. Sierra was not much of a test, hopefully we'll see what we're made of now as we face some tougher kids."

The Tigers breezed past Sierra earlier this week and was scheduled against another sub-par Woodland Park team Friday night.

There will be nothing easy Saturday, though, as some highly ranked teams collide at Pueblo South High School. Included at the Colts' tournament will be fourth-ranked Pueblo East, seventh-ranked Pueblo West, eighth-ranked Discovery Canyon and 10th-ranked Pueblo South in Class 4A. From Class 5A will be ninth-ranked Ponderosa and Class 2A's third-ranked Rocky Ford and sixth-ranked Swink.

One of the toughest brackets belongs to Tigers freshman Zac Hanenberg in the 132-pound weight class. Hanenberg is ranked sixth in Tim Yount's On The Mat Rankings in the 138-pound class. To win the championship, he'll have some tough matches to get past with Discovery Canyon's top-ranked Sam Turner and Swink's second-ranked Austin Coy.

Advertisement

Hanenberg has been in the 138-pound class this year, and his move down a level is only an experiment, Seaney said. Ricky Garcia is moving from 145s to 138s, and Bailey McBride is going from 132s to 145s.

Seaney said Hanenberg has wrestled well this year after winning middle school state last year. Also doing well, the longtime head coach said, are Tigers third-ranked Blake Repshire, sixth-ranked Cody Killis and eighth-ranked Cody Simms.

Tigers searching for win

Dylan Allbrandt during the Cañon City Tigers' boys basketball game against the Mitchell Marauders on Thursday night in the Tiger Dome. (Brandon Hopper / Daily Record)

A tight one slipped away from the Cañon City Tigers on Thursday night, and Tigers coach Greg Baxter said he thinks it's going to make them better.

"I think it gives us confidence," he said. "For 31 minutes and 50 seconds we did everything we needed to do to win the game."

The Tigers turned over the ball twice in the final 10 seconds and missed two free throws in their 62-61 loss to Mitchell. They also had an 11-point lead in the second half that slipped away thanks to a 15-0 run in the third quarter.

At 6 p.m. Saturday, the Tigers (1-8) will take on Cheyenne Mountain (2-5) in Colorado Springs.

Both teams enter the game on losing streaks — four in a row for Cañon City and two for Cheyenne Mountain — and both have losses this year to Palmer Ridge. CCHS lost by 19 and CM by 15.

Huskies back on court

Mark Marquez and his Florence Huskies won't have to long to wait to get back on the court. After being scheduled to go to Trinidad on Friday night, the Huskies have a 2:30 p.m. game against Fountain Valley in another Tri-Peaks League contest.

Heading into Friday's late game, the Huskies held on to a 3-6 record.

Fountain Valley had only played three games before its game scheduled for 7 p.m. Friday against Colorado Springs Christian School. The Danes beat Class 1A Pikes Peak Christian (0-5) and have losses to 1A Cornerstone Christian Academy and 2A Evangelical Christian Academy.

Brandon Hopper: 719-276-7644, hopperb@canoncity dailyrecord.com