A leader has emerged from the pack of Republicans seeking Iowa's open U.S. Senate seat.

Joni Ernst has taken a commanding lead in the formerly tight, five-way Republican primary race, according to Loras College Poll results released Thursday.

Furthermore, the results indicate the primary might not wind up in a nominating convention, the poll's director said.

The new Loras Poll shows Ernst with a 12-point lead over Mark Jacobs with fewer than three weeks remaining before the June 3 primary. Ernst, a state legislator, was chosen by 31 percent of voters surveyed, while Jacobs, a former energy company executive, was selected by 19 percent.

That shows a significant surge for Ernst; in Loras' poll in April, the duo was virtually tied at 18 percent.

"State Sen. Ernst has captured momentum in this race and has opened up a substantial lead, according to our polling," said Christopher Budzisz, a Loras College associate professor of politics and director of the poll, in a media release. "Whether it was from her recent notable ad campaigns and endorsements or not, she is the clear front-runner now."

Ernst has turned heads with a pair of campaign advertisements. In the first, she speaks of her experience on the farm castrating hogs and says she will reduce spending, or "cut pork," in the nation's capital. The second ad shows Ernst firing a gun at an indoor shooting range and says she will "take aim at wasteful spending" and "set sights on Obamacare."

Ernst campaign spokesman Derek Flowers said the Loras Poll "clearly shows that Iowa Republicans are responding to Joni's conservative message to change Washington, cut spending and repeal and replace Bruce Braley's Obamacare."

Ernst and Jacobs are among five Republicans running for Iowa's open U.S. Senate seat. The only Democrat running is U.S. Rep. Bruce Braley.

A spokeswoman for Jacobs' campaign pointed to the 29 percent of voters in the Loras Poll who said they remain undecided. She also said the poll will not reflect the impact of ads produced by the Jacobs campaign that criticize Ernst's voting record as a state senator.

"The primary is still extremely fluid, and voters are just starting to tune in," Alissa Ohl said. "For the first time in the campaign, voters are being introduced to Joni Ernst's record of voting to raise the gas tax and not showing up for work almost 40 percent of the time as a legislator."

The other Republican candidates lag behind the front-runners in the new poll. Sam Clovis received 9.5 percent, Matt Whitaker 7.3 percent and Scott Schaben 2.3 percent.

The poll surveyed 600 likely Republican primary voters Monday and Tuesday and has a 4 percent margin of error.

Budzisz said the results suggest the primary will be decided on Election Day, not afterward in a nominating convention. In Iowa, if no primary candidate receives at least 35 percent of the vote, the party's nominee is instead chosen by delegates at a special convention.