President Obama with Attorney General Loretta Lynch. (Andrew Harrer/Bloomberg)

HOUSE GEARS UP FOR ANOTHER OBAMACARE REPEAL VOTE. It is a new year in the House of Representatives and members are getting started by voting to repeal Obamacare and defund Planned Parenthood. The legislation on the schedule this week is a Senate-passed budget reconciliation bill that requires only a simple majority to be approved. Once the House votes, the bill will be sent to President Obama, who has vowed to veto the entire package. PowerPost has more:

House leaders plan to vote Wednesday on Senate-passed legislation that would allow Republicans to make good on a long-standing promise to try to eliminate the Affordable Care Act ahead of the election in November. The timing of the vote means the repeal bill will likely be sent to the White House just days before Obama is scheduled to deliver his final State of the Union address. The combative start sets the tone for a year during which House Speaker Paul D. Ryan (R-Wis.) hopes to move an ambitious list of conservative policies, including introducing a Republican alternative to Obama’s signature health care law.

SUBCOMMITTEE CHAIR WARNS AGAINST GUN CONTROL ACTION. The White House is preparing to announce new executive action on gun control this week, and one powerful House chairman is warning that he will do whatever he can to make it harder for the president to make good on his plans. The chairman of the House Appropriations subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, Science and Related agencies, Rep. John Culberson, (R-Tex.), wrote a letter this week informing Attorney General Loretta Lynch that he will do everything in his power to prevent the executive action from being fulfilled.

“The House Appropriations Committee will not provide resources to your department for the development or implementation of unlawful limitations on the unambiguous Second Amendment rights of Americans,” Culberson wrote.

IRS CRACKING DOWN ON GREEN CREDITS FOR GOLF COURSES. It’s tax season, and that means it’s time for some IRS stories. The Wall Street Journal’s Richard Rubin has a story on how the IRS is going after golf courses and country clubs that try to claim environmental credits for their properties.