Wage plan: $10.50 Cuomo proposes new hike in state's minimum hourly rate

Photo: Jamie Germano Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 New York State Governor Andrew Cuomo with Howard Zemsky, President and CEO of Empire State Development, speak about the Upstate Revitalization Program which pledges 1.5 billion to upstate cities, Thursday, Jan. 15, 2015 in Rochester, N.Y. (AP Photo/Democrat & Chronicle, Jamie Germano) ORG XMIT: NYROD103 less New York State Governor Andrew Cuomo with Howard Zemsky, President and CEO of Empire State Development, speak about the Upstate Revitalization Program which pledges 1.5 billion to upstate cities, Thursday, ... more Photo: Jamie Germano Wage plan: $10.50 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

Albany

Gov. Andrew Cuomo wants another increase to the minimum wage, this time to $10.50 per hour statewide by the end of 2016 and to $11.50 per hour in New York City.

The Sunday proposal came amid a flurry of policy announcements as part of Cuomo's Opportunity Agenda, a State of the State/Executive Budget hybrid agenda being released in full Wednesday. The governor's new pitch is a hefty jump from the state's current $8.75 minimum wage, which is set to rise to $9 per hour by next year.

The governor touted the $10.50 number as potentially becoming the highest in the nation if the Legislature signs off on it. Washington's statewide minimum wage currently is the highest at $9.47 per hour. Washington, D.C., has a $9.50 minimum wage.

"We raised the minimum wage last year, and we're now in the midst of a minimum wage phase-in schedule," Cuomo said at a news conference in Manhattan, where he was flanked by labor leaders who later praised his proposal. "I'm proud that we raised the minimum wage. But the wage gap is continuing to grow."

Politically, a minimum-wage increase may be one of the most difficult proposals for Cuomo to accomplish this year. It was met with criticism from both the governor's left and right.

More Information Minimum wage elsewhere New York's minimum wage currently sits at $8.75 an hour, and it's set to rise to $9 by next year. Under a proposal announced Sunday, it would go up to $10.50 statewide, making it the highest in the nation. Here's a look at other minimum wages nationwide: Federal/State Wage as of Jan. 1 Washington, D.C. $9.50 Washington $9.47 Oregon $9.25 Vermont $9.15 Connecticut $9.15 California $9.00 Massachusetts $9.00 Rhode Island $9.00 New York $8.75 South Dakota $8.50 New Jersey $8.38 Illinois $8.25 Nevada $8.25 Michigan $8.15 Ohio $8.10 Florida $8.05 Pennsylvania $7.25 Texas $7.25 Georgia $5.15 Source: United States Department of Labor Associated Press

Income equality advocates said any raise is good, but they asked why the governor is stopping short of the $15 per hour they've rallied for. Citizen Action of New York Executive Director Karen Scharff called Cuomo's proposal "a missed opportunity to raise the wage to what New Yorkers really need," which she said is $15. Strong Economy for All Coalition Executive Director Michael Kink called on the governor to convene a wage board to recommend a minimum wage increase (one already is considering an increase for tipped workers).

Business representatives lambasted the proposal. State Business Council President and CEO Heather Briccetti said the two-tier system would be extremely difficult for businesses to implement, and the accelerated implementation time frame would create a drag on job creation.

As with the full Women's Equality Act, another minimum wage increase (one was passed in 2013) presents great potential for a political stalemate between the Democratic Assembly and governor and the Republican Senate.

"I am heartened that Governor Cuomo has put forth a bold proposal to dramatically increase the minimum wage, something I and my Assembly Democratic colleagues have long advocated for," Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver said in a statement. "As I have said many times, no one who works a full-time job should have to live in poverty, and by increasing the minimum wage we can dramatically improve the lives of so many workers and their families."

A Senate Republican spokesman declined to comment. Senate Majority Leader Dean Skelos has expressed unwillingness to revisit minimum wage talks, most recently late last year when there was talk that an increase could be traded for a bump in lawmakers' pay.

The $10.50 minimum wage piece is part of a 10-point poverty and income inequality plan released Sunday. The plan includes an expansion of the state's Urban Youth Jobs Program, a large increase in affordable housing and homeless services funding, and a student loan program that would supplement the federal Pay As You Earn income-based loan repayment program.

Cuomo also announced the creation of a state Office of Faith-Based Community Development Services, which would help community and faith-based organizations helping impoverished communities in particular.

The afternoon announcements were preceded by a small business assistance proposal unveiled in the morning. The headliner of that is a reduction of the income tax rate for small businesses that file under the corporate franchise tax. The rate would drop from 6.5 percent to 2.5 percent over three years.

The announcement was met with lukewarm support by some. In a statement, Republican state Sen. George Amedore said he is encouraged by Cuomo's proposal, but he added that more needs to be done to ease the tax burden on all small businesses. The freshman senator, who helps operate Guilderland-based Amedore Homes, called for a reduction and overhaul of regulations and fees that he says discourage private-sector growth and success.

National Federation of Independent Business State Director Mike Durant said in a phone interview that the combination of the minimum wage and small-business proposals sent a "fairly perplexing" message and called Sunday difficult to swallow.

mhamilton@timesunion.com • 518-454-5449 • @matt_hamilton10