There are scores of TV shows out there, with dozens of new episodes each week, not to mention everything you can find on Hulu Plus, Netflix streaming, and HBO Go. How’s a viewer to keep up? To help you sort through all that television has to offer, Flavorwire is compiling the five best moments on TV each week. This time: How to Get Away with Murder shows its title murder (spoiler ahead) — but hasn’t explained how to get away with it. Yet.

How to Get Away With Murder Gets Its Murderer

It was Wes, with the trophy, in Annalise’s house! Despite her husband being dead, her husband was also a huge jerk who knocked up his mistress, so Annalise’s response when Wes says he’s sorry is, “Don’t be.” It’s awesome! And the last we’ll see of How to Get Away With Murder until next year.

Olivia Pope Chooses Herself

Shortly before being kidnapped, but still! For a few sweet minutes, Kerry Washington boogies around a living room while telling Scott Foley that she wants both Jake and Fitz, and if either of them want her to make a final decision anytime soon they’re crazy, because she chooses herself over either of them. Not that anyone in the audience understands why Fitz is still in the running.

… And Jane Villanueva Chooses Rafael

One of Jane the Virgin‘s many, many subplots is the love triangle between the title character, her cop fiancé Michael, and her former crush/inadvertent baby daddy Rafael. Just six episodes into the series and that triangle’s already broken; Jane breaks up with Michael for lying to her about knowing Rafael’s wife Petra was cheating on him with his (now-dead) best friend Zaz — see, lots of subplots! — and goes running into Rafael’s arms, complete with a dramatic, swept-off-her-feet makeout. It’s worthy of a telenovela, which makes sense given that the show’s based on one.

#TrueDetectiveSeasonOne, Reprise

Saturday Night Live‘s Woody Harrelson/Kendrick Lamar episode is widely agreed to be the 40th season’s best so far, although the high point wasn’t a performance from either. Instead, Harrelson played the dangerously-close-to-breaking sidekick to Taran Killam’s phenomenal Matthew McConaughey, who’s an ardent fan of weird nicknames and the Mario theme music. Watch them square off with Weekend Update co-host Colin Jost above.

<div style=”background-color:#000000;width:480px;”><div style=”padding:4px;”>

http://thecolbertreport.cc.com/”>The Colbert Report

Get More: http://thecolbertreport.cc.com/full-episodes”>Colbert Report Full Episodes,https://www.facebook.com/thecolbertreport”>The Colbert Report on Facebook,http://thecolbertreport.cc.com/videos”>Video Archive

Toni Morrison Meets Stephen Colbert, Disaster Does Not Ensue

An author who made her name by documenting the African-American experience and a colorblind “conservative” pundit may not be a natural match, but Stephen Colbert’s sit-down with Toni Morrison is a fine way to kick off the character’s last month on air before his creator moves on to CBS. Morrison is soft-spoken and game for Colbert’s jokes — she takes full responsibility for Obamacare, BTW — while getting deadly serious in a discussion on the difference between the fiction of race and the reality of racism. Oh, and she’s a huge fan of her own work.