Happy Hump Day, the 77th day of 2015 and the 10th year since doctors in Florida, acting on orders of a state judge, removed the feeding tube of Terri Schiavo, a brain-damaged Florida woman who had been comatose for years. Schiavo died on March 31, 2005, at age 41 despite an intense effort by Jeb Bush, Florida’s governor at the time. Against the wishes of Schiavo’s husband, who says it made his life “hell,” Bush linked arms and formed a flying wedge of intervention with congressional right-to-life Republicans, including multiple court appeals and intense public pressure to stop the feeding tube removal. Here’s your Three-Minute Briefing, all the News You Can Use in 180 seconds or less:

Well, This Is Awkward: Reports of Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s political demise were premature: He scored a decisive victory in yesterday’s elections, winning a fourth term and validating, sort of, House Speaker John Boehner’s decision to breach diplomatic protocol and invite him to address a joint session of Congress. Netanyahu’s win also forces a reset for Capitol Hill Democrats, who were split on whether to attend the controversial speech, and it locks in his bad romance with President Barack Obama, who’ll have to find a way to make it work for the remainder of his term.

Cleveland Rocks: Pivotings away from international crises, Bibi’s re-election and congressional Republican chicanery, Obama heads to Cleveland, where the Republicans are going to hold their convention in about 17 months. He’s expected to talk up the economic recovery and talk down Congressional Republicans’ twin fantasy budgets, which largely follow the usual GOP cut-spending-and-taxes orthodoxy. By contrast, Obama says his wish list hikes spending on infrastructure and education along with other social priorities. He’ll also lay down a marker or two for some Democratic 2016 presidential candidate or other who might or might not want to succeed him.

[READ: Obama to Focus on Economy in Cleveland]

Sen. Inhofe, Call Your Office: As his days in the White House dwindle down to a precious few hundred, Obama apparently is thinking about his legacy, and that includes setting a few things in stone, metaphorically speaking (see: Iran, nuclear disarmament). Politico reports Obama’s engaged in some behind-the-scenes negotiations to lock in a global climate-change treaty by the time he leaves office.

Check Out Time: 11 a.m., Jan. 20, 2017: Of course it’d be hard to blame Obama if he wanted to schedule an early move-out date from the executive mansion: Since taking office, the Secret Service has handled a surge in threats to the nation’s first black president – which, if you think about it, puts a few recent headlines into context. The latest: a Missouri man is under arrest after a police informer and an undercover cop uncovered a plot to assassinate Obama with a high-powered rifle.

More Tweets From Hillary: In the last couple days, Hillary Clinton’s publicly slapped congressional Republicans for stalling Loretta Lynch’s nomination, for attempting back-door anti-abortion legislation and for cutting federal student funding in its budget plans. And if you’re wondering why you haven’t heard or seen her making these statements in a speech or press conference, you’re probably not following her on Twitter. Given her, shall we say, testy relationship with the media, it makes perfect sense: Clinton gets to put out a message that everyone will see, without the hassle of, say, follow-up questions from pesky reporters.

Chappaqua Colossus: Emails, shme-mails; if it’s Wednesday, there must be another poll showing Clinton’s hypothetical presidential campaign crushing would-be competitors like so many bugs underfoot. A new CNN/ORC poll shows her dominance over any potential Democratic rivals – if, you know, she actually decides to run – extends to the current field of Republican hopefuls. That includes a 10-point lead over Rand Paul, the GOP prospect who comes closest to defeating her. In case you’re wagering, Clinton smokes Jeb Bush, the hypothetical Republican front-runner, by 15 points.

Clash of the Early Polling Titans: As the Republicans’ 2016 presidential mosh pit grinds on, two of the GOP’s bigger White House aspirants are poised for an epic smash. U.S. News’ David Catanese reports that Jeb Bush and Scott Walker, two leaders in the field so far, are trading elbows, with Bush and his surrogates hinting that Walker’s an untrustworthy flip-flopper and Walker and his people reminding everyone Bush is the brother of that guy everybody blames for screwing up two wars and the U.S. economy a few years back (George Bush to America: “You’re welcome!”) who screwed things up a few years back. The serious slams haven’t started yet, but the preview has tongues wagging about a potentially brutal primary ahead.

Presidential Run or Performance Art? The political world is about to get Trumped. Despite a rambling, at times incoherent appearance at the recent Conservative Political Action Conference confab last month, real estate mogul and pseudo-politician Donald Trump reportedly has decided to drop his role as professional fire-er on TV’s “The Apprentice” and will form a presidential exploratory committee. Though Trump has virtually no political experience, has multiple business bankruptcies on his resume and sports the worst hair this side of Rand Paul, he apparently is serious about the attention he’ll get by thinking of running for president.

Your Morning Video: Why The Donald might want to think twice about running for office:

Soft-Core Porn, GOP Style: Speaking of the Bush administration, Playboy for some reason published an interview between Fox News correspondent James Rosen and former Vice President Dick Cheney, and the results were far less revealing than the Playmate of the Month gatefold. The Man Called Vice defends everything, admits nothing and suggests Obama and Attorney General Eric Holder are “playing the race card” by suggesting harsh criticism of them is because they’re African American and not because they’re incompetent. Not surprising for a man who literally has no heart. No word on Cheney’s status on the soul-replacement waiting list.

Tweet(s) of the Morning: After a series of tone-deaf Tweets about a state that Scott Walker, her now-former client, wants very badly to win, digital strategist Liz Mair arguably set a record for fastest trip through a campaign revolving door, lasting just one day between her hiring and firing:

Morons across America are astounded to learn that people from *IOWA* grow up rather government-dependent. #agsubsidies #ethanol #brainless — Liz Mair (@LizMair) January 22, 2015

The sooner we remove Iowa's frontrunning status, the better off American politics and policy will be. — Liz Mair (@LizMair) January 24, 2015

Stat of the Day: Factor by which a Democratic senator is more likely than the average American to be a lawyer: 127 (courtesy Harper’s Index).

Duly Noted: On this date in 1766, Britain repealed the Stamp Act of 1765. In 1925, the Tri-State Tornado struck southeastern Missouri, southern Illinois and southwestern Indiana, resulting in some 700 deaths. In 1937, some 300 people, mostly children, were killed in a gas explosion at a school in New London, Texas. In 1959, President Dwight D. Eisenhower signed the Hawaii statehood bill. (Hawaii became a state on Aug. 21, 1959.)