On the backdrop of Michael Sam's public revelation that he's gay, a development that will most likely result in the former Missouri Tigers defensive end becoming the first openly homosexual player in the NFL – and any of the four major American sports leagues, for that matter – on Monday evening Piers Morgan asked Boy George to share his reaction.

An openly gay recording star, George first came out to his family, and then ultimately to the public. Joining "Piers Morgan Live" for a face to face conversation, the former lead singer of Culture Club touched upon the complexity of this issue:

"One of the funny things about coming out public is that people always encourage you to do it, and then when you do it, they say 'all you do is talk about being gay.' So you can't win," said the man behind such hits as "Do You Really Want to Hurt Me?" and "Karma Chameleon." "I think, when I was younger, I was a little bit more kind of gung-ho and that everyone should come out. Now I think, if it makes you happy, come out. If it's going to make you miserable, don't come out ... As long as somebody isn't attacking gay people, I don't care if they're in the closet."

Known for both his music and his elaborate glam appearance, George insisted that the decision to discuss one's sexuality publicly is specific to the individual:

"You come out because it's going to make you happy, it's going to make your life better. But I don't think you have an obligation. I used to think that," he told Morgan, his fellow countryman. "We have this great guy in England called Ben Cohen, who is straight, who's championing homophobia, and all that sort of stuff. I admire people like him, I think we need more people like that. No one is going to listen to us queens, screaming for equality. Good on him. I think it's a very brave thing to do."

Watch the clip for more of Morgan's interview with George, and for the next edition of "Piers Morgan Live," watch CNN every night at 9.

-

» Follow "Piers Morgan Live" on Twitter

» Follow "Piers Morgan Live" on Instagram