A program 'designed to find the gaps'

Preschooler Tyson Barber has lunch at Columbine Elementary on Thursday. The Boulder Valley School District has launched the Gamm Initiative for Infants and Toddlers (GIIT) program in preschools at Columbine, Creekside and University Hill elementary schools. ( Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera )

Three Boulder Valley preschools are serving lunch — and giving students a bag of healthy food to take home each weekend — through a new initiative.

Boulder's Gordon Gamm, who founded the Boulder International Humanist Institute, donated $120,000 for the district to start the program in January, with the hope that others will donate to keep it going.

"I'm throwing out a challenge," Gamm said.

The goal is to alleviate childhood hunger for preschool students, who are too young to benefit from the school lunch program. The federal school lunch program provides universal breakfast and snacks to preschool students at low-income schools, but no lunch.

"This program was designed to find the gaps," Gamm said. "Children should have nutritious food, no matter their circumstances. It has such an impact on them, for the rest of their lives."

The district plans to evaluate the pilot after it ends on June, with a goal of producing a case study to share best practices with other communities.

About 150 preschoolers at Boulder's Columbine, Creekside and University Hill elementary schools are participating.

Students eat a family style lunch, allowing them to practice sharing, pouring milk, table manners and cleaning up.

Columbine preschool teacher Jennifer Sundt said she didn't realize how much hungry preschoolers could eat. The lunches also help expand what they'll eat, with students more willing to try something new, like a radish, if their friend is eating it, she said.

Advertisement

"It makes a huge difference for our kids," she said.

The bag of take home food includes staples, such as rice, beans, pasta, and tomato sauce; and local organic produce from partner farms. The district also sends home information cards about the produce and the farmers, plus recipes.

"We use these bags not only to help hungry families, but as an education piece," said Ann Cooper, Boulder Valley food services director.

Columbine Principal Guillermo Medina said food insecurity — not knowing if there's a next meal — is an issue for an estimated 14 percent of U.S. students.

At Columbine, he said, he sees firsthand how poverty affects school performance. To learn, kids need to have their basic needs met, he said.

"If it's a community expectation that we won't leave kids behind, it's this kind of partnership that we need," he said.

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa