By Karen Cross, National Right to Life Political Director

Often, when the media are discussing upcoming elections, candidates are referred to as “extreme” on abortion. Almost always that label is unfairly applied to the pro-life candidate, even when the pro-abortion candidate holds positions on abortion way outside the mainstream.

Gubernatorial elections will be held in Virginia and New Jersey on November 5.

Pro-life Attorney General Ken Cuccinelli (R) is facing pro-abortion Terry McAuliffe (D) and pro-abortion Robert Sarvis (I) for governor in Virginia.

Pro-life New Jersey Governor Chris Christie (R) is being challenged by pro-abortion state Senator Barbara Buono (D).

What are the candidates’ positions on life?

Virginia Gubernatorial Election

Abortion

Ken Cuccinelli opposes abortion on demand, supports legal protection for unborn children, and opposes using your tax dollars to pay for abortion on demand.

Terry McAuliffe supports a policy of abortion on demand, which allows abortion for any reason. When asked about his position on taxpayer-funded abortions, Terry McAuliffe refused to say whether he supports “taxpayer-funding of abortion up until the moment of birth.”

Robert Sarvis has said “abortion is an individual issue” and that he prefers “to see no decisive legislation in either direction.” His position would continue abortion on demand.

Obamacare

Obamacare will provide government funding in many states for insurance plans that pay for abortion on demand, and will lead to the rationing of lifesaving medical treatments.

Ken Cuccinelli opposes Obamacare and believes it should not be implemented. Terry McAuliffe supports Obamacare and has pledged to implement the law in Virginia. Obamacare will provide government funding in many states for insurance plans that pay for abortion on demand, and will lead to the rationing of lifesaving medical treatments.

Abortion Provider Regulations

Americans were horrified when they heard testimony about the atrocities in the Kermit Gosnell murder trial. They were disgusted at his utmost disregard for women, appalled at the filthy conditions at his clinic, and devastated to learn about his brutal method of “snipping” the spinal cords of babies he had deliberately aborted alive.

Following the exposure of Gosnell’s “House of Horrors,” many attorneys general from across the nation initiated investigations into abortion facilities in their states.

Attorney General Ken Cuccinelli has worked to improve health and safety standards to protect women’s health in abortion facilities across the Commonwealth.

Terry McAuliffe has promised to take executive action to allow abortion clinics, which he admits do not meet Virginia’s health and safety regulatory standards, to remain open.

To download a comparison flyer of the Virginia Gubernatorial Candidates, click here.

New Jersey Gubernatorial Election

Abortion

Gov. Chris Christie opposes abortion on demand, and supports legal protection for unborn children. State Senator Barbara Buono supports a policy of abortion on demand, which allows abortion for any reason, referring to abortion as an “absolute right.”

Obamacare

Chris Christie opposes the pro-abortion, pro-rationing Obamacare law, while Barbara Buono supports it and would implement it in New Jersey.

Funding for Abortion Providers

Chris Christie vetoed a bill that provided state tax dollars to abortion providers. Barbara Buono would restore funding to abortion providers using state tax dollars.

To download a comparison flyer of the New Jersey Gubernatorial Candidates, click here.

Remember to compare the candidates to see which candidate supports your values on life, determine which candidate is extreme in your view, then vote on November

Stay tuned at www.nationalrighttolifenews.org for future 2013 stories and election results.