A local Republican Party leader in Kentucky has resigned her position in act of protest against Sen. Mitch McConnell.

According to WFPL:

After serving on the Daviess County Republican Party’s leadership team for almost three years, Owensboro native Barbara Knott had enough. She resigned on July 10 and the reason was simple; Knott cannot support Senate Republican Leader Mitch McConnell this fall. “I have resigned from the executive committee of the Republican Party because I will not support Mitch McConnell,” Knott, chair of the Owensboro Tea Party, said in a telephone interview. “I have a big 4×8 sign in my front yard that says ‘Retire Mitch.’ It’s going to stay there through the election. I will not vote for that man.” Knott does plan to come out to support other Republican candidates. But in terms of McConnell she is “just fed up” despite voting for him in the past.

When local party leaders are resigning because they can no longer support him, things are getting dire for Mitch McConnell. The only thing that McConnell has going for him is a big pile of money that will be spent by outside groups on his behalf this fall. Sen. McConnell’s campaign has been worst run spectacles of the year. The candidate himself has alternated between gaffes and offensive statements.

Sen. McConnell is using the same playbook that he has been following for decades, but this time it isn’t working. McConnell is not having success trying to tie his Democratic opponent Alison Grimes to President Obama. His Obamacare attacks have gone nowhere, and mostly the senator has looked out of touch with the needs of his constituents on the campaign trail.

Tea party activists are outraged at McConnell because he funded an ad in support of Sen. Thad Cochran during the Republican Mississippi Senate runoff. McConnell has always been on thin ice with the state’s tea partiers, and his decision to play such an active role in the Mississippi contest is coming back to haunt him.

If Sen. McConnell loses the tea party crowd, he is going to have a nearly impossible time winning the election in November, and if the Senate Minority Leader loses his seat, Republican chances of taking back the Senate go down the tubes. By abandoning McConnell, tea partiers are doing what they do best. The tea party may once again end up helping Democrats keep their majority in the US Senate.