Americans today owe $850 billion on credit cards, with New Jersey ranked second, after only Alaska. What will it be after internet gambling goes live?



By Carl Zeitz

On Nov. 26, New Jersey will unleash full-scale internet betting, expanding the boundaries of gambling in a way likely to have some of the most profound social and economic impacts yet caused by the new online world.

To take part, you will have to be within the state and at least 21 years old.

Americans today owe about $850 billion on credit cards, with New Jersey at $5,484 per borrower — ranked second after only Alaska for average credit card debt. What will the figure be a year after internet gambling goes live? Will tens of thousands of people who don’t gamble be gambling, mesmerized as they play slot machines, craps, blackjack and roulette on tablets and phones? The answers are probably yes.

With the inevitable spread to many other states — and potentially all states when, one assumes, federal interstate gambling restrictions are lifted — will a resulting consumer debt explosion be the next bubble in the American economy, with the potential to damage the economic stability of many and create new problem gamblers?

It’s one thing to travel to Atlantic City or to a nearby convenience casino such as Parx in Pennsylvania or Resorts World Casino at Aqueduct Racetrack. It’s going to be quite another thing to carry a casino in your pocket or sit at home gambling on a laptop.

When he conditionally vetoed the internet gambling act and sent it to the Legislature for amendment before signing it, Gov. Chris Christie acknowledged the perils by declaring: “The bill should be revised to do more to prevent the documented harms that can accompany excessive gambling. Our state cannot carelessly create a new generation of addicted gamers, sitting in their homes, using laptops or iPads, gambling away their salaries and their futures.”

The governor’s recommendation, adopted in the final law, increased an annual social assessment from each internet gambling licensee to $250,000 for the New Jersey Council on Compulsive Gambling and the Department of Human Services for compulsive gambling prevention.

Is this a real solution for the havoc to come if havoc it turns out to be, or a gesture to salve the conscience? While the potential societal risk cannot be calculated in dollars, at least not yet, individual risk can be.

Under the internet gambling regulations, it is at least conceivable a gambler could open betting accounts to the initial allowed limit of $2,500 with each of the 12 Atlantic City casinos and quickly gamble into $30,000 worth of debt. Likely? No, not necessarily. Possible? Yes. But how many such accounts will it take to cause personal financial distress even to the point of ruin?

If you choose to use the internet to gamble in New Jersey, will anyone know if you are really in New Jersey and not gambling from outside its boundaries? They’ll know because, as the National Security Agency can attest, satellites, cell towers and technology tell servers where we are or at least where our devices are every minute they are on.

Of course you have to be 21 years old to bet in a casino or soon online. If you are skeptical that computers and casinos taking remote applications can really stop a 16-year-old from creating an identity and getting access to credit cards to gamble online, well, so am I.

Under the law, internet gambling can be offered by Atlantic City casinos alone or with operating partners, provided all such gambling operates from within a casino in Atlantic City.

The policy impetus for the law is to give the Atlantic City casinos a big competitive boost after seven years of getting hammered by competition from casinos and slot operations in Delaware, Pennsylvania and New York — especially Pennsylvania’s neighborhood casinos — a period in which annual New Jersey casino revenue dropped from $5.2 billion to a barely $3 billion pace this year.

And with polls pointing to approval Tuesday of a New York state ballot question to allow up to seven commercial casinos in the Catskills and other upstate areas, there is likely to be still more competition for Atlantic City in the near future.

IMPACT ON JOBS

There are a couple of very big ifs. First, will the ability to gamble online seriously depress real visits to actual casinos to the point of stranding a lot of invested capital in a capital-intensive industry? Will it cause the loss of more jobs after 15,000 Atlantic City jobs have already disappeared? Amazon, after all, has not exactly been helpful to bookstores, and online shopping has seriously cut into big retailers.

The other big “if” is the idea that New Jersey will have an internet gambling lock by going all in early. Currently it’s legal in Nevada, but only for poker, and in a small way in Delaware. New Jersey will allow every game permitted in Atlantic City casinos to be offered, plus any other games the Division of Gaming Enforcement allows. (There will be a “soft” opening Nov. 21, by invitation only, to make sure all the systems work properly).

Atlantic City had a nearly 15-year monopoly on legal casinos east of the Mississippi River. Not this time. If New Jersey succeeds, bordering states and probably most if not every state with casinos will legalize it within 18 months, while tribes will press to have Indian casino compacts amended. It may take even less time to proliferate because other states can adapt and adopt the New Jersey law and regulations.

The DGE is to control this immense expansion of gambling with regulations that seem to leave many unanswered questions.

How big will this be? No one can know. One knowledgeable industry analysis in September predicted $400 million annually immediately, leveling to $350 million a year as other states with legal gambling get into it. The same analysis estimated an $8.5 billion U.S. internet gambling market in 18 states within five years. Christie’s budget projects a state tax share of $160 million in the first seven months, which translates into internet gambling revenue of $1 billion in that same period — given that the internet gambling tax is set at 15 percent, almost twice the 8 percent rate levied on on-site casino revenue.

Those figures may seriously underestimate the result because between commercial casinos and casinos owned by Native American tribes, there are legal casinos today in 43 states generating more than $60 billion a year in gross gambling revenue — the amount gamblers lose.

BIG-TIME LOSSES

Most people don’t realize it — perhaps including politicians who legalize more and more of it — but measured by losses, Americans spend more money gambling legally than they do on virtually all other leisure activities taken separately or possibly even combined.

This year Americans will lose nearly $130 billion in casinos and to state lotteries — about 12 times as much as they spend on all in-theater movie tickets and more than six times the combined 2012 revenues of the NFL, Major League Baseball and the NBA.

About 70 percent of the casino losses are in slot machine games you will soon be able to play online in New Jersey. It’s all a lot of money, but for some added perspective, consider that China allows casinos only in Macau — like nearby Hong Kong, it’s a special administrative region. There last year, some two dozen casinos generated more than $38 billion in gambling revenue, 10 times that in Atlantic City.

Three giants of the U.S. casino industry — Wynn Resorts (Steve Wynn), MGM Resorts International and Las Vegas Sands Corporation (Sheldon Adelson), which are heavily invested in Macau — will be really interested to see what internet gambling begets in New Jersey, focused not only on the United States but also on a potential Chinese internet gambling market of 1 billion customers.

CASINO IN A PURSE

Whether it happens in China someday or maybe Pennsylvania next year, it is about to happen in New Jersey, where every person 21 or older with a cell phone will be able to carry a casino, in fact up to 12 casinos (the number in Atlantic City), in his pocket or her purse.

Banks should be really interested because two of the ways — and they will probably become the main ways — that gamblers will be able to fund their internet casino accounts will be through credit and debit cards.

Traditional credit gamblers get their credit directly from a casino and repay the casino knowing casinos don’t charge interest. But much of internet gambling debt will run up on credit and debit cards, so the banks that issue those cards are about to go into the gambling business, and they charge interest.

So for banks, there may be many new cards and customers, a lot of new interest-bearing credit and lots of overdraft fee revenue on debit cards. But banks may also have a greater exposure to bad debt because effectively they, not the casinos, will be extending and collecting gambling credit.

It is going to change the world for a lot of people. How much and for how many people? We and all the other casino states and the gambling industry are going to find out soon enough throughout New Jersey.

Carl Zeitz is a former member of the New Jersey Casino Control Commission.