There’s Cody. There’s the pair of saucy mutts, Lucy and K.D. (the initials stand for King Dog.) There was Milan the husky, and now that Milan has passed, there’s Enzo. Lucky the Border Collie. Lucy the labrador. Buddy the Australian terrier, and the spaniel sisters, Mia and Meg. And now Luna, the rescued Airedale. And, of course, their humans.

We’re a tribe, we morning dog walkers on the westernmost stretch of the Boyd Lake Recreation Trail in Loveland. Cyclists and joggers often pass too quickly for greetings, but dog people come to know one another’s faces and the dogs’ names, which are often exchanged long before human introductions.

Now, after the flood, we are a tribe scattered, a flotilla unmoored.

Our trail runs for 25 miles, flowing east from Wilson Boulevard. It swings north to dodge the softball fields, then south to lasso the old fairgrounds, reborn as a sparkling new park where a bustling farmers’ market has finally grown large enough to fill the two roofed pavilions. Toddlers splash in water sculptures there, and a historic home anchors a new community garden. The trail cuts south, then emerges behind the Quick Lube and Sonic to tunnel under 287. It cruises through Old Town past our library and recreation center, then whips northeast along a tributary stream. It crosses another major road south of the cluster of big-box stores and the deserted Western Sugar plant. Then it rolls north of U.S. 34 onto true, nearly treeless prairie, looping around the shores of Boyd Lake.

Our trail links the wilder, rural western edge of Loveland with the beginnings of the eastern, newer edge. Or rather, it did.

I know this path so well, I could map its features blindfolded. I know the sound the timbers of the footbridge over the Big Thompson make under feet and under bicycle tires. I know the giant, slowly dying cottonwood at the rivers’ edge with the old steel cable embedded in its bark. The clusters of brush that bend under blankets of snow, luring my dog to pounce and burrow for hidden rodents, and the grove of trees where she pauses to see if the squirrels are going to sass her that day. In any given season, I know which sections of the trail will have more shade, which have rabbitbrush and which have poison ivy. I know where the snakes come out to sun themselves.

I know the bend in the river where the great blue heron likes to hide, the trees where cormorants roost and the patches of bottom land where the elk go when snow chases them down from the foothills.

I know the bench memorializing a redhaired woman who walked the trail with her husband and a sweet German shepherd until cancer took the dog, and later took the woman herself. And the brand-new natural area the city was just about to open on the path’s south side, with a pond just for paddlers, complete with parking and lights and a boat launch.

It’s probably sentimental to mourn the damage to an outdoor space when so many homes, lives, and livelihoods have been lost or damaged beyond reparation. But for many of Loveland’s walkers, bikers, dog owners, joggers, and birdwatchers, this territory was our home more so than our houses, and the time we spent on it anchored our days. I am sure the same loss tugs at all Coloradans who have lost trails, parks or access to them for the foreseeable future.

Our trail served as Loveland’s long backyard, a world of its own that was still never far from the center of the action. It ferried foot traffic and cyclists into downtown Loveland, lending an assist to its nascent reinvention as an arts haven with galleries and microbreweries and real restaurants along its main streets. It connected us. In any given blizzard, Loveland’s main streets might be tough to navigate. But our trail? It would be neatly plowed.

Now Loveland waits to see what the flood has made of this lifeline. More water scoured Loveland on its way east than flowed in the deadly 1976 flood. I wasn’t here then; neither was the trail. I have no idea how long it will take to restore the damaged portions of this trail, or the roads to all the wild places our state enjoys.

I make my living thinking about, writing about, advising on, not just the concrete features of home, but the section of the soul that answers to that call. Now the flood has taught me what it means to have a gash torn in my emotional map. Taught me a mere drop of what evacuees must feel.

Home is always a lot more than rooms and a roof. For Colorado, this flood has measured how much more.