Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

The Patriots could’ve been resting next Sunday with the AFC’s best record all wrapped up.

Instead, a chain reaction of unorthodox decisions, confusion over the rulebook and bad defense left Tom Brady stranded on the sideline in overtime and kept the top seed up for grabs.

New England fell 26-20 to the Jets on Sunday — a loss that will be remembered for Bill Belichick’s decision to give the ball to New York on the first possession of overtime and Pats receiver Matt Slater’s bungling of that choice after winning the coin toss.

The team that wins the coin toss actually can choose from three options: kick or receive — or defend their choice of end zone.

Even though it was warm and not all that windy, Belichick instructed Slater to choose to defend the north end zone if the Patriots won the toss, meaning New York would almost certainly then choose to receive the kickoff. But after Slater won by calling heads, the first words out of his mouth were, “We want to kick.” That meant the Patriots had to kick the ball away, and the Jets, not New England, got to choose the direction.

Confusing.

Then, even more bafflingly, the Patriots defense barely resisted, allowing Ryan Fitzpatrick and the Jets to go 80 yards in five plays for the winning touchdown.

Belichick had won an overtime game two years ago using the “take the wind” strategy. He insisted there was no confusion about his plan this time.

“I thought it was the best thing to do,” he said.

But nothing went the way the coach drew it up.

And because of that, the Patriots (12-3) will not get to rest starters next Sunday at Miami. They’ll go into the game needing a win to guarantee themselves the top seed in the AFC.

In case you missed it, here are the other hot topics after the second-to-last week of the NFL season:

NOT UNDEFEATED: Instead of thinking about a perfect season, the Carolina Panthers now have to worry about locking down the best record in the NFC. The Panthers fell 20-13 to the Atlanta Falcons for their first loss in 15 games this season — and their first regular-season loss since Nov. 30, 2014. (Side note: Check out Julio Jones of the Falcons with his leaping, go-ahead touchdown catch.) The Carolina loss, combined with Arizona’s 38-8 crushing of the Packers, means that if the Cardinals (13-2) win and Panthers lose next week, Carolina would drop to No. 2 in the conference. Oh, and yes, members of the perfect and still-unmatched 1972 Miami Dolphins finally took their champagne off ice.