Topics: aol_on, Donald Trump, Editor's Picks, Elections 2016, Media Criticism, News, Politics News

As the elite media casts about for ways to understand and explain the rise of Donald Trump, they may find outsize historical precedents (as Politico did when it asked 13 historians to name “the closest antecedent to Trump”), or cite Richard Hofstadter’s “Paranoid Style” (as the New Yorker, CNN and Salon did—even while TNR’s Jeet Heer warned against Hofstadter’s influential misreading of populism to explain him), or simply scratch their heads in wonder. But if the media—especially the dominant elite media—really wants to know who’s responsible for Trump’s rise, one place they should start looking is right in their bathroom mirrors.

I know, I know. Trump is a clownish figure far removed from the sort of seriousness they strive to cultivate. Surely they can’t be blamed for him, right?

Wrong. Here’s why: As Congress returns, there’s a looming threat of yet another government shutdown. Once unthinkable, then disastrous when Gingrich introduced them, shutdown threats have become a part of normal politics in the Obama era, thanks in large part to “balanced” journalism, which has helped to reframe them as normal, if perhaps a little bit risky—and therefore, a bit titillating. With a large part of the GOP buying into this fantasy view of how politics works, they were at first content to vent their hatred primarily on President Obama and congressional Democrats, but now their anger has widened to the entire political class—which is actually well deserved, in a way. But it’s not just the GOP politicians who egged them on who are to blame—the “balanced” media played a starring role as well.

Shutdowns are not the only aspect of this story—there’s the dramatic increase in the use of the filibuster, for example—but they are arguably the most extreme form that destructive obstructionism can take. They are also one of the most dramatic—and virtually unprecedented prior to the 1990s. They also involve a kind of psychological regression, back to a more immature state. After all, the essential nature of the shutdown is a refusal to engage in normal give-and-take, the sort of thing most of us learn in kindergarten, if not before. As one indication of this, pollsters even took to asking the public who was acting more adult or more like a “spoiled child.” When the whole political system gets pulled for years in the direction of government-by-temper-tantrum—and the media treats it as perfectly normal—it really should not be so surprising when an intemperate blowhard like Trump suddenly shows up to steal the show.

The “balanced” media has promoted this dysfunction around government shutdowns in at least three distinct ways: First, the media presents the shutdown shorn of historical context, with no indication of how radical, novel or one-sided it is, or of how it relates to a broader range of related radical and novel right-wing strategies, or to the dramatic underlying rightward shift of the GOP in Congress (House/Senate) since 1980. This has the effect of dramatically reducing the cost of introducing new, destabilizing and downright destructive political strategies.

Second, the media adopts a “balanced” approach to reporting on the prospects of a shutdown, and the shutdown itself. It seeks to place blame on both sides (see, for example the Media Matters research report, “What The Media’s False Equivalence Misses About the Government Shutdown Threat“), regardless of how inaccurate this is. This falsely balanced reporting works in favor of the absolute worst actors—always giving them the “benefit of the doubt,” and against those who are most public-minded, adopting a stance of jaded cynicism, regardless of whether they’ve done anything to deserve it. Third, the media “balances” any residual negativity that the shutdown perpetrators might be left with stories intended to cast the other party—the Democrats–in an equally bad light. The media’s months-long obsession over problems with the Obamacare website filled this function perfectly.

Although it began even earlier, shutdown talk began to flower immediately after the 2010 midterms, and ramped up through a series of threats, and near-shutdowns over the next two-plus years (see detailed timeline here), until Republicans finally did shut the government down for two weeks in October 2013, over a doomed attempt to defund Obamacare before it could go into effect. The public reaction was extremely negative, even though the media’s “balanced” coverage strove to give Obama and the Democrats an equal amount of blame (some relevant headlines here). At the time, I wrote a story identifying “nine distinct bodies of evidence” contradicting the “both sides did it” narrative:

(1) The longstanding GOP fixation on shutting down the government. (2) The GOP’s creation of the shutdown crisis by blocking the budget reconciliation process. (3) The emergence and evolution of the incoherent Ted Cruz/Tea Party plan to force a shutdown over ‘Obamacare’. (4) The record of prominent Republican politicians and others who repeatedly warned against forcing a government shutdown. (5) The contrary historical record of some Republicans downplaying the severity of the shutdown. (6) The record of drastic Democratic budget concessions embodied in the “clean continuing resolution” which House Republicans rejected. (7) The polling evidence that only GOP base voters are opposed to political compromise—and are indifferent to crisis. (8) Evidence that GOP base intransigence drives policy. (9) The framework of American legislative history.

There were stories here and there in the press touching on all of the above, but because of the ideologically driven commitment to “balance,” they were kept isolated and atomized, never consolidated into a coherent picture of what was actually going on at the time. And for good reason: the GOP wanted a shutdown, and the public overwhelmingly did not.

Going into the shutdown, a Quinnipiac poll released on Oct. 1 found American voters rejecting it by more than a 3-1 landslide: 72-22 percent. While Gallup had recorded a very modest peak of congressional approval for the year at 19 percent in early September, before the shutdown drama began, it dropped to 11 percent in early October in the middle of the shutdown, and 9 percent in early November—the lowest level ever recorded by Gallup in 39 years of polling the measure.