Most rapes and sexual assaults go unreported, and college students are less likely than non-students to report them, according to new data from the U.S. Justice Department. While 32 percent of non-student victims choose to report the incident to police, only 20 percent of students do.

A report from the department's Bureau of Justice Statistics looked at women ages 18 to 24, who are most at risk for rape and sexual assault. In 2013, there were 1.4 victims of rape or sexual assault for every 1,000 females ages 12 to 17 and 25 and older.

For young women 18 to 24, the rate was much higher: 4.4.



Sexual violence has been a topic of frequent discussion for policymakers of late, especially following a recent Rolling Stone story that described a brutal gang rape at the University of Virginia. The story, which has been disputed, prompted administrators at the school to rethink policies for dealing with rape and sexual assault of students. Earlier this year, a Columbia University student gained worldwide attention for her promise to carry the mattress on which she says she was raped by another student, who remained on campus.

The Obama administration also has focused debate on the issue by releasing the names of dozens of colleges undergoing federal inquiries into their handling of sexual assault cases, and through the launch of the "It's On Us" campaign.

The data underscore the need for a change in attitudes toward rape and sexual assault. Out of the 80 percent of incidents that went unreported, 26 percent of respondents said they didn't report because it was a personal matter, according to the report. Another 20 percent didn't report for fear of reprisal, and another 12 percent because it wasn't "important enough to respondent."

The reasons non-students didn't report incidents were different. Out of the 67 percent of incidents that went unreported, 23 percent of victims said they didn't report because it was a personal matter, while 19 percent said it was because "police would not or could not do anything to help" (9 percent of students cited that reason). While 4 percent of students said they didn't report because the incident was reported to an official other than police, 14 percent of non-students said this, indicating that the number of completely unreported incidents is likely even higher for students.

Students were more likely to say the offender was using alcohol or drugs and more likely to say the offender was a former or current spouse, boyfriend or girlfriend. For students, half of offenders were well-known or casual acquaintances as opposed to strangers, relatives or partners. While 91 percent of offenders were male for non-student victims, 97 percent of offenders in student incidents were male. Assaults of non-students were more likely to occur at a victim's home.