Scientists seeking a cure for cancer say they’ve found early trials of one treatment that sends in modified white blood cells to fight off certain types of the disease have produced “extraordinary” success, with 94 percent of participants in one study seeing a complete disappearance of their symptoms.

In that study, fully 94 percent of acute lymphoblastic leukemia patients treated with the modified cells, called T-cells, said their symptoms vanished. In a separate study, 80 percent of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma patients saw positive results from the same treatment – while half reported their symptoms completely disappeared, Fox News reported.

The ‘Stop Hillary’ campaign is on fire! Join the surging response to this theme: ‘Clinton for prosecution, not president’

“This is extraordinary,” said lead researcher Stanley Riddell with the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle, in the Fox report. “This is unprecedented in medicine to be honest, to get response rates in this range in these very advanced patients.”

The treatment takes out T-cells from the patients’ bodies, sticks them with molecules that are known to target cancer, and infuses them back into their bodies. The molecules, which are chimeric antigen receptors, or CARS, then go to work and limit the ability of cancer cells to ward off the body’s natural immune system.

It’s almost like reprogramming the immune system, medical officials said.

GET FREE E-BOOK RIGHT NOW! Jane Orient, M.D., chief of the Association of American Physicians and Surgeons, has written a comprehensive and crystal-clear e-book on how to protect yourself and your loved ones from dreaded infectious diseases. “EMERGING DISEASES: Protecting Your Family from Pandemics, Viral Threats, and Rogue Vaccines” is available FREE, exclusively to subscribers to WND’s email news alerts. Sign up now for FREE – and you can download Dr. Orient’s e-book, “The Truth About Ebola.”

But it’s a last-ditch effort; researchers say the procedure produces dangerous side effects and in fact, seven of the ALL patients who received the treatment had to go into intensive care after experiencing a serious reaction, cytokine release syndrome. Two of those patients then died, Fox News reported.

But medical officials are hopeful the treatment could prove a viable option for certain types of cancers.

“Much like chemotherapy and radiotherapy, it’s not going to be a save-all,” Riddell said, in Fox News. “[But] I think immunotherapy has finally made it to a pillar of cancer therapy.”