NEWARK — The billboards might be down, but the war of words between two north Jersey hospitals and the state's largest health insurance company is heating up.

Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield Friday asked a federal judge to approve its request for a preliminary injunction to stop what it calls a "smear campaign" against the company and its Omnia Health Care Alliance.

Omnia is new insurance plan launched by Horizon last year which offers lower premiums in partnerships with certain hospitals. The plan puts some hospitals in two tiers, with Tier 1 hospitals able to give patients discounts not available to those that use Tier 2 hospitals.

Valley Health System in Ridgewood and Holy Name Medical Center in Teaneck objected to being left out of Tier 1, claiming it is part of an effort to squeeze them out of business.

Why Horizon sued these 2 N.J. hospitals

The two hospitals in recent months started an advertising campaign, saying Horizon "couldn't care less" about patients.

The billboard campaign ran its course, but the advertising campaign lives on a website, saynotohorizon.com, and can be seen in a banner advertisement on Holy Name's web site.

Valley and Holy Name argue that being classified as Tier 2 hospitals would harm their patients by making them choose between their facilities and hospitals elsewhere that are in Tier 1. That, they argue, effectively reduces their access to care.

But Horizon, which has 3.8 million members, says it's not denying access at all, since the two hospitals still accept its coverage.

Omnia designates 22 hospitals as Tier 1 hospitals; 14 are Tier 2, according to court records.

The fight over the ad campaign intensified this week in an exchange of letters between the two sides filed in federal court in Newark.

Horizon attorney Andrew L. Hamelsky said Valley and Holy Name offered assurances that they would remove the advertisements and would suggest language at a later conference that would be acceptable to both sides. They instead ramped up their "maliciously false" advertising campaign, he said.

"It is apparent that the Hospitals' pattern and practice is to agree to remove false or misleading advertisements only to replace them with different false advertisements," he wrote this week. "This game of "Whack-a-Mole" cannot and should not be tolerated."

Bruce Rosen, representing both hospitals, replied that Hamelsky's letter was a "bullying tactic," adding that it was part of Horizon's campaign to align itself with the state's largest hospital networks and reduce competition in the state.

Reached Friday, Rosen said all of the statements made in the ad campaign were true and defensible.

"There is nothing my clients have said or done that is not true or an expression of opinion protected by the First Amendment in reaction to Horizon's efforts to undermine and destroy what it calls 'Tier Two' hospitals in its OMNIA insurance plan," he said.

Seven hospitals, including Valley and Holy Name, sued Horizon in Bergen County Superior Court in December, saying its advertising of Omnia Tier 1 hospitals unfairly maligned them.

The two sides will meet next week to discuss a schedule for the next steps in the case.

Tim Darragh may be reached at tdarragh@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @timdarragh. Find NJ.com on Facebook.