HOW will the Supreme Court decide this term’s two biggest cases? One slightly cynical prediction floating around forecasts a split decision: the justices will announce a constitutional right to gay marriage, a huge victory for liberals, while voting to upend the Affordable Care Act, a dream of conservatives. According to some iterations of this hypothesis, the chief justice, John Roberts, will broker such a compromise—and vote accordingly—in order to maintain his image as the even-handed “balls-and-strikes” caller he claimed to be a decade ago in his Senate nomination hearing. By giving both liberals and conservatives something, but not too much, to cheer about, the chief will save the court from charges of an ideological tilt. As Noah Feldman wrote a few months ago at Bloomberg View, the chief seems loth to have “a court associated with his name...come to be seen as the most activist conservative court since the 1920s and 30s.”

Supreme Court predictions in close cases are notoriously unreliable, as almost everyone but the Nostradamus-worthy Will Wilkinson, a fellow contributor to this blog, saw three years ago when Mr Roberts voted with the Court’s liberals to save Obamacare. However, I will sketch a plausible scenario: Mr Roberts may vote in the liberal direction in both King v Burwell, the Obamacare case, and Obergefell v Hodges, the same-sex marriage case. The “conservative’s best friend” could deliver not one but two gut-punches to his biggest fans.

There is already a sea of speculation about the chief’s relative quiet in last week’s oral argument in King and Justice Anthony Kennedy’s concern that the challengers’ reading of the ACA poses a “serious constitutional problem” involving the “dynamics of federalism”. Laurence Tribe, a law professor at Harvard and author of “Uncertain Justice: The Roberts Court and the Constitution”, thinks Mr Roberts shares Mr Kennedy’s concern that “the states are being told either create your own exchange, or we'll send your insurance market into a death spiral”. That’s a coerced and unfair choice, Mr Kennedy seems to think, and the chief’s previous rulings on the balance between federal and state power are consistent with this perspective.

But leaving aside federalism concerns, there is the matter of the potential disruption to the entire health-care industry that upending Obamacare would entail. Consider how well health-insurers have done under the law. They are enrolling millions more customers, resulting in rising profits and soaring stock prices. Cancelling subsidies for Americans in 34 states who buy insurance on federal exchanges could price up to 8m people out of the market, which will in turn send prices higher and make health-care less affordable for everyone else. The subscriber pool will continue to contract, costing the health-insurers dearly. An amicus brief from America’s Health Insurance Plans, the trade association of America’s health insurance industry, makes the companies’ position clear:

Premium tax credits (and the related shared responsibility payments) are essential components of an actuarially-viable marketplace because of their integral relationship to the ACA’s market reforms. There is no practical reason to distinguish between State- and federally-operated exchanges in this regard. The ACA’s shared responsibility obligation and eligibility for premium assistance tax credits are governed by nationally-established standards with payment from the federal treasury, regardless of which sovereign administers the particular exchange.

Mr Roberts has long been sensitive to the effect that laws have on American business. A recent study by Lee Epstein, William Landes and Richard Posner published in the Minnesota Law Review revealed that when it comes to business-friendly justices, John Roberts was second only to Samuel Alito over the nearly seven decades from 1946 to 2013. In recent cases such as Burwell v Hobby Lobby and McCutcheon v FEC, the chief justice has sided with corporate America.

What, then, of same-sex marriage? What just a couple of decades ago seemed wildly counter-cultural is now mainstream. That may be one reason why Chief Justice Roberts could switch gears from his dissenting position in United States v Windsor, the case that dismantled the heart of the Defence of Marriage Act in 2013. With more than 70% of Americans living in 37 states where same-sex marriage is now legal, the tide of history is unmistakable. Chief Justice Roberts argued two years ago that there are legitimate reasons to define marriage along heterosexual lines. He did not wish to “tar the political branches with the brush of bigotry”, he wrote in his Windsor dissent. The claim that opposition to same-sex marriage is invariably based on “animus”, then, appears to be a non-starter. But the hatred-of-gays argument is merely one path circuit courts have taken to nullify state bans on same-sex marriage. Chief Justice Roberts could turn to other justifications, including some form of heightened scrutiny for discriminatory treatment of gays and lesbians under the 14th amendment’s equal protection clause, the idea of marriage as a fundamental right, or—maybe most promisingly—the contention that the bans represent discrimination on the basis of sex.

Whatever the doctrinal path, Mr Roberts must have noticed that social mores have changed. To understand how much, consider the fact that 379 big American corporations have filed an amicus brief in favour of gay marriage. In it, they complain that a “fractured legal landscape” marked by a patchwork of laws regarding marriage equality is bad for business:

Discriminatory state laws force amici to implement inconsistent policies across the various jurisdictions in which we operate, our stated corporate principles of diversity and inclusion notwithstanding. Our ability to grow and maintain our businesses by attracting and retaining the best employee talent is hindered. The patchwork of state laws applicable to same-sex marriage thus impairs our business interests and employer/employee relations. If the Court were to affirm the decision below, the costs and uncertainty imposed by inconsistent state marriage laws will only continue. In contrast, reversal will reduce current costs, administrative burden, and diversion of resources from our core businesses.

This is hardly the strongest argument in favour of gay marriage. Unequal marriage laws probably make very little difference to the bottom line. And even if they did, that would be irrelevant to this case, which is about equality before the law, not dollars and cents. What is interesting here is not what corporate America is saying but the fact that it is speaking out at all. Companies usually steer clear of contentious social issues—when was the last time you heard the boss of a Fortune 500 company opine on abortion? Yet signatories to this brief include Amazon and Apple, Barclays and Bristol-Myers Squibb, Citigroup and Coca-Cola. It includes airlines and giant retailers, bookstores and banks, cafes and software companies.

The list is a who’s-who of American capitalism. And that is a sign that gay marriage is swiftly becoming so mainstream that even risk-averse big companies are happy to embrace it. The bosses who signed the brief not only think that gay marriage should be legal. They also assume that their customers will not punish them for saying so. Whether Mr Roberts ultimately votes for same-sex marriage—he may or may not drop hints as to his position at the oral argument coming up on April 28th—he will surely take this social revolution into account.