Topics: Beijing, Dream City, Paris, Pollution, Smog, urban planning, Sustainability News

Last week, Paris and Beijing had one of those feuds that city-watchers love so much. (Such head-to-head battles, like great inter-urban sporting events, fuel the illusion that cities are singular, indivisible, cultural entities.) In this case, it was a race to the bottom: Observers noticed, during the five-day air quality crisis in Paris last week, that there was more particulate matter in the Parisian atmosphere than in Beijing.

This was true, for a moment, but the comparison soon backfired on certain gleeful Chinese media outlets. When the proper way to explain the hazardousness of the air is by saying it’s “worse than Beijing,” nobody has anything to brag about. Last weekend marked the worst air quality crisis in Paris in two decades, during which the air quality index (AQI) – which measures ozone, several poisonous gases, and particle pollution – reached the 180s, more than twice the recommended limits for human health. Yet it doesn’t hold a candle to the 500+ readings recorded in Beijing in January 2013.

Parisians say they are coughing and wheezing; and Beijing has been described by a government think tank as “unfit for human habitation.” But both cities can breathe easy, at least metaphorically speaking. According to the Urban Outdoor Air Pollution Database, published by the World Health Organization, all but two of the 20 worst cities for coarse-particle pollution are in India, Pakistan and Iran. Rounding out the list are Ulaanbataar, in Mongolia, and Gaborone, Botswana. Beijing, with an average PM10 content of 121, is barely in the top 50. Paris’ average annual coarse particle pollution is measured at 38, hundreds of spots below.

It isn’t very instructive to compare individual cities in this regard. But a quick glance at the list reveals how thoroughly urban air pollution – which once darkened the skies in London, Pittsburgh and the Soviet Union – has become a third-world epidemic. A new study estimates that Africa could account for half the world’s particle pollution by 2030.

On Monday, when Paris limited traffic to cars with plates ending in odd numbers, and bicycle commuters wrapped their faces in scarves, the capital’s PM2.5 index (measuring the smallest and most harmful elements of particular pollution) was lower than that of New Delhi. That a once-in-a-generation smog crisis in Paris is equivalent to everyday life in the Indian capital — and makes more news — is a lesson in the distortions of empathy.

But then, too, the crisis in Paris brought an emphatic public response from the French government. Transport was free in cities from Caen (on the English Channel) to Bordeaux (on the Atlantic coast) all weekend. For the first time since 1997, French road traffic was eased with alternate driving days, a move that AirParif, which monitors air pollution in the Paris region, says has had a noticeable effect. In Paris, the crisis has coincided with a mayoral election, in which the favored candidate seeks to phase out diesel fuel entirely. (Diesel, noxious compared to gasoline, is heavily subsidized and used by more than half of all vehicles in France.)

The concentration of smog in Paris is due to an unusually mild European winter, which has had even more destructive effects on the other side of the Channel. It may be an exceptional event; more likely it will reoccur as climate change scrambles historical environmental patterns. Last Thursday, London’s air quality index had quietly risen to 160, not far below that of Paris.

If such pollution crises recur in the West – and as they become an issue in the developing world – cities will have to choose between dangerously dirty air and extreme restrictions on industry and transportation.