Good Sunday morning and welcome to another edition of the Michigan Delegation, your weekly look at the happenings of Michigan's members of Congress on Capitol Hill.

If there is anything you'd like to see here or comments to add, contact at fklug@mlive.com or on Twitter: @fritzklug.

We're 240 days until the November election.

Let the ads begin: If you've watched any television the past few weeks, you've likely noticed political ads starting to air. In fact, I watched two hours of TV on WWMT this week in Kalamazoo and saw every single ad we've so far reported on.

Earlier this year, my colleague Jonathan Oosting wrote how Michigan will be a hotbed for outside election spending because of competitive statewide races for the Governor's office and U.S. Senate.

And it looks like we're seeing the beginning of that now.

All of the ads for U.S. Senate and those supporting Democratic Gubernatorial candidate Mark Schauer so far have come from Super PACs and other groups not affiliated with the candidates.

"Everything is in active play," said Rich Robinson, head of the non-profit Michigan Campaign Finance Network.

Snyder ran campaign ads and the Democratic Governors Association had an ad supporting Mark Schauer.

"It goes towards the idea of a perpetual campaign," said Robinson. "This stuff will be unrelenting through the year."

The only way the ads will slow down? "If a race clearly becomes uncompetitive," Robinson said. "But that has a long way to go."

Americans for Prosperity has aired three ads in Michigan attacking U.S. Rep Gary Peters, D-Bloomfield Hills, on his vote for the Affordable Care Act. Two include Dexter woman and Leukemia patient Julie Boonstra, who says her insurance plan was canceled under the ACA and now she has more costs. The ad, however, was questioned for its truthfulness and was given two out of four "Pinocchios" by the Washington Post's Fact Checker.

Senate Majority PAC, a Democratic organization, two weeks ago started running an ad attacking the AFP ad and also Terri Lynn Land and the Koch Brothers, who fund AFP. At one point the ad has a picture of Land with two photos of the Koch brothers behind her, as a narrator says Land is “helping the powerful at our expense,”

Both the Peters and the Land campaigns have criticized the ads attacking their candidates, saying that its either "big" or "dark" money trying to "trick" voters or "buy" an election.

And there is a lot of money. AFP has said they've put at least $1.75 million for two ads. As of last week, the PAC said it has put $450,000 into its ad.

Obama's budget impact on Michigan

President Barack Obama unveiled his $3.9 trillion budget proposal for 2015 last week and there was nothing for the $2.1 billion New International Trade Crossing. Officials have said funding for the new bridge between Detroit and Windsor is the final hurdle to get construction going.

Also, Obama proposed $275 million for the Great Lakes Restoration Initiative -- about $25 million less than current funding.

But none of those numbers are final: House Republicans will introduce their budget, which will likely counter that of the President. There could always be money added -- or taken away -- from programs that help Michigan.

Stabenow makes a pizza

Being a U.S. Senator takes you a lot of places. One day, you're on the Senate floor casting votes, the next you are visiting your home state.

And for Debbie Stabenow, that included making a pizza.

On Friday, Stabenow spoke to the Future Farmers of America in East Lansing and visited a Domino's Pizza afterwards to meet with franchise owner Dave Cesarini.

Stabenow made a pizza with green peppers, mushrooms, chicken and cheddar.

The staff enjoyed showing the senator how to make a pizza. Ryan Anderson, worked at Dominos for 7 years, and said she did better than many of the new hires.





"Way better than my first pizza," said Kevin Schewda, who works at Domino's.





"She picked up on it," said Anderson. "I"m impressed. She might stick around for a few more week."





I'll let the GIFs tell the story:

Also this week

New campaign manager: The Peters campaign has a new leader. Paul Tencher will replace Julie Petrick, who is stepping aside for personal reasons, Politico reports. Tencher, who recently was Campaigns Director at the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, ran Sen. Joe Donnelly’s 2012 winning campaign in Indiana.

Asking Boehner to raise unemployment benefits: Freshman U.S. Rep. Dan Kildee, D-Flint Township, and U.S. Rep. Tammy Duckworth led 161 members of the House Democratic Caucus in sending a letter urging Republican House Speaker John Boehner for an up-or-down vote to extend unemployment benefits. An estimated 76,850 people in Michigan have lost the benefits, which expire after 26 weeks. The letter comes after a new report says 2 million people in the U.S. have lost the benefits, and 200,000 are veterans.

There was a little political drama this week on Capitol Hill during a hearing when Republican Rep. Darrell Issa, chairman of the House oversight committee, cut short Rep. Elijah E. Cummings (D-Md), during a hearing on the alleged targeting of conservative groups by the Internal Revenue Service. While Issa apologized, top Democrats condemned his actions. U.S. Rep. Sandy Levin, D-Royal Oak., ranking member of the House Committee on Ways and Means said, “House Republicans are desperate to keep their baseless allegations alive, even if it means silencing the truth by turning off microphones. The endless Republican drive to appeal to the Tea Party and taint the White House has pushed them to new extremes.”

Sens. Carl Levin and Debbie Stabenow announced $25 million for Great Lakes projects, including dredging projects in: the Black River in Port Huron, Cheboygan Harbor, Grand Haven Harbor, Leland Harbor, Menominee Harbor, Monroe Harbor, Saginaw River, St. Joseph Harbor, the Detroit River and St. Mary’s River.

Tweet of the week:

Tune in to @wjrradio w/ @PaulWJR to hear my #Oscars2014 recap... J/K we will discuss #Ukraine and suspending participation in the G-8 Summit — Mike Rogers (MI-08) (@RepMikeRogers) March 3, 2014

Fritz Klug is a news buzz reporter for MLive. Contact him at fklug@mlive.com or 269-370-0584. Follow him on Twitter, Facebook, Google+ or App.net.