Hard-left activists this afternoon desecrated a war memorial to the gallant sacrifice of women who served during the Second World War as anarchists objecting to Thursday's election result protested outside Downing Street.

The British people have spoken, and the Left in Britain has replied, “Shut up!” Unable to accept democracy, the hard left in Britain rioted yesterday, violently protesting their failure to win control of the Mother of Parliaments, and showing their utter cowardice and childishness. In the process, they dishonored the war dead who fought to preserve their freedom of speech. The UK Daily Mail reports:

A mindless thug daubed 'F*** Tory Scum' in red paint on the memorial in a sickening display of contempt on the 70th anniversary weekend of VE Day.

A lot of hysterical language was employed, and large parts of London shut down”

A group calling itself The People's Assembly planned to meet up in Whitehall at 1pm to protest against Thursday's election result which seen David Cameron returned to office with a clear Commons majority. The mob chanted 'get the Tories out' as large sections of the city were shut down as a result of the demonstration. Some of the protesters brandished highly offensive home-made banners proclaiming F*** The Cuts', while others described the Conservative Party as Tory Scum. Protesters threw bottles, cans and smoke bombs at the police. Scuffles broke out when the demonstrators, blaring hooters, banging pots and chanting obscenities, confronted lines of police outside the gate protecting the Prime Minister's official residence. Some protesters handed out flyers claiming: 'Parliament is no longer our priority, our priority is survival. A Tory majority is a declaration of war.'

The hashtag #ToriesOutNow apparently had something to do with the mobilization of some of the crowd. Whatever other contributions to civilization it has made, Twitter has certainly made the mobilization of mobs easier for wannabe totalitarians.

The self-discrediting was apparently contagious, as semi-celebrities threw themselves into the bonfire:

However, left-wing writer and activist Laurie Penny confirmed that she did not have a problem with the attack on the memorial commemorating the sacrifice of women during the Second World War. In a series of Tweets, Ms Penny said: 'I don't have a problem with his. The bravery of past generations does not oblige us to be cowed today. 'The people vandalising of memory of what the women of World War II fought for are sitting in Downing Street right now. 'What is disgusting is that some people are more worried about a war memorial than the destruction of the welfare state.'

Ms. Penney would have been right at home with the mobs Hitler used to initmidate his opponents in Germany. No wonder she has contempt for those who saved the world from the Nazis.

As the picture below illustrates, the people demanding the fruits of others' labors be given to them are not exactly starving and clothed in rags: