Here’s a fun fact: 99% of American women have used birth control. Very few, however, know exactly how much of the cost their health insurance is supposed to cover.

Many birth-control methods, especially emergency measures, are expensive out-of-pocket. Morning-after pills can cost up to $90. IUDs can cost between $500 to $900.

With the advent of Obamacare, obtaining and paying for birth control has become even more bewildering. The conversation this year isn’t just about “yes or no” to birth control, but an exact taxonomy of which types are acceptable. In its Hobby Lobby decision, the US supreme court ruled that “closely-held” for-profit companies can claim a religious exemption to avoid including all forms of contraception in their employees’ health plans. Pills? Okay. IUD? Not allowed.



The Hobby Lobby decision was controversial; the court’s female justices, led by Ruth Bader Ginsberg, rejected it. The Affordable Care Act mandates – at least we all thought it did – that insurers must provide access to all forms of contraception without charging a co-payment. Yet women are still working out the financial implications of birth control. The Obama administration issued guidelines in response to the supreme court ruling, detailing how religious exemptions would work and seeking feedback at the same time.

The Guardian provides this explainer and guide to some of the most important questions. We welcome contributions from readers in the comments.



Who does the supreme court ruling on Hobby Lobby affect?

As of now, it certainly affects women employed by Hobby Lobby and Conestoga Wood – the two companies that brought and won the case. Both said they objected to covering at least four specific methods of birth control – Plan B and Ella, both of which are pills and emergency contraceptives, and “certain” intrauterine devices, or IUDs. These were singled out because they are believed to prevent the “implantation of a human embryo after its fertilization,” which is morally outside the beliefs of the companies’ founders. Scientists dispute whether that’s how an IUD really works, however.

The Hobby Lobby decision also affects women employed by for-profit companies. These companies are demanding and, in some cases, getting a preliminary injunction – basically, a stay – allowing them to opt out of covering contraception until the case is fully resolved. A full list of these companies is available here.

The ruling could affect many more women enrolled in employee health plans because nearly 100 cases, involving for-profit and nonprofit companies and similar to the one brought by Hobby Lobby, are pending in federal courts across the country.



Some of those companies, such as Michigan-based Autocam and Eden Foods, and Ohio-based Freshway Foods are objecting to all preventive advice, including counseling and education on birth control.

“Now that is what I call a loophole,” said Judy Waxman, vice-president for Health and Reproductive Rights at The National Women’s Law Center. “At least for the moment [these companies] can just opt out.”

Coverage could vary from excluding certain contraceptives to all of them, depending on the company.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest The Hobby Lobby decision also affects women employed by for-profit companies. Photograph: RGB Ventures / SuperStock / Alam/Alamy

What alternative is available to women whose employers claim a religious exemption from including birth control in their employees’ health plan?

This is where it gets tricky. Under the Affordable Care Act, health plans in the marketplace and those offered by employers must cover all forms of contraception without charging a co-payment or deductible. The trick here is in the word “forms”: it covers each birth control method but not every product.

Only religious institutions – such as churches, synagogues, mosques – are technically exempt from this rule. If their employees require birth control, those women must seek coverage outside of their employee plan.

Nonprofits, such as Catholic universities or religiously affiliated charities, are only exempt from paying claims for contraceptive services. Instead, they seek an “accommodation” – they fill out a Labor Department form, which makes the insurance company or a third party administrator responsible for paying their employees’ claims for birth-control coverage.

In fact, the supreme court’s majority opinion in the Hobby Lobby case refers to the “accommodation” as an alternative option for providing contraceptive coverage without co-payments.

The Obama administration said in a statement that their primary goal was to ensure that, despite religious exemptions, women can access contraceptive coverage under the ACA without co-payments. The new rules seek to offer the “accommodation” to “closely held” for-profit companies like Hobby Lobby so the insurers or a third-party can bear the cost of coverage.

Doesn’t that accommodation solve the problem?

Not exactly.



For one, it’s unclear exactly what kind of corporations are eligible for this “accommodation”.



“We don’t know what happens if a nonprofit objects to the accommodation” said Kara Loewentheil, director of Public Rights/ Private Conscience Project, a think-tank that studies religious exemptions from federal and state laws.

The latest guidelines suggest it is for closely held companies, which are not publicly traded on a stock exchange like NYSE or Nasdaq, and whose ownership will be “concentrated among a certain number of owners.” This is a proposal, however, and the administration is soliciting comments, which would help decide the appropriate number of owners or percentage of ownership.

The supreme court interpreted the term “closely held” to mean family-owned companies, though Justice Ginsburg objected in her dissent that means “its logic extends to corporations of any size, public or private.”



Second, the accommodation itself is under threat. Around 50 of the 100 cases pending in courts involve nonprofits that are challenging the accommodation.



Wheaton College, a Christian college in Illinois, argued to the supreme court that it is exempted from having to file an “accommodation” with the insurance company. The supreme court issued a temporary order agreeing with Wheaton.



Wheaton’s argument: they don’t want to give permission for birth control in any form. The exemption form, which allows them to authorize a third party to pay for their employees’ birth control, is still infringing on their religious beliefs by requiring them to sign on to employee requests for coverage, even if the college isn’t paying. The college now has to notify the government, which, in turn, will authorize the insurance company. The only difference is the college administration will not actually sign the form.

The administration has already conceded this option in the latest rules. Nonprofits who don’t even want to touch the issue of birth control can notify the Department of Health and Human Services, which then will inform the insurer or third-party administrator.



Still, many of these cases are still pending, and legal experts think that several of them will object even to this “fix.”

Why? Because they may consider notifying the government to be no different from filing a form with the insurer. They are still enabling coverage for contraception, which would still be a “substantial burden” on their religious beliefs.

The trouble with the Hobby Lobby decision, Loewentheil said, is that it doesn’t say exactly up to what point these companies can exercise their religious freedom.



So, although the majority opinion mentions the accommodation as an option, the temporary order granted to Wheaton College allowed the accommodation to be challenged.



It isn’t clear if these companies, whether for-profit or nonprofit, would be allowed to opt out anyway – or only if they have triggered an alternative process.

“There is nothing in the logic of the opinion to put the line anywhere at all,” said Loewentheil. “But an exemption that leaves a woman without coverage is completely at odds with the intent of the ACA.”

That is, it would defeat the crux of the ACA’s contraceptives mandate – to enable women to access birth control through their insurance plan at no additional cost.

Plan B was singled out in the Hobby Lobby case because it is believed to prevent the ‘implantation of a human embryo after its fertilization,’ by the company. Photograph: Shannon Stapleton/Reuters





So women should not be charged co-payments for contraceptive services under the ACA?

That depends on your plan and the contraceptives you use. None of this applies to you if you are enrolled in an employee plan offered by religious institutions that are completely exempt (like churches, synagogues, or mosques).

According to the ACA, all health plans in the marketplace must provide the “full range” of contraceptive services, ensuring that each method (barrier, hormonal, implanted devices) includes an option without co-payments.



So insurance companies typically distribute the drugs and devices across different tiers (or what they call formularies) based on cost. The cheapest tier would include generic drugs without co-payments and the most expensive tier would have specialty or brand-name drugs.

If you directly purchased your plan in the marketplace, you should not be charged a co-payment for generic contraceptives. You should also not be charged a co-payment for a contraceptive if its generic equivalent is unavailable. For instance, there are three brand-name IUDs on the market and no generic versions. According to the ACA, your health plan should not exclude this method or ask you to share the cost. The same applies if your doctor says a generic drug or device is “medically inappropriate” for you. You are then eligible for the brand-name version without co-payment.

“The doctor calls our pharmacy service center, where we enter an override into the customer’s record so the customer can receive the brand contraceptive at no cost,” said Mark Slitt, Cigna’s public relations manager. He added that health plans under the ACA are “required” to provide the brand-name versions in such a situation.



That’s not always how it works, however. As NPR has reported, it’s common for insurers to require co-pays even for birth control that should be covered. Be prepared to argue your case at considerable cost and time.



What if I am being charged a co-payment despite being eligible for one of the above?

First, make sure you’re not enrolled in a “grandfathered” plan – one that was already around by March 23, 2010.

These plans are not required to cover preventive services (such as contraception) without co-payments.



Next, make sure your doctor is in your plan’s network. Some plans don’t cover services provided by “out-of-network” doctors.

If you still believe you’re being charged a co-payment in violation of the ACA, you can contact your state Department of Insurance or Department of Labor, depending on the plan. You can also get in touch with The National Women’s Law Center or use their guide.

And you’re not alone. Although out-of-pockets payments among privately insured women dropped between late 2013 and mid-2104, according to a study by the Guttmacher Institute, a reproductive health think tank, women continue to be charged co-payments in violation of the ACA.



The number of women using birth control pills without a co-payment jumped from 15% to 40%. Among vaginal ring users, it nearly doubled. But, the study pointed out, the numbers hardly changed among women who used injectables or IUDs. Although there are no generic versions of IUDs, women are still being charged co-payments for the brand-name versions.

Part of the problem is awareness. “We are finding like everything else in this law, it’s taking a lot of time for the information to get through,” said Waxman.

But women’s groups say insurance companies are also to blame.



“Insurers require women to use the cheapest method first and have that not work for her before approving a more expensive method,” said Susan Levy, executive director at the Boulder Valley Women’s Health Center in Colorado.

Many of the center’s clients are women who are low-income but don’t qualify for Medicaid. Oral contraceptives, such as pills, are relatively cheap but, Levy said, they are not the best option for her patients: “They work odd shifts. They have tons of reasons why taking a pill every day is hard.” While long-term methods like IUDs are more suitable, they are also more expensive. In the meantime, Levy said, low-income women are being exposed to an “unintended pregnancy.”

“It’s glass half-full, glass half empty,” said Pearson. “We would like [HHS] to do more. Possibly communicate directly to the insurers that the administration knows they have been trying to slide around the simple interpretation of the law.”