Obama loses nearly a fifth of his public support in just a MONTH after Obamacare shambles

Obama's approval sits at an all-time-low 37 per cent

Fully 48 per cent want the Affordable Care Act repealed

The president has lost nine points since October as the Obamacare fiasco has become front-page news

At this point in their presidencies, Ronald Reagan rated 65 per cent positive and Bill Clinton's number was 58

Just 1 in 10 Americans say the health insurance rollout is going well

Could it get any worse? President Obama is riding a wave of public disgust with his health insurance overhaul that threatens to put him decidedly into Jimmy Carter territory.



His latest public approval rating, just 37 per cent, is the lowest measured by a major poll since he took office.

A month ago, that number was 46 per cent: low but manageable for a president in his second term.



But the Affordable Care Act's disastrous website launch, and its accompanying millions-strong wave of insurance cancellation letters, appear to have damaged the president more deeply than his administration's earlier scandals, judging from Wednesday's CBS News poll numbers.

That's because more and more Americans either have their own Obamacare horror stories to tell, or have heard them from people they know personally.

SCROLL DOWN FOR VIDEO

Why the long face? Obama's shine has lost its luster and his poll numbers are in the toilet

Awkward: On Wednesday Obama presented the Presidential Medal of Freedom to former President Bill Clinton, the politician who did more than anyone else to send Democrats running for Obamacare's exit ramp

The outrage-laden Benghazi affair was always explosive, but never hit home with Americans who don't have direct contact with the military.



The Internal Revenue Service's tea party scandal only resonated with the Republican Party's right wing.

But just as the Washington, D.C. press corps found its aggressive voice when the Department of Justice admitted spying on reporters, Americans who have been personally touched by Obamacare's ham-fisted rollout are venting their spleens – to pollsters, at least.

And the pool of disaffected taxpayers is growing.

Compare Obama's numbers to those of President George W. Bush at the height of public angst over the Iraq war, and the depth of his PR nightmare becomes clear.

Once promising, Obama's historical legacy now seems doomed to feature his flailing health insurance agenda

At this point in his presidency, Bush's rating was 35 per cent, just two points away from where the foundering Obama presidency now sits.

Ronald Reagan sat at 65 per cent approval in the first November of his second term in office. Bill Clinton's number was 58 at that point.



No gloating, Speaker Boehner: Congressional Republicans are faring worse than the president, with just 21 per cent of Americans approving of their job performance

Key constituencies are abandoning Obama in droves. He has lost ten full percentage points in women's approval since October, now winning over just 39 per cent of them. He has also lost nine points among men, only 34 per cent of whom back his job performance.

Worst of all, Obama's support among swing-voting independents has dropped like a rock. Just 29 per cent of them now say they view his presidency in a positive light, a loss of 12 points since October.



A month into the national experiment with healthcare.gov, just 1 in 10 Americans believe the project is going well. Two-thirds say it isn't.

A paltry seven per cent say the Affordable Care Act should be left in place as-is. A far larger group, 48 per cent, now want it repealed. The rest favor keeping the law with some changes.

As the president's coat-tails shorten, Democrats in tight 2014 congressional races have begun to walk away from him.



And Hillary Clinton, the likely Democratic standard-bearer in 2016, has used her husband, the former president, to put distance between herself and the current White House.

Bill Clinton made waves when he said Obama should honor his promise to let Americans keep their health insurance policies if they wanted to.

Clinton's comments started both sides of the political aisle on a sprint to craft a proposal doing just that, and Obama himself pre-empted Congress with his own announcement last week.