If you go What: Turtle Island String Quartet with vocalist Tierney Sutton present "A Solstice Celebration" as part of the CU Presents Artist Series When: 4 p.m. Sunday, Dec. 15 Where: Macky Auditorium, 285 University Ave., University of Colorado-Boulder campus Tickets: $14-$52 Info: 303-492-8008 or cupresents.org

While the Grammy Award-winning Turtle Island String Quartet uses the four instruments of the classical ensemble, only naive newcomers would attend one of their concerts expecting to hear, say, a program the local Takacs Quartet would present. That's never been what the Turtle Island String Quartet are about.

Cellist and founding member Mark Summer describes the group as four classically trained musicians with great skills in jazz improvisation. It's a classical crossover infused with a heavy dose of jazz.

"We use our instruments in different ways," Summer said. "The cello is a walking bass, and we imitate drums, piano and other percussion. We figured out how to create our own rhythm section with just four string instruments and their bows."

Modifications to the instruments are there, but they are minor.

The quartet is mainly known for vernacular styles, though it also plays much of the original music of violinist and founding member David Balakrishnan, who is also the group's principal arranger. These days, they spend a great deal of their time performing as a quintet, the other instrument being the uniquely ethereal voice of Tierney Sutton.

"A jazz vocalist totally fits with our aesthetic," Summer said. "We perform a piece with her called 'Voice of the River' (by Balakrishnan) that has no words; she provides a fifth element to the instrumental texture."

Sutton and the Quartet bring this magical collaboration to Macky Auditorium for a Sunday afternoon concert on Dec. 15 as part of the Artist Series from CU Presents. Called "A Solstice Celebration," the program promises music from the winter holiday traditions of various faiths and peoples, combined with other staples of the "quintet's" performances.

"We've had a complete program called 'Poets and Prayers' that easily transitions into this holiday theme," Summer said. "We'll go from Tierney singing Joni Mitchell through George Harrison's 'Within You, Without You' and Sigmund Romberg's 'Softly in the Morning Sunrise,' then possibly transition into 'Silent Night,' and we won't finish until we've taken it to Miles Davis' 'All Blue.' "

The "Poets and Prayers" program includes music from Sutton's acclaimed album "After Blue," a tribute to the music of Joni Mitchell that includes collaborations with Turtle Island, as well as others, including a duet with Al Jarreau.

Sutton, a Grammy-nominated vocalist, spoke with the Camera about the album and her collaboration with the quartet.

"They work in a way similar to the way I work," she said. "We all simply take music as music and bend genre boundaries. There's always the flavor of classical, folk, pop and jazz. Like them, I have striven to use my instrument, my voice, in an unconventional way."

The "After Blue" album actually resulted from her performances of Joni Mitchell songs with Turtle Island.

"It set me on the path toward other collaborative performances I've wanted to do for a long time," she said.

Sutton said conversations with Balakrishnan two years ago led to the partnership. They agreed that all music of real quality has at least some element of spirituality, even if only in the effort toward excellence.

"I think of music as one of the most perfect metaphors of harmony and peace," she said. "We felt that music of people like John Coltrane and Joni Mitchell was spiritual in nature because of its beauty and sublimity."

She stressed that this spiritual element is multi-faceted and ecumenical. That will certainly be reflected in the Boulder concert's approach to the winter holidays. Summer said that tribute will be paid to both Christmas and Hanukkah. The former includes Sutton's rendition of "Christmastime is here" from "A Charlie Brown Christmas."

But the Hindu festival of Diwali is also included. "It's interesting that the Hindu tradition also includes a holiday around the solstice and, like Hanukkah, it is a festival of lights," Summer said.

"David (Balakrishnan) has Indian heritage, and he has done some great arrangements, including a Bollywood piece."

"It can't be a coincidence that these various traditions all have holidays when the days are short and the world is darker longer," Summer said. "These festivals of light speak to that. It's really uplifting to have houses lit up while you are freezing. It keeps people from becoming dark inside and really brings out their spirit -- and spirituality."