FORT COLLINS — Colorado State’s goal of qualifying for its first bowl game since 2008 remains alive despite Saturday night’s 42-30 loss to Boise State. But the Rams now have less wiggle room. Colorado State needs to squeeze out seven victories from its 13-game schedule to become bowl eligible.

That means the Rams (4-5, 2-2 Mountain West) must win three of their last four regular-season games.

“There were some good things that happened in that game and obviously some disappointing things. We still have to grow,” CSU coach Jim McElwain said. “It’s how we come back next week. We have a lot to play for. Not all is lost by any means.”

CSU likely will be favored in three of those games — next Saturday at home against Nevada, at New Mexico (Nov. 16) and at home against Air Force in the Nov. 30 finale. The Rams will be an underdog Nov. 23 at Utah State.

An upset loss during the next few weeks could end the dream, which no doubt was one reason the Hughes Stadium crowd of 21,133 became especially raucous Saturday night when the Rams took a 10-0 lead on the Broncos.

Boise State (6-3, 4-1) had outscored Colorado State the past two seasons by a combined score of 105-27. But the Rams appeared to have the upper hand early. Clicking on the ground and through the air, CSU rolled up 113 yards of offense in the first quarter.

A seven-point underdog, Colorado State moved into Boise State territory six times in the first half. Trouble was, the Rams produced just 17 points.

“In the red area, against a good football team, you have to get points,” McElwain said.

Still, after two Boise State touchdowns, CSU regained the lead when a 7-yard touchdown pass from Garrett Grayson to junior Charles Lovett put the Rams up 17-14 with 6:20 left in the first half.

But just three plays later, Colorado State’s season-long Achilles’ heel reared its ugly head when the Rams’ secondary was burned.

This time, it was a 68-yarder to 5-foot-6, 157-pound sophomore wideout Shane Williams-Rhodes, who beat Rams safety Trent Matthews down the right sideline and caught a perfect spiral from quarterback Grant Hedrick in full stride along the Boise State bench.

Matthews, finding himself in single coverage, was at a disadvantage against the speed of Williams-Rhodes. But it didn’t help that Matthews hesitated for an instant when Hedrick slipped out of the pocket.

“We practiced their routes and the routes were there to attack but we didn’t execute,” Matthews said.

Hedrick hit Matt Miller for a 15-yard touchdown with 1:13 left before halftime for a 28-17 lead. Then he found Miller again for a 13-yard score that completed a five-play, 68-yard drive to open the second half.

Another touchdown pass by Hedrick, his fifth of the night, sent most of the fans heading to the parking lot early in the fourth quarter.

Hedrick, a junior, was making only his second career start, having replaced injured senior starter Joe Southwick. He finished 19-of-27 for 305 yards.

On the bright side for CSU, running back Kapri Bibbs scored three touchdowns for the third straight game; Grayson finished 36-of-53 for 397 yards, one touchdown and one interception; and the Rams finished with 626 yards.

CSU had its two-game conference winning streak snapped.

“This one hurts,” Lovett said. “We lost big the last two years but this was closer so it hurts more.”

Tom Kensler: tkensler@denverpost.com or twitter.com/tomkensler

Key play

Colorado State took a 17-14 lead in the second quarter to regain some momentum, but Boise State didn’t let the CSU fans celebrate for long. On the Broncos’ third play of the ensuing possession, wide receiver Shane Williams-Rhodes caught a Grant Hedrick pass and took it 68 yards for a touchdown.

Key stat

Colorado State crossed midfield six times in the first half but managed just 17 points from all that effort. The Rams came up empty three times.

Tom Kensler, The Denver Post