The 2015 United States Conference on AIDS is taking place from September 10-13 in Washington, D.C. Here is a snapshot of AIDS.gov and federal activities to help you get the most out of the conference.

Not attending USCA? AIDS.gov will update you as the conference unfolds.

USCA Coverage Platform : Updates, tweets, images and more from conference attendees and partners.

: Updates, tweets, images and more from conference attendees and partners. Twitter : Join the conversation with #USCA2015 and view live tweets from the plenary sessions.

: Join the conversation with #USCA2015 and view live tweets from the plenary sessions. AIDS.gov blog: Subscribe for coverage of the federal plenary and sessions on emerging research, policy and expert opinions.

Instagram : View photos from the conference social media lab, sessions, and plenaries.

Get Social with AIDS.gov:

AIDS.gov offers several ways to sharpen your social media skills while at USCA.

AIDS.gov and NMAC Social Media Lab

September 10 – 12

Scarlet Oak Room – Mezzanine Level

10:00 am to 12:00 pm and 2:00 pm to 5:00 pm

1-on-1 training sessions: Drop in for customized assistance with your social media questions and learn how social media can help engage clients and partners in your organization’s HIV prevention, care, and treatment work. Or book an appointment . (And stop in to charge your devices!)

Mini Sessions:

Brief sessions to address popular social media topics that are frequently brought to the Social Media Lab. Stop by the Lab for the schedule.

Website Usability:

We’d like your input! Preview and give us feedback on some of our new design concepts. Please sign up for a usability testing session in the Geranium Room, Mezzanine Level, Thursday, Friday or Saturday.

Positive Spin Roundtable

Real Stories of Real People Across the HIV Continuum of Care

Saturday, September 12

4:30 pm – 6:00 pm

L’Enfant Plaza, Meeting Level 3

Positive Spin uses the power of digital storytelling to raise awareness of the stages of the HIV care continuum and the steps people living with HIV can take to live longer, healthier lives and reduce their risk of passing HIV to others. The creators and two of the men featured in the project (@KenLike Barbie and @IAMGUYANTHONY ) will share strategies for using this storytelling tool in your community.

Learn more about the federal response to the domestic HIV/AIDS epidemic

There are many opportunities to hear from our federal leadership including the White House Office of National AIDS Policy (ONAP), U.S. Department of Health and Human Services agencies, and other Departments.

Federal Plenary

Thursday September 10

12:30 pm – 2:00 pm

Marquis Ball Room, Meeting Level 2

Douglas Brooks (Director, ONAP) will discuss the updated National HIV/AIDS Strategy (NHAS)

Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, (Director, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, NIH) will speak on the science that informs the NHAS. Also, NMAC will honor House Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi with the Elizabeth Taylor Legacy Award .

Master Series for Leadership

A select number of federal speakers are featured in the new USCA Master Series , an innovative lecture series that explores the urgent questions behind the work.

The future of the Ryan White Care Act: Dr. Laura Cheever, HRSA HIV/AIDS Bureau

Thursday, September 10

10:30 am – noon

Georgetown University, Meeting Level 1

The future of HIV prevention in the U.S.: Dr. Eugene McCray, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Thursday September 10

2:30 pm – 5:30 pm

University of DC/Catholic University, Meeting Level 1

HRSA Track: Moving Closer and Forward

The Health Resources and Services Administration, HIV/AIDS Bureau (HRSA/HAB) staff worked closely with grantees and planning bodies from the Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program (RWHAP) community to put together a track with 16 sessions focused on the needs of grantees and consumers. Sessions will also reflect upon the accomplishments of the 25-year history of the RWHAP. Learn more about HRSA’s USCA sessions .

Interactive Discussion with the Presidential Advisory Council on HIV/AIDS (PACHA)

Saturday, September 12

8:30 am – 11:30 am

Howard University, Meeting Level 1

Join the members of PACHA for a discussion on their upcoming activities.

We look forward to meeting you at #2015USCA , whether in-person or on our digital platforms.