The government's Diabetes Prevention Program, funded through the Affordable Care Act, will be expanded under Medicare under a plan announced Wednesday.

The program, a lifestyle community-level intervention, could save on healthcare costs in the long run by delaying or preventing onset of diabetes, according to the Department of Health & Human Services (HHS). It said the expansion would improve quality of patient care without limiting coverage or benefits, and that the Medicare actuary had certified that it would reduce net spending in Medicare.

"This program has been shown to reduce health care costs and help prevent diabetes, and is one that Medicare, employers and private insurers can use to help 86 million Americans live healthier," said HHS Secretary Sylvia Burwell in a statement. "The Affordable Care Act gave Medicare the tools to support this groundbreaking effort and to expand this program more broadly. Today's announcement is a milestone for prevention and America's health."

The Diabetes Prevention Program has been around for more than a decade; a landmark 2002 study found that it was effective in preventing onset of diabetes for those at high risk. In 2011, CMS gave nearly $12 million to the National Council of Young Men's Christian Associations to enroll Medicare beneficiaries at high risk, and the HHS said that the results were "striking."

On average, participants lost about 5% of their body weight, and Medicare estimated that they saved $2,650 for each enrollee over 15-months, which was more than the cost of the program for each participant. "These findings are relevant not only to the Medicare program, but to employers and insurers who may want to initiate diabetes prevention programs in their populations," HHS said.

The proposal will go through a public comment period before it finalized. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services is "considering how it would expand this model broadly throughout the Medicare program," HHS said. It added that more information about the rollout will be included in the 2017 Medicare Physician Fee Schedule, which is to be released this summer.