Photo

In the final weeks before the midterm elections, Republican congressional candidates have come out in favor of making contraception available over the counter. Candidates including Cory Gardner of Colorado, Thom Tillis in North Carolina, Ed Gillespie and Barbara Comstock in Virginia, and Mike McFadden of Minnesota have announced they want birth control pills to be available over the counter.

Mr. Gardner wrote an op-ed explaining his position in The Denver Post on June 19. The candidate cites a 2012 study by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists saying that pharmacists and “women themselves” were able to effectively screen patients for risks related to contraception.

Mr. Gardner argues that offering birth control over the counter will save families money and time. He says that making a medication available at drugstores brings down the costs and saves women from unnecessary doctors’ appointments. “Fewer unneeded doctors’ appointments mean fewer missed workdays and child-care expenses, more productivity and more time with family. This is particularly true for rural families like mine where doctors are not always nearby.”

Mr. Gardner also sees a political advantage: “Too many people in Washington would rather play politics with contraception instead of actually making life easier for women. Too many Democrats prefer to attack Republicans on the issue of contraception rather than actually make contraception more available and affordable and too many Republicans are afraid to break the mold.”

Reihan Salam writes in a column for National Review that conservatives can yet take the lead on social issues in this election. He applauds “the recent Republican embrace of allowing for the sale of birth control pills over the counter as a way of parrying liberal attacks” that Republicans are out of step on social policies or are harming women’s health. But the position is not only political; it is also, Mr. Salam argues, “authentically conservative” and would empower women, especially ones who are uninsured. He concludes, “One hopes that this birth control shift will prefigure a new policy creativity on social issues.”

Indeed, Republicans are doing everything they can to appeal to women voters. According to an article in The Wall Street Journal (registration required), men favor Republicans over Democrats by 17 percentage points, whereas women prefer Democrats by 14. For that reason, Republicans are finding ways to criticize their opponents for undermining women, such as in a television ad claiming that Senator Mark Begich, Democrat of Alaska, pays his male staffers more than his female staffers.

Jonah Goldberg at National Review laughs off the idea that Republican control of Congress has been bad for women: “By any objective measure, things have been going great for women for a long time.” He writes: “women earn 57 percent of bachelor’s degrees, 63 percent of master’s degrees, and 53 percent of doctorates. They constitute the majority of the U.S. workforce and the majority of managers.” He renames the recession “the mancession,” a reference to the fact that women kept their jobs or went back to work more quickly than men.

All the same, Republicans are getting pushback about whether offering contraceptive pills over the counter would truly help women. Dr. Nancy L. Stanwood, a practicing ob-gyn and board chair of Physicians for Reproductive Health, told ThinkProgress that changing birth control’s availability without ensuring that it is covered by health insurance will keep women from being able to get it. “We know that increasing access is important, but affordability is part of access,” Dr. Stanwood said.

Ms. Stanwood notes that making birth control pills available over the counter is likely to mean they won’t be covered by insurance, in effect weakening the provision of the Affordable Care Act that guarantees that insurance cover the total cost of contraception. It will likewise make insurance less likely to pay for other forms of contraception, such as the I.U.D., an expensive form of contraception that is also one of the most effective. Thomas M. Burton and Natalie Andrews write, in The Wall Street Journal, that the Food and Drug Administration would need to approve any such change, which would be initiated by the drug companies, not Congress.

Planned Parenthood has made clear its opposition to the plan and criticizes the opportunism of Mr. Gardner and others. “If Cory Gardner and others were serious about expanding access to birth control, they wouldn’t be trying to repeal the no-copay birth control benefit,” said Dawn Laguens, the executive vice president of the Planned Parenthood Action Fund, in a news release. “This is simply a cynical political attempt to whitewash his terrible record and agenda for women’s health.”

ThinkProgress catalogs some of the legislation supported by the candidates now purportedly in favor of supporting women’s health needs. Mr. Tillis was House speaker when North Carolina’s legislature passed an “extreme provision that required doctors to force women to look at ultrasounds of their fetuses before getting an abortion.” Ms. Comstock supported a similar mandatory ultrasound law that initially required a transvaginal ultrasound before an abortion could be performed and was later amended to accept an abdominal one. Mr. Tillis also led an effort to defund Planned Parenthood, and Ms. Comstock opposed a Medicaid expansion in Virginia that would cover 400,000 uninsured citizens, including an estimated 169,000 women.

Whether the Republican’s gambit will pay off with women voters remains to be seen. The Wall Street Journal quotes Marcy Stech, a spokeswoman for Emily’s List, which raises money for pro-choice Democrats: “Voters are too smart to fall for these false tactics,” she said. “Republicans know they have this problem, and they keep thinking the fix to their problem is a cosmetic one.”