Principles: If Republicans want to know how to respond to President Obama’s barbs and attacks, they should pay close attention to what Gov. Scott Walker said after Obama smacked him for signing a right-to-work bill.

Obama, who believes that he should comment on anything and everything under the sun, issued a written statement condemning the law.

“I’m deeply disappointed,” he said, “that a new anti-worker law in Wisconsin will weaken, rather than strengthen, workers in the new economy.”

Obama then claimed that Walker’s action was part of an “inexcusable assault on unions, led by powerful interests and their allies in government.”

Clearly Obama needs to take a civics refresher course. After all, the bill that landed on Walker’s desk was the result of the state’s duly elected representatives’ 62-35 vote in favor of it — and that after 20 hours of debate. In other words, democracy at work.

But what’s really interesting is how Walker responded to Obama’s tantrum. Rather than meekly taking Obama’s blows, as most Republicans seem wont to do, Walker punched back — hard.

“On the heels of vetoing Keystone pipeline legislation, which would have paved the way to create thousands of quality, middle-class jobs, the president should be looking to states, like Wisconsin, as an example for how to grow our economy,” Walker told National Review Online.

“Despite a stagnant national economy and a lack of leadership in Washington, since we took office, Wisconsin’s unemployment rate is down to 5%, and more than 100,000 jobs and 30,000 businesses have been created.”

Bam! In just two sentences, Walker shoved Obama’s phony concern for workers back at him and pointed out that Wisconsin is growing its economy despite the flat recovery Obama’s policies have produced nationwide.

Early in the Obama administration, when public anger over ObamaCare was rising at town hall meetings, Jim Messina, a top White House adviser at the time, reportedly offered Democrats this advice:

“If you get hit, we will punch back twice as hard.”

Obama himself said during his first presidential run that “if they bring a knife to the fight, we bring a gun.”

The problem is that Republicans too often pull their punches or just run away from the fight. It’s unfortunate and unnecessary. When the GOP resolutely defends free-market principles as Walker has done, it wins. When they’re defensive and apologetic, they lose.