Right after Chris Christie announced his 12-point plan to reform Social Security and Medicare last week, I got an email from someone who would benefit greatly from the plan.

That's not because Amanda Lott is a retiree. It's because she's a financial planner. If this plan goes through, financial planners will make a fortune trying to rescue future retirees from its effects.

"The proposed benefit reform could remove more than 20 percent of the retirement income from an American couple," the email read. It went on to point out how the Christie plan could cause even more retirees to flee New Jersey than are currently leaving.

I decided to give Lott a call at her office in Morristown to learn more about the problems with the plan.

"This punishes people who have been fiscally responsible and have saved all of their lives," Lott said. "But people who haven't planned ahead will be rewarded."

The problem is the "means testing" that is the basis of the plan. Means testing is usually something pushed by Democrats for the obvious reason that it takes from the rich and gives to the poor.

That's one drawback for a guy who wants to compete in a Republican presidential primary. Another is the definition of "rich" in Christie's plan. He would start imposing penalties on any couple with a retirement income over about $80,000 annually, barely enough to get by in his own Morris County.

The higher that income rises, the less Social Security they'd get - and the more Medicare premiums they'd pay. At about $200,000, such a couple would get no Social Security and would pay 90 percent of the full cost of Medicare premiums. That's a double whammy that creates a huge disincentive to save for retirement, Lott said.

Imagine a couple with an annual income of $79,000. If they worked long enough, they might receive Social Security benefits of $40,000 annually. Meanwhile they'd pay Medicare premiums of perhaps $2,000 a year.

Now imagine the same couple has retirement income of $200,000 a year. They'd get zero Social Security and pay about $20,000 in Medicare premiums under Christie's plan.

That's a net loss of $58,000 just because they set aside a lot of money for retirement.



In his speech last week in New Hampshire, Christie emphasized that only 2 percent of Americans have retirement income over $200,000.

Lott calls that the Warren Buffett diversion. Politicians always like to cite Buffett as an example of someone who doesn't need Social Security or Medicare.

But talking about the top diverts attention to what's going in the middle and at the bottom of the sliding scale. And what's going on is that every time you move up a notch you lose a proportionate amount of income.

In the above example, the couple in question would lose almost $500 in benefits for every $1,000 of extra income - and that's before the federal and state taxman takes a bite. In other cases, the bite would be smaller, but even at 20 percent there's a big disincentive to save for retirement, she said.

"There's no need to eliminate benefits for the middle class who pay hundreds of thousands into the system," said Lott. "I agree with him something needs to be done but the solutions he proposed are going to ostracize him from both parties."

The Democrats are already slamming Christie for proposing to raise the retirement age. But if he jumps into the Republican primaries, how long before some opponent - perhaps his nemesis Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul - points out that Christie plans to keep collecting hundreds of thousands in payroll taxes from couples who won't see a dime in benefits?

And how long before someone points out that means-testing Medicare turns it into Obamacare - minus the market forces?

This is what happens when politicians dabble in economics, said Boston University economics professor Laurence Kotlikoff.

"This guy has not spent a day in his life in public finance, but he's feeling free to design a new system of incentives for people to work and save without any understand of what we have in place already," said Kotlikoff, who is the author of the best-selling "Get Yours Now," a guide for those planning retirement.

The big problem with the current system in America is our high marginal tax rates, both in retirement and in everyday life. Because of the progressive nature of the tax system, every extra dollar you earn is taxed at your highest rate. There's already a huge disincentive to work and savings, said Kotlikoff.

"This is a crazy marginal tax," he said of Christie's plan. "We want to give people incentives to work. We don't want everyone to be thinking from one minute to the next about whether they're facing a higher marginal tax rate."

No, we don't. That's what financial planners are for.

And if they're smart, they'll start contributing to the Christie campaign.

UPDATE: U.S. News and World Report has a good piece on how Christie defended his plan at a bar in New Hampshire in the face of questions from patrons who understood its impact on the middle class quite well.



ADD: Christie is lucky he's polling so poorly that few pundits paid attention to this plan. But one who did, liberal columnist Charles Lane of the Washington Post, recognized immediately what a gift this would be to the big-government types inside the Beltway:

"You might even say Christie's plan restores the basis for future active government -- a point that neither he and his fellow Republicans nor their Democratic foes have the slightest interest in acknowledging."

You might indeed. This is the most progressive tax scheme that I've ever seen - though I'm sure Christie would not term it a tax hike.

Neither would Grover Norquist.

Americans for Tax Reform President Grover Norquist defended Christie Wednesday in an email to TIME, praising him as a acolyte of President Reagan. "To date Christie has opposed and vetoed all tax hikes in New Jersey," Norquist said. "Reducing a benefit is not a tax hike. Shame on any conservative who confuses spending cuts and tax increases. For a Northeast Republican he is very Reaganite."

Nonsense. When you sit down with your tax accountant prior to April 15, as I did a couple of weeks ago, he adds up all the various government actions that dictate how big a check you send the feds on April 15. When he tells you that because of Christie's plan you're going to lose perhaps $15,000 in Social Security and pay perhaps an additional $10,000 for Medicare, you won't care what the feds call it.

Kotlikoff calls it a big increase in the marginal bite the Beltway takes out of your income.

"That's enough to disqualify him from any public discourse," he said of Norquist.

Actually I've consider him disqualified ever since I interviewed him a few years ago and listened to him argue against the Balanced Budget Amendment.

I suspect no one in Washington deserves more blame for our $16 trillion in debt than Norquist. His taxpayer pledge lets politicians pose as conservatives by not raising taxes while borrowing billions to fund their spending addication.

But back to Christie. As I've written before, a conservative could make a good argument for ending Medicare altogether and replacing it with something like Kotlikoff's Purple Plan, which would fund a basic health care voucher for all Americans funded by broad-based rather than progressive taxation.

But when it comes to Social Security, how could any conservative argue in favor of taxing a person for a lifetime and then returning only a tiny portion to that person - or none at all?

Imagine this exchange between Rand Paul and Christie in a debate:

PAUL: I favor letting Americans opt out of Social Security and setting up their own retirement accounts with their own money. But there's one candidate up here on this stage who believes it would be perfectly fine to tax that person for life and keep every cent for the government's use. Isn't it true Mr. Christie that under your plan a self-employed couple could pay more than a million dollars in Social Security tax over a lifetime and not get a penny back from the federal government? CHRISTIE: I'm suggesting that Americans pay into this system throughout the course of their life knowing that it will be there if they need it to support them...But if you are fortunate enough not to need it, you will have paid into a system that will continue to help Americans who need it most.

The Rand Paul quote is made up, of course.

As for the Christie quote, he actually said that. Why he said it is a mystery to me.

Perhaps he thinks he's running in the Democratic primary.