Sen. Marco Rubio arrives for a Senate Foreign Relations Committee hearing on Capitol Hill in Washington, regarding recent Iranian actions and implementation of the nuclear deal. (Photo: AP)

Federal post lawsuit a joke?

Let’s see. A pro-Hillary group has filed suit claiming that Donald Trump promised Ben Carson a federal post in exchange for his endorsement. And this is somehow different from Barack Obama offering Hillary the secretary of state position in exchange for backing off in 2008 and endorsing him. Oh, I forgot — that appointment was in recognition of Hillary’s “expertise” that brought us Benghazi and assorted disasters around the world. Is this an April Fool’s joke or what?

Robert Werdann, Titusville

Best, Brightest needs fix

Recently local television featured an interview with two teachers — one who had received a Best and Brightest award and one who did not. The recipient was a second-year teacher and the other was a veteran secondary teacher with a master’s degree. Curious to know how a teacher qualifies for the award, I downloaded a copy of the enabling legislation.

The measures used to determine the “ brightest” were of particular interest to me. The “Legislative Intent” section emphasizes the importance of academic achievement:

“… research has linked student performance to a teacher’s own academic achievements. Therefore ... (the Legislature shall) designate teachers who have achieved high academic standards during their own education as Florida’s Best and Brightest Scholars.”

Judging candidates for this award, I assumed, should include achievements such as high class rankings, academic honors, advanced degrees and additional certifications. But the only measure of “academic achievement” specified in the law is a score “… at or above the 60th percentile on the ACT or SAT…”

Teachers scoring below the magic percentile or who didn’t take these exams (not used in over 850 colleges and universities) are excluded from consideration. At best, ACT / SAT scores are a very limited measure of pre-university academic success. Using them in determining the “Best and the Brightest” teachers is simply nonsense. If ever a piece of legislation needed revision, this one is it. For the teacher’s sake, let us pray that someone up there (Tallahassee) is listening.

Thomas Grotelueschen, Cocoa Beach

Student union dollars a waste

Really? $9.5 million for a student union at a college that is only open four days a week? How about staying open on Fridays, Eastern Florida State College, so your students can access labs, advisers and tutoring? Universities have big student unions because they have on-campus housing and services available on Saturdays, too. This is a waste of money and another poor decision on funding for Rick Scott.

Jodi Pierce, Merritt Island

And he calls Trump naive?

I listen with incredulity to our esteemed and all-knowing President Obama reacting to all the violations of the nuclear deal by the Iranians.

He seemed naively surprised, while at the same time trying to convince all the real foreign policy experts in Washington that actions ranging from ballistic missile tests to shipping weapons to terrorists in Yemen, aren’t really violations. He seemed hurt that Iran isn’t behaving in the “spirit” of the agreement.

Amazing. He has the temerity to pompously call Donald Trump “naive on foreign policy.”

William Alford, Palm Bay

Pay should reflect work done

Regarding “Brevard commissioners reject most citizen requests,” (FLORIDA TODAY, April 2) Stockton Whitten owes Carol Walton an apology for his flippant dismissal of her idea.

Walton proposed that county politicians’ pay be based on how much time they actually spend at work. In other words, the same way it goes for anyone with a job.

Whitten said we can’t do that because “it is up to each commissioner to decide” how much time and effort is necessary for the job. Would that political doublespeak hold up anywhere else? “I’m sorry, boss, but I only felt like laying half of the bricks today. You’ll be paying me in full, right?”

It’s nonsense. Remember: politicians work for us, not the other way around. They aren’t exempt from common sense, and they shouldn’t be paid if they’re not doing their jobs

Nick Tomboulides, Suntree

Hike in prescription prices

Wow, has anyone had a prescription refilled in the last few days? I did. What was a $5 co-pay is now $72.99. I called every number I have (health plan provider, prescription provider, multiple pharmacies) and all gave me the same response. Thank you, Affordable Care Act, was the explanation.

Apparently, effective April 1, a new drug pricing, whatever, kicked in. More smoke and mirrors, or just another ploy to make national health care look more desirable? We don’t need another government boondoggle. I was happy with the old school way of doing business at $5 per.

Tom McGee, Merritt Island

Ill-advised fertilizer tip

I am shocked and saddened to read Sally Scalera’s advice to gardeners in her April 2 FLORIDA TODAY article titled “Enough prep, start planting and pruning this April.” In it, she advises gardeners, “April is a good time to fertilize your lawn as it’s the last time you’ll be able to before the county-wide fertilizer bans take effect.”

How irresponsible of Ms. Scalera to advise gardeners to rush out to fertilize their flowers before a fertilizer ban takes effect. Has she been reading the informative articles and photos that FLORIDA TODAY has printed? Has she looked at our brown rivers as she drives over our bridges? I hope most residents of Brevard County will ignore her advice. Avoiding the use of fertilizers is a small price to pay to help heal our rivers.

Bonnie Ewards, Merritt Island

Read or Share this story: http://on.flatoday.com/1RWuFZH