In the history of feel-good and soon-to-be forgotten feminist hashtags, #AskHerMore’s moment in the viral spotlight at Sunday’s Oscars surely ranks among the more ridiculous.

The campaign, an initiative of The Representation Project (which has the aim of seeking to further gender equality through film), encouraged red carpet interviewers at the Academy Awards to focus less on what designers the starlets happened to be hawking (err, wearing) and more on, well, the great depths of non-sartorial wisdom of which said focus had presumably denied us. As Reese Witherspoon, a key champion of the effort, declared on the red carpet: “We are more than just our dresses.”

That may very well be the case the other 364 days of the year. But on this night of all nights, the feminist push – much like Patricia Arquette’s clunky, if well-meaning, plea for pay equality during her acceptance speech for winning best supporting actress – came off as more than a little ham-fisted.



[READ: 2015 Academy Awards Best Picture Winner Is Not Taxpayers]

For starters, the dresses are actually a huge part of both the economics and appeal of an occasion whose continued popularity, even if increasingly flagging, is predicated on its ability to peddle the glamour and other-worldliness of Hollywood. Notably, Witherspoon didn’t turn up her nose at presenting the Oscar for best makeup and hairstyling later in the evening, because at the end of the day this is an event about appearance and artifice. It is not, lest Tinseltown forget, a Nobel Prize Award Ceremony or a meeting of the Oxford Union.

Moreover, the actresses are sometimes paid to wear and promote the brands on the red carpet or are lent the dresses for free. As one designer told Refinery29, "Everybody relates to it on a financial basis."

And for that matter, why exactly would you not expect to field questions about what you are wearing if, like Lady Gaga, you descended on the red carpet decked in a futuristic white contraption paired with what appeared to be a pair of red rubber gloves, or, like J-Lo, you showed up exhibiting ever new heights (or would that be lows?) of decolletage daring?

Oscar presenter Kerry Washington couldn’t shut up about her shimmy-worthy, peplum Miu Miu gown, despite the best efforts of “Good Morning America” co-host Lara Spencer to draw her out about her work. “Can you tell me anything about my favorite show in the whole wide world, ‘Scandal’?” asked Spencer. “I can’t. As you know I’ll get fired if I tell you anything,” Washington replied, before quickly adding, “I will tell you that the very next episode is an episode that means a great deal to me. It’s a very moving episode. Yeah.”



[STUDY: Women are MIA in Hollywood]

Wow, talk about a great leap forward for womankind right there. (For the record, Washington was far more engaging when she was showing off the dance moves she could do in her dress.)

Then there was the sulky Dakota Johnson, who was so charmless and glum – snapping at her mother Melanie Griffith and offering half-assed responses to questions about upcoming projects – that about the only reaction possible after her interview was an overwhelming urge to tweet #DontAskHerMore.

Which raises another fundamental problem of the campaign: Even without the requisite queries about clothes and accessories, there’d be little time for long-form, soul-baring on the theatrical craft (for either the boys or girls involved) during brief red carpet interviews. As Hallie Cantor noted in the New Yorker: “[T]he frenetic pace and A.D.H.D. nature of the red-carpet broadcast doesn’t exactly lend itself to in-depth, substantive discussions of artistry.”



[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on Hillary Clinton]

Finally, beyond its all-too-obvious contextual disconnect, #AskHerMore, as is the case with so much hashtag activism, offers little more than symbolic gestures as solutions for endemic social ills, raising awareness and tweets for the fleeting virtual struggle du jour. Meanwhile, injustices back in the non-virtual world – remember #BringBackOurGirls? – proceed apace.

Don’t get me wrong. There are very real problems with how Hollywood treats its female stars, from wage inequality to age discrimination to sexual harassment. But asking actresses to muse over softballs – such as naming their favorite TV show or “biggest risk” that has paid off, both of which were posted on Witherspoon's Instagram account as examples of possible questions – is hardly likely to do much for the cause of women. And once #AskHerMore's metaphorical 15 minutes of trending on Twitter has passed (it was even tweeted by the "Ready for Hillary" super PAC), the vast institutionalized inequities of an entertainment industry that is woefully behind the times when it comes to the treatment of women (look no further than John Travolta’s revolting behavior both on the red carpet and on stage Sunday night) will remain.