It’s been a big year for IPOs, but one of its wildest days was March 14, when Castlight Health soared 149% on its first day of trading. The stock hit a market cap of more than $4 billion, for a company with 2013 revenue of just $13 million.

Though the stock’s come closer to earth since then, Castlight (CSLT) continued the comeback for health care IT IPOs. Drug IPOs have gone gangbusters since early last year, but HCITs didn’t get rolling until the fall, when Benefitfocus (BNFT) and Veeva Systems (VEEV) debuted.

Two more HCIT IPOs are scheduled: on Thursday, consumer-oriented health website Everyday Health (EVDY), and next week, in a stark contrast to all the tiny startups, venerable health-industry data and consulting services provider IMS Health (IMS).

About 125 HCIT companies in the portfolios of top venture capital and private equity firms are “ripening” to where they’re ready for an exit, says Paul Teitelbaum, managing director at boutique investment bank Mesirow Financial.

Teitelbaum expects most of those exits will be buyouts, but he also expects more to go public this year since so few went out last year.

“People (were) waiting to see how the Affordable Care Act was going to roll out and how that was going to impact various different sectors of health care,” he said. “Some of the companies who were looking to exit were holding off until they reached certain levels of revenue and profitability.”

The small size of most of the IPO candidates is in part because many were started during the Obama administration. The 2009 stimulus package included incentives toward digitizing health care, particularly medical records, which led to a boom in HCIT stocks already trading as well as the formation of more startups.

Most of the established stocks in IBD’s Computer Software-Medical Industry Group, such as Cerner (CERN) and Allscripts (MDRX), sell products that help run hospitals and doctors’ offices, so they took naturally to electronic health records.

The more recent IPOs, however, have a more eclectic variety of business models. Castlight and Benefitfocus both help employers shop for health plans, while Veeva’s software handles sales and marketing functions for drugmakers.

Analyst Michael Cherny of ISI Group says the newer companies had to carve out their own niches.

“In an environment where there are so many established competitive players in the pure electronic-health-record/practice management market, the fact that there are other technologies that are needed creates an opportunity for venture-capital-backed companies to create business models that just now are big enough to stand alone as public companies,” he said.

Teitelbaum says one need that became more apparent as ObamaCare rolled out was for consumers to take more control of their health care, as they often end up shouldering more of the expenses. Castlight, Benefitfocus and Everyday Health all pitch their consumer focus as a major selling point.

Along that line, he says Vitals and Healthgrades are two consumer-oriented health companies he sees ripening for possible IPOs. Both help users find and rate physicians, in a similar way to how you might find a plumber on Angie’s List (ANGI).

Providers, meanwhile, are facing a world where more than ever their pay will be tied to outcomes, which creates business for companies offering population health management and disease-management software.

Among the possible IPOs in that field, Teitelbaum points to MediMedia, which has both a population-health arm and a consumer arm, and America Well, which assists disease management by letting doctors and patients consult online.

The old practice-management field also might produce a few more IPOs. Both Teitelbaum and Cherny point to Practice Fusion, which offers online electronic health records for free. Cherny also highlights CareCloud, which offers both records and other practice-management solutions online.

Since these companies are small enough to be “emerging” under the Jobs Act, they can file confidentially, so investors might not know when these firms are going public until a couple weeks before their debuts. Meanwhile, Teitelbaum and Cherny note, we shouldn’t expect another Castlight anytime soon — either in terms of how early in its life cycle it went out, or the massive valuation.

“That was quite remarkable,” Teitelbaum said. “‘Crazy’ is even a word I would venture to use.”