Buy Photo In-home child care provider Kelly Martini smiles as she holds Rose Loso, 6 mos., while playing with some of her charges Tuesday, March 29 at her Avon area home. There has been a decline statewide in the number of in-home child care facilities and a shortage, especially in infant care. (Photo: Kimm Anderson, kanderson@stcloudtimes.com)Buy Photo

AVON — Kate Bruzik started looking for child care for her newborn long before baby Ella was born.



After trying more than 20 child care providers, she found just two with a spot for an infant.

"I called months ahead of time even, and there was no openings," Bruzik said. "It's frustrating."

Her daughter, now 16 months old, is cared for by Avon child care provider Kelly Martini, and it's been a good arrangement. But many parents aren't so lucky.

According to the Minnesota Department of Human Services, the number of in-home child care providers in Stearns, Benton and Sherburne counties has declined by more than 17 percent in the last five years. The trend has led to a shortage of affordable child care, which puts a crimp on working families and businesses looking to hire workers.

"We're definitely getting calls from the community all the time looking for child care, and they can't find it," said Jodi Heurung, social service supervisor in Sherburne County. "So we know the shortage is out there."

Buy Photo In-home child care provider Kelly Martini holds Abel Sand, 11 mos., as she plays with some of her charges Tuesday, March 29 at her Avon area home. (Photo: Kimm Anderson, kanderson@stcloudtimes.com)

House Republicans formed an advisory committee that toured the state earlier this year to learn about the issue. Legislators at the Minnesota Capitol are debating several proposals to address the shortage, from regulatory reforms to increasing funding for child care assistance.

The shortage of child care hurts businesses trying to fill job openings, said Rep. Tama Theis, R-St. Cloud, who served on the advisory committee.

"If one of the reasons why people aren’t going to work after they have children is they can’t find child care, that’s really worrisome," Theis said.

Meanwhile, child care costs remain out of reach for many. As of last week, 189 families in Stearns County are on a waiting list for assistance designed to help working families pay for child care.

Minnesota is one of the costliest states in the nation when it comes to child care, at least for care provided in centers. A 2015 report from Child Care Aware of America found Minnesota had the most expensive child care in the nation when it comes to infant care in centers — more than $14,300 a year, about 15 percent of median income for a two-parent family.

In-home child care providers offer a lower-cost option for Minnesota families, averaging about $7,800 a year in 2014 for full-time infant care. In Minnesota, family in-home providers far outnumber centers, which tend to be concentrated in metro areas. Many parents prefer to have their young child in a more home-like setting rather than a busier center.

Buy Photo Kelly Martini plays with Abel Sand, 11 mos., at Martini's in-home child care near Avon. There has been a decline statewide in the number of in-home child care facilities and a shortage, especially in infant care. (Photo: Kimm Anderson, kanderson@stcloudtimes.com)

But for various reasons, those options are becoming harder to find. In Stearns County, the number of family providers dropped from 562 in 2010 to about 418 as of January, said Paul Weinmann, licensing supervisor for the county’s human services department.

The reasons for the trend aren’t easy to determine. Providers and officials point to increased regulations and training requirements, long hours, low pay and increased expectations of parents as possible factors.

"There's 101 reasons why," said Martini, who serves as president of the Stearns-Benton Child Care Association, which has about 80 members.

Some providers have decided tighter regulations and increased training requirements adopted by the state a couple of years ago were too onerous. The new rules were the result of 2012 media coverage about a spike in sleep-related deaths at day cares.

Now, providers aren’t allowed to put anything in a crib with an infant, such as a blanket or stuffed animal. Infants in care settings aren’t allowed to sleep in car seats or strollers, and they must be checked every 15 minutes.

That’s when Sherburne County started to see a decline in family child care options. The number of in-home providers in the county fell from 235 two years ago to 207 last year.

“It’s a lot of responsibility, and they had to make a lot of changes in their home daycare programs to comply with those expectations,” Heurung said.

Some providers decided they want to deal with the liability of caring for an infant.

"It made them a little bit fearful," Heurung said.

Melissa Rieland, a Sauk Rapids child care provider for 19 years, said she understands the regulations, but they make caring for infants tougher. If a baby falls asleep in a stroller or carrier, they must be transferred to a crib right away.

“It’s for the safety of all infants, so I get that,” Rieland said. “It just makes it hard.”

Training requirements have increased too. Providers are now required to have about 16 hours a year of training, compared to eight hours a year in the past. That includes training on first aid, CPR, head trauma and sudden infant death syndrome.

For providers already working 12-hour days, finding time and money for training can be difficult, Martini said. Rural providers often must drive a considerable distance to get to training.

New child care providers typically aren’t complaining about the requirements, Weinmann said.

Buy Photo Rose Loso, 6 mos., plays with her mobile on the floor at Kelly Martini's in-home child care near Avon. There has been a decline statewide in the number of in-home child care facilities and a shortage, especially in infant care. (Photo: Kimm Anderson, kanderson@stcloudtimes.com)

“We’re hearing from more people that have been around for 25 or 30 years that, ‘Oh, another thing?’” he said.

For some providers, it’s not about the rules and regulations, but they’re simply getting older and want to leave a profession that demands long hours and hard work for little pay.

“They’re in their 50s, 60s. They’ve been doing this for 30 years,” said Ann McCully, executive director of Child Care Aware of Minnesota. Studies show most child care providers work long hours, have no benefits such as health care and retirement plans and earn about $15,000 to $25,000 a year, according to McCully.

In-home child care is a family business, said Sandy Trossen, a former Stearns County child care provider who now advocates for other providers.

“When you’re a family child care, you’re in your work environment all the time, and it encompasses your whole family,” she said. The family has to put up with having kids around, wear and tear on the house and following rules like not having friends over, Trossen said.

Many people start doing child care thinking it will be easy money and way for them to stay home with their own kids, not realizing how much work it entails, Martini said. Beyond caring for the kids, there’s cleaning, shopping and food preparation.

The expectations of child care also are changing. Parents now demand an educational component that didn’t exist in the past, experts say.

"There's just this growth of expectations of frankly, a more professional field," McCully said.

Things have changed a lot since the days when children in kindergarten learned their colors and how to write their name, Weinmann said.

“When you get to kindergarten these days, you need to be able to write your name, know your letters, know your numbers, know your address, your telephone number," he said. “If you have a two-wage earning family, who’s teaching the kids that? A lot of times, it’s your daycare provider."

Buy Photo In-home child care provider Kelly Martini smiles as she holds Rose Loso, 6 mos., while playing with some of her clients Tuesday, March 29 at her Avon area home. There are fewer in-home child care providers in the St. Cloud area and across Minnesota than there used to be. (Photo: Kimm Anderson, kanderson@stcloudtimes.com)

And while the cost of child care centers has been rising, the cost of in-home family care hasn’t kept up, Weinmann said. Providers say they can’t raise their rates because the St. Cloud-area job market won’t support it.

Counties are allotted a certain amount every year for the basic sliding fee program designed to help low-income working families afford child care. But it's not enough, said Janet Goligowski, gateway services director in the Stearns County human services department. The Legislature cut funding for the program more than a decade ago.

"What happens is that typically, it is not nearly enough to fund everyone statewide or even in our county who could benefit from child care assistance," she said.

The formula used to determine how much funding counties receive for child care assistance is outdated and not always targeted to where the need is, Goligowski said. While some counties aren't spending their entire allocation, there's a waiting list statewide of almost 8,000 families.

"There's a huge disconnection there," Goligowski said.

For some families, the basic sliding fee can be the key to helping them be self sufficient and keeping them off welfare programs, where child care costs are fully covered.

"If we want people working, we need to support them in their work so they don't get deeper into the public assistance programs," Goligowski said.

Family child care providers Benton

Sherburne

Stearns

State lawmakers have about six weeks left in the legislative session to consider proposed solutions. Rep Mary Franson, R-Alexandria, who chaired the state advisory task force, has authored several bills, including creating a manual for people who are interested in starting a child care business and providing economic development grants for communities that create unique solutions to child care needs.

Gov. Mark Dayton has his own proposals, including increasing reimbursements to providers the assistance program. Fifteen years ago, 75 percent of providers had their costs fully covered, said Jim Koppel, assistant DHS commissioner for children and family services. Today, it's 25 percent. The governor's proposal would raise the reimbursement rate back to 50 percent.

Buy Photo In-home child care provider Kelly Martini laughs as she interacts with her child care charges, Rose Loso, center, 6 mos., and Abel Sand, 11 mos., at her Avon area home. (Photo: Kimm Anderson, kanderson@stcloudtimes.com)

"That will have an enormous effect in terms of the viability of a child care provider making a living," Koppel said.

Some county officials are considering new tactics to recruit and retain child care providers. Such efforts would be a first for Sherburne County.

"I think we just want to get the word out about the need," Heurung said.

Some providers say county licensors could help by communicating better about what's expected. They say it sometimes feels like the rules aren't enforced consistently.

"The citations, they don't make sense," Martini said. "You might be cited for one thing, and another person wouldn't be cited for it."

Weinmann said the county uses a newsletter to get word to providers about new regulations or common issues. He said the county's role is that of a regulator, "yet we want our providers to be successful."

“A great majority of our providers do an awesome job,” he said. “They have a lot of responsibility. They work very, very hard, and they do great. They allow everyone else to go and work, and their children are taken care of. They’re safe, and they’re fed.

"And they’re being taught things that a lot of parents may not have the time.”

Follow Kirsti Marohn on Twitter, Facebook or contact her by phone at 320-255-8746.

Read or Share this story: http://www.sctimes.com/story/news/local/2016/04/02/shortage-affordable-child-care-hampers-families/82262546/