The nation’s small business lobby has found a replacement for its leader, who is stepping down next year.

The National Federation of Independent Businesses (NFIB) has named Juanita Duggan, the current president and chief executive of the American Apparel & Footwear Association, as its president and CEO. Duggan becomes the first woman to lead the organization in its 70-year history.

ADVERTISEMENT

The NFIB board voted unanimously to appoint Duggan, who NFIB Chairman Steve Schramm called a “strong and tireless advocate.”

She succeeds longtime NFIB official Dan Danner, who has been with the business group for 22 years, including the last seven years as its leader. He plans to retire in February.

“I have known Juanita Duggan for more than 25 years and her energy and enthusiasm are unmatched. Coupled with her broad experience, she is uniquely qualified to lead NFIB going forward,” Danner said in a statement.

Under Danner, the organization has been a leading voice in tax and regulatory reforms, including mobilizing its grassroots network on issues such as healthcare and labor rules.

Duggan says her passion for small business runs in the family, with her grandfather opening a business 100 years ago.

“My whole family worked there, and it is still in existence today,” she said. “So I understand the obstacles that business owners and operators face.

“The next few years will be critical to the future of America’s small businesses as we wrestle with the issues of tax reform, ever expanding government regulation, and the continuing challenges created by Obamacare,” Duggan said in a statement.

Duggan has been with the American Apparel & Footwear Association since last July. Prior to that, she spent about three years at Brownstein Hyatt Farber Schreck — now the third-largest K Street firm by revenue.

She is also a past president and CEO of both the American Forest and Paper Association and the Wine and Spirits Wholesalers of America. She served as vice president for federal relations at Philip Morris Companies, Inc. during the tobacco settlement with state attorneys general.

She also has public sector experience, having worked in the White House of both President Ronald Reagan and President George H.W. Bush.

“I won’t hesitate to be an outspoken advocate for the interests of America’s small businesses,” Duggan said.

Danner's base salary in 2013, the most recent forms available, is listed at $905,677. Tax forms for the American Apparel & Footwear Association are unavailable for the year that Duggan served as its chief executive.