“Hey, Smitty, good to see you, my friend,” Dr. Clark said, propping his sneakered feet on his desk and swigging from his habitual can of Red Bull. By his side, a harness whip, a gift from a patient, sat beneath the framed diplomas hanging crookedly on the wall.

“Hey, Doc,” Mr. Smith said, settling his 270-pound frame into an armchair. He had hurried back from a job building windmills in Alaska just in time to get his next month’s prescription: four 8-milligram tablets a day, the highest dose recommended, that stave off withdrawal, eliminate his cravings for heroin, keep his mood balanced and alleviate his chronic pain.

Growing up in the hilltop town of Meyersdale — “Pennsylvania’s High Point” — Mr. Smith had aspired to follow his grandfather into the family business. “All I wanted to do was towing, in my Pap’s footsteps,” he said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

A rare kidney condition, treated with surgery and potent painkillers, knocked him off course. After several years, he told his doctor that he wanted to wean himself off the pills.

Video

He said: “The doctor stopped dead like I had my pants on backward, and said, ‘You’re admitting you’re addicted?’ I said, ‘Well, it ain’t no news flash.’ ” The doctor ripped up his prescription and threw it in the air.

Mr. Smith spent the next week “dope sick,” shivering, sweating and vomiting. A friend proposed a solution: heroin, cheap and easy to find. “Things started going south,” Mr. Smith said. Then his grandfather died, and he learned that the towing business would be sold.

“I went clean off my rocker,” he said. To finance his habit, he burned through $12,000 in savings and finally drove off to sell the contents of his gun safe, including weapons of disputed ownership. A police officer was waiting when he returned to arrest him for theft. Agonizing on that jailhouse floor, he promised himself he would never use again.

A week later, essentially under house arrest in the custody of his father, a corrections officer, he called Dr. Clark’s office, crying.

“He saved my life,” Mr. Smith said.

That was two years ago. In his session last spring, Mr. Smith told his unlikely savior: “I’m sort of pissed at you. I hear you’ve been shooting Airsoft without me.” (The game involves fake guns and pellets.)

“Yeah, sorry, buddy,” the doctor said. “I know you’d be into that. What we all do in getting better is to switch to different ways of getting our ya-yas out, right?”

They talked motorcycles. The doctor drives a Harley-Davidson Fat Boy. Mr. Smith fantasizes about “barreling down the highway on a Big Dog” but is in too much debt to buy one. “You know how it is,” he said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Dr. Clark nodded. “I thought losing my credit was the worst thing in the world, but it was the best thing in the world because now I’m living on a cash basis,” he said. “Credit is a big scam, man. It uses our addictive nature against us: ‘I want it now. I want it now.’ ”

Mr. Smith loves it when Dr. Clark talks to him addict to addict. “I’ve heard patients say he ain’t no better than we are or he’s just in it for the money,” he said. “But I think being an addict makes him a better doctor. He’s been in our shoes.”

Defending the Disparaged

With tattoos commemorating his recovery, Dr. Clark runs the office with his girlfriend, Natalie Tombs, also a recovering addict. Emotive and animated, Ms. Tombs has festooned the walls with inspirational messages on butterflies and hearts and signs warning against sharing, trading or selling medication: “ANY PATIENT CAN BE SUBJECTED TO RANDOM PILL COUNTS.”

The couple portray themselves as the defenders of a disparaged segment of society with which they commiserate. Their patients see them that way, too.

Video

“As you know, my pharmacist thinks you’re pretty much a joke, and he’s not filling your prescriptions,” one patient, James Markeley, said recently. “I brought one in, handed it to him and said, ‘How long will it be?’ He said, ‘It won’t be.’ ”

Dr. Clark giggled. “What’d he say again?” he said. “I’m an old hippie? I like that one.”

It was not always so.

A graduate of the University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Dr. Clark did a fellowship in child psychiatry at Yale, served as an Air Force doctor in Germany and then took a job at a Pennsylvania hospital.

In the late 1990s, unhappy and overwhelmed by his patient load, he prescribed himself Adderall, a stimulant. His mood improved, and he focused better. But he kept taking more to get the same effect. After two years, he was a wreck.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Dr. Clark checked himself into a rehabilitation program in 1999.

“I had to cold-turkey it,” he said. “Withdrawal from amphetamines is different. It’s much more tolerable than from opioids. After detox, though, the obsession and craving for the drug are similar. The relapse rates are similar. The triggers are similar. I had to learn to manage stress better, to rest better, to improve my self-esteem.”

Dr. Clark also had to meet the demands of Pennsylvania’s physician recovery program: therapy as well as five 12-step meetings and two random urine screens a week.

After a few sober years, he relapsed when his marriage was breaking up. He wrote himself a prescription for painkillers in his son’s name. His wife notified his program advocate.

“Just how much pain is your son in?” the advocate asked.

In 2002, a second residential program gave him a diagnosis of depression and narcissistic personality disorder — he disagreed — and discharged him early with a poor prognosis. He agreed to take a reprieve from practicing medicine in Pennsylvania; Ohio suspended his license.

Deeply in debt, Dr. Clark was reduced to collecting food stamps until Pennsylvania let him return to medicine as a prison doctor in 2003.

That same year, after a positive drug test, Dr. Clark entered his third treatment program and promised himself it would be his last. He has been sober since, he said.

His troubles did not end with sobriety, though.

Pennsylvania suspended him for a month in 2010 because he failed to submit to three unannounced drug tests while on vacation. Ohio revoked his license in 2011 because he forged signatures verifying his attendance at 12-step meetings.

Video

In 2008, a Reckitt Benckiser representative approached Dr. Clark at a children’s hospital, saying: “There’s this great medicine, Suboxone. Why not get certified? It doesn’t take much, and it’s a nice thing to add to your practice,” he said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Dr. Clark devised a treatment program based on federal guidelines, except he tailored it to what his working-class patients could afford. He mostly prescribed generic buprenorphine rather than the higher-priced Suboxone, which has an additive meant to deter abuse and is favored, though not mandated, by the guidelines.

And he established monthly, rather than more frequent, office visits unless patients violated the rules. He decided to “cut out the middleman” by declining to accept insurance and set his fee at $150 a visit, with a couples’ price of $100 a person.

“I made sure my price was the lowest of any of the clinics, and that’s why people liked us in the beginning,” he said. “Many of my competitors were gouging them.”

With his caseload limited to 100 by law, Dr. Clark quickly found himself turning away patients and searching for doctors who wanted to supplement their income by working part-time for him.

He hired the walk-in clinic doctor who monitored his urine drug screens, and an alternative medicine specialist who sees patients by Skype from Virginia. He also hired a 53-year-old internist shortly after a 25-year-old woman died of “acute combined drug toxicity” at the internist’s home following an evening together at the Wicked Googly bar in Ligonier, Pa.

“He told me he was feeling some heat in his area and needed to get out of town for a while,” Dr. Clark said.

After filing for bankruptcy protection with $1.5 million in debt early this year, the internist quit in May to run his own buprenorphine practice, saying he needed to make money fast, Dr. Clark said.

Dr. Clark scrambled to replace him so his patients would not be abandoned. They often are in this volatile field. Many of Dr. Clark’s patients showed up on his doorstep after the authorities had put their previous doctors out of business.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

That happened with both Angela Scotchel, 25, and Amanda Rogers, 32. They are like before and after pictures. Ms. Scotchel, a former basketball star, is relatively fragile in her recovery, while Ms. Rogers appears firmly entrenched in hers despite a tempestuous personal life.

‘A Classy User’

In certain lights, Ms. Rogers, with her long blond hair and cornflower blue eyes, looks like the cheerleader she was, before the people closest to her started dying from drugs and she developed a yearslong habit.

Video

“I never shot up; I always snorted,” she said in March at her home in Toronto, Ohio. “I called myself a classy user. I always made sure the kids were taken care of and the bills were paid first.”

In Steubenville, where Ms. Rogers grew up, drugs were everywhere, and almost everybody in her life was an addict: her mother and stepfather, who suffered fatal overdoses; her younger sisters; her best friend; and her boyfriend.

“That town is like poison,” she said. “I’ve probably lost close to 25 friends in the past 10 years.”

She was 21 and devastated by her mother’s death when she started seeking solace in the “nerve pills” her mother left behind. She became so dysfunctional that she lost custody of her first child to relatives, she said, then quit the pills, had a second child and sought help for back pain and fibromyalgia from a local doctor.

“I didn’t know he was a pill pusher at the time,” she said of the doctor, who was forced into retirement by the medical authorities in 2010. “He’d get people hooked and then kick them out to hunt for drugs on the street. And once you’re on the street, heroin is cheaper than pills and lasts longer. I loved it.”

Fearful she would end up killing herself, she found a Suboxone doctor she could afford and placed her first tablet under her tongue on Sept. 21, 2009. She has been clean since, she said proudly, despite traumas that tested her resolve.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In June 2012, her younger sister Tiffany was released from a court-mandated, abstinence-based rehabilitation program. She glowed, Ms. Rogers said. But returning to Steubenville, with temptation all around, proved too much for her. Ms. Rogers said, “She was crying and crying, bawling, saying, ‘Mandy, I’m craving.’ ”

Within a week, Tiffany was dead at 26 of “acute cardiac and respiratory distress due to opioid abuse and dependency,” her death certificate said.

“When I got that news, it was like with my mom,” Ms. Rogers said. “I just wanted to get in bed and stop trying.”

This time, though, she ran a household filled with the grief and need of her sister’s traumatized children and of her own. So she coped. Then her Suboxone doctor lost his license for excessive narcotics prescribing, and she had to forage for medication on the street until Dr. Clark’s office called in April with an unexpected opening.

Before Ms. Rogers’s first appointment with him, her 2-year-old played boisterously as she described feeling achy and nauseous. Her buprenorphine supply had run out and withdrawal had begun.

Photo

“If it wasn’t for my pain, I might tough it out,” she said. “But if I went off the Subs, I’d have to go back on painkillers, and I’m not going back down that road.”

A few hours later, clasping a heart pendant containing a vial of her sister’s ashes, she told Dr. Clark with tearful defiance that she would not let her children or her sister’s children follow in their parents’ and grandparents’ footsteps.

“I want to break that cycle,” she said.

A Basketball Star’s Fall

Angela Scotchel was a first-generation user, but her family clung to her as she self-destructed. For her mother, Connie, that included lying by her side on the nights she overdosed to make sure she did not stop breathing. “You couldn’t call an ambulance every single time,” Connie Scotchel said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Once a week, Mrs. Scotchel, a small-business owner with her husband, drives her daughter to Dr. Clark’s office outside Pittsburgh from Morgantown to ensure she gets there and uses their hard-earned cash to pay the doctor and buy the medication. At home, Mrs. Scotchel keeps the buprenorphine in a locked safe and dispenses it dose by dose.

In her daily uniform of basketball shorts, Angela looks more like the point guard who used to squat 300 pounds than the scrawny addict who worked for an escort service to pay for her substantial heroin habit.

“I would never do anything like that sober in a million years,” Angela said. “It was always men in their 40s, 50s and 60s, doctors and lawyers. Me being gay, it was especially disgusting. But I didn’t care as long as I got high.”

During her senior year of high school, playing a rival team in a packed gym, Angela stole a ball right before halftime, tore down the court, leapt for a layup and was smacked down by an opposing player. A hush blanketed the crowd. She had torn an anterior cruciate ligament. And though she recovered to start on a college team, she soon tore another ligament. After two surgeries, she felt she had lost her game. She also developed a taste for painkillers.

“A lot of people said I could go pro, play overseas,” she said. “But I gave it all up for drugs. Every time I used, I hated myself. I felt like I had let everybody down. I wanted to die.”

Over lasagna at their home, her parents talked about how bad things got: the times she disappeared, stole money from them, crashed cars, dangerously mixed heroin and Xanax. “I can’t count the number of times the police and the municipality walked up these steps,” Mrs. Scotchel said. “They assisted us with her overdoses time and time again. I’d have to follow her to the hospital. They’d shackle her. I’d be there all night waiting.”

Putting down her fork, Angela Scotchel cried. “I went from a superstar to this lowdown dirty addict,” she said.

She first tried Suboxone in Dr. Sullivan’s clinic, which is 10 minutes from her home. But it made her ill. She thought she might be allergic to the additive in Suboxone and asked for plain buprenorphine. The clinic said no. She dropped out.

Photo

“They lived by the white coat there,” her mother said, “while Dr. Clark is like one of the addicts.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Angela’s heroin dealer stocked plain buprenorphine, so she tried it. It made her feel great, not sick, she said, so she found a doctor willing to prescribe it last year. After six months, she and her mother arrived at his office to find federal agents in windbreakers.

“We watched the D.E.A. go in and out, and I said, ‘Angela, he’s busted,’ ” Mrs. Scotchel said. “Poor Angela was crying, thinking she was going to get sick again.”

They drove to Dr. Clark’s office, even though they knew his waiting list was long. Seeing how distraught Angela was, the doctor took her on. Early this year, Angela confessed to Dr. Clark that she was injecting her buprenorphine and mixing it with Xanax. He threatened to discharge her unless she stopped immediately. She did.

Mrs. Scotchel insisted that Dr. Clark see her daughter weekly, even though they are uninsured and it adds $3,000 to the yearly cost. The doctor gives her a $20 discount for each Narcotics Anonymous meeting she writes up in her journal.

During her daughter’s appointments, Mrs. Scotchel prefers to wait outside in her Subaru Forester, reading her Bible. “When I go in there, I gawk,” she said. “It should be a reality show.”

Policing Prescriptions

On a typical day last spring, Dr. Clark’s waiting room was a tangle of mothers and babies, interlocked girlfriends and boyfriends, bikers in leather and miners with their names on their shirts. As conversation snippets made clear, they were wrestling with eviction notices and restraining orders, insurance headaches and custody problems, parole officers and abusive spouses.

“If he comes back and says, ‘I’ve got a gun,’ I’ll load up my 12-gauge and it will be war! ” said a patient with purple-streaked hair, mascara dripping down her cheeks.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Another woman, juggling two small children, car keys and a lit cigarette, told the office manager she was broke.

“I just gave you guys my last money, and I’m out of diapers and don’t got gas,” she said. The manager returned $25 to her and told her to get home safely.

Employees wandered about in shorts and flip-flops, shouting, “Can I have a pee cup, please?” Many are recovering addicts themselves, like Thomas Walleck, who staffs the drug testing station, in front of the Wall of Lost Souls — a collage of celebrities who died of overdoses.

Photo

Mr. Walleck, gentle and raspy-voiced, said he led patients to believe that his tests were all powerful so they would be forthright.

“I’ll also tell them Doc has kicked out 180 people for dishonesty; I exaggerate,” he said. “But we got to know if they’re dirty for their own good. And if they admit it, it’s good for the bottom line, too. Because then they have to come back in two weeks, and that’s another $100.”

Monitoring patients is a delicate task. Dr. Clark summons them for surprise pill counts; a sign in his office offers “CASH and FREE VISIT rewards for information leading to the prosecution of those who are engaging in illegal activity regarding their Suboxone/Subutex prescriptions.”

Yet this policing clashes with the doctor’s fierce instinct to take his patients’ side and to confide in them about, say, his own reliance on antidepressants or his girlfriend’s routine of reading recovery books while eating licorice in bed.

Ms. Tombs, the girlfriend, gets frustrated with his penchant for giving his patients second, third and fourth chances. After he wrote a 30-day buprenorphine prescription for a young man who had admitted to dealing cocaine, Ms. Tombs angrily drew 1,000 stick figures to illustrate those on their waiting list.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“I had to sleep in the office for three days,” Dr. Clark said.

Usually the two are united against outside forces: the police who keep a too-watchful eye on their parking lot, the child protection workers who do not consider buprenorphine users drug free, the pharmacists who hassle their patients.

Dr. Clark has frequently felt under siege. He said a Reckitt Benckiser representative cautioned him that he was courting trouble with the authorities by prescribing generic buprenorphine and not Suboxone. Last year, Dr. Clark wrote the Drug Enforcement Administration to ask whether he was indeed tempting fate.

A senior D.E.A. official responded that “what drug to prescribe, what formulation, what quantity” was a doctor’s prerogative.

“It is unfortunate to learn that physicians in Western Pennsylvania have received incorrect information,” the official wrote, “and that such misinformation may potentially be inhibiting legitimate treatment.”

Feeling vindicated, Dr. Clark circulated the letter to pharmacists. But they were concerned, too, about the amounts he was prescribing. While within federal guidelines, his doses were on average twice those of Dr. Sullivan’s.

Many of his patients, having flooded their bodies with potent opioids for years, need high doses, Dr. Clark said. Indeed, he noted, studies have shown higher treatment retention rates for people getting higher doses.

Photo

Dr. Sullivan, though, spoke with frustration about “prescribing wars” in Pittsburgh between “entrepreneurial doctors” who were “naively or maliciously overprescribing.”

“Which is terrible,” he said. “Patients will take what they need and sell the rest. And once the medicine is on the street, for the D.E.A., it looks just like heroin: part of the problem. It blows back on all of us.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

A Structured Program

Early this year, Dr. Sullivan invited the United States attorney for the Northern District of West Virginia to visit his clinic, which with its mushroom-colored walls and white-coated professionals inspires a kind of institutional hush.

The federal prosecutor, William J. Ihlenfeld II, said he was eager to be “enlightened” given that West Virginia has the country’s second highest rate of overdose deaths and that a fifth of its babies have been exposed to drugs or alcohol in the womb.

“We’ve taken the approach in our office that we can’t just arrest our way out of the problems we’re facing with prescription drugs and heroin,” Mr. Ihlenfeld said. Before his visit, he felt “somewhat close-minded about how effective something like this can be” given that he had “heard a lot of people in law enforcement complain” about buprenorphine.

What he saw inspired him, though, he said: “People benefiting, from a coal miner to a restaurant owner to somebody who had had ankle surgery and got sucked into addiction.”

Dr. Sullivan’s program, a showcase for buprenorphine treatment, is as regimented as Dr. Clark’s is free form. New patients must attend one 90-minute session at the hospital plus four 12-step recovery meetings a week until they achieve 90 continuous days of sobriety, which usually takes half a year.

“There’s no data to support it, but people who go to meetings get better,” Dr. Sullivan said. “You can’t just give addicts a pill, pat them on the head and expect them to turn things around for themselves. These people live very complicated and messy lives.”

The new patients often inquire how long they will have to take buprenorphine. Once stable, though, they stop asking, realizing the answer is “maybe forever,” Dr. Sullivan said.

“Forever seems like a nice alternative to dead,” his patient Joellen Trippett, 48, said dryly.

At a staff meeting one day last spring, a case manager asked Dr. Sullivan how he wanted to handle a younger woman who was vigorously denying her pharmacy’s report that she had sought to fill a prescription for Oxycodone.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“I guess we’ll do an observed on her,” Dr. Sullivan said, referring to a monitored urine test.

“An observed?” the case manager said. “How about a discharge?”

Photo

Relapses are plentiful — 12 of 50 patients that day — but patients are expelled only if they lie. Confronting the woman in her therapy group, Dr. Sullivan said that “surreptitious use of opioids is not permitted” and dismissed her with a prescription for one week of Suboxone.

Unlike Dr. Clark, Dr. Sullivan does not meet with patients individually. It would not be cost-effective; more than half of the clinic’s patients are covered by Medicaid. Instead, he relies on therapists like Katie Chiasson, whose “advanced” group — those clean of drugs for at least a year and therefore required to come only monthly — was full of angst one day last spring.

Betty Jo Cumberledge, 47, announced in a trembling voice that she had just gotten a text from a fellow patient seeking to buy some of her Suboxone.

“Tell them that if they don’t stop, you will expose them in group,” Ms. Trippett said.

Ms. Chiasson asked how they could set boundaries.

“We all need to protect our medicine,” Ms. Trippett said. “It gets stolen out of our cars and homes.” She added that while selling Suboxone would be profitable, she did not want to return to the life she used to lead: “I don’t want to be a cheat. I don’t want to be a thief. I don’t want to be a liar.”

Chelsea Kennedy, 21, skinny and pregnant with her second child, reported that seven Suboxone dealers had been arrested in her town the previous week, and talked about her friend who gets a Suboxone prescription in Pittsburgh without even seeing the doctor — “and she’s selling, shooting, buying, running the streets.”

Ms. Cumberledge threw up her hands: “It’s these kind of people who are hurting us.”

A Disease’s Tentacles

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In late spring, Dr. Clark, still on probation, got an anxiety-provoking visit from a state medical investigator. Some pharmacists had complained about his prescribing practices, which led to the discovery that Dr. Clark had violated his 2010 suspension by continuing to write prescriptions for three buprenorphine patients he had not been able to place with other doctors.

When the investigator arrived, Mr. Smith was there. It made him nervous. He was already rattled, dealing with a job change and a custody battle, and did not want to contemplate losing Dr. Clark. “I’d be tossed right back out onto the street to buy drugs,” he said.

Addiction is a tenacious disease with tentacles — family problems, legal problems, financial problems — that do not disappear with sobriety. Recovery has its zigs and zags, which many of the patients interviewed experienced this summer and fall.

Angela Scotchel, overwhelmed by anxiety about her future, constantly craved and sometimes gave in to her desire for Xanax. She also heard the siren call of opiates even as she set out to engage in life-affirming pursuits like lifting weights, working for her parents, dating.

“This one dealer called me today and said he got some fire in,” she wrote in an email, referring to high-potency heroin. “I can’t get it out of my head. I’m not gonna act on it, though. Just threw me off. I needed to tell someone about it.”

Ms. Rogers rode a roller coaster of life changes. She broke up with her partner of 21 years and got involved with another man. She found a job as a cashier and lost it because of unreliable babysitters. She placed her late sister’s children in a therapeutic foster home. She reluctantly moved back to Steubenville for lower-priced housing. She became pregnant with her fourth child.

Dr. Clark, meanwhile, prepared himself for the possibility that he could lose his license. He aggressively recruited other doctors, figuring he could manage the clinic. He watched the movie “Lincoln” twice; it helped him “deal with ‘the negativity.’ ”

“I figure if Lincoln could fight for the rights of slaves during a time when many people thought this was practically criminal,” he wrote in an email, “the least I can do is continue to fight for the rights of a few people suffering from the disease and stigma of addiction in my little part of the world.”

At summer’s end, though, his probation was lifted. He hired two New Jersey doctors, one a recovering addict, to see patients by Skype. His business grew fatter while he grew leaner, shedding 20 pounds and his sense of dread.

“I feel like I got de-stigmatized,” Dr. Clark said. “Like now I got nothing to hide, nothing to fear, and there’s hope for me and hope for all my patients. But we’ll see.”

———

The Double-Edged Drug: The second of two articles examining the increasing use — and the successes and failures — of buprenorphine as an addiction treatment. Read the first part.