Topics: Conservatism, Police, Quentin Tarantino, News, Politics News

Over the past couple of weeks, conservatives — who love to call out liberal “political correctness” and denounce the left for attacking their freedom of speech — have shown just how little they actually care about the first amendment. The latest person to experience a barrage of what is commonly known as “conservative correctness” is the movie director Quentin Tarantino. After appearing at a march in New York City protesting police brutality, and saying a few words, police unions across the country and conservative politicians and pundits are calling him a “police hater” and claiming that there is a “war on police.” For a little perspective, lets look at Tarantino’s actual words:

“What am I doing here? I’m doing here because I am a human being with a conscience. And when I see murder, I cannot stand by and I have to call the murdered the murdered. And I have to call the murderers the murderers.”

Pretty clear words. The director is obviously referring to specific cases — Walter Scott, Tamir Rice, Eric Garner, etc. — where unarmed citizens were killed by police officers. (Or, in other words, murdered.) One has to be quite dishonest and conniving to take away from these words that Tarantino is a “cop-hater” or that he encourages any kind of violence against police officers. Of course, this is exactly how conservatives are interpreting it.

Texas Republican Ted Poe gave a slanderous summary of Tarantino’s words last week:

“He referred to police officers as murderers. His hateful rhetoric called for violence against law enforcement…He is on the side of the one’s who confront and are confronted by police. His comments encourage mischief and crimes against police officers. For the haters to justify lawlessness in response to perceived lawless acts by the police is idiotic.”

Poe, who was a leader of the birther movement and has previously attempted to force the families of deceased soldiers to have Christian ceremonies, regardless of their religion or lack thereof, has defamed Tarantino, as have other conservatives, in order to shut him up. As they have all too often in this country’s history, conservatives are manufacturing outrage and creating the idea of a “war on police” to crack down on those who speak out against police brutality. During WWI, in the midst of deafening jingoism, those who spoke out against war were labeled German sympathizers or anti-American Bolsheviks. In the McCarthy era, union members and government workers were labeled communist infiltrators and dissent was muted. Conservatives have always been at the front of the flag-waving brigade, creating fictitious stories and slandering dissenters as threats to the American way of life to stir up a panic among the masses, and today is no different.

Rather than addressing the problem of police brutality and the killings that are all too common, police unions and conservative commentators call any criticism “hateful rhetoric” and a “war on police,” and claim that critics called for violence when they did no such thing. This is conservative correctness at its finest; when faced with any kind of valid criticism, they make up a “war” or accuse critics of something they have never said, or simply say the critics are biased and cannot be trusted, i.e. the “liberal media.”