Better Business Bureau Serving Acadiana is alerting consumers to use caution when receiving prescription drug discount cards in the mail, as BBB records show they can possibly lead to identity theft.

Companies have been sending out prescription benefit cards during open enrollment for health insurance, causing some concerns for consumers about their legitimacy and how the consumers' information was obtained.

UniScript is one such company offering prescription benefit cards that has garnered BBB attention. The company sends out prescription discount cards under at least 17 different brands names and claims the cards can result in up to 75 percent discount on certain medicines.

BBB sets standards for ethical business behavior and monitors compliance.

The company has received an “F” rating. Reasons for the rating include 37 complaints filed against business, failure to respond to two complaints filed against business and the business has failed to resolve underlying cause(s) of a pattern of complaints.

The complete BBB Business Review can be found at: http://www.bbb.org/new-york-city/business-reviews/medical-dental-discount-plans/script-relief-llc-in-new-york-ny-130619 .

BBB files indicate a pattern of complaints concerning business practices/privacy policies in reference to company mailings sent to consumers. Complaints are coming into BBB alleging issues with receiving unsolicited mailings from Script Relief LLC or one of its other brand names containing prescription discount cards.

According to the company's website, residents receiving the card can take it to local pharmacies in order to receive an automatic discount on prescriptions without signing up for or paying for the service. Receipt of these cards is raising concern from consumers who are worried about potential identity theft, healthcare fraud, or that their personal information is being collected and distributed for unknown purposes.

Some consumers tell BBB that documentation received from the company mimics official government notices by using a brand name such as “United States Prescription Discounts,” along with terms phrases such as “Resident Code,” and a Washington D.C. return mailing address. These factors contribute to some consumers reporting that they thought this is an official program of the U.S. government or part of the Affordable Care Act.

BBB offers the following tips on pharmacy discount cards:

· Start with Trust®. Always check with BBB before doing business.

· If you are considering using a discount prescription or pharmacy card, be aware that the card is not insurance. Consumers should compare prices of medications before using the discount cards.

· Consumers should compare prices of medications before using the discount cards. Although the savings may be real with the discount card, they may be based on prices other than the ones offered by local pharmacies.

· Compare prices to get the best price for the medication. And if you're really struggling to pay for your medications, talk to your pharmacist about patient assistance programs that could provide even greater discounts.

· Guard personal and banking information. Never provide it to any one you do not know over the phone or on a computer.

BBB Serving Acadiana works for a trustworthy marketplace by maintaining standards for truthful advertising, investigating and exposing fraud against consumers and businesses.

Please contact BBB at bbb.org or (337) 981-3497 24 hours a day for information on businesses throughout North America.

BBB serves the parishes of Acadia, Evangeline, Iberia, Lafayette, St. Martin, St. Landry and Vermilion.