STEVEN TELES, an associate professor of political science at Johns Hopkins, has spent the past year or so trying to make the term "kludgeocracy" happen. I, for one, think this word is so fetch. What with Ted Cruz, John Boehner and the rest of the GOP throwing together legislative kludge after kludge in a doomed attempt to repeal the gigantic kludge that is Obamacare, "kludgeocracy" is one of the best lenses through which to look at the health-care battlefield. Mr Teles argues in National Affairs that the real battle in America over the next few decades isn't going to be about the size or scope of government; with a national universal health-insurance system in place, "the frontiers of the state [are] roughly fixed". Instead, the battle is about how to reduce government incoherence, to combat the exceptional kludginess of American governance:

A "kludge" is defined by the Oxford English Dictionary as "an ill-assorted collection of parts assembled to fulfill a particular purpose...a clumsy but temporarily effective solution to a particular fault or problem."... "Clumsy but temporarily effective" also describes much of American public policy today. To see policy kludges in action, one need look no further than the mind-numbing complexity of the health-care system (which even Obamacare's champions must admit has only grown more complicated under the new law, even if in their view the system is now also more just), or our byzantine system of funding higher education, or our bewildering federal-state system of governing everything from welfare to education to environmental regulation. America has chosen to govern itself through more indirect and incoherent policy mechanisms than can be found in any comparable country.

Mr Teles goes on to observe that the kludginess of American government, like the kludginess of much software, often stems from the demand of backward compatibility. If you need the new version of Microsoft Office to run on Windows 7 as well as Windows 8, you're going to insert lots of bumbling, inelegant code to make it work. Similarly, the greatest single source of complexity in Obamacare is the need to be backwards-compatible with America's established health-insurance system, both to safeguard the interests of existing insurance companies and to ensure that people who already have health insurance will not see any change. A universal health-insurance system built from scratch wouldn't have had separate Obamacare, Medicaid, and Medicare systems, it wouldn't have separated the tax breaks for employer-provided insurance from the subsidies for individual insurance, and so on; it would never have been this complex.

The incoherence here, in other words, is a result of America's bias towards conservatism (in the classical sense of the word). America has always been protective of the interests of existing stakeholders, and sceptical towards root-and-branch reform. There's tremendous value in such conservatism. It encourages investment by promising to safeguard the interests of investors rather than ripping them up with the next reform. It hedges against catastrophic mistakes by moving in a stepwise fashion and preserving fallback options in case the new system doesn't work. But it also leaves our systems uselessly complex, frustrating and opaque to the average citizen.

What can we do to reverse this? llya Somin makes the expected conservative argument: shrink the government. He thinks Mr Teles is wrong to claim that the size and scope of government are a separate issue from its incoherence.

Government has become complex and difficult to monitor in large part because it is trying to do so many complicated things. A government that spends some 40% of our GDP and regulates nearly every aspect of our lives can’t help but be complex and often incoherent. And it also can’t help but create numerous opportunities for well-organized interest groups to exploit the power of the state for their own benefit. Teles suggests that complexity and interest group power in American government is in large part caused by our system of federalism and separation of powers, which makes it more difficult to establish a single, coherent policy and creates many openings for interest groups. But there is little evidence to suggest that “kludgeocracy” is a lesser problem in more unitary democratic states, such as France, which is highly centralized and has a much weaker separation of powers (and stronger presidency) than the US does.

The connection Mr Somin makes here between amount of government spending and kludginess seems tenuous; the largest single spending programme in the US government budget, Social Security, is also extraordinarily simple and kludge-free. But more to the point, I'm pretty sure everyone I know who has experienced both the French and American health-insurance systems will testify that the French one is much less kludgey. Personally, I haven't experienced the French system, but I have experienced the Dutch system, which is formally quite similar to Obamacare: all private insurers, guaranteed issue, individual mandate. It's also much less kludgey than the American system. Or rather, it's less kludgey in terms of a crucial distinction Mr Somin fails to draw: it's simpler and more comprehensible towards the user. The Dutch health-insurance system is in fact extremely complex in terms of its inner workings, just as Obamacare is. But the Dutch health-insurance user can easily compare plans online, never has to worry about whether or not normal services will be covered, and moves seamlessly through the health-care system with their insurance card, rarely facing any need to claim reimbursement. The goal of Obamacare's health-insurance exchanges is to reduce the American system's kludginess towards the user in the same way.

And kludginess towards the user is 90% of the issue. The 1980s-era Macintosh OS surely contained far more lines of code than DOS, but for a user, the Mac was more intuitive and less confusing. It doesn't matter so much what's under the hood; the important thing is the part that faces the user.

Now I don't think anyone would argue that Dutch governance on the whole lacks kludginess; the Netherlands can be a maze of opaque bureaucratic overregulation. Mr Somin is right that in many cases, the best way to reduce kludginess is for the government to stay out altogether. He's also right that the vast majority of voters will never be sufficiently dedicated and informed to serve as a real check on the internal kludginess of governance. But voters do know whether or not systems are kludgey to use. Voters can effectively demand shorter lines and simpler procedures at the Department of Motor Vehicles. They can demand easier voter registration. And what we see is that, in fact, government systems often do become more comprehensible and easier to use under pressure from voters and other interest groups.

In fact, government intervention is often necessary in order to bring comprehensibility to a bewildering private landscape. How would investors have any idea how to evaluate the performance of corporations, if not for the mandatory reporting requirements and easy-to-access databases of the SEC? And bringing comprehensibility to a bewildering private marketplace is precisely the purpose of Obamacare's insurance exchanges. It's a task that private actors can't accomplish effectively, since the players have a vested interest in keeping their products incomprehensible; that's why existing, private online insurance quote websites don't work. Yet the effort to create a government-ordered marketplace has been plagued by precisely the outdated 20th-century ideological confusion Mr Teles decries, with opponents denouncing it as if it were a government takeover of health-care insurance provision.

Finally, it's worth noting what would happen if the government had simply set up a single-payer health insurance system, rather than Obamacare: It would have put more of the health-care system into government hands, and it would have been simpler and less kludgy. Countries like Canada and Britain, with respectively a single-payer health-insurance system and a government-run national health-care provision system, have what are from the user's perspective some of the world's least kludgy health-care systems. (They also have less choice than other countries, which is why the French and Dutch systems may have a better balance.) Curiously, Mr Somin cites Canada as a model of a country that has succeeded in shrinking government. And it's true, Canada's government spending used to be significantly higher than America's as a percentage of GDP, and is now about the same: a little under 40%. It's not likely that one can run a major advanced economy on much less. If our hopes of reducing kludginess rest on sharply shrinking the size of government, we may be in trouble. But I'm much more optimistic than Mr Somin about that.