With the 2016 primary election cycle underway in Maryland, state voting data for the county show a widening age gap in party alignment.

Demographic data provided by Maryland's Board of Elections show the major parties growing overall at roughly the same rate, both adding about 10,000 voters since the 2012 presidential primaries.

But over the past four years, the county Republican Party has grown largely due to older voters. Half of the GOP's newly registered voters in the county are 65 or older, and many of them are women.

On the Democratic side, it's nearly the exact opposite. Voters under 44 have driven the vast majority of the party's growth, with substantial gains in the 18-24 demographic.

The trend has one woman Republican leader worried the party could be losing ground. Meanwhile, Democrats talk proudly of the gains they've made in the past four years.

Nearly nine out of 10 newly registered Republicans in the county were 45 and older, the election board data show. The numbers do not reflect same-day voter registration, but give a good look at voter counts until April 5, the close of conventional voter registration.

While this is nothing new for Republicans, who nationally see stronger numbers among Baby Boomers and the Greatest Generation than with Gen Xers and Millennials, but the trend is even more well defined in Anne Arundel County.

Half of the growth is exclusively among residents 65 and up, who account for nearly 4,800 newly registered voters.

"In my opinion, the older (voters) are so focused on social issues that they're dividing the party," said Barbara Morsberger, former president of The Republican Women of Anne Arundel County. "That has become an issue in the Republican Party."

A 2015 Pew Research study predicted that Millennials, defined as those between 18 and 34, will be the largest voting bloc in this election cycle. Some 75.3 million people are in this group.

Morsberger said she has pushed to bring younger voters into the GOP. The 50-year-old Severna Park resident was the club's vice president before she stepped down this year. She is now the vice president of the Severna Park Republican Women's Club.

The Republican Party's core message could still ring true for younger voters, Morsberger said.

She pointed to how Republican Larry Hogan, in his successful gubernatorial campaign in 2014, focused on his acumen in dealing with private industry, stayed away from talking about gun rights and even pledged not to challenge Maryland's abortion laws.

At the time, a political scientist with St. Mary's College told The Baltimore Sun Democrats "know that in Maryland an area of weakness for Republicans has always been social issues."

That's why, Morsberger said, she spent more time focusing on economic issues when she campaigned for the party in Maryland and out of state with the National Federation of Republican Women.

"The younger women are worried about their budget," she said. "That's how we need to vote."

Today, the party's fastest growing demographic is women aged 65 and older.

Over the past four years, the group has made up one out of every four newly registered Republicans in the county.

The new president of the county's Republican women's club is Caroline Middleton, a 67-year-old Davidsonville resident.

Middleton said she has seen much of the party's growth "from Severna Park all the way to the southernmost part of the county."

She said the increase in Republican registration reflects what she has seen locally "because of the Affordable Care Act." More expensive prescriptions hit home with a population in which many are on fixed incomes, Middleton said.

She said she'd heard reports of the act pushing up the cost of prescriptions, which hits home with a population in which many are on fixed incomes.

"I would say even from 60 on (up) ... their premiums have gone up," Middleton said. "I heard stories of prescriptions: 'Well, this prescription cost me $400 a month.' I have one that costs me $200 a month."

This area, she said, continues to grow, with former Washington, D.C., and Annapolis workers moving out to more spacious homes in the county after they retire. "We've become a bedroom community."

Middleton said that while she was an early supporter of Jeb Bush, she and other women in her club are becoming more comfortable with the idea of voting for Donald Trump.

"Probably most of the women in my organization are leaning very much toward Trump because they're not comfortable with (Ted) Cruz," she said.

"Trump has really toned it down a bit," she said, hiring new campaign staffers and advisers with deeper ties to Washington.

An Anne Arundel Community College poll found that while Cruz, a U.S. senator from Texas, got more support among likely voters between 60 and 69, Trump has his strongest support among those over 70.

The youth push

Eight out of 10 newly registered Democratic voters in the county were between 18 and 44, the election board data show. There was a 23 percent rise in voters between 18 and 24.

Torrey Jacobsen, the vice chairman of the county's Democratic Central Committee, said the party has striven since 2014 to court younger voters.

"We definitely have pushed for the younger people to register to vote," Jacobsen said. "We're just starting to grow the party, and that's the easiest way."

Jacobsen said this "was not as much of a focus in years past." There have been more informal rallies and events to bring teenagers and young adults into the political process, he said.

"We're not sleeping anymore."

Steven Haughton, an 18-year-old from Odenton who attends Towson University, said he's going to return to Anne Arundel to vote for Bernie Sanders in the presidential primary.

"I actually come from a very conservative family," Haughton said. "Up until I was about 15 or 16 (years old), I really felt my political views shifting and changing."

While Morsberger believes the GOP could bring in people like Haughton on fiscal issues, he said those policies have driven him in the opposite direction.