The big revelation of this week has been how many political pundits have spent six years of the Obama administration opining furiously about the administration’s signature policy without making the slightest effort to understand how it works. They’re amazed and in denial at the suggestion that it has the same structure as Romneycare, which has been obvious and explicit all along; they are shocked, shocked to learn that it uses the mandate as an alternative to taxing and spending, which has always been completely obvious and open.

Let me expand on the second point, by referring to my own publicly available class notes from 2012. To explain Obamacare, I started with a schematic representation of how single-payer health care works:

Photo

Then I showed a schematic of ObamaRomneycare — it calls it that right on the slide — and showed that to a first approximation it delivered the same results, but with a much smaller amount of money flowing through the federal budget:

Photo

So the community rating/mandate/subsidy system is in effect a way of simulating single payer, but with lower headline taxing and spending.

It’s important to be clear what this does NOT mean — it doesn’t mean that there is a huge hidden burden on the public. For the most part, people buying health insurance would have bought it anyway. Under single-payer, they would have stopped doing that, and paid taxes instead; under the ACA, they continue to pay premiums but don’t pay the extra taxes. There’s no secret extra cost.

So, why was Obamacare set up this way? It’s mainly about politics, but nothing that should shock you. Partly it was about getting buy-in from the insurance industry; a switch to single payer would have destroyed a powerful industry, and realistically that wasn’t going to happen. Partly it was about leaving most people unaffected: employment-based coverage, which was the great bulk of private insurance, remained pretty much as it was. This made sense: even if single-payer would have been better than what people already had, it would have been very hard to sell them on such a big change. And yes, avoiding a huge increase in on-budget spending was a consideration, but not central.

The main point was to make the plan incremental, supplementing the existing structure rather than creating massive changes. And all of this was completely upfront; I know I wrote about it many times.

Look, I understand why the hired guns of the right have to act ignorant and profess outrage. But I really am shocked at centrists who apparently thought they could opine on the politics of health reform, year after year, without taking a hour or two to learn how the darn thing was supposed to work.