Masturbation remains taboo despite the hypersexual climate we live in. Whether you whack your weed or polish the pearl, you’ve probably been told it’s unhealthy and can even cause blindness and infertility. But can some self-love actually be good for your health? In AsapSCIENCE’s video, “Is Masturbation Good For You?” hosts Mitchell Moffit and Gregory Brown, alongside Rachel Salt, explain there are many benefits to reap from feeling ourselves, from reducing menstrual cramps to reducing cancer.

Most men and women masturbate in their lives, with 95 percent of men and around 72 percent of women admitting it, according to AsapSCIENCE. Contrary to popular belief, masturbation is not for single people. Seventy percent of men and 40 percent of women in relationships reported masturbating within the four weeks leading up to a recent survey. Self-love can boost the health of men and women, even lending a helping hand in the bedroom.

For example, endorphins released during an orgasm can decrease our perception of pain, especially reducing menstrual cramping for women. With the help of the hormone prolactin, which is linked to sleep, women are more likely to feel exhausted and get a good night’s sleep.

Meanwhile, men can also benefit from masturbating by reducing the occurrence of a cold and the risk of prostate cancer. A study found components of the immune system are activated during masturbation, increasing the number of white blood cells in the bloodstream. Male solo sessions might also help reduce prostate cancer due to high ejaculation frequency. Researchers hypothesize that increased ejaculation means potential carcinogenic secretions in the prostate excreted more regularly, decreasing their negative impact on the body.

Masturbation can do more than boost your health, it can also give you a helping hand in the bedroom. Stroking the penis or clitoris can activate the bulbocavernosis reflex, resulting in pelvic muscles contracting. This is basically a workout for your sex muscles. Masturbation can help maintain nitric oxide levels (known to diminish with age) in your blood throughout your life.

Click on the video above to learn more about masturbation’s physiological benefits.