Center fielder and pitcher led Indians' charge atop Front Range League

Loveland junior Abby Lukkes developed into an ace for the Indians with a 1.89 ERA and becoming the RH all-area softball pitcher of the year. ( Matthew Gaston / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Loveland's Tatum Rembao was a force to be reckoned with in every facet of the game for the Indians, earning her RH all-area softball player of the year honors. (Matthew Gaston / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

Mike Felton is a spoiled man.

Most softball coaches would give anything to have dominant pitcher or a terrific five-tool player leading their team. Loveland's coach has both.

In juniors Tatum Rembao and Abby Lukkes, Felton found two cornerstones for a resurgent Indian team, which won 17 games and came out tied atop a very difficult Front Range League at 10-1 (the only loss coming to Broomfield in which Lukkes didn't play).

They were an effective one-two punch and head this year's RH All-Area softball team as the player and pitcher of the year.

Joining them on the team are teammates Kassi Reiger and Braxton Morby; Mountain View's Kaley Barker, Lilly Meza and Tara Shadowen; Thompson Valley's Allie Mason, Janessa Rivera and Makenna McVay; and Berthoud's Taylor Armitage.

Rembao brings every raw athletic ability you could want to the diamond, starting in the box where she hit .561 in her junior campaign. As a leadoff hitter, she boasted a .600 on-base percentage and scored 42 runs (sixth-most in Colorado). But that's only scratching the surface.

She offers up serious power when needed, slugging .939 (fifth in the conference), 22 RBI and 18 of her 46 hits went for extra bases (four home runs).

"It was really fun contributing everywhere. I felt a lot more comfortable this year just in my stance and especially out in the field," she said. "It was easy because I had confidence in Abby and everyone on our team. That was the easiest part."

Advertisement

As great of a hitting performance as Rembao put forth this season, it was far from the most exciting thing to watch when she took the field. Her ability to cover ground in center field was second to none, to saying nothing of her arm.

"Tatum also backs it up on defense. We had a few fly balls with a girl on third and she throws them out at home and the (opposing) coach looks at me like 'we always score on that,'" Felton said. "The fact that she can put the two together, and hit for power, I thought she was the best player in the Front Range League and easily the best center fielder in the state."

Perhaps her most impressive work was done on the bases. She was impossible to throw out. No, seriously. Rembao swiped a perfect 43 of 43 bags, the second-best total in the state.

"I've had to put in a lot of work to do the slapping and stuff like that, but base running just comes naturally to me," she said. "I kind of have the green light to go whenever I want, which makes it fun, but challenging too because sometimes I do get the wrong read. It's just fun stealing and I'll take every base I can get."

While Rembao was doing everything, Lukkes wasn't all that far behind. It started in the circle, where she took a more confident approach and it showed.

Lukkes soaked in all she learned from her first year of varsity experience as a sophomore and churned it into a dominant season, finishing with a 1.89 ERA and 15 wins.

She also provided a big bat for LHS, hitting cleanup and finishing with a .493 average, with 26 RBI and a 1.253 OPS, including five home runs.

"Last year definitely prepared me for this season because I'd never experienced pitching varsity and I didn't know what to expect," Lukkes said. "Last year was definitely a learning experience for me and I think it helped quite a bit."

The biggest difference was something all young pitchers go through, and that's learning the art of the position. Felton saw her development from a mental side of the game that paid huge dividends.

Walks were down — cut in half actually — striking out just 63 batters in 122 innings, but controlling the strike zone from without and within.

"This year she learned not to try and throw every pitch for a strike. You don't have to get into the mode of throwing a strike every time and make them hit it," Felton said. "You have to throw balls on purpose. She started moving it around, starting mixing in the change.

"If we didn't have her, I don't know where we'd be. She got really competitive this year. I only see a great season coming as a senior."

Armitage — Berthoud's senior was a tremendous two-way player, controlling the game from the circle with 139 strikeouts (ninth in the state), while hitting .423 with 24 RBI.

Barker — It was a booming sophomore season for Mountain View's catcher, leading the Lions with a .556 average and an area-best 34 RBI.

Mason — Thompson Valley's senior was the ultimate definition of slugger, bringing an intimidating presence to the plate with a .466 average, 31 RBI and area-best 10 home runs.

McVay — The Eagles found a pleasant surprise from the freshman, who ended up as a key contributor, hitting .430, driving in 20 runs and scoring 27 herself.

Meza — Mountain View's pitcher did more than that, racking up 17 wins (fifth-most in the state), to go with a .450 average, 27 RBI and 36 runs.

Morby — Serving as Loveland's lone senior, she controlled the run game from behind the plate and chipped in with 11 extra-base hits a team-best 29 RBI.

Rivera — The cleanup spot suited Thompson Valley's junior nicely, driving in 24 RBI with a .425 average and 1.187 OPS.

Reiger — Just a sophomore, Loveland's left fielder was a steady performer at the plate with 24 RBI, 10 extra-base hits, .465 average and added seven stolen bases.

Shadowen — Mountain View had a true leadoff hitter in its junior as she batted .506 with 18 stolen bases, 40 runs and 20 RBI, including three homers.

Cris Tiller: 970-669-5050 ext. 511, tillerc@reporter-herald.com or twitter.com/cristiller