RICHMOND — Cornerback DeAngelo Hall was driven off the practice field on a cart Sunday morning after landing on his back.

Hall, 30, participated in the beginning of practice prior to leaving midway through. He was helped out of the cart by two Redskins employees and gimped into the practice facility for evaluation.

Coach Jay Gruden said Hall did a somersault during a red-zone drill and landed strangely on his back. He also said Hall could have walked off under his own power, but they drove him off as a precaution.

SEE ALSO: With a Redskins roster spot in his sights, rookie Ryan Grant is all business

Linebacker Brian Orakpo also sat out practice. He said his quad was “hurting a little bit.” Gruden called it a thigh contusion.

“A little caution,” Orakpo said. “I’m all right.”

Wide receivers Pierre Garçon and DeSean Jackson sat out of team drills as they continue to recover from hamstring strains. Gruden thinks Jackson is making progress and could be available for the Aug. 18 preseason game against the Cleveland Browns.

Free safety Ryan Clark and strong safety Phillip Thomas missed all of practice with strained hamstrings.

Defensive end Jason Hatcher, who returned to practice Saturday and was activated from the physically-unable-to-perform list, continued to be held out of team drills as his surgically repaired right knee strengthens.

Tight end Jordan Reed did not attend practice after missing Saturday’s session with a stomach virus. Running back Chris Thompson sat out with a sprained ankle and inside linebacker Darryl Sharpton has a high right ankle sprain. Gruden said Sharpton could be out for some time, though Sharpton disputed that idea.

“Yeah, it’s kind of one of those day-to-day things, so it shouldn’t be anything lengthy or anything that requires anything major,” said Sharpton, who injured the ankle in the preseason opener. “It’s just a matter of just healing up and just getting better every day.”

Running back Silas Redd sat out with a mild ankle sprain. Tight end Mike Caussin (knee) was out for the second consecutive day.

Running back Lache Seastrunk experienced inflammation in the arch of one of his feet, but said that he refused to leave practice.

“I just got to tough it out,” Seastrunk said. “It’s not killing me. I’m running. I’m still gonna do what I’ve got to do. I’ve got to show them I’m tough.”

That pleased Gruden.

“It’s important for these guys to play through these nagging injuries,” Gruden said. “If you can play through it, it’s great. He has played through a sore foot the past couple days.”