<p>University of Tennessee Medical Center on Thursday, July 14, 2011.</p>

By Kristi L. Nelson of the Knoxville News Sentinel

Next year, customers in BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee’s Network S health insurance plan will no longer be able to get in-network care from the University of Tennessee Medical Center and many of its affiliated doctors.

As of March 1, UTMC will be out-of-network for the plan, except for state employees covered under state of Tennessee health plans. UTMC is still in Networks P and E.

Network S was created as a plan with more-limited choices to make it more affordable than plans with more options, said Mary Danielson, corporate communications director for Chattanooga-based BCBS of Tennessee.

UTMC and Covenant Health were in-network for many years. In February, BCBS signed a five-year contract with Tennova Healthcare and its facilities to be in Network S. It notified UTMC in August that it would be excluded from Network S. Covenant facilities are still in Network S.

People with Network S plans can still use UTMC facilities and providers after March 1, but they may pay more. Health plans have negotiated reimbursement rates for “in-network” providers and may not pay as much to an out-of-network provider, which can then bill the patient for the difference.

A study released earlier this month by America’s Health Insurance Plans found out-of-network bills range from 118 percent to 1,382 percent higher than what the federal Medicare program pays for the same services. About 12 percent of bills are out-of-network.

But the Affordable Care Act of 2010 prevents insurers from requiring pre-approval or higher co-pays or coinsurance for emergency-room usage.

UTMC is the only Level I trauma hospital in the area. Danielson said BCBS will pay for emergency-room visits for emergencies — not for nonemergency care — at the same rate as if UTMC were in-network, although reimbursement varies by the care needed.

Steven Ross, senior vice president for strategic development for UTMC, said it’s unclear yet what reimbursement will be, and said that insurance contracts require the hospital to bill for patients for the balance — although it offers help working out payments.

Danielson said BCSC has about 95,000 Network S members in the Knoxville area. Around 3,300 have used UTMC facilities; and about 6,800 have used UTMC doctors and providers. They will receive letters about the change, she said.

A few patients in the middle of care for a serious illness at UTMC can file an appeal with BCBS to recognize their providers as in-network for the rest of their treatment. Ross said UTMC will help patients appeal or transition to covered providers.

Some physicians will stay in network. A list is at www.upasolutions.com.