Buy Photo Ohio Gov. John Kasich stands as the best candidate in the GOP presidential field. Shown, he speaks in Concord, N.H. (Photo: The Enquirer/Meg Vogel)Buy Photo

Ballots cast for presidential candidates Donald Trump or Ted Cruz are votes for drastic change – votes to break a system that isn’t working.

A vote for John Kasich is a vote for an optimistic vision of our country and a roll-up-your-sleeves approach to achieving it.

The Enquirer editorial board shares the widespread frustration with years of Washington gridlock. However, throwing a bomb into a traffic jam only makes it worse. What’s needed in the White House is a problem-solver – someone with the expertise and temperament to do the tedious work of democracy.

This board endorses Kasich for the Republican presidential nomination.

Ohioans know better than anyone that our governor is a pragmatic leader. He has chosen paths in areas such as education and health care that have made both the left and the right unhappy – paths that run down the middle, where compromise and the quiet majority live.

On the presidential trail, Kasich is the only candidate talking about a positive vision of the country – a vision of making America great together, not through exclusion and belittling of various groups.

“There are a lot of people out there yearning for somebody who’s going to bring America back, both at the leadership level and in the neighborhood, where we can begin to reignite the spirit of the United States of America,” he said in Thursday night’s debate, likely his best of the campaign. “And let’s stop fighting!”

Yes.

Even in Kasich’s own state, evangelicals and tea party members have not embraced him. But he is a real Republican. He opposes abortion and the Affordable Care Act. He wants lower taxes on businesses and less power for unions. He just signed a state bill defunding Planned Parenthood.

At the same time, Kasich has an executive’s understanding of the complexity of issues that some want to reduce to simplistic slogans. He realizes that national education standards in the form of Common Core are necessary to keep American workers competitive with the rest of the world.

He has said what many to his right don’t dare acknowledge about immigrants in the United States illegally: “It’s inconceivable that we would start to round up 10 or 11 million people and start to ship them out of the country,” he told Fox News. “The idea that we’re going to deport all these people is ludicrous.”

The Enquirer hasn’t agreed with Kasich on everything – for example, his way of restoring the state’s rainy day fund was to raid the pot of money that goes to local governments for basic services such as police and fire.

Still, he’s the obvious choice for the GOP nomination. He is a principled yet compassionate conservative with the right skill set. As a nine-term congressman, he helped balance the federal budget, and as governor he has led the Buckeye State through a difficult economic recovery.

It’s Kasich’s bad luck that he’s running for president in a year when voters are gravitating toward the extremes. But the editorial board remains hopeful that voters will reconsider whether Trump, in particular, reflects our values as Americans.

The billionaire political novice has tapped into a deep reservoir of anger and fear in this country in a way that pits us against each other and demonizes individual groups ranging from Muslims to women. Many citizens understandably feel insecure about an economic recovery that hasn’t brought prosperity and the United States’ place in an uncertain world.

But turning against each other isn’t the answer. Our strength is in our diversity. Trump’s big talk may inspire confidence in some people, but it doesn’t actually help anything. That takes work, and leadership.

Thursday night’s debate proved once again now is the time for serious conversations and strong leadership focused on our nation’s most important issues. We believe Kasich is best-equipped to confront those challenges with a pragmatic and proven leadership style that pulls the GOP nomination process from the hubris that has unfolded.

Read or Share this story: http://cin.ci/1p4NwbA