Advocate wants language opposed by park owner to be reinstated

If you go What: Boulder City Council meeting When: 6 p.m. Tuesday Where: Municipal Building, 1777 Broadway Info: There will be a public hearing and third vote on an ordinance to protect the sales of older mobile homes. To read the memo on the ordinance and to see the rest of the agenda, go to bit.ly/1CVhiVV.

An attorney hired by Boulder to represent the interests of mobile home park residents wants the City Council to reinstate language it removed from an ordinance designed to protect the sales of older such homes.

The ordinance would require that park owners allow mobile homes built before 1976 — the year the federal government adopted uniform standards for their construction — to stay as long as they are in "safe and sanitary condition."

The Boulder City Council has already voted twice to approve versions of the measure, but because the language has changed, it requires a third vote to be finalized. If the language is changed yet again, it would require a fourth vote or six votes to pass on an emergency basis.

The council will hold a public hearing and third reading on the ordinance Tuesday. Two versions are before the council, with Councilwoman Lisa Morzel asking that the language supported by resident advocates be used.

Advertisement

The council took up the issue at the urging of residents of the Vista Village Mobile Home Park, where park management told people who were selling older mobile homes they would have to be removed from the park at the time of sale. That rendered them virtually worthless, as no other mobile home parks in the area allow older homes to be brought into their parks. Pre-1976 mobile homes account for nearly half of the homes in Vista Village.

The ordinance had also stated that park owners could not require repairs as a condition of sale. That provision was added after residents said the management of Vista Village used arbitrary and excessive repair requests to get some residents to sell to brokers at a pittance. Residents said buyers and sellers should be able to negotiate over repairs, just as the owners of site-built homes do.

But at a meeting in June, City Council members dropped that provision from the ordinance at the request of representatives of Vista Village's owner, Harvey Miller, and the statewide mobile home park industry. They contended that without the ability to require repairs at the time of sale, the quality of housing in parks would be degraded.

"The way that it was originally worded was better and more helpful for the homeowners," said Ishbel Dickens, an attorney and executive director of the National Mobile Home Owners Association.

Dickens was hired by the city to meet with residents and see if any of their complaints about harassment and unfair treatment by park management constituted violations of the Colorado Mobile Home Park Act. Dickens said she is still assessing those complaints, and her first priority is the final adoption of an ordinance that protects residents.

She said all mobile homes, not just older ones, should be inspected by an independent third party, and then repairs or price reductions can be agreed on between buyer and seller.

"Having an inspection checklist for every home, regardless of age, provided by a third-party inspector makes more sense," she said. "That gets away from the subjectivity and the inherent imbalance of power. It removes any suggestion that it was based on anything other than the quality of the home."

Park owner drops opposition

Miller, the owner of Vista Village, has dropped his opposition to the ordinance, saying he didn't realize it would be so hard for those homes to be moved.

"I thought there were other spaces that would take those homes," he said. "As it turns out, there is not. Yes, I'm a landlord, but I do get the reality of it. It would have been unfair to those people to lose their equity. The flip side is that the reason there is no place to put those homes is that everyone believes those homes should go away."

In a letter to City Council members and park residents last week, Miller cited a long list of safety issues with pre-1976 homes, from insufficient load-bearing walls to lack of emergency exits to aluminum wiring, that led the federal government to adopt construction standards in the first place and have led some municipalities to bar such homes from being brought into their borders.

He also disputed allegations of harassment and said older homes that have been removed had significant problems, citing mold in one case and a home's use as a marijuana-growing operation in another.

Dickens said the pre-1976 homes that are still in use often have been upgraded and remodeled, just as older site-built homes have been. She said each home should be looked at individually.

"People live in them," she said. "Across the country, there are thousands of pre-1976 homes that people live in year after year after year. ... Just because it's old doesn't mean it's not a functioning home."

Home removals 'very worrisome'

Carol Siems, who bought a 1971 mobile home in Vista Village in 2013, said that in many cases it is not obvious from the outside which homes fall on which side of the cut-off. Many homes in the park have been expanded and remodeled, with hardwood flooring, picture windows and ceramic tile.

As she took a reporter on a tour of the park, she pointed out numerous house sites with new double-wides or recently vacated lots. Frequently, park residents don't know why a home was removed, which, she said, speaks to the need for new protections.

"What we've seen is a very arbitrary application," she said. "There are old homes where they have allowed people to stay and others where they do not. And from the outside it's very hard to tell what is going on, and it's very worrisome."

Miller said that as the park owner, he wants nothing to do with private transactions between buyers and sellers, but buyers should receive full disclosure of any problems with the home. He also said he needs to have a way to require repairs short of pursuing eviction.

"All we want to do is continue the existing policy of doing a for-sale inspection in which all homes must meet the current park standards," he said. "We can't always evict someone for a minor repair. Either the court won't go along with it or we might not want to go to the trouble. But to keep the park having high standards, we need a way to require repairs."

Marion McClain, park manager at Orchard Grove Mobile Home Park, said she also does an inspection and requires repairs for broken skirting and other issues at the time of sale, but if the new ordinance doesn't allow that practice to continue, she's not concerned about park standards deteriorating.

"Then that's up to the homeowner because they won't be able to sell it for as much (without the repairs)," she said.

McClain said she plans to support the ordinance because her residents have asked her to, even though the ownership there has not asked for any older homes to be pulled out.

"Anything to help my residents," she said. "I have '76 and lower in here, and they're maintained and they look great."

Erica Meltzer: 303-473-1355, meltzere@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/meltzere