I nearly had an aneurysm trying to get my new ACA coverage with CareFirst Blue Cross.

Which is a doubly bad thing as it wasn’t clear until a few minutes ago, and several heated phone calls with Blue Cross, whether my new Obamacare coverage was even going to start at all.

In a nutshell, providers like Blue Cross and Coventry are still leaving new Affordable Care Act registrants in limbo, risking their coverage.

It all began a few weeks ago when my insurer, CareFirst Blue Cross Blue Shield, informed me that they were going to raise the rates on my grandfathered pre-Obamacare insurance plan by around $100, or 14%.

The similar, and slightly better, ACA version of my plan was also around $700, but was only going up in price around $50, or 7%, so I finally decided to make the move and sign up for Obamacare.

(Keep in mind, ye Obamacare haters, that my premium was going up twice as much in a NON-Obamacare plan than it was in an Obamacare plan.)

So, I diligently went to the DC health exchange Web site on December 14, the day before the deadline for getting new coverage that would start on January 1s, and signed up.

The sign up process itself was relatively simple. I then got a confirmation page that claimed that I had not signed up on December 14th at around 745pm Chicago-time, but rather had signed up on December 15th at 1:43 in the morning. In other words, the DC ACA Web site was working on London time. More importantly, I was lucky I didn’t sign up on the evening of December 15, or the site apparently would have claimed I’d signed up on the 16th instead, I’d have missed the December 15th deadline, and my coverage wouldn’t have started until February or later.

Little did I know, it was an omen of things to come.

The site indicated that my status was “approved,” and that my coverage was starting on January 1, 2015, so all in all I was pretty happy.

Fast forward to today.

So, it’s December 29th, 2014, and my ACA coverage starts this coming Thursday. I’ve been checking the DC health exchange Web site diligently, waiting for an update, and it kept telling me that I was “approved,” that my enrollment was “in progress,” and that my new coverage would start “1/1/2015”.

But as that date is only a few days away, and I have yet to receive a bill in the mail, or online, from Blue Cross (meaning I also don’t have my new insurance card), I decided to phone up the ACA folks in DC to find out whether in fact I was going to have health insurance on January 1.

My first mistake was failing to take a Valium before calling.

After a 15 to 20 minute hold, I got a very nice woman who informed me that if I hadn’t received a bill yet from Care First, I need to call them asap.

So, I called Care First, sat through another turbo-hold, and got a young woman who wasn’t terribly informed about how any of this works, and then put me on hold, a lot, to go find out (which was fine). I was finally informed that yes, I did in fact need to pay for the new plan, pronto. So she walked me through how to do that.

(I had a flashback to when I had major surgery in a French hospital and it was like pulling teeth trying to find out how and when they wanted me to pay — they were content discharging me with no payment for services whatsoever (we’ll probably send you a bill later, the discharge-woman told me at the time). I strongly suspected that my current tale with Care First would not have such a happy ending.)

While the Care First woman had me on hold, I decided to log in to my Blue Cross Web account, just for thrills. And I discovered that I had a $1,400 bill waiting for me — for two plans covering me concurrently next month.

Apparently, not only did I need to figure out how to pay for the new plan myself, I also needed to take the initiative to cancel my old Blue Cross plan, even though Blue Cross knew that I couldn’t possibly want two plans for myself with the same company. (The cancellation can’t be done online — you need to print out a form and then mail it in, or fax it.) It might have been nice for the ACA site, or Blue Cross itself, to tell me all of this when I signed up for the new plan.

So, I paid the new bill, cancelled auto-pay on the old bill, and printed out the cancellation form.

Thinking all was well, I thought of another quick question right before the woman from Care First hung up. “I assume my coverage is starting January 1, right?”, I asked her.

If the payment arrives on time, yes — she told me.

Huh?

Wait, I told her, you’re telling me that because Blue Cross dropped the ball and didn’t process my new registration in time, even though I met the December 15th deadline for having new insurance by January 1, I might not have insurance on the 1st, even though I’m canceling my old plan on that date?

It “should” be processed by the 1st, she told me. It normally takes “2 to 3 days,” she said.

But three days puts us on January 1st itself, I said. If it doesn’t process until, say, that evening, or the next day, I don’t have insurance on January 1?

You’ll be fine, she said, it “should” process by then, repeating the same bogus assurance she’d given me a moment ago.

The Care First woman just wasn’t getting the math that 3 days from now means I could potentially not be covered on the 1st at all.

So, I asked to speak to a manager, and got promptly disconnected. To their credit, a manager called me back, and repeat the same line about the payment “should” go through by January 1, so I had nothing to worry about.

Having just had this discussion, I asked to talk to her manager, and got the supervisor. I explained to him all that had happened, from not hearing back at all from Care First after signing up for the new coverage online, to being double charged for two plans at once, to now being told I might not have insurance come January 1 at all.

Interestingly, I told the supervisor, this is what happened last year too. A lot of people weren’t processed in time, and the insurers were forced to start coverage on January 1, with the proviso that so long as the payments came in by January 10, people would be covered retroactively. I asked him to do the same for me, and to his credit he did.

Why does it have to be this hard?

Why was there nothing on the DC ACA Web site telling me that I had to call Blue Cross by a certain date or I wouldn’t be covered by January 1?

And why didn’t the site tell me that I had to physically cancel my old Blue Cross plan, even though my new plan was using the same subscriber number as my old plan, so Blue Cross was clearly aware of what I was doing?

Of course, it remains to be seen if Blue Cross cancels my old plan in time (they say it can take ten days), or whether they’re going to try to charge me for January too. So stay tuned on that one.

As I said at the start, my new ACA is basically better than my old grandfathered plan. It’s cheaper, for starters. And it has an annual cap on expenditures, which is pretty nifty should I ever have any catastrophic (or not even catastrophic) medical bills. So all of that is great.

But still, there’s really no excuse for Blue Cross (and Coventry, a friend tells me, who’s going through the exact same thing with them as I write) not having a working process in place to fulfill these registrations in a timely and transparent manner.

Had I not acted today, I could have had no plan — or potentially two plans — come January 1. And that’s not right. Not everyone is as tenacious as me. And they shouldn’t have to be.