Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share V12 Group tries to sell itself and Red Bank as a tech hub. MICHAEL L. DIAMOND/STAFF VIDEO

Buy Photo Software developers at V12 group in Red Bank. (Photo: BOB BIELK/STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER)Buy Photo

New Jersey's job market followed a record-setting March with a chilly April, the state Department of Labor and Workforce Development said Thursday in a report that showed the state's economy once again having trouble picking up momentum.

The monthly unemployment report was poor across the board. The state lost 7,500 jobs in April. Its unemployment rate rose from 4.4 percent to 4.7 percent. And for the first four months of the year combined, the state has lost 6,400 jobs, figures show.

"It's really been a roller coaster ride," said James W. Hughes, an economist at Rutgers University. "It's a head-scratcher to figure out why it's jumping around so much."

The monthly unemployment report is made up of a survey employers to measure the number of jobs and a survey of households to measure the jobless rate. The employment figures are preliminary and will be revised next month.

MORE: NJ job growth; slow might be 'new normal'

Big gains and losses

The state after spending more than a decade in the doldrums showed signs of life last year when it added 81,600 jobs. But the beginning of 2016 has included not only a record gain of 22,000 jobs in March, but also a steep loss of 15,700 jobs in January.

For perspective, the U.S. added 769,000 jobs the first four months of the year. Since New Jersey accounts for about 3 percent of the nation's labor force, it should have gained 23,070 jobs.

Economists caution not to put too much stock in monthly job reports. But it often seems like a futile plea. Policymakers and lobby groups are watching closely as they debate whether New Jersey should lower its estate tax, raise its gasoline tax, increase the minimum wage as high as $15 an hour, and find ways to close an $843 million budget deficit.

MORE: Would $15 minimum wage cost 70,000 NJ jobs?

In April, New Jersey lost 10,800 private-sector jobs and gained 3,300 public-sector jobs.

Sectors with the biggest gains: Trade, transportation and utilities added 1,300 jobs; manufacturing added 1,100 jobs; and financial activities added 800 jobs.

Sectors with the biggest losses: Professional and business services lost 6,700 jobs; and construction, information and leisure and hospitality all lost 1,800 jobs.

MORE: Here's how scammers try to rob job seekers

Still, employers are hiring at the Shore. Here's a look at three of them:

Aerotek in lakewood is looking for for people who can work with equipment such as drill presses. (Photo: Jupiterimages)

Aerotek, Lakewood

What the company does: Staffing agency

Job opening: Packing and maintenance mechanics for companies in the Lakewood Industrial Park.

Pay: $20 an hour and up.

Technical skills: Troubleshoot and repair equipment; perform changeovers, startups, shutdowns and some setups; use shop equipment such as drill press, lathes and hand and power tools; document adjustments to equipment; work with pneumatics and some hydraulics.

Other qualities: Good communication skills, teamwork, keep work station clean.

Where to find more information: Contact Robert Fiorani at rfiorani@aerotek.com.

MORE: Neptune's WorkWave move: Holmdel or Missouri?

Buy Photo Paul Chachko, CEO of V12 group in Red Bank, is looking to hire coders. (Photo: BOB BIELK/STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER)

V12 Group Inc., Red Bank

What the company does: It provides data that clients use to market to customers.

Job opening: Software coder with expertise in Hadoop, a programming language.

Technical skills: Should have at least a year of experience working with Hadoop, MapReduce, Hive/Pig and similar technology. Expertise in data architecture, database design, development and data modeling.

Other qualities: Can identify problems and effectively communicate solutions to co-workers. Should be passionate about technology, excel in a team and thrive for advancement.

Pay range: Declined to disclose.

For more information: Visit v12group.careerplug.com/jobs/117200/apps/new.​

Starbucks is hiring baristas at its Matawan location. (Photo: ASSOCIATED PRESS)

Starbucks, Matawan

What the company does: Coffee retailer

Job opening: Barista

Technical skills: Prepares food and beverages from standard recipes to customized orders.

Other qualities: Can keep a calm demeanor in a fast-paced environment; be on time to work; learn quickly; be part of a team; and have strong interpersonal skills.

Pay range: Declined to disclose.

For more information: Visit www.starbucks.com/careers/retail-careers.

MORE: UnitedHealthcare dumps NJ Obamacare plan

Michael L. Diamond; 732-643-4038; mdiamond@gannettnj.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/27F3dYH