EAST RUTHERFORD — After a dispute over potentially nightmarish traffic at the stalled American Dream project, NJ Transit, the Turnpike Authority, the Giants, the Jets and Triple Five — the American Dream project developer — hammered out an accord designed to ease congestion on game days at the adjacent Meadowlands Sports Complex, according to a report in The Record.

Triple Five's addition of indoor water parks to the project, formerly known as Xanadu, drew outcry from sports teams who warned of prohibitive congestion if the facility were to open on game days.

The memorandum of understanding between the parties, which was obtained by the newspaper, provides no compensation for teams and does not limit the hours of American Dream, but reconfigures traffic patterns, adds signage and buttresses train access to the site.

NJ Transit agrees — at its own, undisclosed expense — to increase its train capacity at the complex to at least 16,000 to 18,000 riders per 90 minutes as fans arrive for football games. NJ Transit can increase its capacity by providing double-decker cars, lengthening trains, improving boarding procedures and turnaround times at Secaucus Junction, and installing new signs and equipment at the MetLife Stadium train station

Buses would also be augmented, the newspaper reported. The No. 85 line in Hudson County, the 703 in Passaic County, and the No. 772 in Bergen County also would be expanded on game days during American Dream Meadowlands hours, the Record reported.

According to the memo, the Turnpike Authority has agreed to pay for improvements at Interchange 16W and re-route traffic on the turnpike near the start and finish of games to the eastern spur to ease football related congestion on the western spur.

Triple Five agreed to fund an increase in ramp capacity at various exits by upgrading pavement markings and adding signage at key locations that directs patrons to on-site parking or to off-site lots.

The 19-page memo stems from a 2012 lawsuit field by the Giants and Jets against Triple Five. The case was originally dismissed by Superior Court Judge Peter Doyne because the board of the sports authority — the landlord of the sports complex — had not approved the Triple Five plan. The teams refiled the case last summer after that approval was given.

The settlement was announced earlier this week.

RELATED COVERAGE



• Jets, Giants agree to drop American Dream lawsuit

• Giants and Jets go to court to stop American Dream project