He joined the Marines in 1981, according to his Facebook page. (Source: Facebook)

The suspect, pictured on the left, is identified as John Albert Campos Sr. The victim, on the right, was 52-year-old Frank Pascua. (Source: KPHO/KTVK)

The retired police officer who was gunned down outside a Valley casino on Christmas Eve "died a hero," according to a relative who witnessed the shooting.

Frank Pascua, 52, was shot and killed while being carjacked in the parking lot of Wild Horse Pass Casino, according to his brother.

"We just arrived and it just happened like that. It was so quick," Clarence Pascua told KBAK in Bakersfield, California.

The brothers were in a car with Frank's fiancee, Brenda, Thursday night when someone approached them.

"He pulled out a gun. [He said,] 'Get the [expletive] out of the car.' We got out of the car. I think my brother tried to grab it. It went off and then he got shot," Clarence Pascua said.

Gila River police said the retired Bakersfield police officer and former Marine was shot three times. He was pronounced dead at a hospital.

"I want to say he died a hero and I think he possibly saved Brenda and my life too," Clarence said.

On Saturday, investigators identified the suspected gunman as John Albert Campos Sr., 47, a convicted felon. He is considered armed and dangerous, according to Detective Robert Hawkes with the Gila River Police Department. He remains on the run.

"Anyone who sees him call 911 immediately," Hawkes said. "We need to get him off the streets as soon as possible.”

[MOBILE USERS: Click here to view the full news briefing]

After the shooting, Campos carjacked another person and drove away in a green Kia Soul, Hawkes said. That vehicle has since been recovered.

"We've checked multiple Valley locations that we believed he's at and it's believed he knows that we're after him at this point," Hawkes said.

Court records show Campos has previous convictions for robbery and kidnapping. Police said they don’t believe he knew the victim.

[RELATED: Search continues for man who shot, killed retired officer outside casino]

Frank Pascua owned a winter home in San Tan Valley.

"Very friendly guy," said neighbor Kelly Ankrom. "Always wanted to come over and watch football. That kind of stuff."

Another neighbor said Pascua was outgoing and sociable.

"They just moved in a little bit ago," Mike Houtz said. "Nice guy. Said we could use his pool whenever we wanted."

Pascua spent 6 1/2 years with the Bakersfield Police Department before retiring in 2003.

According to a Facebook page identified as belonging to Pascua, he joined the Marines in 1981.

Police initially identified 25-year-old Frank Rojas as a person of interest in the shooting. Before 3 p.m. Friday, however, police said that after receiving numerous tips they were able to clear Rojas as a person of interest in the homicide.

Gila River police said Rojas was initially flagged because his car was found near the casino and he has similar tattoos to the ones seen on the suspect in surveillance images. Rojas is the son-in-law of the prime suspect, Hawkes said.

Hawkes said police obtained a federal warrant for the suspect's arrest Friday night.

"We're working hand-in-hand with the U.S. Marshals Task Force," he added.

A gofundme account has been set up for the victim's family. The page is to help with expenses related to memorial services to be held in Bakersfield mid-January for Pascua's friends, family and fellow officers, as well as additional expenses incurred for transportation back to California.

Anyone with further information concerning this crime is asked to call Detective Vanessa Turner at 520-610-9000 or Detective Rob Hawkes at 520-610-2791.

Copyright 2015 KPHO/KTVK (KPHO Broadcasting Corporation). All rights reserved.