A survey measures a person's perception of his or her own financial distress or well-being.

Many pre-retirees want to work in retirement, but not full time. (Photo: Jamie Grill, Getty Images) Story Highlights The Personal Financial Wellness scale is an 8-question survey that measures financial well-being

The PFW scale is designed to be a wake-up call for Americans who are in 'serious debt'

The National Council on Aging also has an online tool for helping seniors measure their financial well-being

In the world of medicine, it's relatively easy to determine whether you're healthy or not. You simply need to know some numbers such as your blood pressure, heart rate, body mass index, cholesterol and the like.

But how might you tell whether you're in good financial shape or not? Is there the financial equivalent of self-service blood pressure machines that you find in pharmacies? Yes, though they are few and far between.

One such tool that you might consider comes from the Personal Finance Employee Education Foundation (PFEEF), a Washington, D.C.-based non-profit group focused on financial education in the workplace.

Established in 2004, that group's proprietary tool, the Personal Financial Wellness (PFW) scale, is an eight-question survey that measures a person's perception of his or her own financial distress or well-being. Whether you're retired or still saving for retirement, you can use the questions from the survey to determine your financial health. (See sample questions.)

According to Judith Cohart, the president of the PFEEF, scoring less than 5 is a clear sign that you're in terrible financial shape and that it's high time to consider some basic financial planning tools and techniques. "If you score below 5 for anything, you're in trouble," Cohart says. "There's no simple solution to this. And I don't see a different answer for a retiree."

To be fair, you wouldn't be alone if you're experiencing extreme financial distress. Nearly one in three Americans responding to the PFEEF's most recent survey were in the worst state of financial distress; they scored 1 to 4. By contrast, some 44% of survey respondents reported having an average amount of financial distress (they scored 5 or 6), and about one in four (24%) report having little financial distress (they scored 7 to 10). Of note, the average score in the PFEEF's latest survey was 5.2.

According to Cohart, the PFW scale is designed to be a wake-up call of sorts for those Americans who are in "serious debt" and those who have no money to spend on discretionary expenses. "You need to pay attention to how you spend your money," she said. "You don't need to buy a cup of coffee or buy lunch every day."

So, what should you do if you're in financial distress? First, track your monthly income and expenses, create a budget, create a schedule to pay down your debt, and establish an emergency fund.

You can do this this sort of basic money management for free at many websites such as Mint.com.

Another free resource: The National Council on Aging (NCOA) launched last year an online tool to help older adults improve their financial security. The EconomicCheckUp asks a series of questions to help seniors identify benefits and services that could save them money, cut expenses, get trained for and find a job, and better utilize their assets, the NCOA said in a release. Early tests in 25 communities found that seniors using the tool saved up to $3,000 a year on average, the NCOA said. Or you can become a member of a firm such as HelloWallet for $100 per year for three years.

If you don't mind paying $100 per year to become a member, HelloWallet has developed what it calls the Financial Wellness Score, which measure a person's financial stability and preparedness to handle short-term emergencies and to enjoy long-term financial success. According to HelloWallet, the service analyzes your saving, spending, and debt across your various financial accounts, and subsequently isolates pain points and then "motivates" you to improve on them.

Sample questions from the Personal Financial Wellness Scale:

1. How confident are you that you could find the money to pay for a financial emergency that costs about $1,000?

1-- no confidence, 4 is little confidence, 7 is some confidence, 10 is high confidence

2. How frequently do you find yourself just getting by financially and living paycheck to paycheck?

1 -- all the time, 4 is sometimes, 7 is rarely, 10 is never

3. How stressed do you feel about your personal finances in general?

1 -- overwhelming stress, 4 is high stress, 7 is low stress, 10 is no stress at all.

Tally the response that is most appropriate for your situation. Total your score and divide by three. The answer gives you a sense of your financial health. Any score below 5 would be cause for concern.

Robert Powell is editor of Retirement Weekly, a service of MarketWatch.com

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1jcQTHw