‘God’s Not Dead 2’ is adding another familiar name to its already impressive cast. Gov. Mike Huckabee has just announced he will be making an appearance, as himself, in the faith-based film.

Starring in the sequel are Melissa Joan Hart (“Sabrina: The Teenage Witch”), Jesse Metcalfe (“Dallas,” “Desperate Housewives”), Fred Thompson (“Law & Order”), Hayley Orrantia (“The Goldbergs”), Robin Givens (“Head of the Class”) and “Duck Dynasty’s” Sadie Robertson.

The original ‘God’s Not Dead’ struck a nerve with Christian audiences last year, finally offering them an option on marquees usually full of titles glorifying sex, drugs, etc. The second installment, produced by Pure Flix Entertainment, will follow a high school teacher’s battle to keep her job after voicing Christian ideals in her classroom.

The former governor of Arkansas and current presidential candidate said it was a “true honor” to make a cameo in the sequel in a recent statement:

“The breakout film GOD’S NOT DEAD struck a nerve with America depicting how believers are marginalized in the classroom, and "God’s Not Dead 2” is virtually ripped from the day’s headlines by showing how people of faith are now being criminalized and taken to the courtroom,” he said. “A few years ago, such a film would be fiction that could someday be true; now, GOD’S NOT DEAD 2 is the story that has become true for believers across the nation. GOD’S NOT DEAD 2 is a wake-up call.”

Defending religious freedom has no expiration date. Huckabee would be the first person to tell you that. This past summer, he was one of two presidential contenders, the other being Sen. Ted Cruz (R-TX), to stand by Kentucky Clerk Kim Davis’ side when she was jailed for refusing to issue same-sex marriage licenses. Meanwhile, in an effort to defend the right to life, Christian business owners have sued the Health and Human Services agency for forcing them to provide abortifacients to their employees.

Christians are no doubt glad to see Hollywood is also willing to stand for religious liberty.

Look for Gov. Huckabee and the rest of the cast when ‘God’s Not Dead 2’ arrives in theaters April 1, 2016.