Velveeta shortage just a small part of government's War on Cheese

Stores are reporting empty shelves where bricks of the luscious cheeselike substance were once stacked. And in homes across the country, mac is going un-cheesed, chili is being served "sin (without) queso" and hardworking Americans are being forced to dip their chips into bowls of mud or gravel.

By now, most of you have learned that America is facing a Velveeta shortage the likes of which we've never seen.

Draw your own conclusion: A shortage of Velveeta coincides with the beginning of Obamacare. (Scott Olson, Getty)

Officials from Kraft have been unable — or perhaps unwilling — to explain how the nation's strategic processed cheese product reserves have dwindled. But I think we all know the answer: Obamacare.

Let's look at the evidence. Obamacare officially went into effect Jan. 1. Before Jan. 1, nobody was talking about a Velveeta shortage.

But after Jan. 1? THAT'S when the Velveeta fountains ran dry.

This isn't speculation, folks, these are just facts.

I went to a searchable version of the Affordable Care Act and found no mentions of "Velveeta" or "cheese" or "ban on dips." Of course, there are also no references to "death panels" or "socialized medicine," so the absence of specific cheese-related language raises plenty of red flags.

And there's no way this stops with Velveeta. Soon the U.S. Department of Agriculture will be rationing Stilton and brie and, before you know it, our pizzas will be nothing but dough and sauce.

Since Barack Obama was first elected in 2008, I've been predicting that the government would eventually try to take away our cheese. That's why the second-story addition on my house is made entirely of Kraft singles and my basement is lined with a 10-inch layer of Gouda. (I also carry a concealed can of Cheez Whiz at all times.)

But I worry about those who aren't prepared. I don't want to see my fellow Americans fall victim to unclogged arteries or the notoriously violent Velveeta black market.

So it seems legal action is necessary. I'm sure some will say a lawsuit over cheese is just a frivolous attempt to cast Obamacare in a negative light, to which I say, "Yes. Yes, it is. What's it to you?"

It's not unlike a federal lawsuit filed last week by Sen. Ron Johnson of Wisconsin against the U.S. Office of Personnel Management, claiming the government should not help pay for the health care costs of members of Congress and their staffs.

You see, under the Affordable Care Act, lawmakers and their staffs have to go on the Obamacare health exchanges. The Office of Personnel Management, which oversees federal worker benefits, ruled that these government employees would continue to receive a subsidy to offset their health care costs.

Johnson believes that's unfair because regular Americans who go on the exchanges don't get that same subsidy.

I applaud his staunch opposition to this cheese-stealing law.

Granted, every person who has employee-provided health insurance receives a "subsidy," in that the employer pays a part of their health care costs. And what the federal workers in question are getting now is the same thing they got before Obamacare existed.