African governments are on pace to issue a record amount of bonds in 2014 for a second consecutive year, jumping at the opportunity to borrow at low interest rates to fund infrastructure and other spending.

But global investors’ appetite for African bonds may be testing its limit. Mutual funds and exchange-traded funds are net sellers of African bonds this month through August 13, on pace for the first monthly outflows since March, according to data provider EPFR Global. Bond prices in countries ranging from Gabon to Kenya to Ivory Coast have dipped after hitting near-record highs at the start of the month.

The pullback comes as money managers reassess their riskiest bets on the view that central-bank policy will draw cash back to the developed world. Stronger U.S. economic data this month reinforced expectations for an interest-rate increase from the Federal Reserve that could hit bond prices across the board next year. Similar fears sparked an exodus from U.S. corporate junk bonds and other risky holdings earlier in August.

Investors worry that a retreat from higher-yielding bond markets would hit African borrowers particularly hard. It would put pressure on countries struggling to plug budget and trade deficits, potentially slamming currencies and reducing economic growth. Small, illiquid debt markets also could seize up if investors try to cash out at once, essentially trapping money managers in losing trades. Analysts see a key test of investor comfort with African bonds coming up later this year in a planned sale by Ghana.

“If you look across some of these African countries, I don’t see a lot of value out there anymore,” said Jack Deino, head of emerging-markets debt with Invesco. “The problem is when things do get a little bit rocky. I don’t think a lot of people who are [buying] these deals are doing their homework.”

WSJ Frontiers Newsletter Enter your email to be notified when we launch the new WSJ Frontiers weekly email newsletter

Mr. Deino said the firm, which oversees $799 billion, had cut back on its holdings of some African sovereign bonds.

African governments are on pace to sell a record $12.2 billion in bonds to international investors this year, according to data provider Dealogic, topping last year’s record of $10.9 billion. The countries, many with long wish lists of infrastructure projects to serve their growing economies, have been eager to join in the tide of cheap global borrowing as major central banks hold interest rates at near-record lows.

Last month Senegal sold $500 million worth of 10-year bonds to investors at a yield of 6.25%. The country’s previous effort to tap international debt markets, in May 2011, came with a 9.125% yield. Yields fall when prices rise.

Senegal’s experience was typical of African countries that tapped international markets this year. Most sold 10-year bonds, but there were exceptions such as Kenya’s $2 billion split between five- and 10-year debt and Tunisia’s seven-year bond backed by the U.S. Agency for International Development. The bonds sold by Kenya, Ivory Coast and Senegal in the past two months—valued at a combined $3.25 billion in face value—collectively attracted about $17 billion in bids, according to bankers who worked on the deals.

However, investors may be getting more selective about the bonds they will buy. Investors during the two weeks ended August 13 pulled $29 million from bond funds that buy African bonds, according to EPFR Global. During the previous four months, investors had poured $351 million into such funds. The data doesn’t include South Africa, a longtime participant in global bond markets, since many investors view it as a different class of investment.

And in a move that gave investors pause, Ghana this month asked the International Monetary Fund for a bailout at the same time as it planned an international bond sale. Countries at the doorstep of the IMF, in Ghana’s case because of a ballooning budget deficit and plunging currency, typically aren’t able to tap international debt markets cheaply.

Kieran Curtis, a portfolio manager with Standard Life Investments, said his firm trimmed its holdings of Kenyan debt in recent weeks, fearing the selloff in U.S. junk bonds would spill over into other risky debt markets.

“We don’t want to get caught unawares” Mr. Curtis said.

Read the full story at wsj.com.