New Jersey should expect a strong surge of last-minute health insurance enrollments before the Feb. 15 sign-up deadline at HealthCare.gov, the online exchange where federal subsidies from the Affordable Care Act are helping consumers defray the cost of coverage, said Mario Schlosser, co-chief executive of Oscar Insurance.

Oscar is the newest entry into the health insurance market in New Jersey, and one of five companies selling health insurance in the state via HealthCare.gov.

But while Oscar is a New Jersey newcomer — the venture-funded startup launched last year in New York — selling health plans for the 2014 inaugural year of Obamacare. And that experience has Schlosser optimistic about New Jersey.

“Last year we doubled in the last two weeks, and we are seeing that kind of final fire now in the New Jersey market,” Schlosser said.

Indeed, New Jersey enrollment in 2015 health plans is trending well ahead of last year, according to the federal Department of Health and Human Services, which runs HealthCare.gov. HHS reported that through Jan. 30, 216,425 New Jerseyans had signed up for coverage on HealthCare.gov, compared with about 162,000 who bought plans for 2014.

Consumers have to purchase a new policy each year, but insurers automatically re-enroll customers who were covered in 2014 and didn’t return to HealthCare.gov and select a new plan during 2015 open enrollment, which started last Nov. 15 and ends midnight on Feb. 15.

Click here to subscribe to the NJBIZ e-newsletters

As a new competitor in the 2015 market, Oscar wants consumers to consider all the plans offered at HealthCare.gov, rather than re-enroll in their current plan.

And health care experts have also urged consumers to shop around, arguing they have a good chance of finding comparable coverage at a lower price if they investigate all the available choices at HealthCare.gov, where five New Jersey health insurers are selling plans: Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey; AmeriHealth New Jersey; Health Republic Insurance of New Jersey; UnitedHealthcare and Oscar.

HHS announced on Monday that, so far during the current open enrollment season, 83 percent of the New Jerseyans who have purchased a 2015 plan qualified for an average $309 a month per person in subsidies to defray the cost of coverage.

Schlosser said Oscar so far has enrolled thousands of customers in New Jersey; he won’t have a final tally until several days following the close of open enrollment Sunday.

And he said, that while New Jersey is seeing more signups this year than last year, there are still many who have yet to take advantage of the opportunity to get coverage under Obamacare.

“Now that we are in the second year of the ACA, the population that has yet to come in are those who have either put off signing up because they don’t see the value (of being covered) — or they don’t realize that, with the subsidies, you can get fantastic deals on health insurance,” Schlosser said.

The majority of consumers who bought a plan on HealthCare.gov for 2014 have opted to remain with their current insurance plan, rather than go back online and shop for 2015 coverage.

Schlosser said throughout the country, “The degree of switching between plans is relatively low; it seems like it’s in the single digits percentage-wise of people switching from one plan to another, or from one insurance company to a competitor,” despite the fact that health care experts repeatedly urge consumers to take the time to explore the new choices available to them at HealthCare.gov.

Schlosser agrees with that advice: “You can really get a much better deal for yourself if you go back to (HealthCare.gov) and find yourself a better plan.”

He said Oscar members have embraced the innovative health technology solutions the company is known for.

Oscar provides a free wristband activity monitor known as a “Misfit” to members, who earn cash rewards when they meet activity goals. Between New York and New Jersey, about 15,000 Oscar members have requested a Misfit:

“People really love it,” Schlosser said. “They just keep walking and keep earning dollars, and that is exactly how we intended for it to be.”

And Oscar has pioneered free “tele-visits,” where members can contact Oscar online or by phone and get a call back from a doctor, 24/7.

Since Oscar began doing tele-visits last year in New York, it has seen the impact it can have on improving the medical care of its members, Schlosser said. For example, Oscar has found that for members under age 35, 60 percent of bronchitis episodes can be handled via tele-visits: the doctors can diagnose the condition over the phone and prescribe the required medication.

“That is a tremendous shift of care that would otherwise have gone to the emergency room or an urgent care center,” Schlosser said.

Oscar is off to a good start in the New Jerseyans market, and Schlosser expects “A huge flood of calls on the last couple of days,” before open enrollment ends this Sunday.

Meanwhile, everyone at Oscar will be on the phones, handling that last-minute surge of customers — including the CEO: “I will be on the phone, answering questions and helping members get signed up.”

ALSO ON NJBIZ:

Look beyond the dollar sign when considering the best-paying jobs for women

Venture buys last buildable Giralda Farms land as Madison strives to encourage redevelopment

Pinnacle joins with Hampshire in developing new Montclair hotel