Eager to distinguish himself from his rivals in the GOP presidential field, former Arkansas Governor Mike Huckabee has opened a new front in the culture wars: a bag of toasted corn tortilla chips.

Mr Huckabee recently wrote an open letter to snack food giant Frito-Lay, to complain about its latest out-there flavour of Doritos. But his concern was not for, say, childhood obesity. Instead, he was protesting the company’s partnership with the It Gets Better project, which seeks to combat anti-LGBT bullying among young people.

Last month, Frito-Lay offered to send a bag of rainbow-coloured Doritos to anyone who donated $10 (£6.59) or more to the initiative. The firm’s marketing chief, Ram Krishnan, said the multi-hued comestibles demonstrated Frito-Lay’s “commitment toward equal rights for the LGBT community”.

Yet Mr Huckabee took issue with the scheme because, he said, the man who originated the It Gets Better project – sex columnist, podcaster and gay rights activist Dan Savage – had made “hateful and vulgar comments towards Christians.”

I don’t see how a gay bag of chips limits anyone else’s religious freedom

Mr Savage is known for his biting criticism of gay rights opponents, particularly those on the Christian Right and in the Republican Party. Mr Huckabee, a critic of same-sex marriage and an ordained Christian minister, wrote in the letter, dated 23 September: “It is beyond me to understand how a responsible corporation would think that partnering with someone who spews the vicious vitriol that Savage does would be worthy of your corporate contributions.”

Apparently unruffled, Frito-Lay continued the partnership, and the rainbow Doritos proved so popular that they sold out. Mr Huckabee has since joined forces with the American Renewal Project (ARP), a lobbying group of evangelical pastors, to demand a boycott of all snacks made by the company, which include not only Doritos, but also Cheetos, Fritos and Tostitos.

Frito-Lay offered to send a bag of its rainbow-coloured Doritos to anyone who donated $10 or more to the It Gets Better project

In a letter sent to more than 100,000 pastors, ARP founder David Lane wrote: “Tolerance for Frito-Lay’s brazen corporate support of hate speech by Dan Savage... is chipping away at the very character and soul of the American experience.”

Mr Savage said the Christian group’s response to the rainbow Doritos was analogous to their attitude to other gay rights issues. “I don’t see how a gay bag of chips limits anyone else’s religious freedom,” he told Time. “You don’t have a right to live in a world without bags of gay chips, and it doesn’t infringe on anyone’s private beliefs.”

Presidential prowess? Republican candidates in televised debate







10 show all Presidential prowess? Republican candidates in televised debate

















1/10 DONALD TRUMP - MOGUL AND PRESENTER Most likely to say: “You other guys are just a bunch of stiffs. I LOVE Mexico. I will make America great again!” Least likely to say: “I invited Hillary Clinton to my wedding. Which wedding? I forget. Pass me a comb.” Reuters

Least likely to say: “I invited Hillary Clinton to my wedding. Which wedding? I forget. Pass me a comb.” 2/10 JEB BUSH - FORMER FLORIDA GOVERNOR Most likely to say: “I am the only one with a proven record as a conservative governor.” He will always add at least one sentence in Spanish. Least likely to say: “I know how to campaign. The last time I ran for office? 2003.” Reuters

Least likely to say: “I know how to campaign. The last time I ran for office? 2003.” 3/10 SCOTT WALKER - GOVERNOR OF WISCONSIN Most likely to say: “I took on the unions and beat them. I won two elections in a Democrat state and a recall election too.” Least likely to say: “Put a guy without a college degree in the White House. I won’t tell you why I dropped out.” AP

Least likely to say: “Put a guy without a college degree in the White House. I won’t tell you why I dropped out.” 4/10 MIKE HUCKABEE - FORMER GOVERNOR OF ARKANSAS Most likely to say: “I will fight to end gay marriage and reverse the Supreme Court on Obamacare.” Least likely to say: “You over there, Fox News guy. Keep my seat warm in the studio, because I’ll be back soon!” AP Photo/John Locher, File

Least likely to say: “You over there, Fox News guy. Keep my seat warm in the studio, because I’ll be back soon!” 5/10 BEN CARSON - FORMER SURGEON Most likely to say: “Barack Obama has been a disaster for America and I am the only to have called him out consistently.” Least likely to say: “I have never ever held elected office or even run for one. But I have a great life story!” Getty Images

Least likely to say: “I have never ever held elected office or even run for one. But I have a great life story!” 6/10 TED CRUZ - SENATOR FROM TEXAS Most likely to say: “I will end big government and slash Washington to ribbons. Bye-bye gay marriage and Obamacare.” Least likely to say: “Hey, Mr Trump, if you want to play the ‘birther’ game again, I was born in Calgary, Canada!” EPA/SHAWN THEW

Least likely to say: “Hey, Mr Trump, if you want to play the ‘birther’ game again, I was born in Calgary, Canada!” 7/10 MARCO RUBIO - SENATOR FROM FLORIDA Most likely to say: “President Obama is wrong on Iran and wrong on Cuba. I won’t chum about with tyrants.” Least likely to say: “I look like a puppy, but bring it on Putin. Yes, Jeb Bush was my mentor. Who cares?” AP

Least likely to say: “I look like a puppy, but bring it on Putin. Yes, Jeb Bush was my mentor. Who cares?” 8/10 RAND PAUL - SENATOR FROM KENTUCKY Most likely to say: “Everyone else on this stage is war crazy. I will not send your children to fight pointless wars abroad.” Least likely to say: “Time Magazine called me ‘the most interesting man in politics’ last year. Why y’all yawning?” Reuters

Least likely to say: “Time Magazine called me ‘the most interesting man in politics’ last year. Why y’all yawning?” 9/10 CHRIS CHRISTIE - GOVERNOR OF NEW JERSEY Most likely to say: “I am a two-term governor in a Democrat state with a record of reaching across the aisle.” Least likely to say: “Any bridges in Cleveland I can foul up? Don’t ask me about New Jersey’s economy.” Getty Images

“Any bridges in Cleveland I can foul up? Don’t ask me about New Jersey’s economy.” 10/10 JOHN KASICH - GOVERNOR OF OHIO Most likely to say: “Welcome to my state, where jobs are growing and spending is down. You want to win Ohio, don’t you?” Least likely to say: “Don’t send me any foreign policy questions, because I’m more or less clueless. I might ramble. Again.” AP

This is not the first time Mr Savage has antagonised a Republican presidential hopeful. In 2003, he struck back at anti-gay comments by the then-US Senator for Pennsylvania, Rick Santorum, by introducing his surname to the lexicon of homosexual activity. Mr Savage invited his readers to choose an alternative meaning for the term “Santorum”, so anyone searching for the Senator’s name online would see its sexually graphic definition.

Of the Doritos controversy, Mr Savage said: “Michelle Obama’s probably going to call to thank me for getting so many right-wing nuts to give up snacks. Maybe they’ll be a little thinner.”

The First Lady has led a campaign against childhood obesity, winning praise from Mr Huckabee among others. While Governor of Arkansas, Mr Huckabee was clinically obese, and famously lost more than 110lbs after being diagnosed with Type-2 Diabetes.