Tradition continuing at most St. Vrain Valley schools

The ritual of students and families crowding around the front doors of the elementary school to see the class lists before school starts is on its way out in the Boulder Valley School District.

Most, if not all, Boulder Valley principals are now notifying parents directly of teacher assignments — and making students wait until the first day to find out who's in their class, unless they can find out through social media first.

Principals, who decide how to handle class-list distribution, said the change is about privacy and efficiency for parents used to getting information by email.

"We want to respect student privacy," said Jon Wolfer, principal at Boulder's Douglass Elementary. "We've emailed the teacher assignments for the last few years."

But Alden Perkins, a parent at Boulder's Foothill Elementary, said she's missing the annual fun of checking out the class lists outside the school with her kids and other families.

"As a parent, it is frustrating because both we and the kids would really like to know who's in their class and who's not," she said.

School starts this week for students in the Boulder Valley and St. Vrain Valley school districts, among others.

Class lists legally can be posted on doors under the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act because names are considered "directory information" — though parents can opt out.

Still, principals who stopped posting names said they worry about privacy and custody issues.

Advertisement

Samara Williams, principal at Broomfield's Emerald Elementary, emails teacher assignments directly to parents, and staff members call the 40 of the 350 families without email addresses.

Keeping class lists secret until the first day also may cut down on parental requests to switch classes to keep children with their friends — or away from a disruptive student.

But Boulder Valley principals said they don't get many requests for moves because they work hard with teachers to create lists that balance boys and girls, students of different ethnicities and different learning needs.

Williams said teachers also take student interactions into account, separating kids when there's a bad dynamic.

"The school knows the big picture," she said. "We have a thorough process."

In the neighboring St. Vrain Valley School District, most principals posted class lists outside their schools Friday afternoon.

Cyrus Weinberger, principal at Erie's Red Hawk Elementary, was posting the lists at school and also emailing parents the teacher assignments in case they couldn't get to school yet.

He said he doesn't see posting students' first and last names, with no other identifying information, as a privacy concern. Instead, he said, he likes that posting class lists gets students excited about the school year.

"It gives kids a feel for their classroom and gets them in the mindset for coming back to school," he said.

On the other side, Sean Corey, principal at Frederick's Legacy Elementary, said he's never been comfortable posting student names so publicly.

Years ago, he said, he mailed letters home with teacher assignments. Now, he provides the teacher assignments directly to parents through the private Infinite Campus system — and then watches "the social media frenzy."

He said parents and older students post on Facebook, text and call to share information, so there's still a sense of community.

The difference, he said, is "they're sharing it on their own terms."

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa