Chris Fleming

September 25, 2013

Editor’s note: For more on variations in uninsurance patterns and related policy issues, see “Plano, Texas Vs. Revere, Massachusetts: Sorting Through The Differing Causes And Durations Of Uninsurance,” a Health Affairs Blog post published today and written by John Graves, one of the coauthors of the Health Affairs Web First article discussed below.

A Health Affairs Web First study released today analyzes state variation in the percentage of adults losing health insurance and the lengths of their uninsured spells. Adults with public insurance were more likely to lose coverage than adults with private insurance. However, of the adults who did lose coverage, those who had been covered by public insurance typically spent less time uninsured than those who lost private coverage, report authors John A. Graves of Vanderbilt and Katherine Swartz of Harvard.

Graves and Swartz also found significant regional differences. For example, between 2009 and 2012, nearly 50 percent of the nonelderly adult population in Florida, Nevada, New Mexico, and Texas experienced an uninsured spell; in Massachusetts, only 18 percent went uninsured during the same period.

The authors’ findings demonstrate considerable turnover in the US health insurance system. Their results can help states tailor their enrollment outreach and retention efforts for the Affordable Care Act’s coverage expansions and can help policy makers anticipate whether coverage expansion programs in their state are more likely to be used as long-term insurance options or short-term stopovers for people between jobs.

“Differences in length of time without insurance are just as important as differences in income for policy makers,” write Graves and Swartz. “The current variations in the incidence and duration of new spells of being uninsured across states suggest that states will need to take different approaches to minimizing those spells and ensuring continuity in coverage. Some states will need to focus particularly on people who are eligible for the subsidized plans in the exchanges, while other states will need to concentrate instead on reducing the Medicaid churning that results from income fluctuations.”

The primary data source for the study was a panel of adults from the 2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation from the US Census Bureau, which provided longitudinal monthly information on health insurance between May 2008 and March 2012. Support for this study, which will also appear in Health Affairs’ October issue, was provided by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.