Topics: Currency, Global economy, Kremlin, oligarchs, Pat Buchanan, Paul Krugman, ruble, Rudy Giuliani, Russia, Russian Oligarchs, The New York Times, Vladimir Putin, Politics News

What’s happening in Russia? Amid a dramatic fall in the ruble’s value, the country’s central bank frantically moved this week to correct course, sharply raising interest rates and sparking renewed discussion of Russia’s economic woes. In his year-end news conference yesterday, President Vladimir Putin sought to steel Russians for a medium-term slump, warning that the economic turmoil could last two years.

In his New York Times column today, economist Paul Krugman sets out to explain how Russia arrived at this point. A variety of factors contributed to the ruble’s plunge, including Russia’s incursion into Ukraine, but the immediate cause of the collapse is the dramatic fall in global oil prices, largely owing to factors like increased shale production and reduced demand from countries like China. But, Krugman points out, the ruble’s value has plummeted far more dramatically than oil prices have decreased. What gives?

“The kind of crisis Russia now faces is what you get when bad things happen to an economy made vulnerable by large-scale borrowing from abroad — specifically, large-scale borrowing by the private sector, with the debts denominated in foreign currency, not the currency of the debtor country,” Krugman explains.

Unlike most countries that experience currency crises, however, Russia has been running trade surpluses, not trade deficits. So what’s with the “large-scale borrowing”? Here’s Krugman:

Well, you can answer the second question by walking around Mayfair in London, or (to a lesser extent) Manhattan’s Upper East Side, especially in the evening, and observing the long rows of luxury residences with no lights on — residences owned, as the line goes, by Chinese princelings, Middle Eastern sheikhs, and Russian oligarchs. Basically, Russia’s elite has been accumulating assets outside the country — luxury real estate is only the most visible example — and the flip side of that accumulation has been rising debt at home.