Xannon Zito, dressed in camouflage and armed with a plastic toy gun, didn’t hesitate when the mob of moaning, blood-thirsty zombies approached his position in downtown Denver.

The 5-year-old knows how to fight them. “Shoot them in the head,” he said.

“That’s my boy,” his father, Curtis, cheered.

The zombie-slaying duo found themselves outnumbered and surrounded by thousands of the walking dead Saturday at the 10th annual Zombie Crawl on the 16th Street Mall.

The event is billed as one of the largest in the nation, fueled in part by a pop-culture revival of the zombies as the ghoul of choice.

All types of bloodied zombies — nurses, brides, high school graduates and cartoon characters — invaded the city, creating a colorful horror movie mashup.

But to many, it didn’t seem fantastic at all.

“It seems like the real thing,” said Dustin Vogelbacher, stopping on the edge of the action.

The 14-year-old from Lakewood dressed as a survivor of the zombie apocalypse, as marked by the duct-taped “X” on his shirt and pants.

He held a toy gun and carried extra tape in case he needed to help treat any survivors who were attacked.

As he talked, he kept his head on a pivot, wary that a zombie would come rip off his “X,” a move that would declare him infected and dead.

“I’m just watching to see what they do,” he explained, glancing over his shoulder.

Lane Hines, a 36-year-old from Lakewood, came prepared to fight.

He serves as the captain of the local chapter of the (fictional) Special Tactics and Rescue Service, the team known as S.T.A.R.S. from the “Resident Evil” video game and movie franchise.

The former (real) Army soldier wore body armor loaded with ammunition magazines, sported an earpiece connected to a radio and carried a replica of a MP5 submachine gun.

His team of seven, dressed in similar gear, posed for pictures with zombies and onlookers.

“It’s very claustrophobic,” Hines said of being surrounded by the dead.

The Zitos and S.T.A.R.S. team managed to survive the ravaging horde. But others weren’t as fortunate.

Dan Krofta, 49, and Joshua Langley, 44, wore torn and bloodied military fatigues as they shuffled and groaned in the zombie parade.

“We used to be zombie warriors, and we kind of got taken over,” Langley said.

The two once dressed as the good guys, but now they like being zombies.

“It’s just a blast scaring the crap out of people,” Krofta said.

Jared Greenfield, a 22-year-old from Littleton who dressed in military fatigues, disagreed.

“It’s a self-fulfilling prophecy if you came as a zombie,” he said. “Those who want to survive come as survivors to practice.”