The spoof movie trailer for Snackpocalypse, a mockingly entertaining play on the popular apocalyptic movies Divergent and Hunger Games, uses unhealthy snacks as the end of public health school systems. First lady Michelle Obama, whose Let’s Move! campaign to fight childhood obesity has raised awareness and research funds for a healthier America, stars in the trailer as a healthy-movie-snack-loving viewer.

In the online video, actress Chloe Grace Moretz battles through a world of junk food zombies set in a high school full of advertisements and promotions for candy, chips, soda, and other unhealthy snack choices. Moretz is told she is different for snacking on carrots, as the school is divided into students who consume different types of unhealthy snacks, which mimics Divergent. The dramatized version of a world without healthy food options turns the entire student body into dysfunctional zombies, which is not far off from the truth of the current status of today’s society.

In the last 30 years, childhood obesity rates have more than doubled in children aged 6 to 11 years old, and quadrupled in adolescents aged 12 to 19 years old, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Not only are children inundated with unhealthy food options, they’re also eating more and exercising less. The exhaustion that sugar highs bring and high fat diets weigh students down with are only some of the fundamental problems with the food logistics of this country.

Michelle Obama’s "Let’s Move!" initiative was launched to solve the childhood obesity problem and invest in future generations for a healthier United States. The campaign helps to ensure that every family has access to healthy and affordable foods while children are encouraged by physical activity. Public school systems have improved thanks to years of improved concern and focus. While some of America’s school cafeterias are still serving unhealthy culinary creations filled with sugar, salt, saturated fats, and empty carbohydrates to keep a child going until the end of the day, other schools manage to invest in their students’ health.

Young people with growing bodies and brains need to be nurtured and developed with healthy options. Food can be the greatest medicine or the worst poison. Instead of poisoning the future of America, Snackpocalypse emphasizes the dangers and highlights the benefits of snack discretion.