By MICHAEL NORTON

BOSTON – Republican candidate for governor Charlie Baker blasted federal intrusion into the Massachusetts health care reform effort Tuesday, saying the state should continue to seek certain Affordable Care Act waivers, which have been rejected by the Obama administration.

Before Obamacare, Baker told Boston Herald Radio, Massachusetts was “seven years ahead of the federal government” on health care reform, with 97 percent of residents covered and a website that he said worked. “People could find the plans they wanted to find and buy them. And while the cost of health care here is high, people were making do and it seemed to be working,” he said.

Baker said he was disappointed by the waiver’s rejection after lawmakers from both major parties passed a law requiring Gov. Deval Patrick to seek one. In particular, Baker said, Massachusetts under Obamacare risks losing ground on small group and individual health insurance.

“I think we should go back to the feds every week if we have to until they give us a waiver,” Baker said. “What’s happening right now is people are losing coverage that they like, something they were told wouldn’t be happening to them. Many people will have a hard time getting coverage again because of the increase in price that comes with the rollout of the federal health care law and all the new rules associated with that and you have literally tens of thousands of people in Massachusetts right now with a piece of paper that says they have temporary coverage until the state figures out how to fix all the glitches and get it back together.

"I mean, I think this thing here in Massachusetts has been a real detriment to the progress and the success that we’ve made in health care reform. We’re going to end up with fewer people covered, higher cost of care and a much tougher time for individuals and small business trying to buy insurance,” Baker said.

In a report last month, the Blue Cross Blue Shield Foundation of Massachusetts listed as added benefits from the ACA: expanded coverage for low- and middle-income populations, fewer coverage restrictions and barriers, simpler eligibility and enrollment processes, additional consumer protections, updated insurance market rules, new payment and delivery system initiatives, and significant additional federal funding.

RELATED:

» Enrollment in Massachusetts health connector plans falls short due to website glitches