Dana Perino unloads on ‘poisonous,’ ‘abhorrent,’ ‘disaster for the country,’ Harry Reid

posted at 8:01 pm on April 22, 2015 by Noah Rothman

Outgoing Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid is a rather despicable figure, and he has determined to use his waning days in Washington to prove that fact.

A famous proponent of efficacy McCarthyism, a fan of making unfounded allegations against his colleagues, and the man history will remember as the figure who pulled the nuclear trigger in the U.S. Senate, Harry Reid won’t be missed by any but the most aggressive of liberals.

Few articulated Reid’s contemptible behavior better than Fox News host and former White House Press Sec. Dana Perino in a recent appearance on Hugh Hewitt’s radio program. While promoting her new book, And the Good News is…, Perino was asked to elaborate on her strong feelings about the Senate minority leader. She didn’t hold back.

Hewitt noted Reid’s latest offense to decorum occurred when he attempted to give Jeb Bush a compliment after the former Florida governor said that the GOP-led Senate should hastily confirm Loretta Lynch as the next attorney general. In the process of complementing Bush, Reid said that “he showed more common sense than his brother showed in eight years as President of the United States.”

“He can’t give a compliment,” Hewitt observed.

“He’s an absolutely poisonous figure in Washington, D.C., he’s been a disaster for the country,” Perino shot back. “I think a lot of the dysfunction in Washington can be traced directly to his doorstep.”

“I think it is very good for this country, for the world, and especially for the Democrats that Harry Reid is retiring,” she added. “I’ve never seen anything so abhorrent in my entire life as Harry Reid.”

Even while issuing a stern condemnation, it’s admirable that Perino still refuses to shed her trademark politeness. This was a rather mild condemnation of the Nevada Democrat who reiterated his demand that Mitt Romney release his tax returns in order to disprove his own spurious allegations as recently as two weeks ago.

But Perino does deserve kudos for dropping the Beltway pretense of cordiality even for those who do not deserve the courtesy.

Related Posts: