Noah Smith has another post on John Cochrane’s anti-Keynesian screed, in which he takes on various “structural” stories about the continuing weakness of the economy. As usual, Noah is very mild and eager to give the benefit of the doubt, although even so there’s not much there.

What I’d like to point out, however, is that there’s an overarching reason not to take any of this stuff seriously. All the anti-Keynesian stories (except “uncertainty”, which as Nick Rowe points out is actually a Keynesian story but doesn’t know it) are supply-side stories; Cochrane even puts scare quotes around the word “demand”. Basically, they’re claiming that unemployment benefits, or Obamacare, or regulations, or something, are reducing the willingness of workers and firms to produce stuff.

How would you test this? In a supply-constrained economy, the kind of monetary policy we’ve had, with the Fed quintupling the size of its balance sheet over a short period of time, would be highly inflationary. Indeed, just about everyone on the right has been predicting runaway inflation year after year.

Meanwhile, if you had a demand-side view, and considered the implications of the zero lower bound, you declared that nothing of the sort would happen:

Now, the equation [the quantity equation for money] still holds. But all that tells us is that any changes in the money supply are offset one for one by changes in velocity … Actually, in the real world it’s even worse, because central banks don’t control the money supply, they only control the monetary base. Broad aggregates like M2 may well be unaffected by what the central bank does: increase the monetary base, and all that happens is an offsetting fall in the money multiplier.

(I was arguing against neomonetarism, but the point holds more generally.)

Reality:

Photo

It seems to me that the failure of the inflation predicted by anti-Keynesians to appear — and the fact that this failure was predicted by Keynesian models — is a further big reason not to take what these people are saying seriously.