As previous plummeting gas prices start to creep back up, fleet managers for cities and counties will be hedging their bets on how to best keep the fleet running cheaply.

For the city of Longmont, the city of Boulder, Boulder County, the city of Lafayette and other area governments, fuel for everything from firetrucks to riding lawn mowers is purchased through the Colorado Multiple Assembly of Procurement Officials.

MAPO allows the government entities to band together and purchase items like gasoline, street sign materials or road salt in bulk - the local government version of a group discount.

MAPO negotiated a contract with Hill Petroleum for fuel. A city or county government has an option to go for a capped price with Hill for a period of time like six months or a year. When a government gets the capped price, they are protected from price spikes because it's agreed the gas won't exceed the cap.

The City of Boulder requested about 317,000 gallons, including unleaded and diesel fuel, for the year while the City of Longmont requested 370,000 gallons. Boulder County, minus the vehicles for the Sheriff's Offices, requests roughly 473,000 gallons a year.

Advertisement

Bruce Maysilles, the Longmont fleet manager and MAPO board member said that as MAPO negotiated with fuel vendors and settled on Hill Petroleum, he made sure to have a provision in the contract that allowed for something called downside protection. Longmont opted for downside protection while the city and county of Boulder did not.

Downside protection is like a type of insurance that allows a purchaser to pay an extra 4 percent per gallon of gas and if the market drops below that "do not exceed" price for the year, the purchaser can pay the week's market price. That market price is lower than what other consumers pay because the governments are exempt from about 40 cents worth of taxes per gallon.

"I want that protection and I'm willing to pay for it," Maysilles said.

Maysilles said on the purchase of 7,500 gallons of diesel fuel he buys for Longmont at a time, the locked in annual price is around $2.95 a gallon but downside protection allows him to buy it for $1.75 a gallon, saving $9,000. The savings on unleaded are similar for an 8,500-gallon load. Maysilles said unleaded is going for about $1.70 a gallon instead of the capped price of $2.65, saving Longmont about $8,075. Those savings are compounded every time Maysilles buys a tank-load of fuel.

Maysilles said the extra 4 percent a gallon as insurance seems worth it to him.

"A lot of municipalities opt not to do that but they are basically gambling," Maysilles said. "I don't like to do that."

Without the cap or downside protection, both Boulder County and the Boulder's gas buys ebb with the market but saves them 4 percent per gallon.

For the county, for example, the average so far in 2015, at $1.75 for unleaded and $2.22 for bio-diesel, is about $1 cheaper than last year's average price.

Karen Antonacci: 303-684-5226, antonaccik@times-call.com or twitter.com/ktonacci