Tina Fey and Amy Poehler proved again tonight they own the Golden Globes hosting job. Whoever takes over next year is already in trouble. The indomitable pair nailed jokes about Bill Cosby, South Korea and Sony/”The Interview” all within the first nine minutes of the show. See the monologue here.

Worst of the show: Ryan Seacrest’s selfie stick, Jeremy Renner’s “globes” gag at JLo’s expense.

Best of the show: lots of support for free speech, from Helen Mirren’s pin to George Clooney’s “Je suis Charlie” button.

Political messages were sprinkled through the night. In an impressive statement, Jeffrey Tambor, who won for his career defining role in “Transparent,” dedicated his win to the transgendered community. Maggie Gyllenhaal, who won for “The Honourable Woman,” attempted to strike a political stance but ended up raising questions when she cited the “wealth of roles for actual women in tv and film” as revolutionary. Really? It’s getting better, but Hollywood still needs to push for more.

Speaking of a politically daring bit, perceived by some as a misfire, prepare for a flood of commentary on Margaret Cho’s unavoidably racist impression of a North Korean. Was that running gag offensive, or funny? I’d say the later, a welcome jab at the censorship surrounding “The Interview.” But the Asian stereotype she played was stinging.

Like the Globes themselves, the monologue was biased toward the big screen: “Our apologies, television, we’re running out of time.” And yet, thank the Globes for being open to little-known, worthy shows — “Transparent” (Amazon) and “Jane the Virgin” (CW) got the recognition they deserve (and likely won’t get elsewhere). Both CW and Amazon are first-time award winners. That’s what makes the Golden Globes a fun night. Kevin Spacey’s win for “House of Cards” is big for Netflix, another sign that the game has changed. Entertainment is ever more platform agnostic. Viewers will go wherever to find good content.

For those keeping score, ultimately the only broadcast networks to win awards were CW (“Jane the Virgin”) and PBS (“Downton Abbey”). The big four broadcast networks’ combined Golden Globes 2015 tally: zero.