Wooster Community Hospital's Board of Governors approves first phase of expansion By STEVEN F. HUSZAIStaff Writer Published: January 24, 2015 4:00 AM

1 of 1 Photos | View More Photos

WOOSTER -- "It's a go."

That is all that needed to be said by Yvonne Williams at the Wooster Community Hospital's Board of Governors meeting when she introduced a resolution to begin the much-anticipated northward expansion project.

The resolution was to enter into a contract with Hasenstab Architects for pre-schematic and schematic designs for the hospital's latest project at its main campus, set to go to bid later this year. The contract fee to Hasenstab was approved at an amount not to exceed $275,000.

"It's a new year, and we're ready to build," Bill Sheron, CEO, told the Joint Township Hospital District board Wednesday evening, when discussing the project.

Armed with layout of the plans to the north, where the College Hills shopping plaza used to sit, plus a 3-D schematic of the new addition, Sheron explained the long-discussed building plans will provide ambulatory services.

See also - WCH board approves big purchases ]





[Article continues below]

The addition will connect with the current hospital building and include things like imaging and radiology services, as well as some cancer services.

Sheron told township trustees initially the hospital planned for a much larger expansion, possibly expanding the hospital's emergency rooms, before the Affordable Care Act led to them scrapping those plans and returning to the drawing board.

The current layout plans do not cover the entire shopping plaza space, but will be built out with enough space to build further north if needed down the road.

The hospital acquired the land where the College Hills plaza was located at the end of 2009.

See also - Hospital continues to fine-tune funds for expansion ]





Sheron noted he still gets asked what happened to Hop Hing Chinese Restaurant, the last tenant in College Hills.

"We don't have Hop Hing, but we have Subway," Sheron said, of the newly opened Subway inside the hospital.

Something that was not included in the preliminary schematics was a road or some sort of boulevard connecting the hospital to Portage Road. This is something Sheron said he asked the city to consider as the area continues to be developed.

The hospital board Wednesday also approved resolutions to bid and award its elevator modernization project on the 1950s "blue" elevators, to purchase a new ultrasound system, purchase a new EEG system for the pulmonary/neurology department and purchase a new nerve monitoring system and operating table.

Reporter Steve Huszai can be reached at 330-287-1645 or shuszai@the-daily-record.com. He is @GeneralSmithie on Twitter.

See also - Healthy move ]





Rate this article

Do you want to leave a comment? Please Log In or Register to comment.