BIRMINGHAM, Alabama – Atherotech Diagnostics Lab announced today it is teaming up with Johns Hopkins Ciccarone Center for the Prevention of Heart Disease to better treat and prevent the leading cause of death in the U.S.

Birmingham-based Atherotech has spent years testing and compiling data on lipids and cholesterol – one of the leading contributors of heart disease. That information is housed in Atherotech’s aptly titled “Very Large Database of Lipids” or VLDL for short. Johns Hopkins’ world-renown cardiac research will use that information to try to apply it to better clinical practices for physicians on the front lines battling cardiovascular disease.

“This unique collaboration initiative joins Atherotech Diagnostics Lab’s valuable VLDL dataset with Johns Hopkins’ tremendous human capital and expertise,” Michael Mullen, Atherotech chief executive, said in a release. “With more than 8 million individual samples of multiple cardiovascular disease biomarkers, our VLDL database represents one of the largest diagnostic testing databases of its kind in the world, capable of advancing heart disease research and improving patient treatment and outcomes.”

In an interview, Mullen said Atherotech’s VLDL along with the multiple positions, disciplines and profiles from Johns Hopkins will go a long way in identifying the 50 percent of those at risk of heart disease who don’t realize it through current basic testing techniques.

A study in the August 20 Journal of the American College of Cardiology compared the accuracy of calculated LDL cholesterol measurement using the traditional basic lipid panel against the directly measured LDL cholesterol using Atherotech’s VAP Lipid Panel. The test determined that nearly 60 percent of at-risk patients with basic lipid panel LDL below 70 mg/dL and triglycerides over 200 were misclassified. The study examined more than 1.3 million VLDL samples and is the largest of its kind to evaluate basic lipid panel estimation of LDLc relative to Atherotech’s direct measurement.

Atherotech’s proprietary VAP Lipid Panel consistently assesses and measures risks of LDL, HDL and subclasses; triglyceride-rich risk in remnant lipoproteins; and hereditary risk markers — all of which are represented in the VLDL.

Atherotech’s current VLDL has 1.4 million data points representing unique individuals. Its next data harvest will give the VLDL more than 3 million data points.

Dr. Steven R. Jones of the Johns Hopkins Ciccarone Center for the Prevention of Heart Disease, said Johns Hopkins and Atherotech are both focused on not just diagnosing, but preventing heart disease.

"Atherotech’s organization is committed to a comprehensive yet practical lipid profile, and our research group’s emphasis is on high-impact, clinically relevant research,” Jones said.

Mullen said more studies will be published in other journals that bolster Atherotech’s work. He said the ability to identify at-risk patients with an inexpensive test will be a critical tool as the Affordable Care Act goes into effect.

Up until now, the collaboration has “all been in the interest of science,” Mullen said. But as the relationship matures, Mullen said there will likely be a foundation formed to seek National Institutes of Health funding to expand the research and heart disease prevention.