LOS ANGELES--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Health Net, Inc. today announced that Andy Ortiz has been named senior vice president, Organization Effectiveness and chief people officer, effective June 29, 2015.

“Andy was a valued member of our leadership team from 2002 to 2008, and we are delighted to welcome him back to Health Net,” said Jay Gellert, president and chief executive officer of Health Net. “Andy will be instrumental in helping us continue focusing on the development of our associates and making Health Net a great place to work.”

Most recently, Ortiz was chief human resources officer at Western Dental Services/Brident, where he led all aspects of human resources, including workforce planning, recruitment, compensation and benefits, performance management, employee relations and engagement, change management, and employee and leadership development.

Ortiz received a master’s degree in organizational leadership from Woodbury University and a bachelor’s degree in speech communication from California State University, Fullerton. He holds a certified executive coach certificate from the Hudson Institute of Coaching and he is a member of the International Coaching Federation.

Ortiz will succeed Karin Mayhew, who is retiring after 16 years at Health Net.

“Karin’s positive impact on Health Net is enormous,” said Gellert. “We are deeply indebted to her for helping us successfully navigate a period of tremendous change in the world of health plans.”

About Health Net

Health Net, Inc. (NYSE:HNT) is a publicly traded managed care organization that delivers managed health care services through health plans and government-sponsored managed care plans. Its mission is to help people be healthy, secure and comfortable. Health Net provides and administers health benefits to approximately 6.0 million individuals across the country through group, individual, Medicare (including the Medicare prescription drug benefit commonly referred to as “Part D”), Medicaid, dual eligible, U.S. Department of Defense, including TRICARE, and U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs programs. Health Net also offers behavioral health, substance abuse and employee assistance programs, and managed health care products related to prescription drugs.

For more information on Health Net, Inc., please visit Health Net’s website at www.healthnet.com.

Cautionary Statements

The Company and its representatives may from time to time make written and oral forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act (“PSLRA”) of 1995, including statements in this and other press releases, in presentations, filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”), reports to stockholders, and in meetings with investors and analysts. All statements in this press release, other than statements of historical information provided herein, may be deemed to be forward-looking statements and as such are intended to be covered by the safe harbor for “forward-looking statements” provided by PSLRA. These statements are based on management’s analysis, judgment, belief and expectation only as of the date hereof, and are subject to changes in circumstances and a number of risks and uncertainties. Without limiting the foregoing, statements including the words “believes,” “anticipates,” “plans,” “expects,” “may,” “should,” “could,” “estimate,” “intend,” “feels,” “will,” “projects” and other similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Actual results could differ materially from those expressed in, or implied or projected by the forward-looking information and statements due to, among other things, health care reform and other increased government participation in and taxation or regulation of health benefits and managed care operations, including but not limited to the implementation of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010 (collectively, the “ACA”) and related fees, assessments and taxes; the Company’s ability to successfully participate in California’s Coordinated Care Initiative, which is subject to a number of risks inherent in untested health care initiatives and requires the Company to adequately predict the costs of providing benefits to individuals that are generally among the most chronically ill within each of Medicare and Medi-Cal and implement delivery systems for benefits with which the Company has limited operating experience; the Company’s ability to successfully participate in the federal and state health insurance exchanges under the ACA, which involve uncertainties related to the mix and volume of business that could negatively impact the adequacy of the Company’s premium rates and may not be sufficiently offset by the risk apportionment provisions of the ACA; increasing health care costs, including but not limited to costs associated with the introduction of new treatments or therapies; the Company’s ability to reduce administrative expenses while maintaining targeted levels of service and operating performance, including through the Company’s master services agreement with a subsidiary of Cognizant Technology Solutions Corporation (“Cognizant”); whether the Company receives required regulatory approvals for Cognizant’s provision of services to the Company and any conditions imposed in order to obtain such regulatory approvals; the Company’s ability to recognize the intended cost savings and other intended benefits of the Cognizant transaction; the risk that Cognizant may not perform contracted functions and services in a timely, satisfactory and compliant manner; the recompetition of the company’s T-3 contract for the TRICARE North region; negative prior period claims reserve developments; rate cuts and other risks and uncertainties affecting the Company’s Medicare or Medicaid businesses; trends in medical care ratios; membership declines or negative changes in the Company’s health care product mix; unexpected utilization patterns or unexpectedly severe or widespread illnesses; failure to effectively oversee the Company’s third-party vendors; noncompliance by the Company or the Company’s business associates with any privacy laws or any security breach involving the misappropriation, loss or other unauthorized use or disclosure of confidential information; the timing of collections on amounts receivable from state and federal governments and agencies; litigation costs; regulatory issues with federal and state agencies including, but not limited to, the California Department of Managed Health Care and Department of Health Care Services, the Arizona Health Care Cost Containment System, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, the Office of Civil Rights of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and state departments of insurance; operational issues; changes in economic or market conditions; investment portfolio impairment charges; volatility in the financial markets; and general business and market conditions. Additional factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those reflected in the forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, the risks discussed in the “Risk Factors” section included within the Company’s most recent Annual Report on Form 10-K and subsequent Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed with the SEC and the other risks discussed in the Company’s filings with the SEC. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements. Except as may be required by law, the Company undertakes no obligation to address or publicly update any forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances that arise after the date of this press release.