Regional poverty by the numbers 26 percent: Poverty rate for working residents without a high school diploma 304,336: Black residents living in poverty – highest by ethnicity, percentage-wise 3.2 million: Number of total residents living in poverty $25,668: Per capita income: $1,650 below the national average Source: economy.scag.ca.gov

Redlands-based economist John Husing issued a dire warning Wednesday, as elected officials from across Southern California pledged to reignite Lyndon Johnson’s war on poverty:

“If we do not solve this problem, we are not going to want to live in Southern California. The communities are going to become unhinged.”

Husing is one of several economists who looked at findings from the 2012 American Community Survey and state Employment Development Department to find out where poverty is concentrated in Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, Ventura, San Bernardino and Imperial counties.

RELATED: Dollars don't stretch as far in Southern California

Some of the results were alarming, said economist Wallace Walrod, who advises the Orange County Business Council.

They found disparities among the percentage of residents in poverty across counties: 19.1 percent in Los Angeles, 12.9 in Orange and 20.4 in Riverside. But Husing and others said the flow of goods and services is so closely integrated that poverty is a regional, not local, issue.

They also found:

Poverty is on the rise

Four decades ago, the region boasted poverty levels below California and national averages. It has flipped: 17.8 percent of residents are living in poverty compared to 17 percent statewide and 15.9 percent nationwide. Husing attributed the shift to changing demographics, including an upswing in the Hispanic population, and stringent state environmental regulations hampering manufacturing and construction.

Compared with the 1970s, fewer adults earn high school diplomas

Also in 1970, 70.4 percent of adults in the region had a high school diploma or less, more than 8 percentage points better than the national average. By 2012, that figure was 42.3 percent, trailing the national average of 41.7 percent.

Economists said this is important because educational “attainment” is considered a root cause of poverty. The counties with the highest poverty rates, Imperial and San Bernardino, also have the highest percentage of adults ages 25 and older with a high school education or less. The counties with the lowest poverty rates, Orange and Ventura, have the lowest percentage.

One in four children are in poverty

In 2012, more than 25 percent of youths under age 17 lived below the poverty line, from 17.7 percent in Ventura County to 32.8 percent in Imperial County.

The sectors that have grown the fastest since the recession are low-paying

Retail, consumer services, dining, hospitality and agriculture: occupations that have few entry level requirements, are projected to produce 578,721 new jobs by 2020. But their 2013 median pay is only $29,039.

Five job sectors show promise for workers without bachelor’s degrees

Workers with a high school diploma or less could earn decent wages in construction; logistics; finance, insurance and real estate; manufacturing; and health care. The California Employment Development Department forecasts new jobs from 13,600 in manufacturing to 143,100 in logistics. The yearly median incomes range from $44,291 in logistics to $57,144 in health care.

Contact the writer: jchandler@losangelesregister.com and @jennakchandler on Twitter