Vigil held Sunday night at Lake Loveland to remember Kiara Murray

Becky Murray right, hugs her husband Randy Murray, after listening to students talk about how much they cared for her daughter, Kiara Murray, at a vigil Sunday night. Kiara, an eighth-grade student at Bill Reed Middle School, died unexpectedly Wednesday night. ( Jessica Benes / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Hundreds of students showed up to pay their respects to the family of Kiara Murray in an evening vigil by the beach at Lake Loveland on Sunday.

Her parents, Becky and Randy Murray, were met by students and friends at the park. Kiara's loved ones wrote messages on balloons and released them into the air after several students talked about how much they liked or appreciated her.

Kiara, an eighth-grade student at Bill Reed Middle School, died unexpectedly Wednesday evening. The cause of death hasn't been officially released. Friends said it wasn't a suicide and her father said they aren't sure what happened. She just went to sleep Wednesday and didn't wake up.

Ajahnique Cruz, a freshman at Thompson Valley, was one of several students, including several eighth-grade students at Bill Reed Middle School, who helped organize the vigil on Sunday.

"I just like how blunt she was and how honest," Cruz said. "She didn't care about what people thought about her. She didn't like it but she pushed it aside and didn't let it affect her."

Cruz said that Kiara liked to walk around Albertson's and try on perfume. Recently, she convinced Cruz to stroll around Albertson's dressed as boys.

"She sagged her pants... and put her hair up in a bun under a hat. She didn't care what people thought," Cruz laughed.

Kiara was also close to eighth-graders Austin Johnson, Kevin Sanchez, Jesus Garcia and Bryan Sanchez, who went to school with her at Bill Reed.

Advertisement

"I hung out with her 24/7," Johnson said, but found it too difficult to say more. He was her next-door neighbor.

"She had a beautiful smile," Garcia said. "She liked to live it up. She was a really happy person."

The boys said she loved to draw and take photos to make memories.

"Other people would be down and she'd be there to cheer them up," Bryan Sanchez said.

As everyone gathered in a circle before releasing balloons into the sky, students spoke about Kiara.

They said how much they missed her and that she was one of the best people to be up in heaven with God.

Several students alluded to conflicts over Internet, but said there was a lesson to be learned, to not pay attention to what you hear about someone.

"I wish I could have hung out with her more. We would have had a lot of fun," one student said tearfully.

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com, Twitter.com/jessicabenes.