Deputies confiscated a fully loaded military rifle, cocaine and heroin in a bust Friday night after they responded to a call for help. A neighbor in the 2000 block of River Ridge Boulevard knocked on a neighbor's door asking for help.

When deputies were notified their investigation led them to three suspects known to them by past arrest activities.

LCSO considers the trio dangerous. Getting them and the drugs off the street was a positive step for their task force.

D'Angelo Gary, Keon Mcrae and Tory Carnegie were arraigned Sunday morning on charges of drugs and weapons violations.

Seven guns, more than a hundred rounds of ammo and more than thirty-three hundred dollars in cash were confiscated in the investigation.

Carnegie and Mcrae both have prior attempted murder charges against them. They were implicated in a shootout at a downtown Gainesville nightclub involving a popular rapper.

The woman complained that Gary had hit her but later recanted her account of what happened. During their investigation, deputies were able to obtain a search warrant and uncover the drugs and weapons.

The three men will be back in court toward the end of October.

According to the Lee County Sheriff's Office:

The following items were located within the residence:



166.7 Grams of Heroin

15.9 Grams of Powder Cocaine

19.1 Grams of Crack Cocaine

3.8 Grams of MDMA “Molly”

1.5 Grams of Xanax

21 Grams of Vicodin

Seven (7) Firearms including an American Tactical AR-15 (fully loaded with one in the chamber)

Two of the firearms had been reported as stolen - one report was made to the LCSO and one made to FMPD.

100 Rounds of Ammunition (for firearms located at the residence)

$3,356 in US Currency (Pending Forfeiture)

As a result of the search warrant and above seized items, narcotics detectives arrested the following persons, all of whom are on the violent offender list and are well known to area law enforcement:

D'Angelo Lavasha Gary (DOB 9/14/87) for Trafficking in Heroin (56.9 grams), Possession of Cocaine (3 grams), and Possession of MDMA (3 grams)

Keon Deshawn Mcrae (DOB 9/18/84) for Possession of a Weapon by a Convicted Felon, Trafficking of Heroin (51.9 grams), and Possession of Cocaine (1.4 grams)

Tory Denard Carnegie (DOB 3/12/85) for Trafficking Heroin (57.9 grams), Possession of a Weapon by a Convicted Felon, Possession of Cocaine (11.5 grams), Possession of MDMA (.8 grams), Possession of a Controlled Substance Without a Prescription (Xanax - 1.5 grams), Trafficking of a Controlled Substance (Vicodin - 21 grams)