The South Carolina Highway Patrol has closed Interstate 126 at the Broad River Bridge due to ongoing flooding issues.

The South Carolina Highway Patrol has closed Interstate 126 at the Broad River Bridge due to ongoing flooding issues.

Roads and several interstates are closed throughout the Midlands because of flooding. And road conditions continue to change.

"I can't stress enough, please don't travel unless it's absolutely necessary," said Trooper David Jones with the South Carolina Highway Patrol. Jones said road conditions continue to change and roads that currently are passable may not be open later.

The South Carolina Emergency Management Division says as many as 322 roads and 158 bridges were closed statewide. An update Wednesday morning said 269 roads and 143 bridges remained closed.

"It's still dangerous to drive along these highways in the Midlands," Jones said. "A lot of debris floating down that river, and that debris is hitting the bridge and standing up against it. A large amount of debris is coming against that bridge and could come up and over it."

Interstate 95, which had been closed between Florence and Orangeburg, is now open in some areas. The Interstate remains closed between exits 119 and 132, which are the Manning and Route 527 exits in Clarendon County. Click here for I-95 closures.

Click here for a link to the South Carolina Emergency Management Division for additional updates.

Click here for road conditions from the South Carolina Department of Transportation.

Dozens of secondary roads throughout the area are closed because of high water.

More than 30 roads are closed in Kershaw County. One of the the busiest roads, US 601, is closed at I-20 and Kennedy Road, where the creek has washed over the road. US 521 is closed.

SCEMD says Clarendon County is referred to as "three islands" because all major roads and bridges are washed out.

Emergency crews warn people to stay home. Drivers are warned not to try to drive through a flooded roadway.

Copyright 2015 WIS. All rights reserved.