Topics: Condoms, Editor's Picks, HIV, Love and Sex, Pornography, Sex, stds, Life News

AIDS Healthcare Foundation, which has been behind a push to mandate condoms in porn, held an emotional press conference Wednesday with four former porn performers who recently tested HIV-positive. The standout revelation was Cameron Bay’s testimony about her final adult shoot for Kink.com before testing positive for HIV: She says her co-star, Xander Corvus, got a cut on his penis in the middle of filming and yet the action continued without a condom.

Some might interpret the mention of this within the context to mean that Bay was infected with HIV on-set that day — and that the cut on her co-star’s penis was to blame. Indeed, some outlets seemed to imply as much. Take this headline from International Business Times, which turns the cut — a “nick” and “relatively minor issue,” according to Kink.com’s Peter Acworth — into a bleeding wound: “HIV+ Porn Star Cameron Bay Tells of Sex with Actor with Bleeding Genitals.”

But there is no proof that the transmission happened on-set — during that shoot or otherwise. “I think it is misleading to focus on the penis cut because there is no indication that transmission occurred on set,” Acworth told me in an email. “All performers who interacted sexually with Cameron Bay (including the performer with a cut) tested negative several times after the shoot and have been cleared of transmission.”

Ged Kenslea, director of communications for AHF, acknowledges that to the best of his knowledge the performer “[with the penis cut] has tested negative.” However he says the question of whether the penis cut had anything to do with Bay contracting HIV is “immaterial at this point,” he said. “Because in essence, high risk activity is taking place on these sets.”

Some industry insiders, like Acworth, argue that AHF is misrepresenting the facts, including the penis cut, in order to advance a political agenda. He says that “AHF has models speak in favor of condoms even though those performers performed on the gay side of the industry in condom mandatory shoots” — for example, in the case of Rod Daily, Bay’s boyfriend, who performed with condoms in gay porn and tested positive shortly after her — “or they use someone who performed without condoms but did not contract on set.” Of the six HIV-positive former porn performers to speak at Wednesday’s press conference, he said only one — Darren James, who tested positive in 2004 — has been proven to have contracted it on an adult set. (Now, that said, the question of whether past infections could have happened on-set isn’t without controversy.)