There's a battle going on in Washington between the two majors parties over the size of government. One wants bigger government in perpetuity, seeing it and the Constitution under which it is organized as kinds of living, breathing entities that can and must be allowed to grow with the demands of the times.

The other wants smaller government, at least smaller than the other guys. Even to them, the idea of limited government along the constitutional model, with power controlled and strictly defined, has given way, replaced by a notion that every problem society faces can and must be addressed by Washington.

There are many reasons for this, principally the fact that most politicians like to be re-elected or advanced by the voters into higher office. People like problem-solvers even if they aren't really solving any problems. Let's face it, it's far easier to advocate for a $100 million dollar increase in funding for a failing government program than it is to kill it. The former generates better news coverage too, since the media rarely examine the effectiveness of any program outside the Defense Department and like to tell the story of people who will be harmed or lose money if a proposed program reduction or termination goes ahead as suggested.



[SEE: Political Cartoons on the Economy]

The dishonesty is palpable. This week's crash of an Amtrak train outside of Philadelphia in which eight were killed and many more injured has been seized upon by advocates of spending increases as a prima facie case of government neglect of its responsibilities. Never mind that the wreck happened on the only profitable part of the rail line's operation or that no amount of money could have prevented any crash if its principle cause, as appears to be the case, was a unionized employee's recklessness on the job, it's full speed ahead as far as never letting a good crisis go to waste.

It would be nice if more people took the need for smaller government, limited in its scope and authority, seriously. It is not just a matter of the need to preserve our individual liberties; the great Leviathan federal government is expensive beyond our means to support it, devours everything in its path, is inefficient and often stands in the way of real solutions, all of which is costing the economy just under 25 percent of total annual gross domestic product through all means and measures.

These costs are not insignificant. As the Competitive Enterprise Institute documents in the latest edition of its annual report "Ten Thousand Commandments," the so-called hidden tax imposed by the regulatory state has reached $1.88 trillion.

"Federal environmental, safety and health, and economic regulations affect the economy by hundreds of billions of dollars annually," wrote the report's author, Competitive Enterprise Institute Vice President Clyde Wayne Crews Jr. "Regulatory compliance costs borne by businesses will find their way into the prices that consumers pay, affect the wages workers earn, and lead to lower levels of growth and prosperity."

Oh, but the opponents of such voracious government as we have say, all those regulations are to protect the people from greedy businessmen who don't care about their workers. Really? How does anyone know? The most routine analyses comparing the costs of a proposed regulation to the benefits it is supposed to produce are rarely if ever considered by the special interest advocates pushing for them. Further, there is usually little if any follow up to measure their effectiveness.



[GALLERY: Barack Obama Cartoons]

More from the report:

"If U.S. federal regulation was a country, it would be the world’s 10th largest economy, ranking behind Russia and ahead of India."



In 2014, agencies issued 3,554 new regulations compared to 224 new laws. That's a pace of 16 regulations for every law.

"The 2014 Federal Register contains 77,687 pages, the sixth highest page count in its history. Among the six all-time-high Federal Register total page counts, five occurred under President Obama."

"Some 60 federal departments, agencies and commissions have 3,415 regulations in development at various stages in the pipeline. The top six federal rulemaking agencies account for 48 percent of all federal regulations. These are the Departments of the Treasury, Commerce, Interior, Health and Human Services and Transportation and the Environmental Protection Agency."

When President Ronald Reagan said the only problems with government were that it was too big and that it cost too much, he barely scratched the surface. Just underneath this regulatory fervor lurks the idea that Americans are idiots, unable to be trusted to govern themselves. Presidential adviser Jonathan Gruber, the principle architect of Obamacare, was caught on camera in a candid moment saying almost exactly that. Politicians in both parties, advised by the spin doctors and social media consultants that surround them, are now trying to buy us off with cost estimates involving future spending on education, health care, retirement, the environment, infrastructure,and personal security. Pay no attention to the details, just focus on the money – because the more of your money we spend, the better things will be.