MILLINOCKET, Maine, March 16, 2014 — It’s as if they have a death wish; establishment Republican leaders are poised to self-destruct. Instead of working together to find a direction that could unite the party and help the country, they double down on bickering and back stabbing to keep their positions within the party.

The “I’m entitled to incumbency” bullet is in the cylinder, waiting to be spun, and the trigger finger is twitching with anticipation.

In an interview with the New York Times last week Senate Republican leader Mitch McConnell said, “I think we are going to crush them everywhere.” He was referring to conservative groups who are hoping to unseat several entrenched Republicans this year.

“I don’t think they are going to have a single nominee anywhere in the country,” McConnell added.

Mr. McConnell should be aware that Americans are so very tired of career politicians, and there is a groundswell of support for someone, anyone who can change the status quo. It’s time to let the pompous, arrogant slackers go and find some honest people who actually care about the country.

Later in the interview McConnell said, “I know this: Politics doesn’t like losers,” meaning that if challenging candidates don’t win in the primaries, they will have a hard time recovering from their losses. That statement could come back to haunt him and the party.

Now that Republican David Jolly has won his race by campaigning against Obamacare, establishment Republicans are trying to spin the reason for Jolly’s victory. In an attempt to hijack the narrative by suggesting that Jolly actually ran on “fixing” Obamacare, they caution other conservative candidates to avoid referencing repeal or replacement of Obamacare.

If the voters decide that geriatric, vindictive and lying establishment Republicans don’t deserve to return to Congress, then those politicians can take all the blame, having loaded the gun and pulled the trigger on themselves.

Pithanthropy the Human Conditioner by Jim Bozeman

You can order Pithanthropy, The Human Conditioner, in print and on Kindle from Amazon.com

READ MORE: Pithanthropy the Human Conditioner by Jim Bozeman here