"I'm too scared to go without insurance – plus I'll get fined,"

Dale Yelner knows what it means to be without health insurance. A few years ago she risked it for six months after she was divorced – only to land in the hospital with a freak case of an antibiotic-resistant infection.

So even though she discovered Sunday that the monthly premium for her Obamacare Silver plan would more than double because she now has a job, the South Orange teacher's aide didn't drop her coverage. Instead, she switched to a lower-priced plan.

"I'm too scared to go without insurance – plus I'll get fined," she said outside the office of the Oranges ACA Navigator Project, which kept its office open extra hours for people trying to meet Tuesday's midnight deadline for coverage that begins Jan. 1.

During the final hours before that deadline, community groups and insurers will offer extra help to the confused, the tardy, and the overwhelmed. For example, Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield's telephone enrollment will be staffed until midnight both Monday and Tuesday. In addition, it will have sign-up kiosks at four major malls in the state.

Federal officials recently announced last week that so far 80,152 New Jersey residents have shopped for private health insurance plans sold on Healthcare.gov. That includes both new customers and those returning to the website to switch coverage.

The selection of plans varies from county to county, but U.S. Health and Human Services officials say the average county's array of choices includes 38 different plans. In all five insurers sell products through the federal website - although some of them participate in some counties but not others.

After the open enrollment period ends on Jan. 31, 2016, people will still be able to buy policies only if their life circumstances have markedly changed: they've had a baby, gotten married or divorced, moved out of state or lost a job, for example.

As in past years, the fine for going without coverage increases. Anyone who remains uninsured in 2016 - and doesn't have a really good reason for it - will have to pay that fine when they file their taxes in 2017.

The fine is calculated as a percentage of income, but the minimum is $695 per adult and $347.50 per child, with a cap of $2,085 per household. And it is pro-rated for every month the person goes without coverage, so people who miss Tuesday's deadline to get coverage that kicks in New Year's Day will get fined for remaining uninsured for at least the month of January.

At that rate, say some healthcare advocates, the fine might end up costing more than the subsidized price tag for a policy.

Some consumers have used the open enrollment period to shop around for a different policy than the coverage they now have.

Marcos Monroy, of West Orange, showed up at the Navigator Project's office Sunday in hopes he could find a cheaper plan for his family of five. He, too, had the experience of having a family member hospitalized when insurance had briefly lapsed, and isn't willing to risk that happening again.

But even with a small subsidy, he's paying $525 a month. "People have been telling me that when you look around, you'll get a better price," he said.

Consumers can sign up for plans directly through the federal website, Healthcare.gov, or can call the government's round-the-clock enrollment center at 800-318-2596.

Under the title "Find Local Help," that website also lists places where people can get one-on-one help. The Oranges ACA Navigator Project, for example, also plans to stay open Monday from 4 p.m. to 8 p.m.

Insurers also will enroll a customer - but only in one of their plans. Besides Horizon, they include Oscar, Health Republic Insurance of New Jersey, AmeriHealth of New Jersey, or UnitedHealthcare.

Kathleen O'Brien may be reached at kobrien@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @OBrienLedger. Find NJ.com on Facebook.