BUFFALO, N.Y. — Avalanche goalie Semyon Varlamov again practiced with the team Saturday morning and appears close to returning from his latest groin injury. But following the morning skate at the First Niagara Center, where Colorado will face the Buffalo Sabres on Friday night, Avs coach Patrick Roy said there is no time table for Varlamov’s return to the lineup.

Varlamov has missed 13 games over three stretches with the same injury.

Gametracker: Colorado Avalanche vs. Buffalo Sabres

“We’re doing the opposite than the last time, which means he’s going to be less on the ice, more in the gym,” Roy said. “Last time we did a lot of ice, not much gym. Now he’s doing a lot in the gym and hopefully that will solve that problem.”

Varlamov’s replacement, rookie Calvin Pickard, is definitely not a problem for the Avs. Following his 47-save, 1-0 overtime loss at Pittsburgh on Thursday, Pickard’s goals-against average lowered to 2.27 (10th in the NHL) and his save percentage increased to .934 (third).

But as Roy previously said, Pickard will likely be returned to the Lake Erie Monsters of the American Hockey League when Varlamov is activated from injured reserve. The Avs want Pickard to continue to play, and not serve as Varlamov’s backup.

TOUT VIDEO: Semyon Varlamov at morning skate

Unfortunately for Pickard, he might be spending the holidays in Cleveland, because he’s exempt from the NHL roster freeze that began Friday night and continues to Dec. 27. Roy said his “emergency call-up” status could lead to his demotion to the minors.

“That’s not part of our objective as we speak,” Roy said.

The Avs play at Detroit on Sunday and host St. Louis on Tuesday. After that, their next game is Dec. 27 against visiting Chicago, which could mark Varlamov’s return.

“The way Pickard has been playing, we don’t feel the pressure to push on (Varlamov), and even if we felt the pressure of pushing on him, we would not,” Roy said.

Based on Roy’s comments after the game in Pittsburgh, the Avs are not happy with the work ethic of third-string goalie Reto Berra, who is in the first year of a three-year contract extension paying him $1.45 million annually. Berra is not likely to take his salary to Lake Erie and, with Pickard/Varlamov as the big-league starters, he might only play in off-the-bench fashion.

Mike Chambers: mchambers@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikechambers