“I was treated fairly well at McDonald’s,” the actor writes

James Franco is sticking up for McDonald’s, because the fast food company was there for him “when no one else was.”

The actor, filmmaker, author, artist and college professor wrote an op-ed for the Washington Post to wish the corporation well in wake of slumped sales and a recommitment to “hot, fresh food,” as well as a decision to sell off certain outlets to independent owners.

“I want the strategy to work. All I know is that when I needed McDonald’s, McDonald’s was there for me. When no one else was,” Franco wrote before detailing his experience working at a Los Angeles location at the age of 18 while attending UCLA.

Also Read: The Year in James Franco: Everything He Did in 2013 That You Didn't

“Someone asked me if I was too good to work at McDonald’s. Because I was following my acting dream despite all the pressure not to, I was definitely not too good to work at McDonald’s,” Franco wrote. “I went to the nearest Mickey D’s and was hired the same day.”

Franco shares some amusing stories about practicing his foreign accents while working the late shift drive-thru position, as well as observations about the type of people who frequented the establishment during his time at the front counter.

See video: Jon Stewart Mocks Arby's for Job Offer: 'Come for the Tweets, Run From the Meats'

“Parents ordering for their children are the worst, and parents ordering for a group of children, like a sports team, are the devil incarnate,” Franco shared. “Some customers seem to think that paying for food entitles them to boss the service workers around, but if you’re buying fast food, how much entitlement does that buy you?”

Ultimately, a gig acting in a Pizza Hut commercial rescued him from the low-paying job, but he doesn’t regret it or have any unkind words for McDonald’s.

Also read: Billy Eichner Blasts Burger King for 'Stealing' His 'Billy on the Street' Act

“I was treated fairly well at McDonald’s. If anything, they cut me slack. And, just like their food, the job was more available there than anywhere else. When I was hungry for work, they fed the need,” Franco concluded. “I still love the simplicity of the McDonald’s hamburger and its salty fries. After reading ‘Fast Food Nation,’ it’s hard for me to trust the grade of the meat. But maybe once a year, while on a road trip or out in the middle of nowhere for a movie, I’ll stop by a McDonald’s and get a simple cheeseburger: light, and airy, and satisfying.”

Franco’s reflection on his employment history comes the same week McDonald’s unveiled a new marketing campaign featuring an updated version of the Hamburglar — now a suburban dad whose model looks have either been admired or mocked on Twitter.

Why pay workers more when Mcdonalds can instead save their business with a creepy new Hamburglar. — Jamie Kilstein (@jamiekilstein) May 6, 2015

Christian Grey as The Hamburglar pic.twitter.com/GW4btJtQGM - Maggie Serota (@maggieserota) May 6, 2015



Indiana Pizzeria Scandal: 11 Other Fast-Food Controversies to Chew On (Photos) Indiana-based pizzeria Memories Pizza found itself at the center of controversy this week, when it was announced that the company would not cater same-sex weddings following the passage of Indiana's Religious Freedom Restoration Act. The company can at least take comfort in the knowledge that it's not alone. Here are 11 other food-related scandals that left some people choking on outrage.

DiGiorno Pizza Serves a Slice of Outrage A case of social media marketing gone wrong. DiGiorno was forced to issue an apology when it tweeted the hashtag #WhyIStayed, coupled with the message "You had pizza." A seemingly innocent tweet, until they company found out that the hashtag was actually launched in response to domestic violence, after video surfaced of football player Ray Rice punching out then-fiance Janay Palmer.

Starbucks' 'Race Together' Program The ubiquitous coffee chain's effort to spark a dialogue about race relations in America was met with widespread criticism, probably because most of the company's customers are just trying to get their caffeine fix and go without a lecture from their baristas.

SpaghettiOs' Pearl Harbor Flap Uh-oh, SpaghettiOs, indeed. In 2013, Campbell Soup, the company behind the circular pasta treat, issued a mea culpa after the SpaghettiOs Twitter account tweeted an image of a cartoon SpaghettiO holding an American flag with the message, "Take a moment to remember #PearlHarbor with us" on Dec. 7. Not surprisingly, the crass marketing ploy bombed with the public.

Chick-fil-A's Anti-Gay Boss How about a side order of homophobia with your chicken sandwich? Chick-fil-A stepped into a big pile of controversy when its president Dan Cathy piped up on the subject of gay marriage, stating that "we’re inviting God’s judgment on our nation when we shake our fist at him and say we know better than you as to what constitutes a marriage." Some people boycotted; others, unable to avoid the restaurant chain's tasty fare, swallowed their pride along with the chicken.

Papa John's Obamacare Scare Enjoy your pizza hot, tasty and cheap? Papa John's CEO John Schnatter had some bad news for you in 2012, when he declared that the the passage of Obamacare would raise the cost of a Papa John's pizza by 11 to 14 cents. Sure, and if you find yourself shorted on your breadstick order, go ahead and blame Obama for that too.

Entenmann's Casey Anthony Twitter Goof Sweets-maker Entenmann's hit a sour note when it tweeted the message, "Who's #notguilty about eating all the tasty treats they want?!" Unfortunately, the company was found guilty of using a hashtag associated with the controversial not-guilty verdict of Casey Anthony, who had been accused of murdering her two-year-old daughter. Oops.

Domino's Delivers ... Anti-Choice Support? Domino's Pizza founder Thomas Monaghan's donations to pro-life groups such as the controversial Operation Rescue have left a bad taste in some consumers' mouths.

The Pizza Underground A pizza-themed Velvet Underground tribute band? That includes former child star Macaulay Culkin? Seriously -- that's cheesy.

Krispy Kreme's Klan Kontroversy A British franchisee of the donut company raised eyebrows in February when it launched a "KKK Wednesday" promotion, apparently unaware that "KKK" is a widely known abbreviation for white supremacy group the Ku Klux Klan.

Kentucky Fried Controversy Not everybody needs a little KFC -- least of all PETA, which has targeted the fried-chicken chain for allegedly abusing chickens before serving them up to customers.

Starbucks' 9/11 Gaffe Americans were a tad on edge following the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. Unfortunately, some of that national unease landed on Starbucks, whose poster for its "Collapse Into Cool" campaign evoked traumatic memories for some. Previous ; Next 1 of 12 When questionably nutritious eats meet questionably tasteful corporate action Indiana-based pizzeria Memories Pizza found itself at the center of controversy this week, when it was announced that the company would not cater same-sex weddings following the passage of Indiana's Religious Freedom Restoration Act. The company can at least take comfort in the knowledge that it's not alone. Here are 11 other food-related scandals that left some people choking on outrage.