Photo

Colorado has achieved remarkable reductions in the rate of teenage pregnancy in recent years by giving young women free, long-acting contraceptives that protect them for several years. The birthrate among teenagers in the state plummeted by 40 percent from 2009 to 2013 and teenage abortions dropped by 42 percent largely as a result of this initiative.

Credit the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment for an aggressive outreach program and wise use of private money to carry out a program that could not win approval from the state’s legislature, the General Assembly. The department used funds from a private foundation to provide women with long-acting contraceptives at little or no cost. More than 30,000 intrauterine devices (IUDs) and contraceptive implants were distributed at 68 family planning clinics across the state.

The contraceptive implant is a small plastic rod, about the size of a matchstick, that contains a small amount of hormones and is inserted just under the skin of the upper arm. It can prevent pregnancy for three years once inserted and can be easily removed at any time; fertility immediately returns to normal. The IUDs provided are effective for at least five years, according to the department.

The department also used the private money to train their staff members on how long-acting contraceptives work and how to counsel women on their use.

These contraceptives have big advantages over the birth control pills, spermicides and condoms that poor women typically rely on, though condoms play an important role in preventing sexually transmitted disease. The failure rate of the implants and IUDs is minuscule, which reduces unplanned pregnancies and in turn makes it easier for young women to finish high school or college and enter the work force.

Greater use of these contraceptives can save taxpayers money by reducing spending on prenatal care, deliveries and post-pregnancy care for poor mothers and their children. The state health department estimates that every dollar spent on the long-lasting contraceptive program saved $5.85 for the state Medicaid program, which covers more than three-quarters of teenage pregnancies and births.

Unfortunately, the private grant is running out and the department has been searching, so far unsuccessfully, for additional funds to keep the effort going. As a smart budgetary move, the state General Assembly ought to provide the needed funds.

While birthrates and abortion rates among teenagers have dropped in the nation as a whole, researchers at the Colorado health department believe its efforts and the timing and magnitude of the reductions in their state constitute “a radical game change.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The Affordable Care Act requires insurance plans to cover contraceptives and related services, such as inserting and removing devices, at no cost to women. But various loopholes have left some women exposed to cost-sharing charges. Federal and state regulators and legislators need to close the remaining gaps as quickly as possible to ensure that every woman has easy access to the kinds of contraceptives that have produced such remarkable results in Colorado.