<p>The Toronto Maple Leafs and the Detroit Red Wings face off during the first period of the Winter Classic outdoor NHL hockey game at Michigan Stadium in Ann Arbor, Mich., Wednesday, Jan. 1, 2014. (AP Photo/Paul Sancya)</p>

SHARE Construction crews work on preparing Nationals Park baseball stadium for the 2015 NHL Winter Classic, on Monday, Dec. 22, 2014, in Washington. The game between the Chicago Blackhawks and Washington Capitals will be played on New Years Day. (AP Photo/Evan Vucci) CONTRIBUTED PHOTO/ESPN Jerry Punch will concentrate solely on college sports for ESPN.

By Jim Carlisle of the Ventura County Star

While college football continues to dampen down its New Year's Day bowl games ? making the Rose Bowl a national semifinal does just that by ripping away its tradition ? the NHL continues to make its Winter Classic games something worth watching.

Even with the Stanley Cup residing in Los Angeles, there are a lot of people who don't watch much hockey until the playoffs get closer. The Winter Classic on New Year's Day not only gives the NHL a showcase by putting two of its best teams outdoors in a packed stadium, it starts people in warm-weather areas to thinking about hockey.

Interesting, isn't it, how college football bowl games get people on the East Coast to marvel at warm weather and how hockey gets people on the West Coast to marvel at cold weather?

NBC will show this year's (or rather next year's) Winter Classic at 10 a.m. next Thursday with the Chicago Blackhawks playing the Washington Capitals at Nationals Park, the home of baseball's Washington Nationals.

Mike Emrick, analyst Eddie Olczyk and "Inside-the-Glass" analyst Pierre McGuire will announce the game. There will be plenty of pregame and between-periods commentary and, of course, the Winter Classic is the only hockey game that has its own meteorologist: Jim Cantore of The Weather Channel.

The unpredictability is what makes the event so good.

"We've had sun delays in Philly, we had snow start-to-finish last year in Ann Arbor, rain-to-sleet-to-snow in Buffalo and not only have the crews adjusted, but the players have played," Emrick said recently. "They enjoy it when they are playing in it and they sure enjoyed talking about it when it's over, with smiles on their faces."

Hockey is only part of the attraction, said McGuire.

"The Winter Classic is really a destination location for hockey fans and non-hockey fans," he said. "It's more than a hockey game. The Capitals are a huge part of Washington, D.C.'s sports fabric and you've got a great team in the Chicago Blackhawks. If we have the right conditions for this Winter Classic in Washington, it could be one of the more memorable games."

?ROME' FALLS

"Rome," Jim Rome's daily TV show on CBS Sports Network is said to be ending in March. SportsBusiness Daily reported the decision was mutual and that Rome will continue to do his program on Showtime, as well as his daily radio show for CBS Sports Radio, which is heard on Ventura's KVEN (1450 AM) and L.A.'s KFWB (980 AM). Rome will also continue contributing to "The NFL Today" and the NCAA men's basketball tournament on CBS.

"Together with Jim, we decided to shift focus and produce new projects across CBS Sports Network in place of the daily TV show ?Rome,' " CBS Sports president David Berson told SBD. "Jim remains a valuable member of the CBS Sports family."

OTHER NOTES

The reassigning of ESPN's NASCAR talent continues. Jerry Punch will remain with the network will work on college football and basketball coverage. Punch has been with ESPN since 1984 and had been a NASCAR pit reporter and lap-by-lap announcer. He worked on college sports telecasts from 1989 to 2006 as both a play-by-play announcer and sideline reporter while also covering motorsports. ... The Denver-Cincinnati "Monday Night Football" game earned a 10.4 big-market overnight rating, according to SBD, the second best mark of the season for ESPN. It ranks behind only the 12.1 for the Oct. 27 Washington-Dallas game. ... NBC's Seattle-Arizona game Sunday night had a 12.8 overnight rating, down from last week top audience of the season, but up 2.4 percent over last year's 12.5. ...

"We Need to Talk," the all-woman talk show on CBS Sports Network, will make its debut on CBS at 10 a.m. Saturday. Panelists will be Dana Jacobson, Tracy Wolfson, Amy Trask, Swin Cash and Laila Ali. Cash will interview Golden State Warriors coach Steve Kerr and CBS' Bill Cowher will preview the NFL's Week 17 and the upcoming playoffs. ... CBSSN is showing 10 classic SEC football games concluding Sunday. The full schedule is available at cbssportsnetwork.com. ...

The Week 17 NFL schedule has doubleheaders for both CBS and Fox at 10 a.m. and 1:25 p.m. The CBS games are Chargers-Chiefs and Raiders-Broncos and the Fox games are Eagles-Giants and Cardinals-49ers. NBC has Bengals-Steelers at 5:20 p.m. ... USC's Holiday Bowl game against Nebraska will be at 5 p.m. Saturday on ESPN and KSPN (710 AM). ... UCLA travels to Alabama for a basketball game at 3:30 p.m. Sunday on ESPNU and KLAC (570 AM).