The Eye

Ray J and Princess Love BREAK UP? 'Love & Hip Hop Hollywood' Star IGNORES SPLIT RUMORS, Singer Says, 'I Love My Girlfriend,' Is He OVER Ex Teairra Mari?

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Instagram/Ray J) Despite being at the epicenter of breakup rumors recently, "Love & Hip Hop Hollywood" star Ray J couldn't stop gushing over his girlfriend Princess Love.

When Ray J confessed that he was trying to be a one-woman man now that he has his girlfriend Princess Love in his life fans were happy to hear the notorious play boy may be considering seriously settling down soon, but after rumors surfaced that "Love & Hip Hop Hollywood" star called it quits on his relationship recently everyone started wondering if Ray was back to his old tricks.



However, Ray never responded to the break up rumors-- But he didn't have to! The reality veteran couldn't stop gushing over Princess during a recent interview with VH1's "#NoFliter" and made it pretty clear that his relationship with Princess isn't ending anytime soon.



"I love my girlfriend. I wanna be one-on-one with her and all that extra s**t just really don't matter," Ray said about his lady. "I love her. I don't really get into like my personal relationship too much because I really, genuinely love her. So it's not an act. It's not a joke. It's not a game. It's just real love and I just kinda keep her with me," he said.



Ray's past has been flooded with women, many of which he's claimed to have been in love with too. From his love with contestants on "For the Love of Ray J" to his combative past with ex Teairra Mari, Ray has never had a lack of love in his life.



But when it comes to his relationship with Princess, the singer says his new relationship is completely different from the others simply because for the first time it's only one woman that he wants to be with.



"It feels a lot different because I only wanna be with her," Ray confessed. "That's different from before because I didn't wanna be with just one girl, I wanted to be with more than one girl and that was the problem. This time around I only wanna be with her.



As for his ex, Ray says he and Teairra have no real ties other than the fact that they're on the show together.



"We in a business relationship right now. We on a show together. That's all it is," Ray said.



For more Ray, be sure to catch "Love & Hip Hop Hollywood" every Monday night at 8 p.m. on VH1.



Check out Ray's "#NoFilter" interview HERE.



SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.