Fox & Friends discussed McDonald’s' reported drop in profits by speculating that calls for a higher minimum wage were to blame. Meanwhile, they ignored what the company said was the reason.

The discussion opened with co-host Steve Doocy noting that McDonald’s had reported a 30% drop in its corporate profits.

“Well, it turns out workers’ wages might be to blame,” Brian Kilmeade said.

Well, it turns out they probably are not to blame. As Media Matters pointed out:

McDonald’s CEO Don Thompson “owned up to some corporate image problems” as an explanation for the drop in profits, according to Reuters. The AP also detailed the fast-food company’s image problems.

But guest Maria Bartiromo, of Fox Business, validated the conjecture:

BARTIROMO: Well, the issue really is, this is the implication of raising the minimum wage for certain companies. I mean, something’s got to give. The money comes from somewhere. So, at some point, a company will say, “OK, we have a higher expense rate because we’re raising the minimum wage we’ve got to do something somewhere else.” In this case, they are going to automation. They are changing certain jobs to computers.

Co-host Ainsley Earhardt furthered the meme: “So it’s really biting them in the tail. They were complaining, saying, ‘We want more money,’ and as a result, McDonald’s saying, ‘Hey, we’re going to lose some of you guys, and we’re going to replace you with machines.’”

“The fact is it’s not just about $10 an hour,” Bartiromo added. “It’s about $10 an hour plus a benefit package: you know, benefit, vacation and of course, we know the expense of ObamaCare. As a result, companies have to do something. So it’s either go toward automation, hire fewer workers, take some workers to part time vs. full time. …Something’s got to give somewhere.”

Nice touch throwing in the ObamaCare, don’t you think?

Meanwhile, as Media Matters also noted, nobody mentioned one other thing: The McDonald’s CEO is fine with a minimum wage hike.

But what would he know?

(H/T reader Eric J.)

Watch the discussion below, from yesterday's Fox & Friends.