Here’s how to get your free hot dog to ring in National Hot Dog Day. This is THE MORNING EMAIL for Wednesday, July 23, 2014.

The Scuttlebutt

Is Putin Russia’s Reagan?

Listeria concerns have led to a nationwide fruit recall from Trader Joe’s, Costco

Here’s what we know so far about iTime, Apple’s watch wearable

TOP STORIES

FLIGHT 17: RUSSIA RESPONSIBLE, BUT NOT DIRECTLY

“Senior U.S. intelligence officials said Tuesday that Russia was responsible for ‘creating the conditions’ that led to the shooting down of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17, but they offered no evidence of direct Russian government involvement.” See the satellite images they released to back up their case. Coffins containing the victims were flown to the Netherlands today. The MH17 cockpit was found sawed in half at the crash site. Check out this map of how close four other flights came to disaster when they were in the same vicinity of MH17. And this mom wishes she had listened to her son’s worry that the flight would crash. [AP]

GAZA ONSLAUGHT CONTINUES

“Israeli forces pounded the Gaza Strip on Wednesday, sending thousands of residents fleeing, and said it was meeting stiff resistance from Hamas Islamists, as U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry flew to Tel Aviv to push ceasefire talks.” Hamas gambled on this war as they felt “they had nothing to lose.” The U.S. is barring all flights to Israel. The New York Times continues to update its death toll graphic. And here’s a quick refresher on why tunnels are so important in this conflict. [Reuters]

DUAL RULINGS ON OBAMACARE

“A three-judge panel of the D.C. Circuit court of appeals ruled Tuesday against a key component of the law -- the federal subsidies for millions of people who signed up for health coverage. The 2-1 decision created a legal path for a possible Supreme Court case that could essentially gut the 2010 Affordable Care Act, which passed with zero GOP votes. A few hours later, all three judges on a 4th Circuit panel in Virginia decided the opposite by declaring the subsidies legal and proper.” Looks like the Supreme Court will sort this one out. Read the D.C. ruling and Virginia ruling in their entirety. [CNN]

In cat video news, this one makes quite the DJ.

INTERNATIONAL INTRIGUE: Warzones Complicate Flight Paths

Airlines around the world are figuring out how to navigagte warzones. An Iraq suicide bomber has killed at least 21 in Baghdad. Peru’s Prime Minister René Cornejo resigned in disgrace. And police have quarantined off a town in Northwestern China after a man died of the plague. We’re trying not to think about how “World War Z” begins.

In forgiveness news, this dog adorably makes up for stealing his baby owner’s toy.

SCOUTING REPORT: Tim Tebow’s Return?

Tim Tebow’s holding out hope a NFL team will give him a ring as training camps kick off this week. This guy’s beard may make him the best Nationals fan of all time. The owner of the Denver Broncos, Pat Bowlen, has resigned after an Alzheimer's diagnosis. We knew we liked Adam Silver: the NBA has offered a job to Isaiah Austin, the Baylor player whose NBA chances were cut short by a Marfan’s syndrome diagnosis, contingent on his graduation. And we can’t help but get misty eyed after reading about the eight-year-old who completed a mini-triathalon with his disabled brother.

In sharing is hard news, this cat won’t let her friend have her yogurt.

CULTURE CATCH-UP: Movie Ticket Prices Increasing

Going to the movies keeps getting pricier. Jessica Chastain’s attitude and Colin Farrell’s accent are a lot to handle in the first trailer for “Miss Julie.” Check out the history of autocorrect. The latest images from “The Hunger Games” prove once again that every film out there should hire their brilliant marketing team. The Seinfeld emojis are even better than we could have imagined. Lana del Ray said her song “F—-d My Way Up to the Top” isn’t accurate, saying, “You know, I have slept with a lot of guys in the industry, but none of them helped me get my record deals. Which is annoying.”

In 1920s remix news, we kinda dig this cover of "Wiggle."

In baby reveal news, here’s one gone wrong.

OTHER PEOPLE’S BUSINESS: Then Comes a Baby Carriage?!?

Could a baby be on the way for Zoe Saldana? John Travolta’s ex-pilot will get his day in court to see whether the confidentiality agreement he (maybe) signed will prevent him from writing a tell-all. Shia LeBeouf supposedly wants to clean up his act for Brad Pitt. We love the adorable photos of Jimmy Kimmel’s baby daughter. And Beyonce and Jay Z divorce rumors are hitting a fever pitch.

In slippery news, don’t jump on wet sea rocks.

TWITTERATI

@AndyRichter: I think salads help you lose weight because they're gross and you end up not eating them

@CuteOverloads: wiggle wiggle wiggle



@lordemusic: djs and their sternly smouldering press photos

@JoseCanseco: So much respect @Athletics .can't even express.I've learned a lot over the years & have apologized 4 my mistakes & hope there is forgiveness

@HistoryInPics: Steven Spielberg and George Lucas having a water gun fight on the set of Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom



ONE MORE THING

Fog can be GORGEOUS.

Got something to add? Send tips/quips/quotes/stories/photos/events/scoops to Lauren Weber (lauren.weber@huffingtonpost.com). Follow us on Twitter (@LaurenWeberHP). Does somebody keep forwarding you this newsletter? Get your own copy. It's free! Sign up here.

More: The Morning Email