Topics: Afghanistan, Dick Cheney, George W. Bush, Iraq, The Republican Party, Tom Cotton, war hawks, News, Politics News

One of the more disturbing quotes of recent days (and that’s saying something) is this one:

Rep. Jim Jordan on whether he backs Corker's Iran bill: "I want to talk to Tom Cotton. He's the guy who has the best insight." — daveweigel (@daveweigel) April 22, 2015

Obviously, the idea that any insight can be gleaned from the freshman senator — who famously made the Republican caucus look like a bunch of bumbling fools when they signed on to his embarrassing letter to Iran — is the disturbing part of that comment. When I described Cotton as “a leading light on the right in foreign policy and national security,” back in February, I thought I was making a little joke. But this man, who has been in the Senate for about three months, really has become the go-to expert on all things related to foreign boogeymen.

But as Ed Kilgore noted in an interesting article last week, this is about more than just Tom Cotton. It is part of an overall GOP turn backwards on national security, which was signaled pretty clearly in the 2014 midterms.

Kilgore writes:

I didn’t write about this a whole lot in my own book on the 2014 midterms, but did discuss it: towards the end of that cycle Republican Senate candidates—led by Scott Brown, who ran a surprisingly strong race in NH—really started demagoguing about terrorists pouring into the country via “porous” borders or in response to the general surrender-money [sic] tendencies of the Obama administration. And since the elections, I think we are all aware that Republican pols and rank-and-file alike are increasingly more likely to favor a re-invasion of Iraq or a military confrontation with Iran.

This has made one of the big developments of the previous couple of years—the emergence of a bipartisan coalition in Congress aimed at curtailing Global War on Terrorism (GWOT) surveillance programs at NSA and elsewhere—very, very fragile.

Personally, I thought that coalition was always pretty fragile since it mostly consisted of about six libertarian cranks and a bunch of liberal Democrats, but it was something. And even more than that, the general revulsion among the public over the way the wars had been conducted under Bush and Cheney and the urgent attention required for domestic affairs in the wake of the financial crisis made national security a weak, second-tier issue for Republicans — a first in the modern era. But it was always only a matter of time before they got their hawkish mojo back, and there is no time better than when the Democrats are likely to be running a woman for president. (As I have written here before, that fits perfectly into their decades-long storyline about “feminized” Democrats that goes all the way back to the era of long-haired hippies.)

So it’s not a surprise that we find ourselves on the cusp of another national security election. The economy has improved enough that people aren’t feeling a sense of crisis and, unless Jeb gets the nomination, the GOP probably figures they have enough distance from the last disastrous decade now to run their usual game. The problem is that they seem to have decided that their intellectual Godfather is no longer Ronald Reagan, which was bad enough as it was. But no, the young generation of GOP hawks now obviously see Dick Cheney as their role model. Tom Cotton, their new leader, certainly seems to be poured in his mold. If anyone is still laboring under the illusion that the Rand Paul wing of the party is ascendant, they need to think again.

(Not that it was ever actually true, mind you.)

Politico reported on Friday that Tom Cotton’s portfolio no longer consists simply of making terrible blunders on Iran. He’s now taking up the cause of renewing the PATRIOT Act and also adding new provisions for spying on Americans:

The Arkansas senator, who caused an international firestorm last month with his controversial letter to Iranian leaders, has spent many recent Fridays in Washington at FBI and National Security Agency headquarters, meeting with senior intelligence officials and administration lawyers to build his case for a clean extension of three expiring provisions of the Patriot Act. With the support of GOP leaders, he’s serving as an emissary on the issue to GOP freshmen who are weighing whether to extend the controversial law.