Minnesota Congressman Michele Bachmann has issued her edict on the chances Hillary Clinton's theoretical campaign would have during a theoretical 2016 election: not good. Mostly because America simply isn't ready for a female President. I bet the schmucks who donated to Bachmann's 2012 Presidential campaign feel pretty stupid now!

During an interview with columnist Cal Thomas, Bachmann admitted that she didn't think America was ready for Hillary Clinton because #BENGHAZI #OBAMACARE, but even if those things weren't #BENGHAZI huge #OBAMACARE black eyes on Hillary #BENGHAZI Clin#OBAMACAREton's record, she still wouldn't win. Why? Because America's not experiencing "woman guilt" like they experienced "white guilt." Not enough people want it hard enough. Seriously.

Bachmann says a lot of people "aren't ready" for a female president. "I think there was a cachet about having an African-American president because of guilt." (Presumably she means because of slavery and the lengthy denial of civil rights to blacks.) "People don't hold guilt for a woman," she says, adding that while people vote for women for virtually every other office "I don't think there is a pent-up desire" for a woman president.

Yes. Despite the fact that speculation on who will become the female President has been part of the political landscape throughout the last several decades, we don't want it hard enough. And then, just for good measure, Bachmann said something dumb about race. If she'd have thrown in something xenophobic about muslims, something wrong about abortion, and something hateful about gay people, we'd have won Bingo!

Advertisement

Bless your whackadoodle Minnesota face, Michele Bachmann. Bless it.

I knew this would happen now that Bachmann's not running for reelection this year. She can just let the crazy run free like a caged pony set loose on the plains. She can let it rear back and whinny. Fuck I hope she keeps talking. It's like overhearing a person singing to their pet when they think no one's around.

Sponsored