Buy Photo Students at the Asbury Park Middle School leave the building at the end of classes (Photo: Bob Bielk/Staff photographer)Buy Photo

A new, $3.4 million effort to teach Asbury Park school children to read is generating buzz on social media.

The school district's new partnership with educational services and publishing giant Scholastic was discussed in an Asbury Park Press article Monday that also recounted the school district's prior failures to boost literacy rates. The contract is for four years.

For some, the statistics were alarming: nearly three in four children in the 2,000-student school district are reading below their grade level.

Others found it even more shocking that Asbury Park is among the most expensive district's in the state – spending $33,109 per student – and still struggles with literacy.

The criticism also came with ideas and suggestions including mandatory parent involvement, adult literacy programs, cutting extracurricular activities until test scores improve, and alternative education programs.

Here are six responses from the Facebook thread that started Monday:

1. "Money can't teach kids to read. Effort can't teach kids to read. Parents have to be engaged, facilities have to be updated and current, and teachers have to be passionate." – Chris Robbins

2. "It's really very simple, just take the time to teach the children to read. Small words then big words. Then show them what words can do. Tell a story, give directions, be happy, be sad, take an adventure, teach them to communicate. So far the new ideas and methods and money, money, and small classes have failed, maybe it's time to try something OLD." – Maryellen Oakley Hutchinson

3. "Kiss that taxpayer money goodbye! ... How about you fire the teachers that you pay that aren't being effective? Why are you paying them, and the throwing another 3.4 million at more teachers? I guarantee you will get the same exact results and everyone will be asking what they got for 3.4 million." – Adam Wong

4. "Why not take the bs consultant money and start adult literary programs. If parents can read they will read to the children. Therefore curing the problem." – Stephanie Ziemba

5. "It's not a 'School or Teaching' problem but more of a parent issue! No strong influence at home, no gain in schools! Point the finger in the right direction and stop blaming the schools! There's no such thing as a 'Failing School' but more of a weak support system from a home. Sad to say but it's the truth. Wake up people and take responsibility for your kids and stop blaming others!!"– Brokeneckjeff Mack

6. "If this 'effort' doesn't include meaningful and ongoing access to books for these kids - in their homes, schools and communities, it won't matter how much support/guidance the program gives to the teachers. Literacy skills will not improve without access to books. I'm glad to see a mention of summer reading, but how many books? What about the school year? What about kids who can't get to the library? Our experience is not that kids don't want to read - they have never had access."– Abigail Molineux Daly

Find more coverage of the issues facing the Asbury Park School District online at www.app.com/asburyschools

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1GVHrlj