Gov. John Kasich's budget drops next week. But there's already buzz about welfare reform and cigarette taxes. Read on in today's Ohio Politics Roundup.

Kasich's budget to include welfare-to-work push: "The changes," writes Robert Higgs of the Northeast Ohio Media Group, "fit into a philosophy Kasich has often stated, that it is an appropriate role for government to give people in need a helping hand up, but to also require people take some level of personal responsibility."

Kasich, Higgs adds, "touched on those themes during his inaugural address Jan. 12, recalling his mother's advice: 'It's a sin to not help someone who needs it, but its equally a sin to continue to help someone who needs to learn to help themselves."

The governor's budget proposal is expected to be released Monday.

History repeats itself? This won't be the first time Kasich tackles welfare reform in a similar vein. Sabrina Eaton, writing from NEOMG's Washington bureau, looks back at Kasich's efforts in Congress. Kasich "was ebullient when President Bill Clinton said he'd sign a welfare reform bill Kasich put together in 1996 as chairman of the House Budget Committee," Eaton recalls. Said Kasich at the time: "This is one of those successes that when we get old and we're all in our rocking chairs, we're going to look back and say, 'Thank God we were able to make America a little bit better.'"

Higher cigarette tax could be back on the table: Kasich got nowhere last year with a proposal to raise tobacco taxes – a plan he said would help reduce income-tax rates.

He's almost certain to try again, reports Jim Provance of the Toledo Blade. "The governor has made it clear his third two-year budget proposal to be unveiled Monday will include a proposed hike, but it's not clear how much it would be," Provance writes.

This time, Kasich will have a fresh study to back him up. NEOMG's Jackie Borchardt reports that the study, commissioned by the American Cancer Society and other groups, shows that "states that increased their cigarette tax not only brought in more tax revenue than before the hike but revenues tended to be predictable."

What the Democrats want: NEOMG's Jeremy Pelzer reports that Ohio House Democrats "will resist income-tax cuts, seek more money for local governments and push school funding reform during the upcoming legislative budget fight."

The Democrats, though, hold a record-low 34 of 99 House seats.

Ohio Right to Life seeks 20-week abortion ban: Borchardt reports that one of the state's most politically influential groups is about to begin lobbying legislators.

"Our pain-capable legislation will alter the abortion debate in Ohio," Stephanie Ranade Krider, executive director of Ohio Right to Life, said in a news release.

Michael Gonidakis, the group's president and a Kasich ally who serves on the Ohio Medical Board, declined to identify the legislation's sponsors.

Ohio, Borchardt notes, "would join 11 other states that ban abortion past 20 weeks."

A 2011 Ohio law prohibits abortions after 24 weeks or when the fetus has become viable, as determined by physician tests when women seek abortions after 20 weeks.

Conflict for Judge Judi? In her election campaign last fall, Ohio Supreme Court Justice Judi French emphasized the name she shared with a popular TV judge. She also emphasized that she saw her role on the court as a backstop for conservatism.

Those remarks have the Ohio Civil Service Employees Association asking French to step aside from a case because they fear she is biased in favor of Kasich and other Republican state officeholders, reports Randy Ludlow of the Columbus Dispatch.

He's talking about you, Mike Pence: This is what Kasich meant on "Fox News Sunday" when he noted that other Republican governors were following his lead, "trying to figure out how to expand Medicaid," after Kasich "took all the hits."

From Politico's Kyle Cheney: Indiana Gov. Mike Pence won federal approval Tuesday for an Obamacare-inspired health care expansion, a development he cheered — but one GOP operatives say could put him in political peril if he runs for president.

"The first-term Republican and former congressman is angling for the party's conservative mantle. And like a handful of other governors jockeying for the GOP nod, Pence has embraced a version of Obamacare's expansion of Medicaid."

Your move, P.G. Sittenfeld: A tweet from the Democratic National Committee's Lily Adams captures the latest in fashion from Ted Strickland, the former Ohio governor and potential Democratic candidate for U.S. Senate in 2016.

.@Ted_Strickland has some sharp looking glasses! pic.twitter.com/38S4vezVNQ — Lily Adams (@adamslily) January 27, 2015

Sittenfeld, a Cincinnati city councilman, already is working for the Democratic nomination to face Republican incumbent Rob Portman.

Bonus Twitter pic of the day: Yep, that's a photo of Cleveland's Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and Museum behind Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker. (Tip your hat to Kevin Benacci, communications director for U.S. Rep. Dave Joyce.)

Kudos to @GovWalker for giving some love to #CLE with the Rock Hall on display in background of this Hannity hit. pic.twitter.com/2GpkuftgGx — Kevin Benacci (@KevinBenacci) January 28, 2015

Walker, reports Dan Balz of the Washington Post, took the first formal step toward a presidential campaign Tuesday by forming a fundraising committee.

Tips? Send them here. Or follow me on Twitter: @henryjgomez.