Meg Rosoff, 57, was born in Boston and educated at Harvard and Saint Martins College of Art in London. She worked in advertising, but when her sister died of breast cancer, she realised life was too short to put off the novel she wanted to write. The result was How I Live Now, published in 2004, just as Rosoff herself was diagnosed with breast cancer. The book won the Guardian children's fiction prize and was this year turned into a film. Her latest novel is Picture Me Gone. She lives in London with her husband and daughter.

When were you happiest?

Swimming in the North Sea at midnight, surrounded by phosphorescence.

What is your earliest memory?

When I was about two, I dreamt that a gorilla dragged away my older sister. There was blood everywhere.

Which living person do you most admire, and why?

My husband is the kindest, funniest, most strange and wondrous person I know.

What is the trait you most deplore in yourself?

I'm face blind, have a useless memory, a short attention span, hate cooking, am careless, clumsy, absent-minded, unconcerned with rules and inspire road rage.

Where would you like to live?

The entire top floor of Centre Point.

What do you most dislike about your appearance?

I've got reverse body dysmorphia, so when I look in the mirror, I see a younger, slimmer, more attractive version of myself. Photographs are a shock.

If you could bring something extinct back to life, what would you choose?

My youngest sister.

What is your favourite smell?

My lurchers, after they've been swimming in a salt marsh lagoon.

What is your favourite book?

The Unstrung Harp, by Edward Gorey: every writer should read it.

What is your guiltiest pleasure?

Riding slightly mad horses.

To whom would you most like to say sorry, and why?

To Noel, in sixth grade. He was mixed race with no father and was bussed into our suburban all-white school every day. I wanted to be his friend, but it was social suicide.

Which living person do you most despise?

The opponents of Obamacare.

What is the worst job you've done?

I spent 15 years in advertising, getting fired every 18 months or so. I'm proud of that record now, but at the time it was dispiriting.

What has been your biggest disappointment?

Not being born a boy.

If you could edit your past, what would you change?

I wouldn't have gone to Harvard. It was the most ridiculously conventional place.

When did you last cry, and why?

In August, when my middle sister called to tell me her breast cancer had spread to her spine, pelvis and bones. It turned out not to be true.

What is the closest you've come to death?

I flew Pan Am flight 103 from London to JFK on 20 December 1988. The next day, Pan Am 103 exploded over Lockerbie with no survivors.

What single thing would improve the quality of your life?

Someone else to write my books.

What do you consider your greatest achievement?

My daughter is brave, funny, clever and sane, despite being born into a genetic minefield.

What song would you like played at your funeral?

Reasons To Be Cheerful, by Ian Dury.