The word “retirement” isn’t in Susan Sittenauer’s vocabulary.

After 30 years of teaching history and civil and criminal law at Seaman High School, Sittenauer said she is a lifelong learner and doesn’t plan to leave her chosen profession any time in the near future.

Beginning last week and until Tuesday, Sittenauer is attending the Supreme Court Summer Institute for Teachers at the Georgetown University Law Center in Washington, D.C., a program sponsored by Street Law, Inc., a nonprofit organization founded in 1972.

“There are many technological activities included in the Street Law curriculum which I feel are going to be really useful when we (Seaman High School) go to the 1-to-1 (technology initiative) with our devices,” Sittenauer said, speaking from Washington. “The online tools and resources will be very useful on the technology side of our curriculum.”

Sittenauer is the only Kansas teacher who is participating in the summer institute. While she has attended other constitutional law and history seminars in the past, she said she is learning more practical teaching techniques rather than theory.

“This (conference) has been very beneficial so far regarding the ability to have a big impact with the students,” she said.

Anne Woods, public services manager for the Kansas Bar Association, said the KBA’s Law Related Education Committee chose Sittenauer to attend the conference, saying she is the “perfect example of a teacher who has gone above and beyond to find and use the best resources for her students,” adding that Sittenauer also has been an “invaluable resource” for KBA’s Law Day and Celebrate Freedom Week.

Sittenauer’s conference fees and travel expenses for the summer institute were paid for through a grant from the Kansas Bar Foundation.

“We are very proud that she was selected and hope her experience provides her and the KBA with new resources and ideas,” Woods said in an email.

In addition to getting a more behind-the-scenes tour of the U.S. Supreme Court building, Sittenauer said she and her fellow conference attendees have listened to and have been able to ask questions of a solicitor general who has argued 17 cases in front of the Supreme Court justices, a counsel to President Barack Obama, a counsel to a Republican U.S. senator and a deputy clerk of the nation’s highest court.

Sittenauer said they also will be in the U.S. Supreme Court chamber on Monday for “decision day.”

“Four decisions will be announced,” she said. “No one knows (the decisions) in advance. Nobody knows except the justices.”

The high court on Monday could announce decisions by the justices regarding the Affordable Care Act, commonly known as Obamacare, and gay marriage.

An in-depth exploration of the U.S. Constitution’s 14th Amendment — citizenship rights and equal protection of law — also is part of the institute’s agenda, Sittenauer said, a topic she enjoys teaching because of new court cases to examine.

“You try to make it applicable to the students’ lives or it’s hard for them to relate to it,” she said. “You try to bring in situations that related to constitutional situations in order to bring it alive. I love teaching it because it’s different every semester. With new cases coming out, it just makes it so interesting. Change is good. It keeps you good as a teacher and as a student.”