SHARE October 5, 2015 — Beth Harwell, Tennessee House Speaker (Mike Brown/The Commercial Appeal)

By Richard Locker of The Commercial Appeal

State House Speaker Beth Harwell said Monday that the state legislature likely will revisit Medicaid expansion when it reconvenes in January but that lawmakers still have major concerns that likely will keep it from passing.

Harwell, R-Nashville, also said she believes the state will win a court battle over education funding, but a loss in court would mean a tax increase to increase funding.

The large Shelby and Hamilton county school systems, plus several smaller districts in the Chattanooga area, have filed lawsuits charging that the state's system of funding education is inadequate and, in Shelby County's case, does not provide enough funding to educate students in poverty.

Harwell said she believes Gov. Bill Haslam is leaning toward not asking the legislature in 2016 to approve the state's first gasoline tax hike in 26 years, although he toured the state this summer outlining the need for more transportation funding.

But she thinks his Medicaid expansion plan, Insure Tennessee, may get another look. "I think we will revisit heath care again. I'm not telling you that Insure Tennessee has some magic bullet to be passed this year but I do think there will be continued discussion."

Harwell said Republicans, who hold a supermajority (more than two-thirds of the memberships of both legislative chambers), have "legitimate concerns and I think if we're going to see something passed, we're going to have to address them."

She said those concerns include caps on enrollment in the expansion program, designed under the federal Affordable Care Act to cover more uninsured working poor. "We were told it would be a program for about 280,000. The reality is there are about 400,000 people who qualify," she said.

She said members are concerned about health care consuming more and more of the state budget, leaving no or little new money for education, higher education and other programs. She said Tennessee's Medicaid program, TennCare, takes about 33 percent of the budget. "That's not sustainable. It means we're not doing things for higher education, it means we're not doing things for the rest of the state because it's all going there."

She said lawmakers also want the federal government to give the state more flexibility in managing the existing TennCare program. "And finally I think a lot of my members felt like they weren't getting straight answers. The governor's program called for co-payments and yet when we asked the federal government, can we require co-payments, they said absolutely not. They said you can put them in but you can't require payment."

And the speaker said that while Tennessee hospitals heavily support Medicaid expansion because they will benefit financially, many doctors in her district called her in opposition.

"I would have liked to have seen a disenrollment plan on the front end, with some kind of safety net built in because you can't take (coverage) away from people without a transition plan. I think what would be palatable to a supermajority is if this were given to us in a block grant and we could devise a program the way we wanted without federal strings attached. I do think we could, given the expertise in health care in Nashville and Memphis, we could design a program that would be more cost effective."

Harwell said she spoke with the governor last week about the school funding lawsuits and that his administration is working on redesigning the state's school funding formula, called the Basic Education Program. She said both she and Haslam believe the state can win the school funding lawsuits.

"I think the state is trying. We put another $200 million into education this year over last year. I think we're doing what we can do as a state ... I think we're in a good position to win these cases but if we don't, it's a tax increase. It's just as simple as that."

Speaking to The Commercial Appeal's editorial board, Harwell also said she believes the legislature should work to clarify the guns-in-parks law that it approved this year to make it clear where handgun-carry permit holders can go armed and where they cannot. She said she has asked the National Rifle Association for help in drafting a bill that would keep guns out of venues such as FedExForum in Memphis and Nissan Stadium in Nashville but has not heard back from the powerful gun lobby yet.

The House speaker was in Memphis meeting with community leaders in a roundtable discussion sponsored by Methodist Hospital, attending a meeting of the Tennessee State Museum board and meeting with legislators in their districts. She was scheduled to participate in a town hall meeting in Covington Monday night.