Topics: blackface, dear white people, Editor's Picks, Girlfriend Intervention, justin simien, minstrelsy, prison wives club, Reality TV, Entertainment News

Earlier this week Vulture published an excerpt from Justin Simien’s book “Dear White People” — a tie-in to his film of the same name — with what might be the most provocative Internet headline I’ve ever seen, and I’ve seen a lot: “Reality TV Is the New Blackface.” For context, Simien’s film “Dear White People” focuses on a group of students at a fictional Ivy League university when a house on campus throws an “Unleash Your Inner Negro” party. In addition to a lot of troubling ideas of what it means to be “Negro,” dozens of white students show up in blackface and wigs. The film opens up with the news that this party has occurred, and then dials back the clock five weeks to watch how it all went down the way it did. When the party finally happens (again), in the final act of the film, Simien’s script and his actors have relayed so much emotional complexity around the subject of race on campus that seeing white students in blackface is a literally painful experience (if it wasn’t already). And that’s how Simien makes his point — by letting the audience feel it fully, themselves. The film is extraordinarily unbiased, except toward compassion for its characters; even the instigators of the party have their moments of trying to be understood.

Reality television is a concern of Simien’s in his film, too, personified in Colandrea Conners, who shortens her name to “Coco” to sound less “hood.” One of the first scenes of “Dear White People” is Coco auditioning for a reality TV show filming on campus and being turned down for not being interesting enough. It’s heavily implied that if she were to be more provocatively “black” — whatever that means — she’d be more likely to get “noticed” — whatever that means. It’s Coco’s first step on a journey that becomes about learning to massage your identity to best advantage, even as she is one of the black students uninterested in activism on campus, what she terms “blaming” white people for their problems, and even dating black men. As portrayed by the wonderful Teyonah Parris (who plays the part of Dawn on “Mad Men”) Coco’s story is a tragic little sideshow that contains a lot of the pain and uncomfortable truths of “Dear White People.”

It’s this particular dynamic that Simien discusses in the Vulture excerpt. Like the tone of “Dear White People” itself, Simien is tongue-in-cheek and self-indicting. “Stereotypes from the slack-jawed, no-good black male to the sexually promiscuous, foul-mouthed black woman are so ubiquitous, groups of people in the country assume that this is how all black people really behave. Now the confused, shuffling Mammies and flamboyant, vapid Zip Coons of yesteryear are actually real people, competing for Donald Trump’s affection and/or that of each other’s man.” He specifically calls out “Real Housewives of Atlanta” breakout star Nene Leakes (whose shortened name sounds a lot like his character Coco’s) and former “Apprentice” contestant Omarosa for having a type of notoriety among audiences that undercuts black racial identity, arguing that they “validat[e] the worst stereotypes of black folks for people whose contact with actual black people is limited. And boy, are they fun!”

Where the bulk of “Dear White People” is about processing the reality of white people appropriating blackness, this essay, and the film subplot around Coco, are about something a lot more complicated: the complicity of black people in the perception of blackness. And though that is something I have no personal experience with, I happen to have watched a lot of reality television. I’m not sure I’m entirely on board with Simien’s interpretation of reality TV as the new blackface, especially when the old blackface seems to be still alive and kicking. But I do see that blackness has become a commodity that people of all races use to survive, whether that’s by exploiting it or appropriating it or performing it. And the biggest space for that on television is in reality television.

That fact — that racial tensions and identities are so on display in the world of unscripted programming — is in reality television’s favor; it might be a tense space, but it’s the most diverse subgenre of television out there. Simien’s point in critiquing racial representation on reality TV is that these groups aren’t well represented anywhere else — “The Olivia Pope character on ‘Scandal’ simply cannot wash away the impressions of all the shucking and jiving happening between black people on reality TV.” But at the same time, reality television contains multitudes, and Simien himself confesses to watching a great deal of it. A show like “Say Yes to the Dress” has a very different relationship to its black “characters” than a show like “Real Housewives of Atlanta” — largely because those two shows cast very differently. (The former is looking for a memorable personality; the latter is looking for an interesting family situation that could end with some kind of heartwarming flourish.) Add in shows like “Black Ink” on VH1 or “RuPaul’s Drag Race” on Logo and this idea of what it means for black people to be overrepresented on reality television becomes very difficult to pinpoint; it means many different things.