Buy Photo Lacey Township municipal building. (Photo: Asbury Park Press file photo.)Buy Photo

LACEY Township officials hope 48 affordable housing units will help meet a low-income housing mandate that they are suing to shrink.

On Thursday, the Township Committee approved the construction of the homes on 8 acres of property near Lacey Road and Calvin Street. At the same time, Mayor Gary Quinn is hoping to see a reduction in the township's 1,400-unit affordable housing mandate pending the outcome of an ongoing lawsuit.

The Fair Housing Act requires New Jersey municipalities to allow the building of affordable homes.

"Right now Lacey Township has an obligation in the current round (of affordable-housing decisions) of 900 units," Quinn said. "We have not built any of those units."

In a previous round of decisions, Lacey was required to build 570 affordable housing units, and those have not yet been completed, he said.

As a result, Lacey is currently required to provide for the construction of more than 1,400 homes in a township of about 26,000 people.

"We don't have the available land in town to build those types of units, so we're trying to negotiate it and appeal it. ... to bring that number down," the mayor said.

Lacey joined other municipalities in the lawsuit, so the township's share of the legal bills is only $2,000, Quinn said.

While he and township officials wait on the outcome, they approved the development of two-bedroom family apartments to be built on the site of a former nursing home. It is part of an 18.6-acre parcel that the committee identified Thursday as an area in need of redevelopment.

Quinn said Lacey has met its mandate for affordable homes for seniors but has not yet fulfilled its requirements for low-income families and people under 55.

In an extreme scenario, the state could seize the township's parks for low-income homes to meet the unfulfilled mandates, he said. To avoid such action, Quinn said, the town needs to continue providing for affordable housing.

"We want to start moving in that direction," Quinn said. "The taxpayers of this town (also) have to recognize the fact that we're not going to flood the town with new housing."

Amanda Oglesby: 732-557-5701; aoglesby@gannettnj.com

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1FtyHGD