Photo: AP It’s not every day that a major payroll solutions and benefits administration platform tussles publicly with one of the hottest startup benefits platforms in the country—but that’s exactly what’s been happening during the past week and a half between ADP and Zenefits. And in the meantime, consumers are caught in the crossfire. Complete your profile to continue reading and get FREE access to BenefitsPRO.com, part of your ALM digital membership. Benefits:

Your access to unlimited BenefitsPRO.com content isn’t changing. Once you are an ALM digital member, you’ll receive: Critical BenefitsPRO.com information including cutting-edge post-reform success strategies, comprehensive service provider listings, educational webcasts and videos, resources from industry leaders, and informative eNewsletters.

Exclusive discounts on ALM, BenefitsPRO Magazine and BenefitsPRO.com events.

Access to other award-winning ALM publications including LifeHealthPro.com, ThinkAdvisor.com and Law.com. Register Now Already have an account? Sign In X Sign in with your ALM Account Remember Me Or... Sign In With LinkedIn

Conrad also said that contacts at ADP told him that ADP was concerned about security and noticed a suspicious spike in traffic, but he said he pushed back against the company when the dates provided for the alleged spike in traffic occurred after ADP had started disconnecting Zenefits from client ADP accounts. Then Conrad sent an email to customers of both Zenefits and ADP that stated ADP had deactivated the Zenefits admin user accounts, invited customers to sign a Change.org petition and included the following statement: “The reason for this is that ADP believes it can one day build software to compete with Zenefits, and in the meantime they would like to do anything they can to impede Zenefits.” Conrad also stated in the email that Zenefits would pay existing ADP payroll clients $1,000 to switch to Intuit Payroll and would help facilitate the transition for clients.

“We partner with people all the time—competitors, third parties, whoever—at the behest of our clients, and there’s a process to make sure that it works and it’s secure, because data security is paramount at ADP,” he added. “This is classic playbook strategy for an incumbent software provider,” said Conrad. “Sow fear, uncertainty and doubt. They’re saying Zenefits is accessing their system, unauthorized.