DURHAM, N.C. and NEW YORK, Sept. 4, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- Duke University and Medscape, the leading source of physician information, announced today a newly formed partnership to launch Duke University's Business of Healthcare Academy™.

The Business of Healthcare Academy™ is designed to provide healthcare professionals with an innovative opportunity to increase their business and leadership skills and expertise. The courses being offered through the Business of Healthcare Academy™ are approved by Duke Medicine for joint accreditation and will offer both CME credits and nursing contact hours. Successful completion of five courses leads to the Duke University-endorsed Business of Healthcare Academy™ Certificate.

Medscape's membership of physicians and healthcare professionals will have access to courses designed and taught by the prestigious Duke University faculty. The program will launch with five initial courses:

Effective Leadership for the 21st Century

Financial Decision Making

Strategic Management

Healthcare Policy Part I: Reform & Finance

Healthcare Policy Part II: Payments & Delivery

"Duke's Business of Healthcare Academy™ will help healthcare professionals develop business insights and perspectives not taught in most medical schools or residency programs," said Kevin A. Schulman, M.D., M.B.A., professor of medicine and the Gregory Mario and Jeremy Mario Professor of Business Administration, Duke University. "We are proud to be partnering with Medscape to bring this opportunity to our clinical community."

"The Affordable Care Act (A.C.A.) enacted in 2013 created fundamental changes to the healthcare system in the U.S., and healthcare providers are seeking to understand the new environment," said Jamie DeMaria, Ph.D., M.B.A., group vice president, Medscape Education. "This strategic partnership with Duke combines the strength and quality of two of the world's leading medical education organizations to offer a curriculum that will deliver innovative and pragmatic information to help healthcare professionals succeed. It is our privilege to partner with Duke University to bring this new offering to our engaged and active Medscape members."

Healthcare professionals interested in learning more about the Business of Healthcare Academy™ should check www.medscape.com/BHCA

The Business of Healthcare Academy™ at Duke University



The Business of Healthcare Academy™ at Duke University is designed to provide clinicians and other healthcare professionals with a novel opportunity to build business leadership expertise that will help when navigating the complex, ever-changing challenges specific to clinical practice. Drawing on the knowledge and experiences of industry thought leaders and practitioners, courses are primarily video-driven and incorporate salient case studies, activities and downloadable job aids.

About WebMD and Medscape



WebMD Health Corp. (NASDAQ: WBMD) is the leading provider of health information services, serving consumers, physicians, healthcare professionals, employers, and health plans through our public and private online portals, mobile platforms and health-focused publications.

The WebMD Health Network includes WebMD Health, Medscape, MedicineNet, eMedicineHealth, RxList, Medscape Education and other owned WebMD sites.

Medscape is the leading source of clinical news, health information and point-of-care tools for healthcare professionals. Medscape offers specialists, primary care physicians and other health professionals the most robust and integrated medical information and educational tools. Medscape Education (medscape.org) is the leading destination for continuous professional development, consisting of more than 30 specialty-focused destinations offering thousands of free C.M.E. and C.E. courses and other educational programs for physicians, nurses and other healthcare professionals.

SOURCE Medscape