Family Research Council wants you to travel to Israel with Gov. Jindal

The conservative Family Research Council is promoting a trip to Israel Oct. 27-Nov. 6.

Guests paying for the trip, which start at $4,988 for departures out of New York City, will be joined for part of the itinerary by Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal and former Sen. Rick Santorum. Both are likely to be courting the conservative evangelical votes represented by the Family Research Council during their anticipated runs for the 2016 GOP presidential nomination.

"Whether you're standing in the ruins of the synagogue at Capernaum on the edge of the Sea of Galilee; overlooking the place of Armageddon; journeying up to Jerusalem, the 'center of the nations,' according to Ezekiel; or gazing at the Dead Sea from atop Masada -- the Holy Land is unlike any other place on earth," says Tony Perkins, the Family Research Council's president and a former Louisiana legislator in a release promoting the trip. "Couple this historic land of our faith with Israel's important role in the world today, and you have Family Research Council's first-ever tour to the Holy Land..."

Vitter teams up with liberal Elizabeth Warren on bank legislation

Sen. David Vitter, R-La., continues to team with liberal Democrats on legislation designed to improve transparency and oversight of America's largest financial institutions.

Vitter, who previously joined Sen. Sherrod Brown, D-Ohio, on banking legislation, Thursday teamed with Sen. Elizabeth Warren, D-Mass., in sponsoring a bill that would require the Federal Reserve to vote on all enforcement actions that include fines of $1 million or more.

Vitter and Warren said it would lead to more transparency.

Their bill would also give Federal Reserve members their own staffers, rather than rely on staff working for the head of federal bank.

"The Fed needs to be independent, transparent and accountable," Vitter said in a news release. "But under its current structure, the board of governors doesn't act with complete autonomy and succumbs to groupthink."

Added Warren: "The Fed's board of governors is our first line of defense against another financial crisis. Members of the board should have the resources they need to make their own decisions on important matters, and their decisions on major enforcement matters should be made public,"

Warren, a freshman and one of the Senate's most liberal members, is being urged by some progressive Democrats to challenge Hillary Rodham Clinton for the Democratic presidential nomination, but so far has declined. Vitter, one of the Senate's most conservative members, is running for governor of Louisiana.

Radio ads target diverse group – from Scalise to Pelosi

The American Road & Transportation Builders Association and American Public Transportation Association are running radio ads aimed at convincing Congress to increase the gasoline tax to provide stable funding to fix the nation's highways.

The ads target a diverse group of congressional leaders -- ranging from House Majority Whip Steve Scalise, R-Jefferson, to House Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi of California.

"For the past seven years, our presidents and the Congress have added over $50 billion to our nation's debt... just to maintain current road and public transit funding," the radio ads proclaim. "Now they're talking about doing it again. That puts a huge burden on future generations. And it's wrong."

"It's guaranteeing our kids will have worse debt... traffic congestion and poor infrastructure."

The Beyond Gridlock plan" advocated by the groups calls for a 15-cents-per-gallon increase in the federal gas and diesel motor fuels tax, along with a 100 percent offsetting federal tax rebate for middle-and lower-income Americans for six years.

Current highway funding authorization runs out at the end of May.

Cassidy pushes bill to speech up pipeline permitting

Sen. Bill Cassidy, R-La., is joining with two Senate colleagues, Shelley Moore-Caputo, R-WV., and Heidy Heitkamp, D-N.D., on new legislation to accelerate the pipeline approval process.

Similar legislation has been advanced in previous congressional sessions.

In a news release, the three senators said that while oil and natural gas production is increasing, a shortage of pipelines remains a problem. They said the current permitting process now takes months or years.

"Domestic energy production is accelerating, but the approval process to build the infrastructure to move this energy is stuck in neutral," Cassidy said. "Streamlining the approval process saves taxpayer money and ensures Americans have access to reliable energy to fuel their cars, heat their homes and run their businesses."

Said Heitkamp: "A key piece of developing and implementing a multifaceted, bipartisan energy strategy includes building out our energy infrastructure to meet our energy transportation needs. It just makes sense that oil and gas pipeline applications should be addressed in a timely manner so we can more efficiently site and construct additional pipelines while paving the way for North American energy independence and security."

The bill, known as the Oil and Gas Production and Distribution Reform Act, would require the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) to approve or deny an application within 1 year of receiving a complete application that is ready to be processed.

Rove: Congress needs to be ready if Supreme Court ends Obamacare subsidies

Karl Rove, the former political advisor to President George W. Bush, is urging Republicans in Congress to quickly unify on a plan to deal with a Supreme Court ruling that could stop subsidies for Affordable Care enrollees in states, such as Louisiana, without a state-run marketplace.

The ruling is expected by the end of June, and Rove says rather than continually vote to repeal the law, GOP members of Congress need to unify on a plan to deal with the potential of such a ruling that could be disruptive to millions of Americans. Some GOP members have proposed a transition period that would allow the subsidies to continue through 2017.

Gov. Bobby Jindal, who regularly urges GOP leaders to repeal the health care law he and others call Obamacare, wants Republicans to be ready with an alternative health care law to replace the Affordable Care Act, not just a temporary fix.

At an appearance April 30 at a Washington Examiner conclave on the 5th anniversary of the Affordable Care Act, Jindal reiterated he won't create a state exchange so that state residents could continue to receive subsidized health care under the health law that they otherwise could not afford.