Through his charity Cody's Friends, Cody Allen delivered this carload of goods to a no-kill animal rescue on Saturday, Nov. 7. (Photo: Cynthia Washington / Tucson News Now)

When he was in fifth grade back in 2010, Cody Allen did a report on President John F. Kennedy. He read Kennedy's famous quote, "Ask not what your country can do for you; ask what you can do for your country."

And with that, "Cody's Friends" was born. The charity is aimed at collecting items for local no-kill animal rescue groups and places that serve children in need.

Five years later, Cody is still working the first Saturday of every month, picking up donations with help from his mom who drives him.

This Saturday, he and his mother made a stop at Kimberly Lund’s home. She had supplies for dog beds.

"I was getting rid of this, and I think this is really perfect for large dogs to sleep on, because he was telling me some of these dogs never had a bed before, never slept on a blanket before, and it really tore at my heart strings," Lund said.

The pet food and futon, as well as other bedding that filled the car after a day of rounds, was donated to Tucson’s Cause for Canines.

"The animals and the small children can’t speak up for themselves and they need someone to speak up to them," Cody said.

And Cody plans on continuing to be the voice for the voiceless.

"I want to get a building so that the fosters that have these dogs can go and get food for free and get more volunteers to pick up donations and of course more donations," he said.

For people, Cody collects clothing, toiletries, bikes, toddler beds, strollers and much more. For the animals, he picks up pet food, new and used collars, leashes, bowls, beds and crates.

Cody’s Friends can pick up donations or people can make online donations through his website. To schedule a donation pickup, just message Cody through the charity Facebook page or fill out the donation form on its website.

Copyright 2015 Tucson News Now. All rights reserved.