The Indiana Public Retirement System is laying the groundwork to take its roughly $25 billion pension pool into private credit funds for the first time, said a person familiar with the matter.

Board trustees approved an allocation shift that carves out 4% of the Indiana Public Retirement System’s defined benefit portfolio for private credit, the person said. Indiana previously only had exposure to private credit through an opportunistic debt portfolio, targeted to make up about 2% of its overall investment portfolio, and through which managers could deploy a portion of their mandates in illiquid debt, according to the person.

Indiana joins other investors that are creating dedicated allocations for private credit to bolster returns in a low-interest rate environment.

The pension fund’s fixed income team, headed by Director Allen Huang, will take the lead in the build-out of private credit, the person said. Indiana’s private equity investment staff, the pension fund’s investment consultant Verus and private equity adviser TorreyCove Capital Partners will help source investments.

Verus, in a presentation delivered to Indiana that was reviewed by Private Equity Beat, made a pitch for direct lending: Private capital providers would be “well compensated” for making smaller loans that banks were less willing to make after post-economic downturn regulations hit. Verus also said the high volume of high yield bond issuance could present distressed opportunities ahead if the market goes south.

Indiana’s expansion of its new private credit portfolio is expected to be a gradual process spanning years. The pension fund isn’t looking to push money into the market, especially in sub-sectors that are getting crowded, the person said. The pension fund will work on determining its pacing targets going forward.

More than half of some 50-plus investors polled by Preqin Ltd. this year said they planned to commit more capital to private credit this year than they did in 2014.

The Arizona State Retirement System, which oversees a roughly $34 billion pension fund, raised its target allocation in private debt to 10% from 3% of its portfolio this year. Liquid fixed income target allocation is slated to shrink by a corresponding seven percentage points over time.

The Orange County Employees Retirement System also received approval from its investment committee this year to bolster its target allocation to alternative credit.

Write to Dawn Lim at dawn.lim@wsj.com