Saturday, October 5, 2013

Thousands of people gathered for the furriest festival in town: Woofstock.

Woofstock is the Kansas Humane Society's largest annual fundraising event. It attracted people and their pooches from all over the state on Saturday.

"I've been here many times, and I'm a dog lover -- a huge dog lover," said Jane Schwarz of Wichita.

Schwarz was a volunteer greeter at the event, which she has attended for years.

"It's just so good for the community," she said. "I mean people are coming from different areas that we've talked to, All different backgrounds. One thing in common. They love the dogs."

Sheep hearding, tasty treats and dog races -- there was no shortage of activities to keep everyone entertained. Most people raved the creativity showcased at the costume contest.

"One was dressed like a hot dog, M&Ms, tutus," said Cassie Gilliland of Wichita.

"We saw a whole, like a parade of dogs with M&Ms or a thing of M&Ms strapped to their backs, different colors," echoed Elyssa Judkins of Wichita.

The festival helps raise money for the KHS, which helps save 16,000 pets each year, according to the humane society's website.

"I just love seeing dogs in the little costumes and how people dress them up. It's fun," said Matthew Tucker of Wichita. "It's their day to be pampered and to be treated like princesses."

Event information:

Woofstock, the Kansas Humane Society's largest annual fundraising event, will take place Saturday from 9:30 a.m. to 3 p.m. at Sedgwick County Park.

Woofstock invites dogs and their people to collect donations for the Kansas Humane Society and then party in the Sedgwick County Park with KHS on Saturday.

Thousands of people and their canine companions will enjoy a day full of activities catered exclusively for them including Ruff Races, Doggie Musical Chairs, Water Retrieval, Best Dressed Costume Contest, Sheep Herding, Paws and Play Kids Zone, Shopping District and more.

All proceeds from this family-friendly event benefits the Kansas Humane Society and the 16,000 animals we'll provide care and services for this year.

Woofstock Admission:

路 VIP Admission -$25 Suggested Donation to KHS, includes one (1) event admission ticket, Woofstock Goodie Bag with limited edition Woofstock 2013 T-shirt and other great prizes

路 General Admission - $5 Suggested Donation to KHS, includes all Woofstock activities and demonstrations

路 Kids 12 and under - FREE

路 New this year! Donate $125 or more and get your own personalized Woofstock t-shirt with your pet's photo.