There was another seat at the table when the League of Women Voters of Lower Merion and Narberth met last week with the area’s state legislative delegation.With redistricting, effective with 2014 elections, a portion of Lower Merion Township will shift into a different district, bringing the number of state representative seats that cover some part of the township to four.If re-elected in November, veteran legislator Greg Vitali of Havertown will add Wards 4 and 8 and a precinct in Ward 10 to his constituents in the 166th District. He joined fellow Democratic state Reps. Tim Briggs (149th), Mary Jo Daley (148th) and Pam DeLissio (194th) for the local league’s annual “legislative interviews.” About 40 members of the chapter attended the two-hour discussion at Yangming restaurant in Bryn Mawr.State Sen. Daylin Leach (D-17th) was traveling. He was represented at the forum by his chief of staff, Zach Hoover.Redistricting, or rather reform of what the statewide organization sees as the current partisan political process to reapportion state legislative districts after each 10-year census, has been a perennial topic of the meetings. This year, the questions local chapters are posing to their representatives also focused on election law, education funding and prospects for Pennsylvania’s participation in Medicaid expansion as part of the Affordable Care Act to provide health care coverage to more residents.The area within the boundaries of Lower Merion Township is an example of how the current redistricting process can work to fracture municipalities’ representation, Brigs said. In the redistricting plan revised last year, Lower Merion was further divided in a process that he and the others said favors incumbents and the current majority party.Hoover said redistricting reform, a lengthy process, has been a major goal throughout Leach’s legislative career. “Daylin would say this is probably the biggest single threat of abuse . . . to the integrity of our democracy,” Hoover said. He said Leach has introduced legislation to expand the committee appointed by the legislature to devise a redistricting plan, and require a supermajority vote to approve one, in effect forcing political parties to work together.The contentious and – for voters – confusing process that followed the 2010 census will remain in place until after 2020, but Daley said she is also working on a bill to address the issue. “I don’t think it’s too early to be thinking about it,” she said.On a related topic of election law reform, moderator Suzanne Andrews asked the panel what changes they would support to remove “unnecessary barriers to voting” and promote voter participation in elections. The question comes as a state court has recently struck down, at least for now, the much-challenged Voter ID Act that would have required voters to show specific photo or other approved identification at the polls.Even now, Hoover said, “There are a lot of bills floating around” that Leach would not support, but rather fall into a category that Hoover dubbed a “Let’s-make-sure-Pennsylvania-votes-the-right-way series of acts.” Continued...

“We need to do everything we can to make it easier to vote,” Briggs added, as the others said they support a range of options, from same-day registration to no-excuse absentee ballots to early voting. Both Daley, who is supporting bills to permit on-line registration, and Vitali sit on the House State Government Committee, where they said a challenge is getting Chairman Daryl Metcalfe (R-Butler County) to entertain such measures. Metcalfe was “the prime mover of the Voter ID Act,” said Vitali, a 21-year veteran of the committee.DeLissio is a member of the bipartisan, bicameral Government Reform Caucus. Its goal, she said, is to “discuss substantive reform that we can actually get through the House and Senate to the governor’s desk.”Daley said an option such as on-line registration could be more accurate and actually save counties money in processing. But in general on election reform, as with redistricting, as members of the current minority party and self-described “progressives,” for the local delegation it is a matter of “fighting against the bad stuff to make it less bad,” Briggs summed up.On the issues of education funding and Medicaid expansion, they said they were waiting to see if election-year dynamics for Republican Gov. Tom Corbett would play a role.Noting that Pennsylvania is one of only three states without one, Andrews asked if they would support establishing a formula for distribution of state funding to local school districts, and if, so what elements should be included. Coming just days before Corbett’s 2014 budget address Tuesday, the panel was skeptical on word that the governor facing a bid for re-election, would boost education funding, after being roundly criticized for a $1 billion cut in his first budget in 2011.In fact, Corbett announced a $400 million increase in several forms of aid. Anticipating some move, the local legislators said the question would become what new sources of revenue or cuts in other areas would go along with it.On a funding formula, Vitali said the House recently passed a bill to create a commission to look at factors that would be appropriate. Some that have been mentioned, including a school district’s poverty level, students with disabilities, the number of English-language learners, district size, the geographical cost of living and more, “make sense.” There should be a system “so that every kid, no matter how poor, gets a good level of support,” he said.DeLissio said her district is “unique in that I represent the Philadelphia and Lower Merion school districts. You couldn’t get any more . . . opposite than that” in terms of community resources. “For me, this is an urgent, urgent matter,” she added. “It’s not like we can put our children on hold and say ‘Hang in there, honey, we’re figuring it out. We’ll get you educated at some point.’” Daley said a funding formula “would be a more transparent way of putting money out there. . . . It could be explainable to people.”Another issue on which the dynamic could change, the legislators said they had some reason to hope, is Corbett’s stance on Medicaid expansion. Rather that opting in under Obamacare, the governor has chosen the path of seeking a waiver to create a state plan, which he calls Healthy Pennsylvania. His newly released budget also addresses that initiative.But DeLissio, who came to the legislature from a private-sector career including managing retirement communities, said Corbett’s waiver request includes aspects that federal officials have already rejected in some other states, including a work requirement for some Medicaid recipients. Continued...

There was another seat at the table when the League of Women Voters of Lower Merion and Narberth met last week with the area’s state legislative delegation.With redistricting, effective with 2014 elections, a portion of Lower Merion Township will shift into a different district, bringing the number of state representative seats that cover some part of the township to four.If re-elected in November, veteran legislator Greg Vitali of Havertown will add Wards 4 and 8 and a precinct in Ward 10 to his constituents in the 166th District. He joined fellow Democratic state Reps. Tim Briggs (149th), Mary Jo Daley (148th) and Pam DeLissio (194th) for the local league’s annual “legislative interviews.” About 40 members of the chapter attended the two-hour discussion at Yangming restaurant in Bryn Mawr.State Sen. Daylin Leach (D-17th) was traveling. He was represented at the forum by his chief of staff, Zach Hoover.Redistricting, or rather reform of what the statewide organization sees as the current partisan political process to reapportion state legislative districts after each 10-year census, has been a perennial topic of the meetings. This year, the questions local chapters are posing to their representatives also focused on election law, education funding and prospects for Pennsylvania’s participation in Medicaid expansion as part of the Affordable Care Act to provide health care coverage to more residents.The area within the boundaries of Lower Merion Township is an example of how the current redistricting process can work to fracture municipalities’ representation, Brigs said. In the redistricting plan revised last year, Lower Merion was further divided in a process that he and the others said favors incumbents and the current majority party.Hoover said redistricting reform, a lengthy process, has been a major goal throughout Leach’s legislative career. “Daylin would say this is probably the biggest single threat of abuse . . . to the integrity of our democracy,” Hoover said. He said Leach has introduced legislation to expand the committee appointed by the legislature to devise a redistricting plan, and require a supermajority vote to approve one, in effect forcing political parties to work together.The contentious and – for voters – confusing process that followed the 2010 census will remain in place until after 2020, but Daley said she is also working on a bill to address the issue. “I don’t think it’s too early to be thinking about it,” she said.On a related topic of election law reform, moderator Suzanne Andrews asked the panel what changes they would support to remove “unnecessary barriers to voting” and promote voter participation in elections. The question comes as a state court has recently struck down, at least for now, the much-challenged Voter ID Act that would have required voters to show specific photo or other approved identification at the polls.Even now, Hoover said, “There are a lot of bills floating around” that Leach would not support, but rather fall into a category that Hoover dubbed a “Let’s-make-sure-Pennsylvania-votes-the-right-way series of acts.”“We need to do everything we can to make it easier to vote,” Briggs added, as the others said they support a range of options, from same-day registration to no-excuse absentee ballots to early voting. Both Daley, who is supporting bills to permit on-line registration, and Vitali sit on the House State Government Committee, where they said a challenge is getting Chairman Daryl Metcalfe (R-Butler County) to entertain such measures. Metcalfe was “the prime mover of the Voter ID Act,” said Vitali, a 21-year veteran of the committee.DeLissio is a member of the bipartisan, bicameral Government Reform Caucus. Its goal, she said, is to “discuss substantive reform that we can actually get through the House and Senate to the governor’s desk.”Daley said an option such as on-line registration could be more accurate and actually save counties money in processing. But in general on election reform, as with redistricting, as members of the current minority party and self-described “progressives,” for the local delegation it is a matter of “fighting against the bad stuff to make it less bad,” Briggs summed up.On the issues of education funding and Medicaid expansion, they said they were waiting to see if election-year dynamics for Republican Gov. Tom Corbett would play a role.Noting that Pennsylvania is one of only three states without one, Andrews asked if they would support establishing a formula for distribution of state funding to local school districts, and if, so what elements should be included. Coming just days before Corbett’s 2014 budget address Tuesday, the panel was skeptical on word that the governor facing a bid for re-election, would boost education funding, after being roundly criticized for a $1 billion cut in his first budget in 2011.In fact, Corbett announced a $400 million increase in several forms of aid. Anticipating some move, the local legislators said the question would become what new sources of revenue or cuts in other areas would go along with it.On a funding formula, Vitali said the House recently passed a bill to create a commission to look at factors that would be appropriate. Some that have been mentioned, including a school district’s poverty level, students with disabilities, the number of English-language learners, district size, the geographical cost of living and more, “make sense.” There should be a system “so that every kid, no matter how poor, gets a good level of support,” he said.DeLissio said her district is “unique in that I represent the Philadelphia and Lower Merion school districts. You couldn’t get any more . . . opposite than that” in terms of community resources. “For me, this is an urgent, urgent matter,” she added. “It’s not like we can put our children on hold and say ‘Hang in there, honey, we’re figuring it out. We’ll get you educated at some point.’” Daley said a funding formula “would be a more transparent way of putting money out there. . . . It could be explainable to people.”Another issue on which the dynamic could change, the legislators said they had some reason to hope, is Corbett’s stance on Medicaid expansion. Rather that opting in under Obamacare, the governor has chosen the path of seeking a waiver to create a state plan, which he calls Healthy Pennsylvania. His newly released budget also addresses that initiative.But DeLissio, who came to the legislature from a private-sector career including managing retirement communities, said Corbett’s waiver request includes aspects that federal officials have already rejected in some other states, including a work requirement for some Medicaid recipients.“We’re clearly down to the politics of this,” DeLissio said. “In the meantime, we are hurting real Pennsylvanians” who don’t have access to affordable health care coverage.