Eight years ago next month, Steve Beshear held a party in the Capitol to celebrate his defeat of an incumbent Republican governor in Kentucky.

But the celebration was short-lived.

"My budget director looked at me and said, 'Well I hope you enjoyed yesterday because we're going to have to cut about $340 million out of the budget to keep it balanced,'" Beshear said Tuesday. "That was my welcome to being governor of the Commonwealth of Kentucky. And from there it went downhill."

Beshear took office in December 2007, the official start of what became known as the Great Recession, a year-and-a-half economic slide prompted by the collapse of the housing market that cost thousands of jobs and devastated the state's budget.

The downturn threatened to define Beshear's legacy, with $1.6 billion worth of budget cuts throughout his time as governor. But then Beshear decided to expand eligibility requirements for the state's Medicaid program under the federal Affordable Care Act, bringing health insurance to nearly half a million people and redefining his governorship in the process.

His decision reduced Kentucky's rate of uninsured people from more than 20 percent in 2013 to less than 9 percent this year, the largest drop of any state in the country. But it also meant taxpayers now pay for the health insurance of a quarter of the state's population, placing a strain on the state's finances as it seeks to grapple with a $14 billion unfunded liability in a pension program for public school teachers.

Beshear, upbeat as he met with reporters at the governor's mansion to discuss his legacy, said Republican Gov.-elect Matt Bevin is in the best position to write a state budget since before Beshear took office.

"You probably have to cut some things in order to invest in other things he wants to do," Beshear said. "But (Bevin is) going to have more money to do that with than I've had any time in my administration, and I'm glad, because what that tells me is our economy is moving in the right direction."

Bevin disagrees. The Louisville businessman, set to be sworn in Dec. 8, told a gathering of state Republican leaders over the weekend that his election was "a cry for help" from Kentuckians. Bevin has said his No. 1 goal is to fix the state's public pension system, whose problems, he said, have prompted ratings agencies to downgrade Kentucky's credit recently.

And Bevin has vowed to dismantle Beshear's health care reforms, arguing they are too expensive. That includes eliminating kynect, the state health insurance exchange, which has enabled more than 100,000 people to purchase private health insurance plans with the help of federal subsidies. Bevin wants those people to purchase plans from the federal exchange. And he wants to scale back the state's Medicaid program.

"There are about a half a million Kentuckians out there who now have health care, that if they jerk that out from under them, you know, that's inconceivable to me that anybody would do that," Beshear said.

Beshear defended his decision to go around the state's Democratic attorney general and hire private attorneys to appeal a federal judge's ruling overturning the state's ban on same-sex marriage. The appeal eventually wound up before the U.S. Supreme Court, which effectively legalized same-sex marriage nationwide. But it caused Rowan County Clerk Kim Davis to stop issuing marriage licenses, prompting a national debate on the limits of religious liberty.

"If I hadn't appealed that decision, I bet we would have had 80 to 90 Kim Davises in this state because we wouldn't have had a Supreme Court decision telling us what the law is," Beshear said.

Yet Beshear again refused to reveal his personal beliefs on same-sex marriage.

"I'll get around to that one of these days," he said. "But not today."