A blue light seen streaking in the sky Saturday night was an unarmed missile the Navy fired from a submarine off the California coast, a spokesman said.

The mysterious glow coincided with the Taurid meteor shower notorious for producing fireballs and led to a flood of calls from people contacting local police agencies and posting speculation on social media.

A Navy spokesman told The San Diego Union-Tribune the Navy Strategic Systems Programs conducted the test Saturday in the Pacific Test Range northwest of Los Angeles.

[RELATED: Debate about lights streaking across night sky]

Cmdr. Ryan Perry said the launches are conducted on a frequent basis to ensure the continued reliability of the system and that information about such test launches is classified prior to the launch.

Local astronomy expert Dr. Steve Kates (Dr. Sky) said he believed those flashes and streaks of light could be part of the annual meteor shower. He said the light could have been fireballs, which are extremely bright meteors that last for several seconds and can light up an entire countryside when they are at their brightest.

Unlike other meteor showers throughout the year, the peak of the Taurid shower is drawn out, lasting nearly a week.

Folks in Southern California and Nevada also reported streaks of light.

One viewer, Janelle Bonifas, posted this comment on our Facebook page: "We saw it here in Prescott Valley. It was super huge and bright. We could see the head and tail of the comet."

Another viewer posted, "It's not a theory. I've been in the military 25 years and seen this dozens of times. It's a missile leaving the atmosphere and the strange effects are just light reflecting off expanding gasses."

In his Facebook post, Johnny van Vlimmeren questioned if a missile really was behind the bright light. "If its missile testing why is it coming all the way from California and coming this far inland that should be a little illegal or least worrisome to malfunction what about the people that could get hurt"

And the sighting brought this tongue-in-cheek post from one of our viewers: "For sure aliens have a flare for the dramatic so they need to flash their bling to show us, 'Hey, we're here!'"

#OCSDPIO: Light seen in OC sky was confirmed through JWA tower to be a Naval test fire off the coast. No further details. — OC Sheriff, CA (@OCSD) November 8, 2015

Good cover up! The government works fast when it comes to cover ups https://t.co/vRWzUJWIQc — ChocolateWombman (@jomelanin) November 8, 2015

Obvious Government Cover up. Aliens are real, no denying it. https://t.co/IHu0vx9Q9m — Edward Michael (@EddieArguelles) November 8, 2015

#traxxz #hiphop Everyone on the West Coast Swore They Saw a UFO Earlier Tonight https://t.co/qgTqUZPYQ9 — Traxxz (@Traxxz) November 8, 2015

Copyright 2015 KPHO/KTVK (KPHO Broadcasting Corporation). All rights reserved.