Before there was health insurance, there were almshouses — county hospitals for the chronically ill, available to anyone.

And Dr. Victoria Sweet, author of the book “God’s Hotel,” spent 20 years practicing medicine at the last almshouse in America, San Francisco’s Laguna Honda Hospital. So she knows a thing or two about long-term patient care.

As Americans live longer, more are suffering from multiple chronic health conditions such as diabetes, arthritis, cancer and heart disease. Care of chronic conditions accounts for 75% of U.S. health-care spending, according to the Partnership to Fight Chronic Disease.

MarketWatch contributor Kristen Gerencher recently sat down with Sweet to discuss what the country can learn from the almshouse system, the cost-effectiveness of “slow medicine,” and how to handle the tensions that can arise when caring for the chronically ill.

MarketWatch: Almshouse is a word that has almost fallen out of our vocabulary.

Victoria Sweet: They were how we used to take care of the sick poor before there was health insurance. There would be a county hospital that was essentially free; anybody could go. That would be for the acutely ill, and then there would be an almshouse for everyone else. The almshouse would usually be a great big old place at the edge of a city, usually on many acres of land.

Dr. Victoria Sweet

That’s where the homeless were, the mentally ill, and sometimes pregnant, unmarried women. It used to be that in America every county pretty much had a county hospital that was free and a county almshouse, and that’s where you went if you didn’t have any place else to go. Interestingly enough, they didn’t do means testing. So if you were rich, you could show up.

It worked pretty well, but it wasn’t a fair system and it wasn’t an equal system. In the ’50s, all the almshouses in the country started to be closed for reasons, from the left, of justice — because they were unequal — and for reasons, on the right, of economy — they were pretty expensive. Almost all the almshouses were closed except for Laguna Honda, and Laguna Honda was originally called the San Francisco Almshouse.

I believe that the county hospital and the county almshouse system is a very efficient system for taking care of the sick poor. It’s not just, and it’s not equal, but you know what? It’s adequate. I think what we need to start looking at is what’s adequate.

MW: You make an argument that all the focus on efficiency has actually made medicine less efficient.

VS: A study just came out that ER docs now spend 43% of their time on electronic health records inputting data and 28% seeing patients. That’s just ridiculous. The ER doc is spending almost half the time just sitting there inputting data? That’s insanity. Part of it has been all the documentation. It turns out electronic health records were sold to us as being more efficient, but they’re actually less efficient — if by efficient you mean how much time do I have left to spend with you, examining you, and how much time am I spending filling out forms. That whole thing has shifted.

I’m defining efficient as you pay for me. How many patients can I take care of well?

If I have enough time to take care of patients, my experience at Laguna Honda tells me, I order many fewer tests, I get the right diagnosis, and I use many fewer medications.

I’d have patients that I would just schedule on a regular basis to see for maybe 10 minutes every month or two because that’s what kept them on the right track. It kind of kept things from turning into an emergency — emergencies are expensive.

There’s a whole model for this that’s been going on, which is this concierge model, direct patient care model. All the data is being generated right now with doctors who have dropped out and are taking only the number of patients that they can do a good job with.

It’s kind of obvious. You send your kid to a private school and they’ve got eight students and tutoring. Are they going to do better? Yeah.

MW: I can’t help thinking the benefits of the concierge model are somewhat oversold — that the benefits are more for the doctor: a less hurried lifestyle, fewer forms. Don’t doctors try to pick the patients that are the healthiest to begin with?

VS: What we need is a concierge practice for the sick poor. Let’s do that for two years and see what data we get. The really sick patients, let’s give them the doctors they need and enough time.

I do believe in a capitalist system. I believe if we can show the insurance companies that it is cheaper to do it this way than that way, they will pile on. So let’s take the hardest patients, let’s take the sickest patients, and give them their own doctor.

MW: With the Affordable Care Act, are you optimistic that the poor will receive better care?

VS: I thought Obama’s original idea of how to do health reform was really brilliant and I think that’s what we should do still. I think we should exchange the entire Affordable Care Act for the following: If you don’t have health insurance, you can buy into Medicare. I averaged it out. If you take the sum total cost of Medicare and divide it by the number of people getting Medicare, it works out to about $800 a person a month, which is basically what my health insurance costs. I mean, many Americans have health insurance that they like, so leave them alone. If you want health insurance, let’s let you buy into Medicare. If you have the money, you can just buy into it for $800 a month. And if you don’t have it, we kick in subsidies from the government.

Medicare is already in place. It’s like a sick body: Use what still works. That was Obama’s original idea, and I thought that was genius. Don’t create any new programs. Take what works and expand it. That’s what I would do.

MW: You mentioned the idea of open wards and the danger of too much solitude. What do you mean by that?

VS: Part of it is the difference between being acutely ill and being chronically ill. If you’re chronically ill, and you need to be in for months or years or even weeks and you’re stuck in a private room and you can’t get out, it is so lonely. It’s not good for patients. We have a really interesting comparison now. I’m not working at Laguna Honda, but I visit my patients there now and then and it’s fascinating because they were in the old one and now in they’re new one and they say it is so much lonelier.

I counted the last time I visited one of my patients — I had to go through 12 doors to get to her. She has M.S. and she’s in an electric wheelchair and that means to get out, she’s got to go through 12 doors. I mean, she has to ask 12 different people. So she never goes out of her room anymore.

MW: Another problem that comes up a lot is the balance between fall prevention and exercise, allowing people to move — because if they don’t, it’s deadly, and if they do, sometimes it’s deadly. How do you split the difference?

VS: I’ve heard a lot about that from the therapists, the physical therapists and occupational therapists. It makes them insane. That’s a big problem. What happens is that administrators, understandably, don’t want a fall, because that’s what they get nailed for. They don’t get nailed for someone who gradually deteriorates because they’re not getting any exercise. When you make everything punitive, then the nurses and the certified nursing assistants and everybody is going to lean on the side of no falls, and they’re going to be very nervous when a patient wants to get up. The more staff you have, the better it is, and the less staff you have, the worse it is.

When anybody I know goes into the hospital, anybody I love goes into the hospital, I go with them. I meet everybody, and I talk to everybody, and I check things out and keep an eye on things. In a chronic setting, it’s much harder, but I still do that as much as I can. Just go by and check things out and make friends with the nurses and have an open heart to them. If you go in there with your magnifying glass and want to look at everything, they’re going to look at you and go, “Your great-grandfather is not the person I’m going to let stand up when he wants to stand, because if he falls or breaks something here, my ass is grass.” So you also have to respect that the world’s not perfect. Where do you place freedom vs. safety?

MW: What about the chronic-care aspect? Would you prefer that your loved one fall while attempting to exercise, or would you prefer not to have them risk it? Should there be a philosophical agreement between parties?

VS: In reality, I would hope that the doctors and nurses would know that and do that. We’d have those discussions. Once you get to know someone and they’re in a chronic-care setting, if they have family, the family comes in and you can figure that out. They come in and say, “How much exercise is my husband getting? How come last time I was here he was just in that position and just in that chair and what’s that thing around him?” The care-giver can say, “This is why and how do you feel if we give him more? We don’t have somebody there all the time.”

My mom’s frail and I know she’s going to fall eventually. I just don’t know when ‘eventually’ is. Eventually hasn’t been for 87 years.

MW: She’s living independently?

VS: My dad’s 91 and the two of them are just really amusing people. They still live by themselves and manage. They have somebody now who drives for them and stuff like that.

I’m just waiting for the call, but what’s the opposite? If she sat in one place, she’d get a bed sore way sooner than she’s going to fall. So don’t fall, Mom. That’s what we say. She’s smart enough. She’s not demented. It’s the dementia picture that gets confusing.

MW: If you could give patients one or two pieces of advice for improving their health care this year, what would it be?

VS: I would like a patient when they meet me to assume that I have their best interests at heart. Meet me halfway on that. Deal with me the way you want me to deal with you. It’s a relationship between the two of us.

I’d like my patients to really enjoy the life they have. Do not get caught in what’s going to happen. It’s all time-limited. Don’t worry so much about what you eat. Just enjoy it. I tell my patients who smoke, ‘I don’t care if you smoke. All I ask is you enjoy every single thing about your cigarette.’ Opening the pack, getting that first one out. Because if you do enjoy it, you can’t smoke two packs a day.

Sit down, enjoy your friends and enjoy your life. That’s what I really would like for people.

More from MarketWatch