The following article is entirely the opinion of Jon Mark and does not reflect the views of the Inquisitr.

The beat-down that Ted Cruz suffered earlier in the week, was not only a blow to his campaign, but to those who thought the Dominionist senator, would certainly stick to his self-made delusions that he wasn’t on a sinking ship while it was sinking.

Just the idea that Trump would win the nomination so quickly, was a hard truth to swallow, and even pundits were stumbling on themselves trying to rewire their brains to predict the next move.

Trump’s take-down of Ted Cruz however, could not have turned out more beautifully, as the Texas senator went through the motions of announcing the suspension of his campaign, which ABC News covered.

The response from his followers was also of disappointment, that they had lost their faith-obsessed leader, and their faith along with him.

Just wrapped up interview with Senator Ted Cruz… Opening rally with a prayer. @WISH_TV pic.twitter.com/U61ozJgV3b — Vi Nguyen (@ViNguyen) April 25, 2016

There is no doubt that the dislike of Ted Cruz is quite profound throughout Washington.

As Inquisitr wrote before he made his announcement Tuesday evening, the dislike for Ted Cruz is not just made up by elites.

Cruz has been thoroughly clear through his campaign that he has no love for the American people, only his ideological-Evangelical view of Conservatism.

For instance, in his campaigns, he has often painted the Washington establishment as cartels for working with Democrats, who he hates and loathes.

But now that he’s dropped out of the race, what happens to Ted Cruz?

In order to predict this accurately, one only has to look at the status of the 114th Congress, who are known as the “Do Nothing Congress.”

The Atlantic published an article about Representative David Young who requested that his pay be docked because they missed their deadline to pass a budget on April 15, which is a clue into how little work they do.

There’s also no doubt that this creates a climate where senators can use their imaginations to see how far they can push their obstruction, from trying to sneak in absurd amendment conditions for bills they send through, to reading Green Eggs And Ham on the floor to end the Affordable Care Act,or shut down the government, which is exactly what Ted Cruz did back in 2013.

Just what kind of person does it take to go so far, in order to get their way?

In the end, all it did was throw a small wrench into the Washington gears and cause some people to not get paid for a couple of weeks.

ABC News wrote about Cruz’s stunt saying that according to Standard & Poor’s, $24 billion was the total cost of the government shutdown.

Many of the questions that have been asked about the senator are over how active he’s been in passing legislation, which Congress.Gov keeps track of, and in comparison with others, he’s done his fair share of doing very little.

Ted Cruz not supporting Donald Trump would not be a shock. Even the business mogul said that he’s not sure if Cruz likes him, but had to hand it to the senator that he was one hell of a fighter.

One op-ed for the Dallas Morning News has suggested that Cruz could return to the Senate and reach across the aisle to build bipartisanship for the next two years, before he runs again.

The overwhelming response to this from readers agree that that is never going to happen.

But given the senator’s history with the Senate and his relationship with others, which he has refuses to fix; up until he suspended his campaign, Ted Cruz is likely going to go back to Washington and do whatever it takes to take out his loss on America for not supporting him.

[Image by Darron Cummings/AP Photo]