Kansas 4th District U.S. Representative Mike Pompeo says historically food safety labeling is handled at the national level. The Wichita republican says, "We have historically done food safety at the national level. We shouldn't vary that because a small minority of folks have this loud opposition and in some cases a commercial interest in spreading information about a perfectly safe technology."

Rep. Pompeo told a group of area farmers at the Mid Kansas Cooperative in Benton that his bill called, "The Safe and Accurate Food Labeling Act of 2015," would allow the Food and Drug Administration and the U.S.D.A. to label GMO's if necessary. Pompeo says otherwise every state as well as cities will come up with their own standards for labeling genetically engineered products.

He says the possibility of having so many different sets of regulations will only make it more difficult and costly to get food products to markets. "But these regulations are putting a burden that's going to make it very, very difficult for those of us in South Central Kansas, that care deeply about continuing to be able to provide this food for the kitchen table, especially for those that can the least afford price increases on their food."

Butler County Farmer Tom Page agrees saying, "Any time you require that food chain be broken into smaller and smaller pieces that have to be segregated and handled differently it will slow it down and make it more expensive." Page says one of the things making America's food so affordable is how so much produce is moved efficiently from the farm to store shelves but is concerned that could change if there are too many rules on GMO's.

Pompeo says typically the government puts labels on unsafe products like tobacco not on products which are safe. "Every study that's been done shows that there is no health or safety risk connected to genetically modified organisms. None, zero. There is no peer reviewed study that counters that."

He says the bill will not inhibit consumers from buying non-gmo food if they so choose. Pompeo says consumers could wind up paying $350 to $850 more a year in food costs if his bill doesn't become law.

"I think it's very important that there be a single set of rules for the food chain in the United States and it's equally important that that set of rules be grounded in science and not in someone's emotions or perhaps political agenda."

The bill Pompeo co-sponsored passed the U.S. House of Representatives last month and now goes to the Senate. He's confident the president will sign it if it gets to his desk.