Citizens Insurance is supposed to be Florida’s wind-storm insurer of last resort. It’s a creation of the Legislature, a not-for-profit, tax-exempt government insurer backed up by the full faith and credit of the taxpayers of Florida.

By 2013, legislators felt the government insurer had become much too large, holding 1 in every 5 homeowners’ policies. They felt it was unfairly competing with private business and had exposed the state to excessive potential losses of $406 billion, according to a legislative report.

The Legislature’s solution was to rapidly force Citizens’ customers into a “clearinghouse” where insurers, many of them new startups, could shop for homeowners, and homeowners would have no choice but to accept their offers, so long as they were comparable.

As the Post’s Charles Elmore reported Tuesday, the clearinghouse works opposite of the Obamacare health insurance exchanges.

Instead of consumers having the ability to shop for the best-run, most stable of the private insurance companies, it’s the insurers that get to choose the policies they like.

The insurance companies divvying up the clearinghouse policies aren’t exactly top-tier. Many could qualify as startups. They keep the minimum amount of cash in reserves on hand and rely on offshore reinsurance companies to pay claims in a disaster of any size.

A state safety net pays claims if they become insolvent, something that seems likely – it has already happened to eight out of 22 Citizens takeout insurers, even without a major storm. The profits are what’s privatized. The risk stays with the public.

There are several ratings companies that evaluate the health of the insurers. The most-cited is Demotech, which is paid by the insurance companies. Demotech’s highest rating is A-double prime unsurpassed.

“If somebody wants a company that absolutely, positively is going to be there, get an A-double-prime company,” said company president Joseph Petreli.

So how many of the Citizens clearinghouse insurers meet that standard?

None.

The only one on the list that meets Demotech’s second-highest rating, A-prime unsurpassed, is Safe Harbor. The rest were rated A-Exceptional.

If it sounds like Demotech gives every company an “A,” it’s because they basically do – those that aren’t As don’t want to be listed and don’t pay. The paying insurance companies gladly report their “A Execptional” ratings on their web site without explaining that it’s the third highest rating, more like a “C.”

Consumers will want to do their homework if they are plucked from Citizens by one of these clearinghouse insurers. Not that they have much of a choice.

Obamacare may have its flaws but doesn’t it feel more “free” than this clearinghouse?