Topics: 2016 Elections, aol_on, fox news debate, Marco Rubio, Republican Party, Elections News, News, Politics News

Marco Rubio has become the darling of the Republican establishment. Jeb’s implosion is partially responsible for this, but there is also a belief on the Right that Rubio is the best “mainstream” candidate in the field. If that’s true, if Rubio represents moderate conservatism, the GOP is in serious trouble.

Apart from his fresh face, virtually nothing about Rubio is new or endearing. His ideas are either conventionally Republican or uncommonly extremist. On foreign policy, Rubio is a rabid neoconservative. He wants to double down on the Bush Doctrine; he’s surrounded himself with neocon advisers; he supports the government’s unconstitutional surveilance program; he’s pro-torture; and he wants to dramatically increase defense spending even though America spends more on defense than the next eight nations combined.

On domestic and social issues, Rubio is no less extreme. Against the backdrop of record inequalities, he wants to reduce federal revenue and give the top 1% a massive tax cut (which would explode the budget). Like every other Republican, he wants to repeal Obamacare without offering a viable alternative to the millions of Americans who now have health coverage. He supports a ban on all abortions, including cases of rape and incest. And he wants to undo Obama’s executive orders protecting LGBT citizens from marriage discrimination.

Thursday night’s debate was yet another illustration of Rubio’s faux moderation. If you cut through the canned rhetoric and listen closely to what he’s saying, Rubio sounds like a meat-tossing fanatic. His mini-monologues are either outrageous or patently false. In his opening remarks, Rubio trotted out his line about Obama hating America: “You see, we usually elect presidents in America that want to change the things that are wrong with America. Barack Obama wants to change America. Barack Obama wants America to be like the rest of the world.”

What does that even mean? President Obama has said repeatedly that his story is only possible in America; that he symbolizes the American dream. This is the kind of platitudinous drivel that Rubio spews on the stump. Rubio added that Obama “systematically and habitually violates the constitution” and yet never explains what he means by that. It’s just red meat for the Obama-hating dolts in the audience.

Rubio’s remarks about terrorism and foreign policy were characteristically hysterical – and dishonest. “When I’m president,” he declared, “we are going to rebuild our intelligence capabilities. And they’re going to tell us where the terrorists are. And a rebuilt U.S. Military is going to destroy these terrorists. And if we capture any of these ISIS killers alive, they’re going to Guantanamo Bay Cuba, and we’re going to find out everything they know.”