N.J. POLITICS ROUNDUP A collection of political news from the Statehouse and around New Jersey A collection of political news from the Statehouse and around New Jersey

TRENTON — Republican members of the U.S. House of Representatives voted Wednesday to repeal the Affordable Care Act — or Obamacare — in an action that would threaten health coverage for as many as 650,000 New Jersey residents.

N.J. GUN LAWS

After President Obama issued executive orders to tighten gun control in the U.S., here are five things to know about New Jersey's gun laws.

Meanwhile, here is a look at how New Jersey's lawmakers and leaders reacted to Obama's actions.

N.J. AND THE ECONOMY

A new study shows New Jersey is among U.S. states least equipped to to respond to an economic downturn.

CHRISTIE SLAMS CLINTON OVE NORTH KOREA

Gov. Chris Christie, a Republican presidential candidate, slammed Democratic front-runner Hillary Clinton, the former U.S. secretary of state, in the wake of reports Wednesday that North Korea conducted a bomb test. (See video above.)

Meanwhile, a new ad from Christie's campaign admonishes his GOP rivals who launched attacks on him as he rose in New Hampshire polls.

an independent fact-checker said a recent Christie claim about Guantanamo prison camp is wrong.

And can the governor compete with a 33 percent approval rating in New Jersey?

BANNING TRUMP FROM THE U.K.

British lawmakers in Parliament will soon debate whether to ban Republican presidential front-runner Donald Trump from the United Kingdom.

Meanwhile, The Star-Ledger's editorial board examines the matter.

MENENDEZ RIPS OBAMA OVER IMMIGRATION RAIDS

U.S. Sen. Robert Menendez (D-N.J.), who has been among the strongest supporters of President Obama's actions to shield millions of unauthorized immigrants from deportation, criticized the administration for a series of raids against Central American migrants.

NJ Advance Media staff writers Claude Brodesser-Akner, Susan K. Livio, Samantha Marcus, Jonathan D. Salant, and S.P. Sullivan contributed to this report.

Brent Johnson may be reached at bjohnson@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @johnsb01. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.