Buy Photo Police on scene in the area of 110 Mountain Blvd. in Warren were reports of an active shootings has taken place on Sunday. Here SWAT teams and snipers gather at the Corner Village at Warren shopping center for their staging area. (Photo: Mark R. Sullivan/Staff Photographer)Buy Photo Story Highlights Police trained for a similar situation to the Warren standoff

A robot was used to gain entry into the house where the shooter was believed to be

On a smoldering summer Sunday afternoon, members of Somerset County’s SWAT team, armed with nearly 40 pounds of equipment, established a perimeter around a Warren Township home where a gunman had already killed two people.

The SWAT team, comprised of police officers from around Somerset County, hunkered down for what turned out to be one of the longest standoffs in the 30-year history of the squad.

A few hundred yards behind them, at a command center where they could seek relief in this highly stressful incident under a glaring sun, was an air-conditioned tent with power bars and water. Rescue and paramedics teams were ready to treat dehydration cases, and ambulances were available in the event of injuries.

When the calls came in on Aug. 16 that a man who had possibly killed at least one person was inside his home, armed and threatening anyone who came near the house, county and local police authorities were able to activite a response plan that was established and practiced just seven weeks prior to the incident.

After a standoff of several hours, police learned that John Reno, armed with an automatic weapon, killed his fiancee Heidi Errickson, and her brother, Frederick Errickson Jr., before turning the gun on himself.

But authorities say the lessons learned from the newly implemented response plan helped them in this unprecedented incident, ensuring that officers and surrounding community members remained safe.

The practice exercise, which included law enforcement from North Plainfield, Green Brook, Warren and Watchung police, tested the newly created Police Emergency Response Plan (PERP), a regional law-enforcement response to a mass casualty incident.

“Because we had just played it out, it was fresh in our minds in the Warren incident,” said North Plainfield Police Chief William Parenti, who is also the president of the Somerset County Association of Chiefs of Police. “The advantage was that Warren was one of the players in our simulated drill.

“It saved a lot of time. Up unti this year we didn’t have a plan. We would make random calls,” he added. “Here we had a plan in place where the responding officers knew where to report and when to report.”

The Warren standoff was also the first opportunity for law enforcement to use a robot the county aquired through a Homeland Security grant.

Operated by Detective David Lissner of the prosecutor’s office, the robot was able to enter the home at Mt. Horeb Road and become the eyes of the operation with its various camera’s. Lissner said having the robot enter the home, instead of police, potentially saved lives.

“The benefits of the robot defintely came into play,” he noted. “We were advised that there was a person with a high-powered rifle in the house. We can’t send people into a situation like that.

“If they want to shoot at a robot, I would rather get it repaired than have somone go to the hospital,” he added. “It’s a lot different than driving a remote control car at home. Once it leaves my sight I don’t see it until comes back.”

While the SWAT team was mobilizing, officers from Warren, Watchung, Green Brook and North Plainfield, who participated in the drill in late June, played an integral support capacity role in closing off roads, evacuating the neighborhood and directing traffic.

“In my opinion, this (Warren) incident was one of the smoothest operations I’ve been involved with,” Somerset County SWAT team commander Ed Ciempola said. “We had a unified command, a common channel of communications and just knowing there was food and water available for us was a huge relief.”

The plan has the support of Somerset County Prosecutor Geoffrey Soriano.

“The Police Emergency Response Plan is a product of police chiefs that are tremendously far-sighted,” Soriano said. “The chiefs saw the need to ramp up our existing mutual aid response by way of formalization and organization. It’s a credit to the County Chiefs’ Association.

“The teamwork, the pride, the dedication, from where I sit, it is inspirational and, frankly, overwhelming,” he added. “My gratitude goes out to all the chiefs for letting their personnel serve in these very vital functions.”

Kevin Valentine, the Bernardsville Chief of Police, played an important role in the development of the plan and was on-scene in the Warren standoff.

“We looked at Morris County’s plan a year ago, and from that we developed our plan,” he said. “We wanted to ensure a rapid deployment plan in a critical incident that would be designed to use all the county resources in an organized way.

“Somerset County law enforcement has a long history of working together. In Somerset County there is an incredible spirit of coopration that excisrts among the law enforcement agencies,” he added. “It’s an excellent working relationship. There s no animosity. We respect each other.”

Staff Writer Everett Merrill: 908-243-6606; emerrill@mycentraljersey.com

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1Edgb4C