A black and yellow sign, hanging at the end in a light at the end of the tunnel type of way in a warehouse a few blocks removed from the hustle and bustle of downtown Keene, reads “Contenders Gym.”

It’s owner Matt Durling’s brain child, and with hard work and dedication, now his dream come true.

The Keene High graduate and proud Contenders Gym owner passes on that can-do philosophy to the boxers that come near and far to train with him and a variety of volunteer coaches.

One of those coaches, Chris Manzi of Swanzey, has made it a family affair. Manzi’s son, 15-year-old Keenan Manzi, who attends Monadnock Regional, is in the gym training for bouts five days a week. Colleen, Chris’ wife and Keenan’s mother, also trains at Contenders.

“We started at a very small location in Swanzey,” Chris recalled. “We’ve already doubled that space with this location and we just want to keep growing.”

Keenan will compete in the Silver Mittens competition in Lowell, Mass., on March 31. If Keenan wins a semifinal match, he will be invited back for the finals.

“I think boxing builds good character,” Chris said. “Two years ago, (Keenan) asked if we could come try it. If he didn’t like it, we would’ve turned around and walked away.”

Keenan took a liking to the physical sport, the dedication it needs to compete and the strenuous workouts that go with the training routine.

“They’re a very tight-knit family,” Durling said of the Manzis. “It’s a good healthy environment. They have a lot of energy.”

Jen Amato, a 4-foot-6, 106-pound grad school student, fell in love with the sport two years ago. Amato, the longtime girlfriend of Durling, also trains at Contenders.

Amato said sometimes her life feels like a balancing act: a 3-year-old at home, grad school classes while working toward a doctorate in psychology and training two times a day, six nights a week.

“It’s a grind,” Amato said with a smile, while she wiped sweat from her forehead after the type of strenuous workouts you wouldn’t want to put your worst enemy through. “The workouts are pure torture.”

But those long workouts make it easier for Amato when she’s in the ring.

“I know when we fight people, there’s no way my opponent has done what I’m doing,” Amato said.

Recently, Amato’s hard work paid off at Webster Hall in New York City against three-time Junior Olympic champion Julie LaDisa. Amato won in a three-round unanimous decision.

“She was from the Bronx, so we had three people there, she had the whole city there,” Amato said. “They were throwing stuff at us after we won. But it was a big night, a huge crowd.”

Now, the focus shifts to nationals for Amato, who is 7-1 with two knockouts for her career. The national competition will be held in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., in July.

“I’m wicked excited,” Amato said. “It’s my first time at the national level. That was my ultimate goal to make it to nationals so I could test my ability against the best girls.”

Durling added, “Jen has a great work ethic. She’s very dedicated and she’s always willing to put herself out there.”

Brittnie Stockton also claimed a win on Friday night, fighting in Billerica, Mass., against Jillian Diauto.

“It’s a reflection on her training,” Durling said. “It was a close fight but she showed a lot of heart and worked real hard. She just outworked the other girl.”

For Durling, it’s been a long journey watching his gym grow to what it is now.

“A long, long time ago, in a barn on Water Street,” Durling said as if he was getting ready to start a fairy tale. “I decided with a couple of friends to start a wrestling clinic. It went on for two years with not much technique. But eventually, I started to search for those techniques.”

Durling spent time in Claremont and Massachusetts, learning from the experts about mixed martial arts and jijitsu and combining that with the knowledge he had already accumulated from wrestling in high school and coaching at Keene Middle School for eight years.

Thus, Contenders Gym was born.

Durling, who has claimed two extreme combat amateur titles and a 2011 Golden Gloves title, now is focusing on running the gym. But he hasn’t ruled out possibly getting back into the ring.

“We were moving into this location and things were taking off. I wanted to focus on the move and coaching,” Durling said.

A girls’ class, run by Jenn Durling and Amanda Adams, has added variety to the area’s only boxing gym.

“I just wanted to bring something unique to this area,” Matt said with a smile. “I wanted to wrestle, now I’m putting out boxers. I just saw a good opportunity and I took it.

“It’s been a fun journey to watch this all come together with all the connections we’ve made and people we’ve met. I knew the only way I could do this was to make it happen.”