Oklahoma Wesleyan University President Dr. Everett Piper has been invited by Sen. James Lankford, R-Oklahoma, to attend Tuesday’s State of the Union address in Washington, D.C.

Lankford’s office made the announcement Tuesday, one week before President Barack Obama is set to address both houses of Congress. Lankford said he chose Piper because of OKWU’s continued stance for religious freedom in the United States.

“It is my honor to have Dr. Everett Piper as my guest for this upcoming State of the Union address,” Lankford said. “Oklahoma Wesleyan University is a leader in the national struggle to protect the constitutional right of religious liberty in the United States. Their stand for freedom before the Supreme Court will bring clarity to our personal liberties and the battle between religious freedom and religious suppression.”

Piper said he accepted Lankford’s invitation to attend next Tuesday’s address, and will be travelling to Washington to witness what he called a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.

“I am humbled and honored that the senator has extended his invitation to me to attend the State of the Union address,” Piper said. “I graciously accepted the invitation, and appreciate Sen. Lankford’s continued fight to protect religious freedom in our country. Oklahoma Wesleyan University is in the forefront of this and we join Sen. Lankford in fighting for what is right.”

According to Lankford, the fight to protect religious freedom continues. He has long been an opponent of the Affordable Care Act, and the mandates attached that say health providers must supply certain forms of birth control — including prescription drugs that induce abortion. In August, Lankford introduced the Health Care Conscience Rights Act, a bill that he said would ensure that organizations, private businesses, institutions of higher education, health care providers, and insurance companies are not forced to sponsor insurance coverage that violates their religious or moral beliefs.

Piper has been president of OKWU since 2002. Under his administration, OWKU joined with several other private Christian universities and charities in suing the Obama administration to determine whether the Religious Freedom Restoration Act provides protection against the ACA’s mandates on contraception. The U.S. Supreme Court is expected to hear arguments this session to determine if those mandates to nonprofit and religious institutions are constitutional.

“Instead of allowing diversity of thought and practice, the Obama administration demands conformity to their religious worldview,” Lankford said. “I applaud Dr. Piper’s stand for religious freedom, and I remain hopeful that the Courts will rule in favor of religious diversity and practice. Freedom of religious practice is an essential right for every citizen. Americans have the right to choose no faith at all, or to practice a faith and live their faith free of government suppression.”