KANSAS CITY, MO--(Marketwired - February 16, 2015) - H&R Block (HRB), the world's largest consumer tax services provider, will offer taxpayers the opportunity to switch to Block and pay only half the price they paid last year to another tax preparer, subject to offer conditions. It follows another switch to Block offer to provide free desktop software to unhappy TurboTax users. Taxpayers who prefer to use a tax professional to file their taxes now have their own invitation to switch to Block -- at half the price of their previous preparer -- for a limited time beginning February 15.

"This is the 'refund season' to switch to Block. So far, the average refund this tax season is $3,586 according to the IRS. Our tax professionals will use every available tax benefit you're entitled to get you your maximum refund -- now at half the price of what you paid last year for another preparer to do your taxes," said Kip Knight, president of U.S. retail operations for H&R Block.

Maximum refund guarantee, expertise, support among reasons to switch to Block

One in five eligible taxpayers miss a potential tax credit worth up to $6,143 while only one in three itemize even though millions more should -- especially homeowners. H&R Block's 80,000 tax professionals make sure their clients do not overlook these or any other tax benefits to get them the maximum refund they're entitled.

H&R Block tax professionals also receive the most in-depth Affordable Care Act (ACA) training in the industry and can help taxpayers understand the ACA's requirements, reconcile their Advance Premium Tax Credit and assist eligible taxpayers in applying for an exemption if they were uninsured.

With thousands of offices open year-round, H&R Block clients have access to a tax professional before, on and after April 15.

How to switch to Block and pay half the cost

Taxpayers should bring their tax preparation receipts from last year to their local H&R Block office to receive the half-off discount. The offer includes the cost of individual and business, federal and state tax returns filed in 2014 of $150 or more. Returns valued less than $150 will be charged $75. Taxpayers can find their local H&R Block office and schedule an appointment with a tax professional online or by calling 1-800-HRBLOCK.

About H&R Block

H&R Block, Inc. (HRB) is the world's largest consumer tax services provider. More than 650 million tax returns have been prepared worldwide by and through H&R Block since 1955. In fiscal 2014, H&R Block had annual revenues over $3.0 billion with 24.2 million tax returns prepared worldwide. Tax return preparation services are provided in approximately 12,000 company-owned and franchise retail tax offices worldwide by professional tax preparers, and through H&R Block Tax Software products. H&R Block Bank provides affordable financial services products. For more information, visit the H&R Block Newsroom at http://newsroom.hrblock.com/.