Jordan Bernstein promoted to COO at Cassidy — Lawrence Young joins SevenTwenty Strategies

With Adam Sneed

SCOOPLET… JORDAN BERNSTEIN PROMOTED TO COO AT CASSIDY: K Street firm Cassidy & Associates has upped Jordan Bernstein from executive vice president to chief operating officer. Bernstein — a former chief of staff to Rep. Jo Ann Emerson — will continue his work for clients while adding more operational duties to his portfolio. “Jordan eats, sleeps and breathes the art and business of advocacy. His proven management skills and exceptional client service are foundational to the future of our company,” said firm co-chairman Kai Anderson. Co-chairman Barry Rhoads added: “Our folks already have a real fondness and respect for Jordan as he has demonstrated his commitment to the firm’s success over the past 11 years, and that will go a long way in helping motivate and excite our team in the future.”

Story Continued Below

LAWRENCE YOUNG JOINS SEVENTWENTY STRATEGIES: The firm SevenTwenty Strategies has tapped Lawrence Young to lead the firm’s Fortune 500 and trade association PAC accounts. In his new role, Young will join the team as vice president of PAC programs. He comes to SevenTwenty with experience consulting for more than two dozen members of Congress on fundraising. “We are thrilled to have Lawrence join the team,” SevenTwenty President Pam Fielding said. “He brings significant experience, strategic insight and deep relationships on and off Capitol Hill to support our client work.”

GOOD THURSDAY AFTERNOON where it’s been 55 years since the Twilight Zone premiered on CBS. The original series would run until 1964, and the brand would be revived a number of times — including most recently in 2002. Send us your lobbying news, gossip, tips and scoops at btau@politico.com. And keep up with PI on Twitter by following @ByronTau or @PoliticoPI.

DEBUTING TUESDAY: MORNING SHIFT, the newest morning newsletter from POLITICO Pro. Morning Shift will offer a sneak peek into Pro’s upcoming new labor and employment policy coverage, which will include developments out of the Department of Labor and the National Labor Relations Board as well as intelligence on pressing issues such as unions, immigration, minimum wage, unemployment, retirement, pensions and pay, health care and ACA implementation, workforce training and important court cases. Sign up now: http://bit.ly/Qyu4lQ.

RUSSIAN INVESTMENT FUND ENLISTS CAPITOL COUNSEL: The Russian Direct Investment Fund has hired Capitol Counsel to represent the $10 billion entity in the United States. RDIF was created in 2011 to foster foreign investment in Russia, though Russian Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev this week ordered his government to draft a proposal to allow the fund to work with Russians. With new sanctions from the west targeting Russian money, the fund says it has been misrepresented in the press, according to the FARA registration. Capitol Counsel states in the contract that it will help with media relations, as well as relations with American investors and the federal government. The contract is worth $45,000 a month. View the FARA registration here: http://1.usa.gov/1CHsH7a

ALUMINUM ASSOCIATION HOSTS FLY-IN, ADDS MEMBERS: The Aluminum Association just concluded it’s annual meeting in Washington this week . The meeting included a joint Capitol Hill day with the Aluminum Extruders Council — where members visited 21 House and Senate offices and did a Capitol Hill policy briefing. The associations’ board also elected Michelle O’Neill of Alcoa to the newly created position of second vice chairman of the association. It also added Jack Pell of Sapa Extrusions North America, Sean Stack of Aleris International, Buddy Stemple of Constellium, Erin Fauber of the American Metal Chemical Corporation and Michael Johnson of Clarcor Industrial Air to the board. Finally, the association added new member companies A J Charnaud & Co., Fromm Packaging Systems, Herkules North America and Herr-Voss Stamco.

CHAMBER PARTNERS WITH REV THE VOTE: The Chamber of Commerce will announce on Thursday that it has partnered with Rev the Vote — a long-term effort to motivate motorsports fans to participate in campaigns and elections. "Rev the Vote is excited to get race fans as passionate about the electoral process as they are about motorsports," said Doug Davenport, executive director of RTV. The partnership with the Chamber will connect race fans with easy-to-use voter tools in their home state. Former Reps. Heath Shuler and Connie Mack are also board members.

GOLIN BRINGS ON NEAL FLIEGER: The PR firm Golin has hired Neal Flieger as managing director of the agency’s Washington, D.C., Richmond and Baltimore offices . He comes on board from Adelman, where he led that agency’s research division, StrategyOne. “Neal brings so much to Golin. He has the perfect mix of public affairs, corporate reputation, strategy, research and creative. In many ways, he personally embodies g4, and he certainly will be a driver in its growth and evolution for our clients,” said Gary Rudnick, president of the Americas. “He will be a tremendous asset to both our D.C. operation and the agency overall.”

GAMING INDUSTRY GATHERS IN VEGAS: The gaming industry's 14th annual Global Gaming Expo conference is currently underway in Las Vegas. The American Gaming Association is out with new research that shows the growth of the industry across the country. Local news has more: http://bit.ly/1vd0Tmo

NAPA FLIES IN: More than 100 of the nation’s financial advisors are in D.C. for the National Association of Plan Advisors fly-in forum. Participants took to the Hill on Wednesday to meet with top Senate legislative staff to discuss issues such as tax reform and proposed Department of Labor rules. Attendees also heard from Sen. Orrin Hatch, SEC Commissioner Michael Piwowar, Treasury official J. Mark Iwry and “Meet the Press” host Chuck Todd, among others.

** A Message from ASAE and The Power of Associations: Association professionals enrich lives every day by educating and training the workforce and setting industry standards of quality, ethics, sustainability and safety. We share our expertise across virtually every industry and state to help make a stronger America and world. See how just one association is making a difference today. bit.ly/SummitUnitedFresh. **

BURGESS LAUNCHES NEW PAC INITIATIVE TO HELP DOCTORS, NURSES: Rep. Michael Burgess is using his leadership PAC to launch a new initiative to bring health care providers into the debate over the Affordable Care Act. “The Affordable Care Act is killing the health care profession with high premiums and unstable coverage. It will continue to negatively impact patient care until we come up with common sense solutions,” said Burgess, a practicing physician for more than 25 years. “If we wait too long to get folks involved, we risk damaging the medical profession and patient care in this country forever. Already, we’re seeing a critical shortfall of health professionals, a drop in research and innovation and an unprecedented burden on doctors that leaves patients to bear the brunt.” The PAC will help encourage other doctors, nurses and health care professionals to become involved in politics and run for elected office. It will also help bolster the physicians and health providers who are currently in Congress.

BLOOMQUIST JOINS KOUNTOUPES DENHAM: Darren Goode reports for POLITICO Pro, Mike Bloomquist, general counsel for Republicans on the House Energy and Commerce Committee, is joining lobbying firm Kountoupes Denham. “He honed his legal, parliamentary, and procedural chops under prior committee leadership, and I was honored that he chose to return to my team to help lead our efforts these last three and a half years,” Energy and Commerce Chairman Fred Upton said in a statement. Bloomquist has been on the panel since Upton became chairman in January 2011 and also was an aide on the panel under previous Chairman Joe Barton. He will become a principal at Kountoupes Denham. The bipartisan firm was founded by Lisa Kountoupes, a House liaison, legislative aide and special assistant at the Energy Department for the Clinton administration and an aide to then-House Energy and Commerce Chairman John Dingell.

NORTHROP TAPS MCLEMORE: Defense giant Northrop Grumman today named Tom McLemore as its vice president of legislative affairs for cybersecurity, command, control, communications, computers and intelligence, and space, PI colleague Tal Kopan reports. McLemore is a veteran of Capitol Hill, having been staff director of the House Appropriations Committee Subcommittee on Defense and the Subcommittee on Homeland Security as well as a staffer for several other subcommittees. McLemore has also worked in financial analysis for the Air Force.

ELSEWHERE IN THE INFLUENCE WORLD:

ACC UPS SPENDING GAME PRIOR TO MIDTERMS: “The American Chemistry Council has more than trippled its political spending ahead of the midterm elections as it fights tougher chemical regulations in Washington," according to a new report from a watchdog group. An analysis from Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington (CREW) released Wednesday says the industry group has paid for thousands of political ads backing members of Congress from both sides of the aisle as it pushes for a "friendly overhaul of chemical safety laws,” The Hill reports. http://bit.ly/1E4OEyQ

IS THE SENATE ETHICS COMMITTEE WORKING? NJ reports: http://bit.ly/ZvMaKf

NEW JOINT FUNDRAISING COMMITTEES (Members of JFC):

None

NEW PAC REGISTRATIONS:

OwnEnergy Inc Political Action Committee (PAC

NEW LOBBYING REGISTRATIONS: (Firm: Client)

Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld: Project Frog, Inc.

Becker & Poliakoff: Duarte Monteiro Group

Becker & Poliakoff: Telephone Systems International

Crossroads Strategies: Advanced Medical Technology Association (AdvaMed)

Crossroads Strategies: Alabama Institute for Deaf and Blind

Johnson AG Consulting: Lynch Livestock Inc

McAllister & Quinn: Port of South Louisiana

Ogilvy Government Relations: Tangiers Group International

Peck Madigan Jones: Legacy Community Health Services

Rampy Northrup: Christian Science Committee on Publication

The Colwell Group: USI Insurance Services

Tiber Creek Health Strategies, Inc.: Peck Madigan Jones (on behalf of Legacy Community Health Services)

NEW LOBBYING TERMINATIONS (Firm: Client (Type of Termination))

All-Circo, Inc.: City of North Chicago (Q1 Termination Amendment (No Activity))

All-Circo, Inc.

Knight/McDonough (Q3 Termination Amendment (No Activity))

Billy Van Pelt Consulting-Government Relations: Elisabeth M. Goth (Q3 Termination Amendment)

McAllister & Quinn: City of Hope (Q3 Termination)

Welch Resources: Woolpert (Q3 Termination)

** One in every three Americans is a part of our nation’s vital association and nonprofit industry. Whether as an employee, a member, a volunteer or donor, at the heart of our community are people — researchers, innovators, mentors, communicators — whose expertise and hard work collectively create a stronger America and world.

Association Professionals:

ENRICH LIVES through volunteerism, creating standards of safety and quality, and fostering citizenship with communities around the globe.

KEEP US COMPETITIVE by committing resources to life-long learning, professional development, mentoring and research.

IMPACT OUR FUTURE by offering the expertise and perspectives of many to predict, prepare for and ensure progress.

FUEL THE ECONOMY through industrial development, product and service innovation and facilitating domestic and international business.

For more information visit www.thepowerofa.org. **

** A message from the National Retail Federation: Retail is more than great products, the sound of a cash register, a storefront or a website. Across all states and districts, retail represents a lifetime of opportunities, from first jobs to lasting careers. That’s just one of the reasons why when retail thrives, communities thrive. And, whether or not you work in the industry, there’s no doubt that retail impacts everyone, everywhere, every single day. How well do you know retail? http://bit.ly/this_is_retail #thisisretail **