Republican presidential candidates have talked little about their poverty policies in the debates, but the conversation could be changing this weekend. Seven Republican candidates will be in South Carolina Saturday to talk about poverty.

Republican presidential candidates have talked little about their poverty policies in the debates, but that could be changing this weekend. Seven GOP candidates will be in South Carolina on Saturday to talk about poverty with House Speaker Paul Ryan and Republican Sen. Tim Scott, S.C., who are moderating the Kemp Forum on Expanding Opportunity, according to USA Today.

“There are few challenges tougher than the fight against poverty, and we need all hands on deck,” Ryan said in a statement from the Kemp Foundation. “I’m looking forward to exploring ideas about how we can expand opportunity in America.”

According to USA Today, seven Republican presidential candidates are scheduled to attend and speak in three different groups. One panel features former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, retired neurosurgeon Ben Carson, and New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie. The second group includes businesswoman Carly Fiorina and former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee. A third panel will host Ohio Gov. John Kasich and Florida Sen. Marco Rubio. Businessman Donald Trump and Texas Sen. Ted Cruz are not scheduled to attend.

Political support from both Ryan and Scott is highly coveted, though an endorsement from Scott, as a senator for South Carolina where an important primary will take place in February, is particularly prized, according to Politico.

Because of their political influence, some candidates may seek to align themselves with Ryan’s poverty policy positions this weekend, according to Bob Greenstein, the president of the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, in an article arguing against Ryan’s plan for the Huffington Post this week.

Ryan in particular has led the Republican Party’s conversation on the issue of poverty. The Opportunity Grant proposal that Ryan first proposed in 2014 would combine funding for a variety of welfare programs in a single block grant paid to states from the federal government. “Essentially, the feds would write a check to a state and that state would be responsible for everything else,” explained Marketplace this week.

Tim Smeeding, professor of public affairs and economics at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, told Marketplace that Ryan’s proposal could have mixed results. “Just telling the states, ‘Here, do what you want. Take this bundle of programs,’ and they’re off the federal budget then we don’t have to worry about it, some states will use it creatively and positively and others won’t,” he said.

Alternet reported this week that in the five Republican and the three Democratic debates so far, no moderator has asked a question including the word “poverty” or “poor” once.

One of the forum’s sponsors, Opportunity Lives, said the candidates will “focus on their ideas for fighting poverty and expanding opportunity in America on the eve of an historical election.” The forum is also sponsored by the American Enterprise Institute and the Economic Innovation Group.

dlombardi@deseretnews.com