We must maintain our fiscal discipline and continue to provide tax relief for struggling families and growing businesses.

We must do more for ethics reform to build trust, which is the lifeblood of any government.

Our education system, while better than it was, is far from what we need to lead the global economy. We have new and growing challenges we didn’t have before, such as climate change and extreme weather, which have brought New York tornadoes, hurricanes, snowstorms and floods. Seven feet of snow in Buffalo, more than ever before, that’s saying something. I wouldn’t be surprised to see locusts next, coming up Broadway. We have new challenges to our public health system, like the Ebola virus. We have new challenges to our public safety system, where 13 years after 9/11 terrorism has metastasized from Africa to Asia, from Hamas to ISIS.

These are challenges, to be sure. But the past four years have renewed our confidence and have shown us what we can accomplish when we work together. Remember how far we’ve come. It’s time to be bold, my friends, because there is no small solution to big problems. We can do all this that I’ve mentioned, and we can do more. And we must.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Because in many ways the most severe problems we face go beyond the borders of our state, and the challenges are profound. We’ve seen the national unrest and the national discord. The American promise itself is being questioned. The offer of fairness and opportunity that was the American compact is now in doubt.

Americans are disheartened, disappointed by the economic climate, and rightly so. We are told the recession is over. We read reports that say the economic numbers are going up, up and up — but we work harder, and we earn less.

Income inequality is at the highest point in over a century. While American capitalism never guaranteed success, it did guarantee opportunity. And too many Americans are questioning the long-held belief that their children’s future will be better than their own. For too many, the dream of economic mobility has been replaced with the nightmare of economic stagnation.

For previous generations our education system offered hope. It was the escalator out of poverty. The public education system could take an Italian immigrant’s son from the back of a grocery store in South Jamaica to become the governor of the State of New York. It could take an African-American boy from the Bronx and see him become the head of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. It could take a child of Bedford-Stuyvesant and make that person the C.E.O. of a Fortune 500 bank.

But that was yesterday’s public education system. Today, we have two education systems, if we want to tell the truth: one for the rich, and one for the poor. And if you happen to be born in the wrong Zip code and go to a failing school, you will get left behind and never catch up. Public education that was the great equalizer in the society has become in some communities the great discriminator. Today’s high-tech advanced manufacturing economy, demanding lifelong learning, has squeezed the middle class, and people feel left out and left behind. And that’s not all.

If the American dream of economic opportunity was a basic component in the compact defining America, than the second component was our justice system. And our justice system ensured the promise of fairness and security for all. Our national symbol of justice, Lady Justice, carries a sword, a set of scales, and she also wears a blindfold. Why? To signify objectivity. Objectivity that one’s wealth, one’s class, one’s race are irrelevant to the pursuit of justice.

But today, sadly, too many people are questioning if the blindfold is still intact, or does the justice system now see black and white, or black and blue, or rich and poor? The world saw an African-American man in Staten Island die. And people are confused, disappointed and angry. Law-enforcement officials have been wrongfully targeted, and even assassinated. The situation has devolved into one which everyone is talking but no one is listening.

It must stop, and it’s time for the truth.

The truth is: The justice system does need review. The truth is: There are troubling questions that have been raised that must be answered. The truth is: Police officers do need more safety and need more protection. The truth is: Law enforcement needs to respect the community as much as the community needs to respect law enforcement. The truth is: It is our obligation as leaders to provide the reforms necessary to ensure safety. This is a New York City issue, it is a Buffalo issue, it is a Ferguson issue, a Los Angeles issue, but it is also our responsibility to solve it here, in the State of New York. And that is a challenge that we are up to.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Yesterday a young gentleman congratulated me on my re-election, and he said, “You know, I wish you good luck, governor,” with a sort of sad face. And I said, “Why is that?” And he said, “Well, you’re going to govern in very troubled times.” He told the truth, and he was right. These are troubled times.

When Americans questioning our economic system. When they’re questioning whether or not they have economic mobility. When they’re questioning whether or not their children are going to do better. When they’re questioning whether or not the public education system is working for them. When they’re questioning our justice system and whether or not our justice system is fair. They are questioning the essence of everything we believed in. Those are the primary democratic institutions of this country. That was the essential compact we made, and that’s what they’re questioning.

And that is the challenge before us: to be fearless enough to admit the truth. To talk about these problems no matter how difficult, because you will never solve a problem you are unwilling to admit. And then we must act, and we must perform, and we must deliver results that answer these questions and right these wrongs and restore confidence in what America is all about and what New York is all about.

We can do this. We can create economic opportunity for all. We can raise the minimum wage. We can create good jobs. We can get minority youth the training. We can use job-training credits. We can create the best education system in the world. We can beat the bureaucracy. We can get results. We can make the changes that we need to make. We can get the resources that we need. And we can restore confidence and trust in the justice system, both in perception and in reality.

Now you can say: “Well, governor, those are big challenges. Those are big challenges, and I don’t know if we can do it.” Yes they are big challenges, and yes they will be hard to accomplish. But my friends, that is what New Yorkers do. And that is what we have always done. We have always taken on the big challenges — taken them on first, gotten them done, and then created an example for the rest of the nation.

We started with the Erie Canal in 1812. Here in New York City you think New York City made New York City. No, the Erie Canal made New York City. Governor DeWitt Clinton had a dream. The question was who was going to open up access to the West. How could you get goods by water to the West? And Thomas Jefferson and Washington and Virginia were trying to dig a series of canals that would get you to the Mississippi and that would open the West. And that would have made Virginia the main port. And DeWitt Clinton said: “No, I have a great idea. We’ll use New York. And you can come up the Hudson River and you get to Albany and then you make a left and you go through the state and you come out in Buffalo, and once you’re in Buffalo, you are in the Great Lakes. And then you could go wherever you want to go.” They said: “Governor, one question, when you make the left at Buffalo — at Albany — how do you get to Buffalo?” He said, “No problem, we’ll dig a canal.” Dig a canal? Five hundred and twenty-four miles. Eighteen-twelve. Built that canal. No hydraulics. Men, women and mules, they dug that Erie Canal. It made New York what it was. They came through New York City to go up the Hudson River to get to the Erie Canal. When DeWitt Clinton started that project, they wanted to impeach him because they thought he lost his mind. Literally. They said it can’t be done. It’s too ambitious. They did it. They did it on time. They did it on budget. It worked. It made New York State what New York State is, and it accelerated the whole development of the United States. That’s who we are. That’s the stock we come from.

When they were talking about a dream of women’s rights and women’s suffrage, where did they go? They went to New York. And Elizabeth Cady Stanton said, ‘Yes, we can do this,’ and it is the New York women who came together and organized and got women the right to vote. When they stood up and said in the ’60s, gays deserve equal rights, it was us, at Stonewall, who stood up and said, ‘That’s right, gay people deserve equal rights.’ New York was there first. When a big state had to pass marriage equality because we were discriminating against gay people, and not letting them marry was just another source of discrimination, and you needed a big state to stand up and pass it — and it was hard — it was New York that passed marriage equality. And it resonated all across the country.

After Sandy Hook, when we saw the massacre and we saw the children killed and we said, ‘Enough is enough with this lunacy of guns,’ and you needed a state to pass sensible gun control, who did it? The State of New York did it. We did it first. That is who we are, and that’s where we come from.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Frederick Douglass once said, “If there is no struggle, there is no progress.” We know that in New York. Nothing comes easy. None of the ones worth it come easy. If it comes easy, you didn’t need it in the first place. And this is a uniquely New York moment. Because when things are at their worst, New Yorkers are at their best. And to any of those who have a question about our capacity, just look at where we are today: the tallest building in the Western Hemisphere. The high point of New York, on the same site as the low point of New York at 9/11. Why? Because that’s who we are. That’s what this site says, that’s what this building says: You knock us down, we get up twice as tall. You give us adversity, we turn it into opportunity. You try to divide us, and we come back more unified and tighter than ever before. And that’s what these challenges are asking us to do: to take that great diversity that is New York, and to find the commonality and to come together for the good of New York.

And once again, the emphasis is on “we.” We, as my father said so well, we are the family of New York, he called it, a collection of the most daring, bold, accepting people from every country on the globe. Every color, every creed is here in New York. Gay and straight, upstate and downstate, working together to make our diversity a source of strength and not of weakness, and to find our commonality, all for the same mutual goal of making New York a better state.

We will do this, and we will lead the nation by our example once again, because this is New York, and we are New Yorkers, and this is what we do.

E. B. White said, New York is to the nation what the white church spire is to the village. The visible symbol of aspiration and faith. The white plumes saying the way is up. That is New York. The symbol forward. The symbol that shows us the direction that is up.

Thank you, and God bless you.