Dozens of pro-lifers had a message for Pennsylvania Governor Candidate Tom Wolf at a recent campaign stop: you’re too pro-abortion for Pennsylvania.

As a local news station reported:

Just before Democrat gubernatorial candidate Tom Wolf spoke to dozens of people, a peaceful protest against the candidate was taking place. Pro-Life supporters stood at the corner of West 38th Street and Pittsburgh Avenue, with signs in hand. The group of people says they don’t agree with Wolf’s stance on abortion and say they can’t support a candidate who is endorsed by the “National Abortion Rights Action League.”

Click here to sign up for daily pro-life news alerts from LifeNews.com

Republican Governor Tom Corbett and Lieutenant Governor Jim Cawley are on the same page when it comes to protecting Pennsylvania’s most vulnerable citizens. Corbett and Cawley oppose taxpayer funding of abortion, support parental consent for abortions for teenage girls, and support positive, peaceful alternatives to abortion.

Corbett and Cawley supported House Bill 818, which ensured that no taxpayer funding of abortion occurs under the health insurance exchange created in Pennsylvania by Obamacare.

They also supported legislation to ensure that abortion facilities abide by the safety standards of outpatient surgery centers — a measure that came in response to a massive tragedy in West Philadelphia. There, abortionist Kermit Gosnell was convicted of killing full-term infants and causing the death of a female patient through negligence.

In contrast, Democratic Gubernatorial candidate Tom Wolf and Lieutenant Governor candidate Mike Stack have adopted a pro-abortion stand. Just two years ago, Stack was pro-life, but he has since publicly flip-flopped and has been called supportive of “abortion rights” by Planned Parenthood, the nation’s largest abortion operation. Stack also voted against House Bill 818, giving the go-ahead for tax funding of abortion. Stack’s cumulative voting record is mixed, but he has embraced a new abortion-on-demand position.