Hours after the Colorado Supreme Court ruling was announced against the Douglas County school voucher program, district officials gathered to publicly denounce the decision.

It wasn’t always this way.

Years ago when the district took its first steps toward creating the voucher program, school board members and administrators were cautious and secretive.

Not anymore. Last Monday after the court’s ruling, board members called a press conference to say they may seek a U.S. Supreme Court ruling on the constitutionality of the program.

However, I keep going back to the beginning. As an education reporter with The Denver Post, I was among the first to write about Dougco’s voucher plan.

At the time, district leadership wouldn’t comment. Dougco’s spokeswoman asked me to delay publishing an article. And the board tried to hold secret meetings about the plan at a private business office. Only after media attorneys interceded did the district allow press into the meeting.

It is gratifying the Colorado Supreme Court saw through Dougco’s ruse.

Under the program, the district created a make-believe charter school called the Choice Scholarship Charter School that would collect the state per-pupil funds. A portion of that $6,100 per student would be sent to the student’s chosen school in the form of a check to the parent, who would use it for tuition.

It’s not enough that the virtual charter school had no buildings, employed no teachers and had no curriculum. Its students never attended a day of class. The school’s existence was to collect money for private schools.

Sixteen of the 23 private schools under the program’s 2011 pilot phase were religious in character, and 93 percent of the 271 scholarship recipients in 2011 enrolled in a religious school.

Fourteen of those schools were outside of the district’s boundaries.

Proponents say the idea was to give families more choice.

They decry the court’s interpretation of the state’s constitution, specifically the s0-called Blaine Amendment, which forbids the state from using public money to fund religious schools.

The crux of their argument is that the Blaine Amendment is a 19th century holdover of anti-Catholic bias and should be overturned. They hope the U.S. Supreme Court will do this.

Colorado Supremes say the law should stand regardless of its ugly history.

What’s more, the case against Dougco has its own ugliness.

At least eight of the schools “discriminate on the basis of religious beliefs or practices,” wrote Justice Monica Marquez.

The program also allows private schools to discriminate against students with disabilities. One school has an AIDS policy that allows it to expel HIV-positive students. Another school lists homosexuality as a cause for termination in its teacher contract.

The argument has been made that taxpayer money isn’t going to these schools, that it is going to students. Under that notion, schools receiving state-subsidized funds can be as bigoted and exclusionary as they want, as long as the money is passed through.

That is a hollow argument and one that the state Supreme Court thankfully saw through.

E-mail Jeremy Meyer at jpmeyer@denverpost.com. Follow him on Twitter: jpmeyerdpost

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.