Oftentimes you’ll see someone joke, “I think I’m having a senior moment” when they have a memory lapse. But often as not, we make jokes about poor-memory moments to hide a nagging fear — a fear that we might be one of the estimated 500,000 people who will be diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease in the United States this year.

An Alzheimer’s diagnosis is all too real for the Kniesel family of Granite Bay. When 23-year-old Jennifer Kniesel’s grandmother, Kathleen Riolo, developed symptoms of early-onset Alzheimer’s around her 50th birthday, Kniesel and her parents didn’t recognize the signs.

“My mom started dressing differently, and soon she stopped driving on the freeway, taking long routes on surface streets instead,” said Tracy Kniesel, Jennifer’s mother.

Today Mrs. Riolo doesn’t recognize her daughter, her granddaughters or anyone else.

And seeing the ravages of late-stage Alzheimer’s on her now 72-year-old grandmother led Jennifer to a decision – a decision that has already raised thousands of dollars for the Alzheimer’s Association, and will likely raise hundreds of thousands in the years to come.

She started an event to raise money for the Alzheimer’s Association and research into the disease, which is the sixth leading cause of death in this country and, unlike cancer, has no means of prevention. There is also, at present, no possibility of a cure.

The awareness and fundraising event that Jennifer created will happen on Saturday, Aug. 15, and it’s called Auto’s (sic) for Alzheimer’s.

You may have heard the Kniesel name in relation to auto collision centers. The family has a long love affair with cars, which includes Jennifer’s grandfather, who raced, and later built racecar engines.

Little wonder then that Jennifer, who helps run the family business, Utopia Auto Body, turned to car enthusiasts for help.

The third-annual Auto’s for Alzheimer’s will more than double in size this year, showcasing hundreds of cars – many that can be found at the Sacramento Autorama and Hot August Nights in Reno.

“I grew up around cars and my grandma loved cars, too,” Jennifer said. “I thought, ‘What could I do that I know a lot about?’”

Last year Jennifer had to turn car entries away due to the event’s popularity. This year the group will use grassy areas at Rusch Park in Citrus Heights, with room for hundreds of the hottest pre-1975 cars around.

“You’ll see everything from 1930s Fords to muscle cars,” Jennifer said. “There’s a wide variety, and anyone can enter a car 1975 or older. My favorites last year were the black Willies and the beautiful 1963 split-window Corvette. Admission is free and it’s a great way to spend a Saturday.”

Work behind the scenes to pull off the event takes a team. Organizing raffle prizes, from hotel stays to high-end televisions, signed sports memorabilia and more requires the whole family, including mom, dad (Rick), and teen sisters Makayla and Rachael.

“My sisters are my minions,” Jennifer said with a laugh.

On a more serious subject, both mom and daughter became emotional.

“My grandma would pick me up from school and I would spend hours at her house,” Jennifer said. “I spent a lot of time being angry about the disease. I really shut down for a while. My grandma is the nicest person you could meet and it’s so hard to think of all the memories that she’s missing out on.”

Tracy said she was proud of her eldest daughter’s accomplishments in spreading Alzheimer’s awareness.

“Jennifer said she wanted to do something to honor grandma,” Tracy recounted, taking a moment to reign in emotion. “They say you don’t remember days, you remember moments. It’s amazing how one person (Jennifer’s grandma) can touch so many lives. Alzheimer’s has robbed my girls of their grandma.”