Credit the city of Lakewood for passing an ordinance to challenge Colorado’s vexing construction defects law, which has hampered the building of new condominiums. Even so, this remains an issue that must be resolved at the state level.

State lawmakers have unsuccessfully tried to change the 2005 law blamed for creating an overly litigious environment around construction defects claims and thus resulting in a dearth of new, affordable condos or townhomes.

In the past, this had been a fight between attorneys and builders. Increasingly, Front Range cities have joined the battle out of concern over the lack of condos being built.

The most recent figures show condos represented only 4.6 percent of the total new home starts in metro Denver, compared to 26 percent in 2008.

Condominiums are an important piece of the housing picture — often affordable homes that appeal to first-time home-buyers and empty-nesters. Cities hope to add more condos around transit stops instead of apartments, believing that giving people a sense of ownership will encourage more stable, lasting communities.

This year, Sen. Jessie Ulibarri, D-Westminster, sponsored legislation to push more condo construction disputes into arbitration and lower insurance premiums. But the bills failed over concerns of weakening consumer protection.

No one wants homeowners saddled with poorly constructed condos without redress. But the current law is skewed in favor of litigation as the way to resolve the conflicts.

Lakewood took the right approach, and the state should consider similar legislation.

State law as it exists now allows a majority of a homeowners association board — not homeowners themselves — to approve litigation against a builder. The problem is, once a lawsuit is filed, homeowners often have trouble selling or refinancing units.

Lakewood’s ordinance gives developers and builders a “right to repair” before facing litigation and requires condominium boards to get consent from a majority of homeowners before filing suit.

It is yet to be seen whether construction will now flourish in Lakewood or even whether the city’s home rule status legally allows it to override state law.

Yet, the Lakewood’s ordinance comes at the right time.

Millennials are flocking to Denver, interest rates are low and the area’s economy is doing better than other cities.

People want to buy condos but there is no supply. The state legislature needs to follow Lakewood’s lead.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.