By Emma Crawford Kent

Daily Journal

TUPELO – Tupelo Public School District leaders say they are well aware a recently hired administrator was going through a racial discrimination lawsuit in Natchez just months ago, and they are confident in her abilities to do well in Tupelo.

Tanisha Smith, who served as assistant superintendent for the Natchez-Adams School District until Wednesday, along with NASD Superintendent Fred Hill, were sued by a former principal in the school district who claimed the two created a racially hostile work environment, forcing her to leave her position at West Elementary School.

Smith and Hill are both African-American, while the former principal and plaintiff in the case, Cindy Idom, is white.

The two administrators were ultimately found liable in the case. On Wednesday, a federal judge denied a request to toss out the jury verdict or grant them a new trial.

The NASD Board of Trustees voted Tuesday to terminate Hill’s contract, while Smith turned in her resignation Wednesday morning.

Smith was named director of the alternative program at TPSD’s Fillmore Center at a special-called school board meeting Thursday morning at the Hancock Learning Center.

Gearl Loden, superintendent of Tupelo Schools, said Smith resigned from her position in Natchez to come to TPSD.

Loden also said he has heard nothing but positive feedback regarding Smith’s hire from both TPSD employees and community members.

“Our district is one of the highest-rated districts in the state, and Dr. Smith has worked here before and she worked with our curriculum team and at the high school,” Loden said. “She had the courage to go to a district that was one of the historic underperformers in the state and try to make a difference. We’re well aware of the situation, and we are confident in her ability to do well in Tupelo. We have all the confidence that we can in Dr. Smith.”

Smith worked for Tupelo Schools as a curriculum coordinator for grades 9-12 and as an assistant principal at Tupelo High School before taking a job with the Natchez-Adams School District.

“She did well here, and when you look at places, you have to have the right fit,” Loden said. “She has a good record here.”

emma.crawford@journalinc.com

Twitter: @emcrawfordkent