South Carolina depends on an army of private security guards to protect everything from gated communities to nuclear power plants, but the state has among the nation's weakest training standards for these hired guns.

Security guards in the Palmetto State have about the same authority on private property as a deputy sheriff, including the power to make arrests. Yet the state requires as little as eight hours of training before a new guard can strap on a pistol and head out on patrol.

In comparison, a would-be manicurist must train for at least 300 hours before he or she can polish a set of nails.

With nearly 4,500 armed security guards spread out across South Carolina, opportunities abound for violent confrontations between these private sentries and the citizens they encounter.

State Law Enforcement Division agents have investigated complaints about private guards detaining people without sufficient cause, brandishing their weapons under questionable circumstances, patrolling in public spaces where they have no authority and withholding evidence from police, according to records obtained through a Freedom of Information Act request.

Security guards also have been involved in at least 18 shootings during the past decade, killing at least four people and wounding six others, according to a Post and Courier review of SLED documents, police reports and media accounts. Six guards also have been killed and two others have been wounded in that time span, the records show.

Twice in the past two years, guards in the Upstate have faced criminal charges in connection with on-duty shootings.

In March 2013, Greenville investigators charged Steve Harry, a 50-year-old guard for AP Professional Security, with murder after he shot and killed a man during a disturbance in a hotel parking lot. Authorities have said he didn't need to resort to deadly force in his confrontation with 28-year-old Ledrekius Sloan of Greenville.

About five months later, a guard in Anderson was charged with manslaughter after he pumped 11 rounds into a truck outside a nightclub where he was working, killing India Lomax, a 21-year-old mother of three. The guard, Joey Johnson of Black Ops Protective Services, insisted he fired in self-defense after her truck veered toward him, but authorities said the woman had been shot in the back.

These incidents and other violent encounters involving guards have raised fresh questions here and nationally about the adequacy of screening, training and oversight for an industry that has become a pervasive presence in an age of global unease over terrorism, mass shootings and other threats.

SLED Chief Mark Keel said he thinks the state does a good job of keeping tabs on the security industry, and the majority of companies in the field follow the letter of the law. Many take the initiative to go well beyond the minimum training set by the state, and SLED's regulatory unit works to diligently investigate complaints when they arise, he said.

"There are always a few folks who don't follow the regulations, but I think the vast majority of the industry does a good job," Keel said.

Still, a desire to maintain quality in the industry as it continues to grow prompted SLED in the past year to assemble an advisory committee of agents, security company representatives and technical college professors. The group meets periodically to discuss concerns and ways to improve state standards. The dialogue has been positive, and a move toward improving training requirements is likely, said panel member Randy Harrison, who runs Greenville-based American Security.

"There is an expectation of having qualified folks doing the work," he said. "And I think you will continue to see improvements coming to the business."

Brent Roscoe, a former guard with Black Ops security, agrees more training would be beneficial, but he thinks some law enforcement agencies also need to accept that he and his colleagues are part of the public safety infrastructure, helping to safeguard lives and property.

"It really boils my blood, because we're doing the same job," he said. "And on that (private) property, we are the police."

Roscoe makes no apologies for being aggressive in his duties or for butting heads with Greenville-area police who didn't like his tactics. Nor does he have regrets about the several occasions in which he said he had to fire his weapon in the line of duty, including a December 2012 incident in which he shot a man three times outside a club. The man, he said, ignored his order not to reach for a pistol on the seat of a car. The man didn't die, but he did end up with "a lot of medical problems," Roscoe said.

"I didn't set out to shoot someone that day," he said. "I just did what I had to do. I did my job, and I eliminated a threat."

A national problem

South Carolina is certainly not alone in grappling with this issue. Across the United States, a haphazard system of lax laws, minimal oversight and almost no accountability puts guns in the hands of guards who endanger public safety, according to a yearlong Center for Investigative Reporting and CNN investigation released last week.

Among other things, the joint CIR/CNN investigation found:

States have issued armed security guard licenses to men and women who have never fired a gun, requiring little, if any, training before they go to work.

Most states, including South Carolina, don't require a mental health test for armed security guards.

A dozen states require guards to report when they have fired guns on-duty. But many shootings in these states still go unreported. And when they are, officials seldom take action. Georgia, for instance, collected reports on four shootings by security guards between 2008 and 2013, though media and law enforcement accounts noted six times that many, resulting in 23 injuries or deaths.

Fourteen states have no licensing procedure for security guards and nine states don't conduct a federal criminal background check, allowing ex-cons, domestic abusers and other potentially dangerous people to work in the field.

Armed guards may even increase the risk of violence. A statistical analysis of FBI data showed that during a bank robbery, the likelihood of violence tripled when an armed guard was present.

The CIR/CNN investigation discovered that researchers had warned security companies for decades about the risks of using armed guards. Beginning in 1968, a series of federally funded researchers found that the security guard industry was plagued by poor or nonexistent training. In 1971, researchers with the Rand Corp. recommended guards receive a minimum of 120 hours of training, not including firearms instruction.

Yet today, no state that regulates the industry comes close to meeting the training standards recommended by the country's largest membership group for security guards, the International Foundation for Protection Officers, the joint investigation found.

"We need to get this out there to the public, so they can realize it's a danger out there," Steve Caballero, a security guard trainer who helped write California's firearms training manual, told CIR. "And that's in the form of an untrained security officer with a gun."

Growing pains

The private security industry has grown exponentially across the nation in recent years, with the number of guards about double what it was at the time of the 9/11 terrorist attacks. Businesses, governments and other entities have sought increased protection from a variety of threats and many have found it a lot cheaper to hire a guard - some of whom make little more than minimum wage - than a police officer to safeguard entry points.

That's one reason why private guards now significantly outnumber police officers, and have for some time, with an estimated 1 million working in the security field.

South Carolina is home to 225 private security firms that employ nearly 15,000 guards, about 10,400 of whom are unarmed, according to SLED. That compares to 12,130 sworn law enforcement officers. As in other states, the field attracts former cops, ex-military personnel and police wannabes. All are required to register with SLED and undergo criminal background checks, and companies must notify the agency whenever a new guard is hired or an existing one leaves.

Keel said the state has a solid screening program for would-be guards. SLED notes on its website that about 40 percent of applicants for security guard positions have been found to have arrest records, and at least 60 percent of those folks try to hide those criminal histories on their application forms.

Though no mental health screenings are required, a state law passed last year created a database designed to keep people who have been ruled mentally ill from acquiring guns. That law resulted from a Beaufort woman's attempt to shoot officials at Ashley Hall private girls school in Charleston. Keel said the measure also helps keep the mentally ill from becoming armed guards.

The Post and Courier found little evidence in the 30 or so investigative files provided by SLED of mental health issues raised in connection with guards' actions - with one notable exception. When SLED went to investigate a complaint lodged in 2010 by a guard alleging unprofessional conduct by CMMC Security in North Charleston, they learned she had already left the company after a startling revelation about her mental stability, records show.

A company report indicated that the woman, hired to work as an armed guard at North Charleston City Hall, had told a co-worker she had been diagnosed with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder but had not taken her medication for more than a year "because she needs to learn to deal with it."

"If this is true, we don't need the problem in City Hall," a supervisor wrote in the report. "Especially with a gun."

Company representatives declined to discuss the case, citing personnel privacy issues, and North Charleston officials said they were never advised of the guard's mental health issues. The company no longer provides security at City Hall.

Under state law, the minimum training in South Carolina is four hours for unarmed guards and eight for those who carry a gun. Of states that regulate guards, South Carolina is tied with Arkansas for the lowest number of required training hours.

Though they hold the same authority as a deputy sheriff or constable on private property, security guards undergo far less training than animal control officers, who must undergo 66 hours of instruction. And they aren't even in the same ballpark as South Carolina police officers, who undergo about 531 hours of training over 12 weeks.

Hubert Harrell, executive director of the S.C. Criminal Justice Academy, said the training afforded to security guards "is nowhere near what we have to do."

The vast majority of these guards never fire their guns or run afoul of state laws. But a number of cases from around the state suggest that more training could be beneficial.

In January 2007, for instance, a security guard in Anderson County fired his gun at a library patron who triggered an alarm and drove off with a stolen book. She was gone when police arrived, and it wasn't clear if she was hit. More recently, in 2012, a guard in Columbia was pinned under a car and accidentally shot by a colleague after trying to stop a man driving erratically in a nightclub parking lot. The driver was fatally shot in the incident.

Clashing with police

Complaints about Columbia-based Black Ops Protective Services, whose guard faces a manslaughter charge in last year's fatal shooting in Anderson, fill several files at SLED's headquarters.

The company's guards repeatedly clashed with authorities in the Greenville area, where police, sheriff's officials and a magistrate wrote SLED to complain about alleged breaches by Black Ops guards. Among other things, they accused the guards of improperly withholding seized drugs and other evidence, patrolling public streets in an apartment complex where they lacked jurisdiction, insulting court staff and detaining two women at gunpoint over a remark made in a parking lot, SLED records show.

In a June 2013 email to his chief and other officials, Greenville police Capt. J.M. Harmon expressed particular concern over Black Ops officers patrolling in an apartment complex where they were living, stopping people and "acting as law enforcement." He said he was concerned "it will eventually put our officers in harm's way or get them involved in a shooting situation by not knowing who is who or who is the aggressor in any calls they get out there."

Roscoe, the former Black Ops guard, and his brother, Jason, who also worked for the company, were at the center of several of those complaints. They contend authorities - mainly the county sheriff's office - were at fault, interfering with lawful arrests and dumping good evidence because of ignorance over the powers afforded to security guards and a general desire to hassle private sentries.

"If anyone puts on a badge in their county, it becomes a pissing match as to who is the chief ding-a-ling," Jason Roscoe said. "I don't know what their deal is, because we should be working together."

Greenville sheriff's officials did not respond to requests for comment last week.

Black Ops' problems weren't just limited to Greenville. The company also attracted unwanted attention when one of its guards discovered his pistol had been stolen from his holster while breaking up a fight outside a fast-food restaurant in Columbia's Five Points district. That sent police scrambling to recover the firearm before it could be used for harm.

Blacks Ops owner Melvin Jackson told The Post and Courier his company is now all but defunct and has no more active contracts following "certain mishaps," including the fatal Anderson shooting. He said he started out with the best intentions but was undone by police resistance in some areas and a few bad hires who ran into well-publicized difficulties.

"Your names carries a long way," he said, "and certain mishaps can really bring your name down."

Johnathan Bragg, spokesman for the Greenville Police Department, said the city hasn't experienced many problems with security companies since Black Ops pulled out of town, but police officials would still like to see training requirements increased for private guards.

"They are not trained the same as law enforcement yet they are given the same powers as law enforcement on private property," he said. "That makes it challenging for us and challenging for them. To me, it's a weird system."

Companies in other areas of the state have also butted heads with police, records show.

In 2012, SLED agents cautioned Eagle Security after two incidents in which a guard sought warrants to arrest clubgoers for firearms violations after police had already told him there was no probable cause to press charges.

A Columbia police sergeant filed similar complaints against Elite Protective Services in 2007 after its guards allegedly arrested or detained suspects at an area travel center on grounds that "were not lawful or sketchy at best," according to SLED records. In one instance, a suspected trespasser was doused with pepper spray under "somewhat questionable" circumstances. In another, a guard detained a man and confiscated jewelry he was selling because he couldn't produce a receipt for the merchandise - actions that police said constituted multiple violations of the man's 4th Amendment rights, SLED documents state.

The police sergeant told SLED that "he is not sure what kind of training (the guards) have to attain to become certified, but it is obvious it is not enough," SLED documents show.

After a SLED agent relayed the complaints to Elite, company officials transferred one of the guards from that site and retrained staff in the proper procedures for making arrests, SLED records state.

Doing more

Eugene Coon is a retired deputy U.S. marshal who took over the day-to-day operations of CMMC Security around the time the company's practices were questioned by the guard with alleged mental stability issues. SLED didn't validate the guard's complaints but it did find multiple violations for failing to keep employment records up to date. Coon came in and drafted an extensive plan for reviewing and overhauling everything from record-keeping to training.

At the time, the company did about the minimum training required, which in an industry marked by low wages and narrow profit margins, was about the norm - And it showed, Coon said.

"I was embarrassed," he said. "In four hours (for unarmed guards) you cannot conduct a dialogue much less teach someone all they need to know about the job."

Coon bumped up the training hours, paired rookies with experienced guards and conducted classes in citizenship, responsibility and ethics so they would understand where they fit in the security matrix and the authority they hold. The company has since avoided problems with SLED. Coon sees the value in the industry as a whole adopting stricter standards, possibly following Florida's lead in requiring at least 40 hours of basic training.

Harrison, who runs American Security in Greenville, said some distinction must be made between small businesses that simply need a night watchman to call 911 if a fire breaks out and larger entities such as power plants or defense contractors that require guards with at least 80 hours of training and, at times, security clearances as well. He sees the state moving in the direction of requiring more basic training for all, but it will likely take time to catch up with Florida, he said.

"I don't see us going from four hours to 40 hours, but I do see us making incremental increases in training requirements," he said. "I know some folks would say four hours isn't a lot of training. And it isn't."