D-W.Va

When people visit U.S. Sen. Jay Rockefeller,., at his office in Washington he shows them a picture of a coal miner.Rockefeller said in his farewell speech to fellow Senators Dec. 4 that the picture of that miner embodies the spirit of those he is in Congress to serve.Read Rockefeller's speech in its entirety HERE “This is not about Democrats and Republicans,” Rockefeller said in his speech. “That picture means so much to me because it embodies the spirit of those I am here to serve, and silently reminds us of why we must work toward a common ground.”Rockefeller received a standing ovation from his fellow members of the Senate. Some were wiping away tears as they approached the Senator, who sat while he addressed them for about 40 minutes.One of the things Rockefeller addressed in his speech was a program he helped begin in the late 1990s.CHIP, Children's Health Insurance Program, currently provides health care to 8.3 million children and pregnant women nationwide, including 40,000 in West Virginia.“CHIP is important to me because it offers health care to children, including coverage for mental and dental health issues. It is, in fact, better coverage than the Affordable Care Act provides children,” Rockefeller said. “From those early days as a VISTA, I have seen the devastating toll that a lack of medical care can extract upon a child's well-being, health, self-esteem and even their will to succeed.”He said the bipartisan Children's Health Insurance Program has opened doors for millions who desperately needed to get into a doctor's office. However, every door that CHIP opened will be closed unless we can agree to fund CHIP past 2015.“I have faith that we will be inspired to act by the faces of those children in our communities who rely on CHIP,” Rockefeller said. “It is those individual faces I remember.”Finally, Rockefeller began to choke up thanking his staff members for their hard work.“To my staff, a Senator is really nothing without his staff, or her staff,” Rockefeller said. “You live and you breathe your work every day; you inspire me. You never turned a single West Virginian away.”When he first came to the Senate, Rockefeller said he wanted to be challenged.“I was searching for a clear purpose for my life's work. I wanted the work to be really hard,” he said. “And what I got was the opportunity to work really hard — along with a real and utterly spiritual sense of mission.”Before his speech wrapped up, Rockefeller thanked his Mountain State family for taking him in.“And to West Virginia, thank you for placing your faith in me and giving me the greatest reward — the chance to fight for meaningful and lasting opportunity, for those who are too often forgotten but absolutely deserve the best.”