Dream Lake is among the most visited lakes in Rocky Mountain National Park. (Ed Engle / Courtesy photo)

If you go What: The Colorado Cane Conclave is a gathering of anglers who build, collect, fish and enjoy fine bamboo rods and other vintage tackle. It's an opportunity to meet rod makers and cast bamboo fly rods. There will also be a silent auction, a showing of the 2015 Fly Fishing Film tour and more. This year's Conclave is a nonprofit fundraising event. All net proceeds will be donated to St. Vrain Anglers Trout Unlimited for the restoration of the Buttonrock Preserve Tailwater Fishery damaged by the 2013 flood. When: 9 a.m. to 6 p.m. Aug. 2; register by July 27 Where: Planet Bluegrass, 500 West Main St., Lyons Cost: $60 More info: southcreekltd.com or 303-823-6402

John Gierach and I were on the road by 6 a.m. Our plan was to get to the Bear Lake parking lot in Rocky Mountain National Park before it filled with cars.

It's common knowledge that during the height of the tourist season the lot can fill up by 9 a.m. I hadn't been to the "park" in years, and John seldom goes there nowadays, and when he does it's in the off-season. He forewarned me to expect crowds.

Advertisement

There wasn't much traffic at all on the drive up from the Beaver Meadows Entrance Station to the parking lot, and when we arrived it was only about one-third full, but even that number of cars that early in the morning surprised me. Then again, you have to remember that Dream Lake, our destination, is probably the most visited and photographed lake in the park, although far fewer visitors fish for the greenback cutthroat trout it contains.

John Gierach fishing to greenback cutthroat trout at the inlet to Dream Lake. (Ed Engle / Courtesy photo)

I'll admit to being the instigator for the trip. John had visibly grimaced when I said I wanted to fish a high lake in the park, but he signed on anyhow. Both of us are at best curmudgeons when it comes to fishing crowded waters, and there was no doubt this would be a test.

It didn't take long to gear up at the truck. Over the years we've both downsized what we carry on fishing hike-ins. I loaded some lightweight stocking foot hip waders into my pack, but wore the wading shoes with heavy socks for the hike in. My single fly box contained an assortment of mostly dry flies, a few nymphs and ant and beetle patterns. Some spare tippet material, a fresh leader, fly floatant, nippers and bug repellent rounded out my fishing tackle. In addition, I carried required high country gear such as a rain coat and a fleece sweater.

A low deck of clouds covered the sky when we started up the trail, but I figured they would dissipate later in the day. The trail itself was paved with asphalt, which did give me pause if only as a further indication of the amount of traffic it receives. The wind kicked in big time when we'd covered about two-thirds of the 1.1-mile hike to the lake. We arrived about 20 minutes later, and the surf was definitely up. The east end of the lake was clearly unfishable, but there appeared to be a slick of calm water on the far western end where Tyndall Creek comes in. We headed that way.

Ed Engle, Great Outdoors

A few trout were dimpling the surface when we got there, and even more were finning the current and rising where the creek comes in. The water was clear enough to see their spots and brilliant red bellies and sides. I rigged up, got my hip waders on and headed to the water. I figured I'd be catching trout in no time if only because of those "dumb" cutthroat trout stories you hear that imply they'll take anything you throw at them.

Apparently, these cutthroat trout hadn't read that script and proved very difficult to catch. Whatever they were rising to was minuscule. I started with the smallest dry fly patterns in my fly box and then switched over to a tiny midge larva imitation with a blue glass bead. I managed a few takes on the larva imitation, but missed both fish. Eventually, I switched back to dry flies and finally hooked and landed a nice 8-incher on a size 22 midge emerger with an olive goose biot body.

By this time there was a thick, steady stream of hikers on the nearby trail. I decided to get away from the commotion by wading across Tyndall Creek to the less accessible south side of the lake. The wind had calmed, and I could see a few trout rising in the flat water along the bank. The approach to the trout required crossing a boulder field and then snaking my way along a thin trail through the spruce-fir forest that came down to the water's edge. As I worked my way along the bank I noticed I was spooking trout that were cruising within a foot of the shore and occasionally rising to take something small from the surface.

I decided that my best chance of catching those trout would be to walk a ways up the trail, wade out a bit in the shallow water and then cast back along the bank to the cruising trout. Once again I tied on the smallest dry fly I had. Most of the trout I cast to calmly came up to the fly, looked it over and then refused to take it. Ultimately, through sheer persistence, I caught a few trout, but I paid dearly with the flies I lost to the trees along the bank.

I was eating lunch and watching the trout cruise by when I noticed one take what looked like a dead spruce needle floating on the water's surface. I immediately thought that I have a fly that would imitate that "spruce needle" or whatever it was. It's a fly my friend Gary Anderson came up with to imitate Chironomid midge pupa in the eastern Washington state pothole lakes he fishes. It's a simple pattern with a thin brown foam abdomen, orange foam head and short white antron gills. The fly floats flat on the water's surface like a midge just emerging from its pupal shuck. Gary calls it the "ugly duckling."

A trout took the fly on the first cast, and the majority of cruising trout that I cast it to also took it. I probably landed and released 15 fish from that one spot. I can't say if the fly pattern that most likely imitated the emerging midges I occasionally saw popping from the water's surface rather than a spruce needle would work on any other day, but I can say on that day it cracked the code. I was into trout, and the hordes of hikers on the other side of the lake and the other noisy distractions that might have tainted my day settled into imperceptible background noise.

I was just fishing now with no other thoughts crossing my mind. Once again, the trout had come to my rescue and saved the day.