Texas’ biggest employer of Obamacare “navigators” says his charity and the 15 other organizations it works with across the state will obey an expected edict from Gov. Rick Perry’s administration calling for more training and background checks.

“Our navigators will comply with any regulation and rules that are enacted,” United Way of Tarrant County chief executive Tim McKinney said Wednesday.

He was referring to the federally paid workers who advise consumers about their options in new online state health insurance exchanges.

McKinney clearly wasn’t thrilled about one part of the Texas Department of Insurance’s proposed rule, issued Tuesday. It would require navigators to take 40 hours of additional course work – on top of the 20 hours to 30 hours they’ve already had, under federal guidelines.

“That’s 40 hours that they could be spending doing what they have been trained to do — educate and inform eligible consumers about the marketplace,” he said.

It’s possible, though, that existing navigators could defer some of the additional course work until next spring. That could help them stay focused on an upcoming deadline for people who want to obtain federal subsidies under the Affordable Care Act. Under the law, people have until March 31 to enroll in private plans offered in the exchanges, also known as marketplaces.

On Tuesday, Insurance Commissioner Julia Rathgeber gave the public until Jan. 6 to comment on her proposed rule. If it’s adopted early next month, navigators would have to register with the state, starting March 1, department spokesman John Greeley said Wednesday in an email. They would have until May 1 to complete the educational requirements, he said.

Perry and other Texas Republicans have said Texans could fall prey to identity theft if there isn’t more thorough vetting of navigators. As we reported in this story in Wednesday’s newspaper, though, a leading Democratic lawmaker and a consumer advocate complained the state rule potentially could cripple efforts to educate uninsured Texans.

Consumer advocate Stacey Pogue of the center-left think tank the Center for Public Policy Priorities says the rule would add $330 to $990 of cost per navigator who would have to register with Rathgeber’s department.

In an organization that hired 30 navigators, she said, that would add up to about $30,000 — or enough to wipe out the job of “a full-time navigator who could be assisting the uninsured.”

McKinney said he and his group, the Consumer Health Insurance Marketplace Enrollment Services or CHIMES consortium, haven’t been able to calculate how much the rule would cost.

“Organizational costs will obviously come from the grant,” he said.

In August, CHIMES received a $5.9 million federal grant – or 54 percent of the $10.9 million awarded in Texas.

It has hired 140 navigators, McKinney said. It voluntarily ran them through a $15-per-person, Texas Department of Public Safety background check. Under the state rule, it would have to spend as much as $60 more to have the FBI run a fingerprint check on each, Pogue said.

McKinney’s group also voluntarily gave its navigators an additional 90 minutes of training about privacy, beyond the federally prescribed curriculum, he said.