Chris McDaniel

1. Why do you believe that you are the best qualified to serve as Mississippi’s senator?

I have a proven record fighting for conservative principles. In 2010 Gov. Phil Bryant asked me to be the conservative voice for Mississippi to lead the legal battle against Obamacare. In the state Senate, I stood for principle and consistently voted against wasteful spending bills.

2. In your opinion, what are the most important challenges facing our country and how do you propose to address these challenges?

The biggest challenge facing the nation is the overreach of the federal government. Government has grown too big, meddling in almost every aspect of our lives. Whether it is the EPA telling our farmers how to run their farms or new rules dictating what light bulbs we can use, government regulation is destroying jobs and impinging on our liberties.

Furthermore, we must replace Obamacare with commonsense reforms that lower health care costs and increase choice for consumers. These reforms include allowing individuals to receive the same tax benefits for their health insurance as employee-provided insurance and allowing people to buy health insurance across state lines.

3. What steps need to be taken to improve our nation’s economy?

We need to start by balancing the budget. Washington is suffering from a spending addiction. At a $17 trillion national debt, our country is on the verge of a fiscal crisis, and unless we get our deficit under control, the American people will pay the price for Washington’s reckless spending spree.

4. What should the federal government’s top three priorities be in setting a sound energy policy?

I support increasing offshore drilling and opening up the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to exploration and drilling. I am also a strong proponent of building the Keystone XL pipeline to boost job growth and reduce energy costs. Lastly, I will oppose government funding for inefficient sources of energy.

5. According to Mississippi’s Legislative Budget Office, Mississippi receives $800 million in federal funds for the state’s K-12. If you are elected, would you continue to support the use of federal funds for public schools? Please explain your position.

The majority of the funds need to go to the students and the teachers as opposed to the $100 billion that the Department of Education gets a hefty cut of. Mississippi should receive more funds than the $800 million it receives, and that would be possible if we cut wasteful bureaucracy in D.C.

6. Do you support requiring timely and full disclosure of political expenses from all sources? Please explain.

We must protect the integrity of the political process. By requiring timely and full disclosure of expenses we hold politicians accountable to constituents. Our government must remain open in order for it to operate in a way that benefits the citizens of this great nation.

7. What is your position on cutting Medicare or Social Security to reduce the federal deficit?

My mother is on Social Security and Medicare. I would never advocate that government take away the promises given to the greatest generation and to my parents’ generation. The federal government must deliver on its promises. At the same time we must recognize that our generation must begin to make sacrifices.

Read or Share this story: http://on.thec-l.com/1ivPtch