Here are excerpts from recent editorials in Arkansas newspapers:

Northwest Arkansas Democrat-Gazette, May 10, 2016

Healthy developments

It is almost mind-numbing to conceptualize the world of health care, even though it’s such a vital part of our lives.

There’s no way to watch a TV show without an ad pushing this drug or that, complete with fast-spoken side effects that in many cases sound more scary than what afflicts the commercial’s protagonist. Sometimes, they’re even followed by ads from attorneys seeking customers allegedly harmed by the medicine or device that was all the rage on TV just a few short years ago.

Is the Affordable Care Act a booster shot to the health of the industry we expect to respond to our bodies’ complexities and failings, or is it a terrible policy that will become an unworkable behemoth? Or is it both?

In short, health care can be a tough world to navigate, and it can be frustrating.

Imagine, however, what health care might be like if we didn’t have choices, if there weren’t medical institutions competing to be the best they can be in meeting the health care needs of communities.

Residents of Northwest Arkansas, growing metroruralopolis that it is, have a lot to look forward to in the realm of health care services we all will eventually take a keen interest in.

The biggest recent news came from Mercy Northwest Arkansas, which unveiled a $247 million expansion plan expected to add several hundred jobs over the next five years. The plan includes a new 150-bed patient tower at the 200-bed Rogers hospital, but also the construction of four - and possibly up to seven - new clinics around the region. The first will be in Pea Ridge, and the hospital plans a clinic as far south as northern Springdale.

It’s only the latest news for health care services in the region. Construction continues on a 66,300-square-foot medical office building and a five-story, 105,000-square-foot Women and Infants Center at Washington Regional Medical Center in Fayetteville.

Northwest Health, already in Springdale and Bentonville, recently purchased Physicians’ Specialty Hospital in Fayetteville.

Mercy’s recent announcement also included a partnership with the Veterans Health Care System of the Ozarks, to develop the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences community internal medicine residency program. Eight medical residents will enter the program in July, adding eight each of the next two years until the class reaches 24 students.

If Northwest Arkansas is to grow its health care services in the coming years, that means a need for more trained medical professionals. While the region has enough drawing power to bring in some recruits, it’s going to be necessary for the region to also grow its own.

Washington Regional also recently announced the top floor of its new Women and Infants Center, which will expand the number of neonatal intensive care beds, will become the region’s first full-scale Ronald McDonald House. Ronald McDonald House Charities of Arkoma strategically opens such houses to give families a place to stay while their children are undergoing treatments.

And let’s not forget the plans earlier announced for the $167 million Northwest Arkansas Children’s Hospital in Springdale, a facility that will be a boon to health care for the region’s youngest patients. On Monday, Wal-Mart and the Walmart Foundation announced an $8 million donation to help pay for its construction near Arvest Ballpark and Interstate 49, on land earlier donated by Gary and Robin George and David and Cathy Evans.

These are welcome additions to medical services in Northwest Arkansas, and it’s also worth remembering that the jobs these developments produce put a lot of our neighbors to work - from the construction workers to nurses, doctors and support staff - and the money they make ripple through our communities, helping to keep the local economy health, too.

It’s an exciting time to be in Northwest Arkansas, and it’s outstanding to see the people involved in area medical care and area philanthropists continuing to make the investments necessary to care for the region’s population.

___

Texarkana Gazette, May 10, 2016

Special prosecutor wrong to ask for sealed records in sexual assault case

When former Texarkana, Ark., School District teacher and dance coach Julie Aultman was arrested last month on charges of sexual misconduct with a student, it seemed like just another of several such cases we have seen in the Twin Cities and across the nation.

Aultman, 42, is accused of having improper and illegal sexual relations with a 17-year-old boy.

But the old story got a new twist last week.

Miller County Prosecutor Stephanie Black filed a motion April 20 asking for a special prosecutor to be appointed, stating that Aultman was a “close, personal friend.”

Black did the right thing. She knew there was a potential conflict of interest and did not want the public to think Aultman would be receiving any special treatment.

Circuit Judge Kirk Johnson signed off on the order and the state appointed a prosecutor to oversee the case.

So far, so good.

But then something else happened.

Special prosecutor Jack McQuary asked that the case be sealed. Circuit Judge Carlton Jones, who was our local prosecutor before being elected to the bench, granted the motion.

This is not good.

It’s not customary for such a case to be sealed. The identity of a minor victim is usually protected, but other details remain open to the public and the media.

There has been no reason given why this case is being treated differently.

Prosecutor Black took the proper steps to ensure Aultman would not receive special favors. But the special prosecutor appointed to run the case saw fit to ensure Aultman is not treated the same way other defendants have been.

That defeats the whole purpose of appointing a special prosecutor.

Transparency is key to public trust. Hiding records from public view does just the opposite.

___

Arkansas Democrat-Gazette, May 9, 2016

It finally got here

It happened during the Forgotten War on the Korean peninsula - a war that shouldn’t have been forgotten any more than veterans like Edsel Smith should have been. The boy originally out of Foreman, Ark., is no longer a boy but a man who became a Gyrene on his 18th birthday and who by now has answered his country’s call around the world starting with Midway Island at the close of the Second World War.

It was more than half a century ago when he and his fellow Marines found themselves outnumbered but not outfought by Chinese forces, and only an airstrike allowed the Marines to extricate themselves from the trap that had closed all around them. They were called many things, some of them printable, but the one that has stuck is the Frozen Chosen, which became not just a nickname but a badge of honor.

Edsel Smith didn’t have time to care about such things then; he’d been hit in the leg and the blood was freezing against his skin during the endless Korean night. Our boys had been sent into battle only in thin fatigues while the Chinese were outfitted in quilted battle dress. It was scarcely an even match or close to it. Edsel Smith and his buddies, those who weren’t among the tens of thousands who fell and died in the snow and ice, earned a place of honor in American annals that will go down, or rather up, alongside names like Valley Forge and Yorktown.

But at the time he was distracted by the smell of bacon and eggs frying in the mess hall, and paused to wolf some down. Ah, youth and youthful appetites. How long ago that was, and how fresh as today’s sunrise.