Making the Complex Simple, Awesomely Simple. Past News Releases RSS

Benefit Corporation of America, LLC (BCA), a leader in the development of specialized employee benefits software, has released several major enhancements to BenefitScape®, a cloud-based outsourcing platform for ACA Compliance. The new features provide for stand alone e-filing of IRS reporting and e-delivery of required employee communications.

+ACA compliance presents unique challenges coordinating internal data and guidance.

While HR and Benefits will often direct the ACA compliance effort, significant input and approval is needed from legal, finance, IT, tax, payroll, communications etc. “The overall complexity, number of contributors, and immediate timeframe of ACA compliance make it a perfect candidate for outsourcing,” said Ken Phillips, President of BCA. “The real challenge is to make outsourcing affordable.” Employee benefits professionals often need to react quickly and economically to legislative, regulatory or Marketplace change. Making the required changes to complex HRIS, payroll, and benefits administration platforms is expensive, time consuming and often impossible due to resource constraints. BenefitScape has built a Data Warehouse that fills the gaps in these complex systems enabling ACA compliance without major development and cost.” See a Video on the BenefitScape Data Warehouse approach to affordability titled “Complexity to Simplicity”.

+Flexible Delivery Model for IRS reporting complements established capabilities.

“Our clients have internal capabilities or outsourced vendors that provide payroll, benefit administration, etc., but they may often lack one or more necessary features such as employee communications, hours tracking or IRS reporting,” according to Andy Miller, ACA Development Analyst. “The BenefitScape Data Warehouse provides the flexibility to offer a specific component, such as IRS Form 1095-C reporting by using the Value Added Network (VAN) features of the BenefitScape Data Warehouse.” The VAN creates a secure link to the IRS Affordable Care Act Information Return (AIR) Program as required for electronic filing. The cost reduction for an organization is obtained because BenefitScape creates the link once and extends it at low cost to VAN users.

+BenefitScape is a different outsourcing model, centered on the “employee experience”.

BenefitScape technology makes it possible to communicate to each employee individually, providing each employee a personalized experience available 24/7. We present a clear, optimistic and uplifting vision of your organization for each employee, while creating opportunities to build relationships and deepen engagement with every interaction. BenefitScape helps connect employees, their colleagues, and their community in a dialog on health plans, all in an era of new contemporary concepts, such as Healthcare reform.

+Why focus a compliance effort on the employee experience?

First and foremost, the analysis, communications and reporting of individual employee health plan eligibility and status is the major focus of and the reason for most of the ACA Employer Shared Responsibility provisions. If an organization approaches ACA compliance primarily as a technical exercise, downplaying employee communications, they will be overwhelmed with inquiries, problems and requests for clarifications from employees, their families, Healthcare marketplaces, employee advisors, and the IRS. BenefitScape approaches ACA compliance as a major communications event, focused on creating employee understanding and satisfaction while keeping costs in check.

To find out more about ACA outsourcing services and pricing visit http://www.benefitscape.com

and our Affiliate Program http://www.benefitscape.com/AboutUs/BenefitScapeAffiliateProgram.aspx

+About BenefitScape®

Benefitscape is an agile platform developed by Benefit Corporation of America, LLC (BCA) http://www.bencorpusa.com/ specifically to enable affordable outsourcing of ACA Compliance. BenefitScape creates a clear, optimistic and uplifting vision for employees of how their employer is connecting them, their families, their colleagues, and their community with their potential Health plan opportunities, all in an era of new and complex concepts, such as Healthcare reform and IRS involvement.