When $30 billion dollars are injected into the device industry, it will stimulate the good, the bad and the ugly all the same?

Recently we’ve been getting some feedback from medical device industry advocates.

Ironically, this feedback did not come when we started to raise an alarm about the severe patient safety hazard the device industry’s federal regulations have caused. Rather, it came when we raised a significant concern about providing this unsafe industry a tax advantage – the so-called “medical device tax repeal”.

You see, giving a financial boost to an industry whose products have virtually no standardized guarantee of safety, is wrong. That’s just common sense – doesn’t matter if you are a democrat, a republican or an independent.

Of course, the reason we’ve raised this issue is not because we are die-hard supporters of the Affordable Care Act, where the proposed tax repeal is going to come from - far from it. Rather, we are die-hard activists for patient safety and medical ethics in our healthcare establishment –as all physicians ought to be.

The industry advocates who are approaching us are all kind and well meaning. They are doing a good job promoting the economic interests of their constituents. They are doing a good job trying to create more jobs. But they also feel suddenly threatened by our goal of linking this tax repeal to the severe patient safety deficit in the medical device realm. They know it’s real. Their message to us about these issues is: “Keep’em separated”.

Unfortunately, these are not separate issues. We do believe that a vast majority of medical devices in our country are designed to be ‘life saving’ – and to make a good profit for their manufacturers. We are not against industry or profits. But, a minority subset of these devices are faulty, in design or conception – as the power morcellator is. And no real federal safety checkpoints are in place to protect unsuspecting patients. Doctors and device reps are the only things that stand between the patient and this monster we call “harm” – and that’s just not acceptable.

When $30 billion dollars are injected into the device industry, it will stimulate the good, the bad and the ugly all the same. And when the bad and the ugly in the medical device realm have no real federal safety checkpoints and are stimulated to grow, they devastate unsuspecting patients’ lives in America.

The real problem in the medical device industry comes from the corrupted way in which the Food and Drug Administration is using the 510(k) law to clear the vast majority of medical devices in the United States. This legislation was never designed for this purpose and it was certainly not designed to ensure patient safety. But, with definitive certainty, the way to protect patients from an industry gone rogue due to defunct federal regulation, is not to boost it with a sizable tax advantage.

So, our response to our friends and colleagues in the medical device industry when they tell us to “keep ‘em separated” is: Help us drive a leadership overhaul of the FDA’s Center for Devices and Radiological Health by congress. Help us make a “Medical Device Safety Reform Act” a reality and the law of this land. Only then can we help you achieve your tax repeal, stimulate your industry and create your jobs.

Patient Safety is first and foremost in our healthcare establishment. An industry whose products have the capacity to damage and destroy lives without any real legislative standards guiding safety, has no business influencing our hospitals and practice patterns – much less getting a tax advantage from our federal government.

Our proposal to our friends in the medical device advocacy community: Secure patient safety first, and win your tax advantage next.

We hope our congressional leaders and the president of the United States are hearing us loud and clear - because real lives in America have been compromised and lost to this industry’s inadequate safety legislation and to FDA’s leadership failure.

Hooman Noorchashm and Amy Reed, husband-and-wife physicians, have campaigned to ban electric morcellators since December 2013, soon after Reed’s unsuspected uterine cancer was spread by the device during a routine hysterectomy.

Read more from the Check Up blog »