Last August, after a Colorado State practice, I asked Rams offensive tackle Ty Sambrailo if he ever had been a Colorado Buffaloes fan.

The question was a natural, and not only because the Rams’ 2014 opener against CU was imminent. His father, Mark, was a former CU pole vaulter and a Buffs fan as he and his wife, Karen, a University of Denver graduate, raised their family in coastal northern California. And Ty’s older brother, Erik, also was a CU graduate.

Ty said, “I was …”

The pause was brief, but noticeable.

” … not. I wasn’t really a Buffs fan.” And he went on to say, “I bleed green and gold.”

To this day, I’m not certain what he had been about to say, but I know he called an audible in midsentence. That’s thinking on your feet, a handy trait for a Broncos second-round draft choice about to be thrown into the mix as a possibility to protect Peyton Manning and be a part of zone-blocking schemes, whether at right tackle — the position John Elway cited — or left guard.

“At the end of the day, you need to put your five best offensive linemen out there no matter what,” Sambrailo said Saturday at Dove Valley. “If I’m one of the keys in the cog to make that happen, that will be it.”

The issue of how an eventual high draft choice with CU ties drew only mild interest from the Buffs before the 2010 national signing date is pertinent now only because it underscores that Sambrailo, a successful alpine skier in the regional youth ranks as recently as 2005, was a late bloomer. That’s common for high school linemen, yet there was risk- taking and savvy projection required for the Steve Fairchild staff to make the commitment.

For a redshirt year and then his first three seasons with the Rams, Sambrailo grew, improved and learned the nuances of the offensive line, playing left and right guard and both tackle spots. By the time he was a senior in 2014, he was the entrenched starter at left tackle and suddenly also the leader after the departure of cornerstone center Weston Richburg and three other starters from the season before.

After CSU coach Jim McElwain cracked me up at his news conference on the eve of the first preseason practice a year ago with a comparison to the animated opening of the 1970s sitcom “The Partridge Family,” saying Sambrailo was the big partridge the little partridges were following around, Ty immediately did some YouTube research.

“I guess I get it,” he mused a few minutes later, “but I didn’t watch enough of it to get any character analysis.”

That’s Sambrailo. Dryly funny, sometimes self-effacing and, well, a little goofy. I met his parents and other family at their tailgate before CSU’s game in Reno, Nev., where the CSU flag hanging from Mark’s pole vault pole marked the spot. Now he’s moving on, and the Sambrailo family will follow.

Friday night, several minutes before soon-to-be Ring of Famer Rick Upchurch announced the Broncos’ pick in Chicago, Sambrailo got the call at a family gathering. He stepped away to talk, and when he re-entered the room, Upchurch was at the microphone. And the reaction was tumultuous.

“It was pretty crazy, exciting and a lot of fun,” Sambrailo recalled.

Last season the Broncos were a mess at right tackle, leading to the move of Louis Vasquez out from guard. The new staff, including line coach Clancy Barone, has Vasquez back at guard, and Michael Schofield — the 2014 third-round draft choice — and Sambrailo will get chances to claim the starting spot. Schofield’s absence from the active list on game days last season, and his lack of development, were points of contention between the front office and the John Fox staff.

If Sambrailo’s upward curve of improvement — almost the opposite of the 12-year-old kid skiing downhill — continues, he was a steal at No. 59.

Terry Frei: tfrei @denverpost.com or twitter.com/TFrei