LSU says review of Bill Cassidy's part-time employment continues

LSU says it is continuing its review of whether records support payments, $20,000 a year, made for then Rep. Bill Cassidy's part-time work at the LSU Health Sciences Center.

There was no indication when the review will be completed. LSU also said that it routinely pays the malpractice insurance costs for treating LSU patients by its part-time doctors, suggesting no special benefits for Cassidy's reimbursement of those costs.

Cassidy, who defeated Sen. Mary Landrieu, D-La., in the Dec. 6 Senate runoff election, has not resumed work at LSU. Cassidy said he's still working with the Senate Ethics Committee to get the required authorization. LSU spokesman Ernie Ballard said Cassidy is currently on leave without pay from his part-time teaching work.

During the Senate race, the Landrieu campaign questioned whether Cassidy, a physician who switched from full-time to part-time work at LSUHSC after his election to the House of Representatives in 2008, worked the hours he was supposed for his $20,000 annual salary.

Cassidy maintained that he more than held up his end of the bargain, saying he wasn't being paid "by the hour," and that he worked longer hours when Congress wasn't in session. Cassidy, a liver specialist said, he has provided important medical services to patients, and has carried out his teaching responsibilities -- sometimes from Washington by meeting with students enrolled in residency programs near the Capitol.

Delegation optimistic, but numbers are against them

While most Louisiana lawmakers are optimistic they can beat back the Obama administration budget proposal to scrap 2017 implementation of revenue sharing of off-shore oil and gas development, there's still plenty of concern.

Even if the administration proposal to use the proceeds - up to $500 million a year - doesn't make it through the House and Senate -- there's concern that members, looking for a "pay for" to fund their spending priorities or tax breaks, might find that money -- $3 billion over six years - hard to resist.

And while a strong argument can be made that Louisiana has been counting on the royalty payments to fund coastal restoration work, there are still only four states that are direct beneficiaries -- and that means only a small percentage of House and Senate members have a direct vested interest in seeing the 2006 revenue sharing provisions move forward.

Add that to the fact that the Louisiana delegation, which once enjoyed significant clout through the longevity and leadership qualities of its members, now has a relatively junior delegation. The most senior member, David Vitter, elected to the Senate in 2004 after six years in the House, hopes this is his final year in the Senate as he runs as the current front-runner in the 2015 Louisiana gubernatorial race. It means that in 2016, Louisiana could have two freshman senators, and no House member elected before 2004, when Republican Charles Boustany won his first term.

Of course, the state now has the No. 3 person in House leadership, Rep. Steve Scalise, R-Jefferson, and Rep. Cedric Richmond, D-New Orleans, said the delegation will be counting on him to help protect revenue sharing from being stripped away.

3 GOP Reps who voted no on Obamacare repeal bill explain votes

Three Republicans who joined all voting Democrats in opposing House-passed legislation to repeal the Affordable Care Act have explained their votes. The bill passed the House Tuesday, but is considered unlikely to get the 60 votes required to move legislation in the Senate.

The three dissenting Republicans all offered the same explanation: They don't like the Affordable Care Act, but believe an alternative has to be drafted and ready to be voted on before repealing the president's signature health law.

"During the course of my campaign I made a pledge to my constituents that I would repeal the Affordable Care Act only if there was a replacement ready to go," Rep. John Katko, R-NY., one of the three, told Syracuse.com/The Post-Standard. "Unfortunately, there isn't one ready to go, so I have to stick with my campaign promise. That doesn't mean I am for the Affordable Care Act. I am not."

Chris Christie travel: First class all the way, says NY Times

New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, a likely candidate for the Republican presidential nomination in 2016, often portrays himself as a regular guy, not afraid to speak his mind.

But an unflattering story in the New York Time says that Christie "has indulged a taste that runs more toward Champagne at the Four Seasons, while letting others pick up the tab.

"Last month, Mr. Christie prompted a state ethics inquiry after he flew to at least three games of the Dallas Cowboys, his team since boyhood, on the plane of the owner, Jerry Jones, whose company had received a contract with the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey after the governor recommended it," The Times reported.

It said that New Jersey taxpayers had paid for a trip to the 2013 Super Bowl in New Orleans, with airfare for his party of four coming to $8,146; and three nights hotel, $3,371. The justification was that New Jersey hosted the Super Bowl the following season.

Mary Landrieu returns to legislative battleground

Sen. Mary Landrieu, D-La., made her first public comments last week since leaving the U.S. Senate - taking issue with an Obama administration proposal to scrap revenue sharing for Outer Continental Shelf oil and gas drilling starting in 2017. Landrieu had pushed hard to add the revenue sharing provision to a 2006 energy bill.

"This is a real and grave threat to Louisiana's three-decade march to save our coast, America's Wetlands," Landrieu said. "The administration's proposal is short sited and a gross injustice to Gulf Coast states. I trust our delegation has the will and strength to kill it immediately."

Landrieu, by the way, apparently hasn't decided yet what she'll be doing next - after losing her bid for a 4th Senate term to now Sen. Bill Cassidy, R-La. Former aides said she's spending a lot of time in Louisiana with her two children, Shannon and Connor, Connor's wife, Emily, and Connor and Emily's son, Maddox, her first grandchild.

A former aide said she's very relaxed, and has been making calls to help her former aides find new jobs.

Why and how did you do it? Vitter/Cassidy ask Obama

Eight Republican senators, including David Vitter and Bill Cassidy of Louisiana, are asking President Barack Obama to provide more information for a proposed change in the federal flood risk management standard that could put more state communities in the high risk status.

The senators questioned in the letter whether the administration, in drafting the standard, complied with requirements for consultation with stakeholders, including governors, mayors and other local officials. They fear that the rules will result in higher flood insurance premiums, and make it less likely that the federal government will locate significant projects in Louisiana.

Said Cassidy: "There are many factors that should be considered when addressing flood risk. Millions of Americans, including families and businesses in Louisiana, will be affected. These families and businesses, as well as local elected officials, scientists, experts and Congress should have input in this decision."