An MTV project to get millennials to the ballot box goes beyond participation to advocate for specific — and radically liberal — views and opinions.

In the first episode of The Racket, with an agenda of “vote, dammit,” host Jamil Smith explains that “despite the absurdity, here’s a ton of reasons to vote.” Reasons why young people might not want to vote actually is why they should vote, Smith said.

Some of the reasons make sense and match the snarky tone of the video, including “make politicians give a crap about you.” More noteworthy reasons include:

“It’s not just about you,” but rather “about people who depend upon the government actually working,” such as those who depend on Obamacare and federal loans

If you’re “sick of seeing old white folks in office”

MTV’s shock over how “things like anti-abortion laws, birth control restrictions, and equal pay, are still alive and well, in 2016!”

Donald Trump

Timothy McGinty and Anita Alvarez were voted out “because they screwed up police brutality cases. Make your issue something politicians can lose their jobs over”

Michael Brown, Freddie Gray, Sandra Bland, and Tamir Rice

Having more African-American politicians would engage African-American voters

“Voter suppression is alive and well, so use your privilege”

Rather than encourage or get out the vote, the video serves to alienate certain young people with certain views or who support certain candidates. The video also ignores that a majority of young people are pro-life. All the gushing and praise only applies to those who hold the same views as MTV.

Despite its bias, the web series is lauded for how “it’s relatable, it’s accurate, and it’s honestly a brilliant technique for getting the younger demographic of voters to realize their potential and the importance of being informed going into an election,” in a glowing review from Hollywire.

MTV has had a clear political agenda in other ways, including through “Not in Trump’s America” and “what will Trump’s America look like?”

You can check out all 15 reasons below in the brief web episode: