Pianist Mina Gajic will guest when the Boulder Chamber Orchestra opens its season Oct. 30. ( Courtesy photo )

If you go Boulder Chamber Orchestra season (Orchestral concerts at 7:30 p.m.) • "Spook Symphony," with pianist Mina Gajić: Oct. 30, First United Methodist Church, 1421 Spruce St.; Oct. 31, Lakewood Cultural Center, 470 S. Allison Parkway has been canceled • "The Seasons," with violinist Zachary Carrettin: Dec. 4, First United Methodist Church; Dec. 5, Broomfield Auditorium, 3 Community Park Road • "A Gift of Music," with flutist Cobus du Toit and soprano Jennifer Kampani: Dec. 19, Boulder Seventh-Day Adventist Church, 345 Mapleton Ave.; Dec. 20, Broomfield Auditorium • "Virtuosity and Grace." with pianist Soheil Nasseri: April 15, Broomfield Auditorium; April 16, Seventh-Day Adventist Church • "Mother Nature," with violinist Chloe Trevor: May 6, Broomfield Auditorium; May 8, Seventh-Day Adventist Church BCO mini-chamber concerts (Grace Lutheran Church, 1001 13th St., Boulder) • Opus Two: 1:30 p.m. Feb. 14; BCO musicians: 7:30 p.m. March 12, 1:30 p.m. March 13 • Gloriosa Trio: 7:30 p.m. April 1 Tickets: Individual concerts $35 ($25 seniors, $15 students, $5 children 11-younger); season pass: $225 Info: 303-583-1278 or boulderchamberorchestra.org

(This story was updated Oct. 27 to reflect the cancellation of the Oct. 31 concert in Lakewood.)

For several seasons now, the Boulder Chamber Orchestra has established itself as one of the most stalwart and artistically satisfying of Boulder's many classical music organizations.

Founder and music director Bahman Saless has never set out to compete with other larger or smaller groups, but he relishes the opportunity to collaborate with them.

That will be more apparent than ever as the orchestra opens its 12th season on Halloween weekend.

The first two concerts place the spotlight on Boulder's newest classical "power couple." Serbian-born pianist Mina Gajić, director of education and outreach for the Boulder Bach Festival (and wife of BBF music director Zachary Carrettin), is the featured soloist on the "Spook Symphony" program. Carrettin himself takes the stage as violin soloist on the second event in December.

"These two are the freshest thing in town," Saless said of Gajić and Carrettin. "They love thinking outside the box."

Gajić brought her 19th century Erard piano with her to Boulder. Saless said that hearing her play the beautiful straight-strung instrument was an inspiration for her appearance.

"I thought it would be great to have her play music that would have originally been played on an instrument like that," he said.

The Oct. 30 program at Boulder's First United Methodist Church launches a five-concert orchestral slate for the BCO, down a bit from last season's seven, although three "mini-chamber" concerts with small ensembles, two with special guests, are stacked in the middle of the calendar.

The orchestra is also putting the "chamber" back in chamber orchestra, as the first three concerts all contain works written only for string orchestra.

The expanded ensemble with winds returns with a vengeance, however, in the last two concerts in April and May, which feature romantic-era warhorses. As usual, the orchestral concerts in Boulder also will be performed at the Broomfield Auditorium.

Saless wanted a Halloween theme for the program. He and Gajić agreed that Benjamin Britten's "Young Apollo" for piano and strings was "spooky" music, as was Franz Liszt's "Malédiction," which would have been contemporary with the Erard piano.

Since the program was formed, Gajić discovered her instrument requires some repairs that will keep it from being moved, but another period piano from Fort Collins that actually has some lineage to Liszt himself is being procured.

Saless also directs the Little Suite for Strings by Carl Nielsen, the Danish composer's Op. 1. (This year marks the 150th anniversary of his birth.) A string arrangement of Mozart's late Adagio and Fugue for Organ and a suite from Bernard Hermann's film score for "Psycho" complete the program.

Carrettin's appearance at First United Methodist on Dec. 4 (Dec. 5 in Broomfield) includes "Autumn" and "Winter" from Vivaldi's "Four Seasons" paired with "Spring" and "Summer" from the "Four Seasons of Buenos Aires" by Astor Piazzolla, which was inspired by Vivaldi and incorporates tango elements.

"I thought it would be a good fit to mix them up and do two of each," Saless said. Carrettin will alternate between his baroque violin and his famous electric violin. Selections from Tchaikovsky's "The Seasons," short piano pieces arranged for strings, also will be included.

The third event is the annual "Gift of Music," Dec. 19 in Boulder and Dec. 20 in Broomfield. The Boulder venue changes to the Seventh-Day Adventist Church on Mapleton Avenue, where the April and May concerts also will be played. Saless is known for playing music of substance on his holiday concerts. BCO flutist Cobus du Toit joins the strings for John Rutter's "Suite Antique," which Saless said is "unforgettable, once you hear it."

Soprano Jennifer Kampani is guest on the concert. Saless says Kampani is "one of my favorite singers for baroque-style repertoire." He said she "has an unbelievable ability to produce beautiful sounds with the tiniest amount of air." She sings Bach's Cantata 209, one of the few works of that composer with an Italian text. It is scored for flute and strings.

"With Cobus already there, it works well," Saless said.

Kampani also sings Schubert's "Salve Regina."

The orchestra will play "Rakastava" by Jean Sibelius, who, like his fellow Scandinavian Nielsen, was born in 1865. Saless closes with a selection of holiday pieces.

After the three mini-chamber events, the orchestra returns with its wind players.

On April 15 in Broomfield and April 16 in Boulder, Berlin-based and California-born pianist Soheil Nasseri returns to the BCO after a well-received performance in 2013. He plays the monumental Piano Concerto No. 2 by Brahms.

Saless said Nasseri approached him about playing the monster piece, which is also a challenge for the orchestra (the BCO cellist already is practicing his prominent solo).

"He's getting a lot of good national publicity, too," Saless said of Nasseri. Because of its length and character, the concerto presents notorious difficulties in selecting a partner piece. In the end, Saless decided to precede it with Mozart's great Symphony No. 40 in G minor.

The final orchestral concert is May 6 in Broomfield and May 8 in Boulder. For the third straight year, the BCO ends its season on Mother's Day. The concert is cheekily titled "Mother Nature" and features that most nature-inspired piece, Beethoven's Sixth Symphony. It is paired with another grand concerto, Tchaikovsky's work for violin, played by Chloe Trevor. She is the daughter of Kirk Trevor, whom Saless said is his principal conducting mentor. Gabriel Fauré's "Pavane" opens the concert.

The three mini-chamber events are all at Boulder's Grace Lutheran Church.

On the afternoon of Valentine's Day, Feb. 14, local award-winning piano/violin duo Opus Two (whose pianist, Andrew Cooperstock, is on the University of Colorado faculty) performs the Brahms G-major violin sonata and arrangements from musicals by Leonard Bernstein and George Gershwin.

On March 12 (evening) and March 13 (afternoon), BCO musicians will play a selection of chamber works for various ensembles.

Finally, on April 1, the visiting Gloriosa Trio plays works by Piazzolla, Spanish composer Joaquín Turina and Beethoven's massive "Archduke" Trio. The trio's violinist, Jennifer Carsillo, is the wife of Boulder Philharmonic Orchestra conductor Michael Butterman.