The principle purportedly comes from legendary House Speaker Tip O'Neill, arguably the most influential Democrat in the party's modern history: All politics is local.

Six years after voters swept Barack Obama into office as the nation's first black president, a power-to-the-people triumph that electrified the world as well as the nation, O'Neill's well-worn chestnut has come to haunt the Democratic Party ahead of the 2016 election.

[PHOTOS: The Big Picture – August 2015]

Despite the bizarre Summer of Trump, where a seemingly bulletproof, billionaire populist has seized the imagination of the Republican grassroots – and regardless of the bad headlines trailing Democratic front-runner Hillary Clinton like cans strung behind a wedding limo – most analysts agree Democrats are in good shape to hold serve against the GOP in the campaign for the White House.

Look to the local level, however, and it's clear Democrats have some serious shaping up to do.

An ugly combination of strategic blunders, bad timing, grassroots complacency and superior planning by Republicans has left the party of Kennedy, Johnson and Roosevelt in the midst of a paradox. They can win the most powerful elected office in the world – they've won the last two, and could go three-for-three with a win in 2015 – but can't grasp power at the local level, where party agendas are shaped and real governance happens.

And while Democrats have all but locked down an ever-expanding demographic of young and minority voters, it's a maddeningly fickle coalition in non-presidential election years. When decidedly less sexy House, gubernatorial and state legislative seats are at stake, they stay home as the GOP base electorate heads to the polls like clockwork, handing Republicans more than 900 legislative seats than they had than when the Obama was elected.

"Democrats have put together winning coalitions of young people, fairly highly educated middle class whites and minorities," said Geoffrey Skelley of the University of Virginia Institute of Politics. "It's been a winning combination in presidential cycles, but elements of that have struggled to show up in the midterm elections."

A Democratic Party task force "autopsy" following the 2014 midterms confirms the theory.

Since 2009, "We have suffered devastating losses at all levels of government since 2008 including: 69 House seats, 13 Senate seats, 910 state legislative seats, 30 state legislative chambers [and] 11 governorships." While the party energized young and minority voters in 2008 and 2012, according to the report, its leadership is still largely old and white, and it has struggled to recruit new leaders and fresh-faced candidates at the state and local level.

Put another way: Starting with the GOP's capture of liberal stalwart Sen. Ted Kennedy's seat in true-blue Massachusetts, Democrats have lost once-solid majorities in both houses of Congress, a power outage that party leaders are unlikely to repair any time soon. Republicans now occupy governors' mansions in former Democratic strongholds like Illinois and Massachusetts to match its long-held bastions in the South and Midwest. The GOP also flipped several state legislatures in states like Wisconsin from blue to red, a shift that put them in the driver's seat when it came time to draw up political districts and lock themselves into power for the foreseeable future.

At the same time, in states like Virginia where they didn't get the legislative majority, Republicans increased their political muscle, then shackled Democratic governors who managed to hang on, like Pennsylvania's Tom Wolf, with the same block-the-agenda handcuffs Congress slapped on Obama in Washington.

[READ: Bernie Sanders Won't Inspire the Left's Answer to the Tea Party]

Though the GOP may beg to differ, "None of it is good news," says Norm Ornstein, a senior fellow at the American Enterprise Institute and co-author of "It's Even Worse Than It Looks: How the American Constitutional System Collided With the New Politics of Extremism." The Democrats' inability to win at the local level, and in turn provide a robust counterweight to a Republican Party drifting further to the right, means partisanship and gridlock will continue in Washington at the same time the GOP's agenda gets pushed, virtually unchecked, in states like Kansas and Louisiana.

And by the time Obama leaves office in 17 months, his 2008 pledge to unify the country will be barely a memory, and the local-level gains Republicans won in the 2010 midterms will be practically cemented in place. Whole regions of the country, including the Midwest, Plains states and the South, will be bright red on the electoral map for the foreseeable future, leaving the Democrats without a strong farm system to develop star candidates.



"I think the problem here is the fact that, at least in several of the past administrations, it's not unusual for the national party to be all about the president," says Jim Dean, chair of Democracy For America. The grassroots organizing group was co-founded by his brother, former Democratic National chairman Howard Dean, who also was the party's 2004 presidential front-runner.

When Obama won in 2008, the lion's share of party resources – money, organization and its brain trust – went towards keeping him there for two terms, often "at the expense of the national organization," Jim Dean says.

Skelly agrees: "There have been complaints among Democrats that the 2008 and 2012 elections were about [Obama] and not the party," he says.

That meant Democratic state parties and local organizations were starved for cash as well as organizing and candidate recruiting help at the same time the GOP was focusing on its local State Legislature Redistricting Majority Plan, a.k.a. project RedMAP, a detailed plan to retake Congress by seizing control of state governments just in time for the 2010 midterms. With results from the 2010 Census on the horizon, big state-level wins would give the GOP virtually unprecedented control of legislative redistricting, a once-in-a-generation opportunity to consolidate its power in the House.

Mission accomplished, according to RedMAP's website:

"Republicans flipped at least 19 legislative bodies to Republican control and hold majorities in 10 of the 15 states that will gain or lose U.S. House seats and where the legislature plays a role in redrawing the map," according to the statement, dated September 2013. "Republicans have an opportunity to create 20-25 new Republican Congressional Districts through the redistricting process over the next five election cycles, solidifying a Republican House majority."

The result, Ornstein says, was a big win for the billionaire industrialist Koch brothers, who "saw this as a great opportunity and poured significant outside money into those races." Because just a few thousand dollars can swing a state house race, he adds "It didn't take as much to shape [house] races as it does to shape races for the Senate, much less the House. They're going to do it again this time."

Furthermore, "if a Republican wins the White House, [it's] hard to imagine [Democrats] win enough seats to regain power in the Senate," says University of Virginia's Skelley. "If that happens, they'll probably control all levels of government in [Washington], which opens up the possibility of unified government acting aggressively" on all sorts of issues, like repealing the Affordable Care Act. Indeed, "there's going to be an expectation among many in the GOP base that they would do that."

Yet even if Team Blue holds on to the Oval Office, the Republican supermajority in the House and simple majority in the Senate probably will remain in place for awhile, aided in part by its dominance in state legislatures and governor's offices, where congressional districts have been drawn and decided until the 2020 census.

That means tough to impossible sledding for any candidate with a progressive agenda – looking at you, Bernie Sanders – and federal-level gridlock in the face of national challenges like climate change and the global fight against terrorism.

Meanwhile, red states like Kansas, Texas and Louisiana are famously being used as real-time test labs for what some say are the most extreme Republican policies. That includes tough new restrictions on access to abortion and distribution of safety-net benefits like food stamps as well as wide-ranging tax cuts for businesses and broad public-school reforms.

[RELATED: Political Dysfunction Rules in Kansas]

The GOP's local dominance is likely to mean more national polarization, particularly if the Democrats' off-year election turnout headaches continue. While the president's party tends to lose seats between presidential elections, the young, minority and women voters who surged to the polls for Obama in 2008 vanished in 2010 and again in 2014.

"It's happening for two reasons: off-year electorates are whiter, older and maler, which is much more the core demographic of Republicans," Ornstein says. "Democrats have enough of an advantage with the White House, it's the president's party that takes the hit in the midterms."

However, "there's nothing that moves us towards moderation" with a split electorate, Ornstein says. Because the GOP wins off-year elections with a less diverse electorate, power on Capitol Hill will "tilt towards smaller and more rural states, which tend to be older and whiter, giving them disproportionate influence" on issues like gun control and affirmative action.

At the same time, that electorate isn't happy with the party establishment, which it sees as giving too much ground to Obama and the Democrats in Washington; the rise of Trump is a prime example. That trend, says Ornstein, is being driven by "the disaffected tea-party types who feel they've been screwed again because there's a wishy-washy establishment" forced to compromise with a Democratic president to keep the government functioning.

Still, the nation's overall electorate is becoming more Latino, and the American public is breaking to the left on "culture war" issues like same-sex marriage and the urgency of climate change, which contradicts the GOP's emerging arch-conservative philosophy. Ornstein and others say that disconnect between the politicians and the people bodes ill not just for Democrats but for the U.S. as a whole.

"If we get a political system in which the overall nation is moving in one direction and the political system is completely unresponsive to that, that is not good," Ornstein says.

Step one for Democrats is to think locally, Jim Dean says. Starting with the president, the national leaders have to work with the party's state-level leaders, listen to their concerns and act on them.

"I think that the Democrats are stronger locally than people think," thanks to a "Herculean effort" by state and local party chairs working on shoestring budgets. "It has been woefully under-resourced institutionally" compared to Republicans.

"We're not without rock stars at the local level," Dean says, including state Attorneys General Kamala Harris of California and Kathleen Kane of Pennsylvania. "We've got a lot of good people who are in this for the right reasons."

Still, he says, change starts at the top.