FILE - In this Aug. 28, 1964, file photo, Sen. Robert Kennedy stands before the delegates at the Democratic National Convention in Atlantic City, N.J. (AP Photo) (Photo: AP)

EDITOR: In the film “RFK,” Bobby tries on Jack’s bomber jacket and is talking to Jack’s ghost. He says, “Things don’t make sense anymore, Jack.” As I write this, CNN is airing a segment on evangelicals and the White House. Remember church and state, fellas? The Bible is 100 percent accurate when thrown at close range. Jack and Bobby, you left us a superlatively well-educated people, possessing all the skills needed to build or destroy on an impressive scale. If you were alive today, you’d be in D.C. in 72 degrees being bitten by December mosquitoes.

And those guns that assassinated you two: Every 10 minutes a life is lost to a gun in America. The third anniversary of Sandy Hook produces the Worst Responders. On Black Friday, a gun was sold every two seconds. We interrupt Dr. Phil for today’s Mass Shooting Melee. A light, breezy afternoon shooting, just four dead. There is another term for “well-regulated militia”: police force. If you want a gun, join one.

Brace yourselves, Jack and Bobby: The middle class has been destroyed by billionaires. We still love America, but the greatest flaw in American culture is blind self-absorption. As a member of the TV Generation, I sincerely apologize. If this country elects a vulgarian reality show host president, it’s time for a constitutional amendment forbidding Americans from ever watching TV again.

The modern GOP’s basic premise seems to be that it doesn’t want government to work. It appears the nation is weary of a mentally stable president. Sarah Palin was a gateway drug; now the GOP needs the hard stuff: Donald Trump. The rise of Trump is explained not so much by the hatred of Muslims, but rather the hatred of one Muslim, who isn’t a Muslim.

Jack and Bobby, in 2016, we pledge to declare a moratorium on lunacy and hate. In 2016, Democrats will rebuild the American Dream. By the way, Teddy turned out to be magnificent. Thank you, Brothers Kennedy.

Jody Hurrish

Stevens Point

To submit a letter to the editor, visit: http://static.stevenspointjournal.com/submit-letter/

Read or Share this story: http://spjour.nl/1V4LtxM