WASHINGTON -- The reported plot by some of the House's most conservative members to unseat Speaker John Boehner isn't going to happen, according to several of those leading a new right-wing caucus said to be the plot's instigators.

"There's no move to replace him at all in our Freedom Caucus," said Rep. John Fleming, R-Minden, one of the leaders of the breakaway group in an interview Saturday. Rep. Jim Jordan, R-Ohio, who chairs the conservative caucus, said the same thing Sunday (March 1) on CNN.

Members of the caucus Friday helped defeat a bill backed by Boehner that would have funded the Department of Homeland Security for three weeks. Ultimately, the House and Senate passed a one-week extension Friday night, just hours before the department was to run out of money. Jordan and Fleming voted no, along with other members of their caucus.

It's not that Fleming and Jordon don't have complaints about the GOP's leadership. Fleming said GOP leaders haven't done enough to "make the case" to Americans that House Republicans are right to insist on language in the Homeland Security spending bill to block the president's executive order on immigration.

President Barack Obama has defended his authority to defer deportations of about four million adults, arguing that he can't deport all 11 million illegal immigrants. He said it makes sense -- barring comprehensive immigration legislation he says the nation needs -- to prioritize removal for criminals and recent illegal arrivals into the United States rather than those who have been in the country for some time.

On Fox News Sunday, House Majority Whip Steve Scalise, R-Jefferson, denied there's any deal with Democrats to pass a bill funding the department for the remainder of the 2015 fiscal year without language barring funding for the president's order. Scalise said the House would push its case during negotiations with the Senate.

Fox News Sunday Host Chris Wallace pushed back, saying Senate Democrats have the votes to block such language. "Then you are going to be back in exactly the same situation," Wallace said.

Scalise responded: "I wouldn't presume that because again, last -- what, two weeks ago the Senate Democrats said they weren't even going to take up our bill, Chris, and sure enough on Friday they were forced to take up our bill and so now they might say whatever they want to do, but there's going to be a vote. And that's why I say, 'It's important for people that agree with us that the president doesn't have this ability to put illegal immigration laws in place executively.' They need to light up the Senate switchboard and make those Senate Democrats feel the heat who have been standing with the president on his illegal actions."

Not all Republicans believe that it's a good strategy to tie funding for the Department of Homeland Security to blocking the president's action -- especially now that a federal judge has temporarily blocked it and the 5th Circuit Court of Appeals in New Orleans is expected to consider its legality.

For members to "be threatening to de-fund the Department of Homeland Security at a time when our threat has ... never been greater at any time since 9/11, it's absolutely irresponsible," said Rep. Peter King, R-N.Y., former chairman of the House Homeland Security Committee. But Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal, a potential 2016 Republican presidential candidate, has criticized congressional GOP leaders for not doing more to block the immigration order and repeal the Affordable Care Act.

On Fox News Sunday, Scalise was asked about the surprise defeat of the Homeland Security Department funding bill. With just a one-week extension, the agency again will be facing the threat of a funding cut-off after midnight on Friday night.

"Congressman and I understand it's your role to put the best face on things, but people are talking about what happened on Friday night as a humiliating defeat for the House Republican leadership," Wallace said.

Scalise responded: "Well, first of all, about 80 percent of our conference voted for this strategy, including some of our most conservative members, and we did pass a bill to keep this fight going through next week.

We forced a vote in the Senate. And so, obviously, our members have a lot of differences on how maybe we want to go about tactics. But our goal is the same."

Scalise also strongly defended Boehner's decision to invite Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu without consulting the Obama administration. The Israeli leader is expected to warn against a deal that the Obama administration is working to negotiate with Iran to end its nuclear weapons program - an agreement Netanyahu believes won't contain sufficient guarantees to protect his country.

"I think it's going to be a critically important speech that not only people throughout America are going to be watching, I think people all throughout the world are going to be watching this because they understand how important this threat is of a nuclear-armed Iran," Scalise said.

Wallace asked if Scalise is willing to go to war against Iran.

"I think what we need to do is keep the sanctions going," Scalise said. "The sanctions were working. You want to prevent war, you talk, talk, but you also have to back it up with actions. Increased sanctions give us a better position."

The goal, he said, "is stopping Iran from getting a nuclear weapon."