The Holocaust never left my in-laws. It hung like a cloud of incomprehensible horror, darkening their lives until they both died a few years ago, in their 90s. My grandmother never spoke of her family or her Judaism. As instructed by Ernst, my father never mentioned his religious heritage for years; I only learned of my Jewish ancestry when I was in my 20s, on Christmas Day, no less. Ernst had gone from a wealthy man in Germany to someone who had to start all over again working in someone else’s textile company in New York. These were people who lost everything, whose loved ones were ripped away from them and murdered in the most horrific ways, whose bodies disappeared into the fires of the Holocaust, who never fully recovered from the incomprehensible brutality that descended, unbidden and unexpected, onto their lives.

Jakub, Sochi Piaskovski’s surviving brother, whose entire family was wiped out, was my father-in-law. Janina, the sister of Antosz, was his wife and my mother-in-law. Stella was my grandmother and Ernst—whose last name was Eichenwald—was my grandfather.

When the time came for the former Stella Hadra to flee Germany with her husband and children, it had to be done in secret. The four of them traveled from Berlin to Switzerland on a supposed vacation—this not long after the Nazis came to power—but sneaked to France and then on to the United States by boat. She never discussed it, but much of the rest of her family disappeared in the Holocaust. Her husband, Ernst—apparently fearful the Nazi campaign would spread worldwide—instructed his children to never mention their Judaism once they arrived in the United States. There, they had to start all over; the Nazis stole the textile factory that Ernst had owned in Germany.

Elsewhere in Europe, about the same time that Sochi was dying, cold and alone, another young man from Lodz named Antosz Kaminska was watching his brother suffer with an illness that could kill him. Antosz bartered with a camp guard, ripping a tooth with a gold filling out of his mouth and using it to “purchase” extra rations for his brother. That sacrifice helped save his brother, but the bloody wound in Antosz’s mouth grew infected. Untreated, he died. His sister, Janina, would cry for the rest of her life whenever she thought of the suffering of her beloved youngest sibling.

Sochi Piaskovski was 13 when he was taken from his home in Lodz, Poland, to the Treblinka extermination camp. He was never seen alive again; no one would ever know how death came to that scared, sweet-faced boy. His brother Jakub—the only member of the once-large family to survive the Nazis—was haunted for the rest of his life by nightmares born of survivor’s guilt. In them, his parents, Sochi, and all of his other brothers and sisters asked him plaintively why he hadn’t done more to rescue them.

It is hard to fully comprehend the magnitude of the Nazi death camps and their impact on the lives of untold millions. But, even so, there are a few things I can say for certain: the Nazis, and the Holocaust they brought were nothing like Obamacare. Or the national debt. Or political correctness. Or criticism of economic inequality. Or the Tea Party. Or the Internal Revenue Service. Or the Obama administration. Or the Bush administration. Or any of the other masses of infinitesimal flotsam spewed up in self-pitying and hysterical analogies by vulgarians with more mouth than brain.

And, damn it, how dare so many of you politicians and political commentators and entertainers spit on the ashes of the earth containing the bodies of millions of the slaughtered, by making such asinine comparisons. How dare you belittle unspeakable suffering, how dare you brush aside the emotional torment of survivors, how dare you feed into the Holocaust denialism by pretending that some difference in political opinions is just as bad as the literal torture and destruction of millions of families.

How dare you?

Ben Carson, current darling of the Republican Party whose name is touted as a potential presidential candidate: You compared your feeling of being stifled by “political correctness” to the torment and murder of 13-year-old Sochi Piaskovski and millions of other children. (The American government and its institutions are “very much like Nazi Germany. . . . We now live in a society where people are afraid to say what they actually believe.”) I will assume that, after you made those comments, the Obama administration responded by descending upon you, loading you and your family onto a train, and stuffing you into a gas chamber.

No? Then shut up.

Tom Perkins, multi-millionaire venture capitalist: You compared liberal criticism of income inequality and the excesses of the überwealthy to the slaughter of Jakub Piaskovski’s entire family. (“I would call attention to the parallels of fascist Nazi Germany to its war on its ‘1 percent,’ namely its Jews, to the progressive war on the American 1 percent, namely the ‘rich.’”) I will assume that the tortured and tormented corpses of every member of your family have been burned to ash by progressives, and that you have not had a good night’s sleep for most of your life because of the guilt you feel for surviving.

No? Then shut up.

Ted Nugent, aging rock star, gun enthusiast, conservative spokesman: You compared Obamacare to the beginnings of Nazi Germany. I will assume you mean that you are now preparing to tear out your fillings in hopes of saving a family member while you are imprisoned, starving, cold, and awaiting your death.

No? Then shut up.

Yes, all of you. Shut up, and apologize for demeaning one of history’s most unspeakable crimes. I mean you, Ted Cruz, Republican senator who proclaimed that fighting to defund Obamacare is like fighting to stop the Nazis. And you, Tim Donnelly, Republican candidate for California governor who likened Obama to Hitler because of gun control. And you, Rick Santorum, former GOP senator and presidential candidate who said that failing to fight against Obama’s reelection was like failing to fight Hitler in 1940; he later justified the statement by saying he has used the World War II metaphor “a hundred times.” And you, Bill O’Reilly, political commentator who said the Huffington Post used Nazi tactics and that liberal supporters of gun control embraced the sort of “state control” established by Hitler. And you, Stephen Schwarzman, billionaire co-founder of the Blackstone Group, who proclaimed that some of Obama’s tax proposals were a declaration of war, like “when Hitler invaded Poland.” And you, George W. Bush, whose campaign went all out with the Nazi analogy by releasing a video showing John Kerry, Al Gore, Howard Dean and other Democratic Party luminaries intercut with images of Hitler. And you, Wayne LaPierre, head of the NRA who has used Nazi comparisons to keep gun owners frightened and has even raised the prospect that they may face mass execution. And you, Glenn Beck, who has compared so many people and circumstances to Nazi Germany so many times that the great comedian Lewis Black proclaimed l that Beck suffers from “Nazi Tourette’s.”

And don’t think that the political right has a monopoly on this abominable behavior. So yes, I mean you, Representative Keith Ellison, Democratic congressman who equated [then-President] Bush after 9/11 with Hitler after the destruction of the Reichstag, the German parliament. Or you, Robert F. Kennedy Jr., who accused Republicans of using Nazi tactics during the 2004 presidential campaign. Or you, Linda Ronstadt, the singer who said in 2004 that newly elected Republicans were “a new bunch of Hitlers.” And you, Joy Behar, television personality who compared former Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld to Hitler.

Even politicians of the past who have passed are guilty of this criminal bloviating. So yes, I mean you, Ronald Reagan, who likened John F. Kennedy’s ideas to those of Hitler And you, Robert Byrd, the late Democratic senator who compared Republican plans to suspend the filibuster to Hitler and the Nazis.

Adding to the deplorable nature of these abuses of the dead is the faux outrage expressed by the political party in power about the other side playing the Nazi card. Republicans and conservatives were—rightly—angered by liberals using the comparison during the Bush years. But then many of them dropped that concern as soon as the Democrats won the White House, and the images of Obama adorned with Hitler’s mustache or swastikas emerged.

I’ve spent a long time trying to understand how people can demean such an unspeakable crime as the Holocaust and apply it to some modern-day flapdoodle. How can they reduce this organized, planned destruction of groups of people of its meaning by equating it to tax increases or health insurance?

The only explanation I can muster is this: these are small people who wish they were more. They like to see themselves as fearless resistance fighters, or brave humanitarians like Raoul Wallenberg or Oskar Schindler who placed their own lives at risk to save Jews. They feel the need to portray themselves as tough, swashbuckling champions of right, standing astride the waves of history as they fight back encroaching evil. But they are none of these things. They are soft-skinned, well fed, and snug, pontificating from air-conditioned studios as piles of uneaten snacks grow stale on nearby tables.

None of you are heroes. You are people with policy differences who suffer from aching ignorance of history. None of you who confidently express your contempt or disagreement for the government fear you are risking yours or your family’s lives by standing up to power. You are poseurs, appropriating incomprehensible suffering of others in a pathetic attempt to make your inconsequential squabbling seem important.

Decades ago, Mike Godwin—an American lawyer and author—coined what is known as Godwin’s law: as an online debate grows longer, the probability that someone will compare someone to Hitler or the Nazis nears 100 percent. The ridicule that gives power to this brilliant adage would probably shame those who hear it from using the Nazi analogies. But unfortunately, it seems that those who most need to learn from Godwin’s law are the ones who don’t know it.

And so, now I will create Kurt’s law—not as graceful or eloquent as Godwin’s, but true nonetheless: those who exploit the deaths of millions to buck up their own arguments are cowards deserving of every bit of scorn the civilized world can muster.