On the first Martin Luther King, Jr., Day since the Civil Rights Act had its 50th anniversary, it’s worth reflecting on how — despite much progress in leveling societal playing fields — many environmental “cleanups” in this country simply shift problems to poor communities of color.

Here’s a “Your Dot” essay making this point, written by Robert J. Goldstein, a professor of law at the United States Military Academy at West Point, across the Hudson from my town, who has also served as general counsel for the environmental group Riverkeeper.

Last year, while traveling in the South with cadets on an annual field trip called the “Civil Rights Staff Ride,” Goldstein confronted one such environmental injustice in Uniontown, Alabama. Here’s his post:

Photo



Lessons from Uniontown: Polluting Civil Rights By Robert J. Goldstein* In 2008, five million cubic yards of coal ash, a toxic by-product of burning coal, spilled from the Kingston Fossil Plant in Tennessee into the surrounding wealthy community. A CBS News 60 Minutes segment about the spill focused on the lack of federal regulation of coal ash and the impact of the spill on the affluent homeowners nearby, describing how “a billion gallons of muck shot into the Emory River like a black tsunami.” The segment passingly mentioned that the final destination of the coal ash was a “dry landfill in Alabama.” My chance visit to that place last year with my students, and what we ultimately learned on the journey, would frame my view of the status of modern day civil rights, and the continued need to pursue goals still unattained despite a half-century of progress. Discrimination has many forms In 1964, the Civil Rights Act was passed to put an end to legalized segregation and discrimination. In 2013, we instituted a West Point Civil Rights Staff Ride, an interdisciplinary experiential education journey for cadets from the United States Military Academy who will graduate as officers in the U.S. Army. Our mission is to study the law and history of the Civil Rights Movement, but more importantly, to understand its meaning for our time. This year’s West Point Civil Rights Staff Ride was a great success. Read the students’ blog to ride along. Traveling throughout the South, we were able to meet with civil rights legends like Robert Parris Moses, Myrlie Evers (the widow of Medgar Evers), and Fred Gray, but perhaps our biggest success was understanding that there is still a great need for the movement to continue. I teach Constitutional and Military Law at the Academy, but much of my experience is in environmental law, having practiced most recently as general counsel for the environmental group Riverkeeper, Inc. You might be wondering why an environmental lawyer would be leading this trip — it is largely because I believe that environmental justice is a critical contemporary manifestation of the civil rights movement. Environmental justice cases are not always obvious; in fact they generally involve a compelling environmental problem that needs to be solved. Solutions to those “straightforward” problems often have unforeseen consequences. While general counsel at Riverkeeper I was asked by a very well-known environmental lawyer, one who had long-fought alongside us to protect the environment, to support the removal of a waste-transfer station from a new park. At first blush, it sounded very reasonable to me. With my legal staff we began to examine the unintended consequences of taking that position, especially as we heard murmurs of counter-protest from groups representing underprivileged communities. The bottom line was that there had to be a transfer station somewhere, and if it wasn’t to remain in this more affluent neighborhood, it would be sited in a less affluent one, one less capable of making its case. There will always be someone affected by the transference of a problem elsewhere. When dealing with the toxic PCBs removed from the Hudson River Superfund site, our priority was to get it out of the river. A great deal of attention was paid to the prospect of the contaminated sediments being shipped by rail to Texas where a local company would be well paid to properly dispose of it. In fact, the agreement negotiated with the Environmental Protection Agency assured the local groups who militated for the PCB removal that it would not be sent to any site within the Hudson River Valley. PCBs were regulated as hazardous waste by the federal government, and I understood that they would be managed appropriately. I had viewed the 60 Minutes segment about the spill from the Kingston Fossil Plant in 2008 many times, but hardly noticed the passing reference in that piece regarding the final disposition of the coal ash in Alabama. Perhaps I took for granted that since the E.P.A. was involved with the cleanup, and because of the publicity that the spill had garnered, the final disposition would be highly scrutinized. With little or no fanfare, the problem would be out of sight and out of mind. In fact even after receiving an invitation from Mitch Reid of the Alabama Rivers Alliance to have the Staff Ride visit a coal ash site in Alabama, I still had not connected Uniontown to the Kingston spill. Regulation Matters There is a mechanism at work here that requires explanation. While there is a vast array of federal regulation on pollution, unregulated pollution has created a perverse incentive for states to minimize otherwise prudent regulation to maximize state revenues. We call this the “race to the bottom.” Naturally, states that seek transfer of these noxious materials will agree to locate them in localities that will not have the power to exercise “not in my backyard” power. Coal ash has not yet been designated a hazardous waste by the E.P.A. (although they are inching in that direction), and thus is still regulated only by states.

Photo

So what about that “dry landfill” in Uniontown, Ala.? The coal ash shipped from the Tennessee spill resides in an unsightly facility; it dries into dust and blows with the wind despite the grass that covers it, and is leaking into streams adjacent to the site when it rains. [Insert, Jan. 29 | As the January 23 correction below notes, Alabama environmental officials dispute these assertions, while local environmentalists defend them.] Photo There we met with Adam Johnston, who works for the Alabama Rivers Alliance. He is cut from the same mold as the first Riverkeeper on the Hudson River, my friend John Cronin, and knows every detail (that is knowable) about Uniontown and the fledgling citizens’ group, the Black Belt Citizens Fighting for Health and Justice, that is attempting to deal with this environmental injustice. He showed us the streams that flowed from the facility carrying unmistakable evidence of coal ash. He noted how a nearby resident could no longer keep his windows open, and had trouble breathing outside their homes. He introduced us to neighbors of the facility whose laundered clothes were blackened while hanging out to dry. Photo Neighbors of the facility are largely black and mostly poor. We met with the leaders of the citizens’ group, people who were meeting with this injustice head on. Their local government had let them down. Some noted that the funds received by the community for allowing the facility to be sited there were unaccounted for. All were afraid of the long term impact the coal ash would have on their health and the health of their children. Civil Rights Today We were invited to a meeting in the local firehouse they held to elicit support for their cause. After an opening invocation, the leaders took the stage and spoke about every aspect of the issue. Petitions were signed while children played at the rear of the small meeting room. A potluck supper followed. I would guess that 50 years ago we would have been witnessing the same efforts by community leaders in support of the civil rights movement. These leaders had learned their tactics from civil rights leaders they knew, and from campaigns they themselves had participated in. They understood that the same type of civic empowerment is necessary to address problems of environmental justice that were needed to confront Jim Crow segregation. Now, 50 years after the passage of the Civil Rights Act segregation and discrimination under the law have for the most part been eliminated in the United States. Today, however, we struggle with widespread inequality based on economic and social divides that are not easily resolved by law. Environmental justice is a manifestation of the denial of civil rights, not by law, but by circumstance. That circumstance is based on discrimination which had its origin in slavery, continued with Jim Crow segregation, and lives today with a legacy that includes the use of prison systems as, what Michelle Alexander has couched, “The New Jim Crow.” Photo Among the many places the Staff Ride visited on our journey to the South to understand civil rights was the Atlanta boyhood home of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. In their family room they have displayed, a partially played game of Monopoly. When asked, the Park Ranger who acts as tour guide noted that it was Dr. King’s favorite game. Interesting. I use Monopoly to teach Affirmative Action to cadets. In Monopoly, if you start the game in the middle, your chances of winning are very, very poor. Pollution, the type that fouls the water, air, and soil, the consequences to health which run from asthma to cancer is a further consequence of the inequality that began with slavery. Civil rights are about empowerment. The many lessons of the Civil Rights Movement are invaluable as this situation unfolds, and the community and its civil rights leaders will overcome. The folks in Uniontown are working to achieve it, but there is no happy ending here … yet. Having just commemorated the 50th anniversary of the Civil Rights Act, which ended legal discrimination and was driven forward by the activism of people like the ones we met in Uniontown, we need to remember that the lack of environmental justice is much more than a loose end. It is part of the lasting legacy of a system that had different rules for people based on race. Despite the fact that legal discrimination has, for the most part, ended, the movement to undue its legacy, especially as it concerns environmental justice, must go on. Robert Goldstein said the views expressed above are his alone, and do not necessarily reflect the views of the United States Military Academy, the Department of the Army, the Department of Defense, or the United States Government. Follow him and the West Point Civil Rights Staff Ride on Twitter at @robjgo.

In a note accompanying photos taken during the trip, Goldstein said the cadets visited the Southern Poverty Law Center’s Civil Rights Memorial in Montgomery, Ala., the day after the Uniontown stop.

Photo

With this image, he included this thought: “While Dr. King’s reference to the waters of a mighty stream was surely a metaphor, one cannot help but think that clean waters in Uniontown, Alabama would surely be a sign of justice and righteousness.”

It’s important to note that this phenomenon of shifting environmental burdens to communities with less governance or influence happens even more at the global scale, as was noted on Dot Earth in posts examining where America’s old car batteries end up.