In January 2009, then president-elect Barack Obama gave what amounted to a preinaugural address at George Mason University in Fairfax, Va., during which he made an impassioned case for economic stimulus legislation.

“Only government,” he said, “can break the vicious cycles that are crippling our economy, where a lack of spending leads to lost jobs, which leads to even less spending.”

A new Democratic-controlled Congress passed the so-called American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 – with but three Republican votes – giving the new Democratic president the $800 billion (or so) fiscal stimulus he asked for.

Alas, it turned out that the massive government spending yielded neither the economic growth nor the job creation Mr. Obama promised.

We think it no coincidence that the percentage of Americans who view “big government” as a greater threat to the United States than “big labor” and even “big business” has increased, well, big time since President Obama moved into the White House.

In the latest Gallup Poll, 72 percent say big government is the greater threat. That’s up from 64 percent in 2011, which was up from 55 percent in 2009. In fact, it’s the record high since Gallup started asking the question a half-century ago.

We suspect the ill-conceived Obama stimulus contributed to the rising tide of public antipathy to big government. We also imagine the more recent disquieting revelations of the government’s secret surveillance of the American people were a factor.

But we have no doubt that implementation of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, which the Democratic-controlled Congress passed in 2010 over the objection of Republicans, has done much to turn Americans against big government. That wariness is tripartisan. It includes 92 percent of Republicans, but also 71 percent of independents, even 56 percent of Democrats.

Now, the Gallup Poll may not be a referendum on Mr. Obama personally (although his overall approval rating currently is the lowest of his presidency). But it certainly is a referendum on his philosophy of governing.

The president reflexively bends toward statism, as evidenced by his extreme makeover of the nation’s health care system. But the American people have long preferred limited government, free markets and individual liberty.

We believe Mr. Obama still can salvage the remaining three years of his presidency. That is, if he accepts the proposition, as Henry David Thoreau put it, “That government is best which governs least.”