The General Assembly has lots of work to get done in its current 60-day session.

It will consider 3,000-plus pieces of legislation on a range of issues. It will pass a two-year state budget, likely topping $100 billion for the first time. And there are bound to be unforeseen issues along the way.

But as they undertake this effort, lawmakers must keep their eyes on the most important concerns affecting Virginians, such as adequately funding transportation and K-12 education, finding ways to cover the uninsured and improving government transparency.

Money for roads and bridges — expanding capacity to allow smoother commutes to work, school and leisure activities — is once again among the state's most pressing issues.

Three years ago, lawmakers struck a major transportation deal to boost funding for sorely needed road projects.

That effort — which included revamping the gasoline tax and adding new gas taxes in Hampton Roads and Northern Virginia — has indeed brought more cash into state coffers. But it hasn't been as much as once expected.

That is, the deal was supposed to bring in about $3.9 billion in additional revenue for roads and bridges over seven years. Instead — courtesy of falling gasoline prices — the new money is now pegged at just over $3 billion, or $918 million less.

And in Hampton Roads, the new regional gas tax for transportation was once projected to bring in about $1.25 billion. That's now expected to come in at about $1 billion, or $250 million less.

We urge lawmakers to make up the difference.

Yes, that could mean higher gasoline tax or fees. It could mean putting a "floor" on the gas tax for Hampton Roads, to prop it up.

Or, yes, it could mean more tolls.

Everybody hates tolling, of course, and the tolls for the Midtown Tunnel project were clearly poorly implemented. Still, lawmakers should work with state transportation officials to see where it makes sense to add tolls. We believe this should be limited to new construction projects, and include such things as the for-pay lanes seen outside of Washington, D.C.

Another legislative priority: Making sure K-12 education is adequately funded.

Virginia school systems have taken a significant funding hit of late, ever since the national recession six years ago took a toll on state and local budgets across the country.

Since 2009, per-student spending in Virginia has fallen sharply, according to the Joint Legislative Audit and Review Commission, the General Assembly's auditing arm.

Virginia school districts spent $10,148 per student in 2014, the Joint Legislative Audit and Review Commission report said. That's down 12.5 percent from the $11,595 in 2009, after adjusting for inflation. And there are nearly 6,000 fewer teachers statewide than 2009 levels, leading to larger class sizes.

We don't need to return to pre-recession spending levels for education. The state's schools are outperforming the nation, and lower funding has likely spurred districts to cut out some fat.

Still, it's been proven that smaller class sizes help kids learn. So lawmakers should earmark more funding for more teachers, to allow class sizes to fall back down.

Legislators also need to find an alternative to Medicaid expansion.

The General Assembly has twice said no to accepting about $2 billion a year of federal Affordable Care Act funds to expand Medicaid — money that would have covered more than 350,000 people below the poverty line.

If we're not going to take these "Obamacare dollars," how can we find another way to ensure they get care? We're encouraged by steps the state has taken to bring down Medicaid costs, but that doesn't cover the uninsured.

We also urge the legislature to hold the line against further erosion of the state's Freedom of Information Act.

One worthwhile effort, in separate House and Senate bills, would close a loophole the Virginia Supreme Court opened when it allowed agencies to withhold entire records when only a portion is exempt from mandatory disclosure.

Another would stiffen the penalties for violating the Freedom of Information Act, making doing so a Class 1 misdemeanor punishable by up to a year behind bars and a $2,500 fine.

But perhaps our favorite right-to-know bill would bring Virginia law into line with almost every other state by saying the public can see records of closed police investigations.

Under current law, police in Virginia can withhold police reports and other records on the basis that they pertain to a criminal investigation. But those records can be withheld in perpetuity — even after the investigation is long concluded.

This is unreasonable and unacceptable. This bill should be passed to make these records open upon an investigation's completion.

Our House delegates and state senators will hear from scores of highly paid, highly persuasive lobbyists over the next eight weeks, on everything from school funding to predatory loans to laws on grass cutting.

To do the right thing, they need to hear from you about the issues that matter to you. Give them a call, or send them an email or note. And if they forget to thank you when you do, we'll do it now, on their behalf.