Chief Deputy Attorney General Cynthia Coffman nearly walked away with the GOP nomination for AG over the weekend, amassing 69 percent of the support from state delegates.

The total far outpaced her rival, state Rep. Mark Waller of Colorado Springs, who almost failed to make the June 24 primary ballot as he captured just 30.7 percent of the vote.

“I am running for Attorney General because the office is not some political training ground for another higher office or a place to make policy in order to fulfill one’s political ambitions,” Coffman, who has served in the AG’s office since 2005, said in a veiled dig at Waller. “It is a serious place where serious actions are taken to preserve and protect the people of Colorado.”

On Saturday, Waller was slammed in a handout to delegates created by former state Rep. Doug Bruce, who was ousted from office by Waller in a 2008 GOP primary. The handout featured a silly photo of Waller and questioned his time in the military, characterized him as a political opportunist and endorsed Coffman.

The Coffman campaign denounced the handout.

At most junctures of Coffman’s speech she revved her base by assailing Democratic Gov. John Hickenlooper, U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder and the Obama administration. Coffman’s nomination Saturday was seconded by current Attorney General John Suthers, who leaves office due to term limits.

Waller, a former House GOP minority leader, who for months has been vocal inside Capitol that he would easily make the ballot, focused some of his attention on Coffman as he addressed delegates.

He touted everything from fighting “liberal opponents” on new gun-control laws, to being a staunch opponent to the state’s new health care exchanges implemented under the Affordable Care Act, noting he “was against the idea of implementing what I believe is an unconstitutional law and giving it credibility in the Centennial state.”

“Unfortunately, my opponent refused to oppose this scheme and a narrow majority of Colorado lawmakers passed the implementation of Obamacare,” said Waller about the bipartisan legislation to create the exchanges.

Coffman and Waller hope to move on to challenge Democrat Don Quick, a former District Attorney from Adams and Broomfield counties, who secured his party’s nomination on Saturday in Denver.

Follow Kurtis on Twitter: @kurtisalee