CVS Health (CVS) said Thursday that its year-old tobacco products ban reduced overall cigarette buys. Meanwhile, rival drugstore chain Rite Aid’s (RAD) stock rose slightly despite so-so August company sales figures.

A CVS Health Research Institute study said that cigarette pack sales fell 1% at gas stations, convenience stores, big box stores, and other retailers in states where CVS had a 15% or greater share of the retail pharmacy market vs. states with no CVS pharmacies. Overall nicotine patch sales, meanwhile, showed a 4% increase in CVS-heavy states.

CVS, the No. 2 U.S. pharmacy chain as well as a pharmacy benefits manager, has lost sales from its tobacco ban to rivals such as Rite Aid and Walgreens Boots Alliance (WBA) as well as dollar stores such as Dollar General, but saw the move as an important branding effort to emphasize health.

CVS Health rose 0.6% to 101.70 in afternoon trading on the stock market today, just creeping above the 200-day moving average.

Meanwhile, Rite Aid, the No. 3 drugstore operator, said August same-store sales increased 1.6% vs. a year ago. That lagged some estimates.

Pharmacy same-store sales rose 2.1%, including a negative impact of around 222 basis points from new generic launches. Front-end same-store sales grew 0.6%.

Rite Aid’s total drugstore sales for the five weeks ended Aug. 29 rose 1.6% over last year to $2.5 billion. Prescription sales made up 69.6% of the total.

“We are encouraged by (Rite Aid’s) front-end same-store sales results, the highest year-over-year growth since March,” noted analyst Ross Muken of Evercore ISI.

But Rite Aid’s same-store pharmacy results have showed “a notable slowdown” this year due to tough comparisons from last year’s ObamaCare boost, an industry-wide phenomenon, he noted.

“However, we expect this slowdown to begin reversing itself in the back half of (Rite Aid’s) fiscal year,” especially accelerating in the fourth quarter, Muken said.

Rite Aid will report August-ending Q2 results later this month.

In Thursday’s report, Rite Aid said Q2 same-store sales increased 2.1%, with front-end same-store sales up a fraction and pharmacy same-store sales up 2.8%. Analysts expect Q2 earnings of 4 cents per share, down from last year’s 13 cents.

Rite Aid is the smallest of the three major drugstore chains in the U.S., with 4,561 stores as of Aug. 29. Rite Aid stock rose 1.1% to 8.25 in afternoon trading. Shares recently found support at the 200-day line.

No. 1 Walgreens Boots Alliance advanced 1% to 88.73. Shares have been trading between the 50-day and 200-day lines.

Of the three, Walgreens is the highest rated by IBD, with a Composite Rating of 98 out of a best-possible 99. CVS has an 81 score and Rite Aid a 59.