Google chairman Eric Schmidt is among the bold-faced names. POLITICO Pro DNC rolls out midterm task force

The Democratic National Committee on Thursday named the 10 members of a task force that will explore why the midterms went so poorly and what the party can do to win again in future elections.

The picks made by DNC chair Debbie Wasserman Schultz suggest this will be an earnest effort and that the group’s findings will be taken seriously when they are unveiled in February.

Story Continued Below

Google chairman Eric Schmidt is among the bold-faced names, but there is also a major donor, a campaign finance lawyer and operatives who worked on both sides of the Hillary Clinton-Barack Obama race in 2008.

Key Democratic constituencies are represented: The list includes a labor leader, a gay businessman, African-Americans and Latinos. And there’s also the sitting governor of Kentucky, a moderate white male.

( Also on POLITICO: Loretta Lynch, racially charged justice and me)

The Republican National Committee ordered up a similar autopsy after GOP losses in the 2012 election. That panel had just five members, but its charge was similar. It produced a 100-page report with findings both big (pass comprehensive immigration reform) and small (changing the way television buys are made and setting standards for the party’s internal polling). Some have been implemented; others ignored.

This group plans to collect input from “stakeholders,” including local party leaders and outside experts. Preliminary findings will be unveiled at the DNC’s winter meeting in February, and the final recommendations will be released in a report sometime during the middle of next year. Wasserman Schultz has said one major focus will be how to activate the drop-off voters who cast ballots in presidential elections but stay home in off years.

Here’s a look at the members:

The tech CEO: Eric Schmidt is now executive chairman of Google after stepping down as CEO in 2011. He helped lead the search giant during a crucial decade of growth, becoming a billionaire in the process. He informally advised the Obama campaign during the 2012 race.

Obama’s digital guru: Teddy Goff headed up the 250-person digital operation on the president’s reelection campaign after overseeing the state-level digital campaigns in 2008. He now runs his own firm, Precision Strategies.

A branding expert: Maneesh Goyal runs the marketing agency MKG and is known for an initiative called Live in the Grey, which promotes work-life balance. Goyal lives with his husband, Andrew Wingrove, according to a short bio provided by the DNC.

A Blue Dog Southerner: Kentucky Gov. Steve Beshear easily won reelection in 2011 despite the fact that the Bluegrass State has become increasingly red. He’s become a favorite of the White House because of his outspoken support for health care reform; he oversaw the implementation of Kynect, the state’s Obamacare exchange, which is relatively popular. Even though Senate Republican leader Mitch McConnell just won reelection by double digits, Democrats managed to keep control of the state House. And the party controls six of seven statewide constitutional offices.

A major donor: Naomi Aberly, married to a Dallas hedge fund manager, is one of the party’s biggest bundlers. She is vice chairwoman of the DNC national finance committee and just co-chaired Wendy Davis’ unsuccessful campaign for governor of Texas. She was an early Obama booster, joining his finance committee early in 2007, soon after he announced. But she’s best known as a reproductive rights activist — chairing Planned Parenthood’s federal PAC, sitting on EMILY’s List Majority Council and formerly chairing a Texas women’s group called Annie’s List.

An elder stateswoman: Donna Brazile managed Al Gore’s campaign in 2000, which was her seventh presidential effort. She’s been involved with the DNC for decades and is a recognizable talking head on CNN.

A Latina outreach specialist: Maria Cardona, a principal at the Dewey Square Group, was a senior adviser for Hillary Clinton’s 2008 presidential campaign and worked on Hispanic outreach. She’s been a CNN en Español contributor and was the DNC’s communications director earlier in her career.

The purple-state party chair: Rick Palacio has led the Colorado Democratic Party since 2011. He ran the state party’s get-out-the-vote effort in the successful 2006 cycle, but also has experience in Washington: From 2008 to 2011, he was a senior leadership aide to then-House Majority Leader Steny Hoyer.

The union boss: Lee Saunders is the president of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, which has 1.6 million members, a role he’s held for 2 1/2 years. He’s the first African-American to hold that role and chairs the AFL-CIO’s political committee, one of the biggest spenders in Democratic politics.

The super-lawyer: Marc Elias is one of the attorneys every Democratic campaign calls when it’s in trouble. He represented Sen. Al Franken (D-Minn.) during the 2008 recount, and this year he’s been publicly involved in a number of 2014 campaigns — from Sen. Mary Landrieu (D-La.) reimbursing taxpayers after inappropriately billing taxpayers for private charter flights to campaign events, to Sen. Mark Warner (D-Va.) after the unexpectedly close result on election night. Elias will be helpful to the group as it thinks about campaign finance and ponders the role of outside money in future elections.