Revenue decline under the newly implemented Affordable Care Act (Obamacare) has prompted Vanderbilt University Medical Center to cut employees’ pay and benefits. In addition, the Nashville-based Vanderbilt hospital system–a major center of advanced treatment and medical research–has been forced to eliminate more than 1,000 jobs, The Tennessean reports.

Thanks Obamacare!

The non-profit Vanderbilt Medical Group projects a $250 million decline in revenue over the coming two years alone, even as an growing population continues to increase demand for healthcare in the region.

Now that we’ve seen just how awful government-run health care can be–with dozens of military veterans dying from lack of adequate care at our nation’s VA hospitals, we can all look forward to a future where private hospitals grow to look more and more like the broken VA system.

We never knew how good we had it until Barack Obama went and “fixed” our healthcare “crisis” by shoving through a piece of legislation that the majority of American people didn’t even want.

Vanderbilt is only one of many research hospitals in the U.S. that have had to make major cuts–many specifically citing Obamacare as the reason for the cuts. Cuts as these major medical research hospitals is sure to slow advancements in treatment and will stall the development of new cures.

Once again, thanks Obamacare!

While we’re at it, let’s not forget to thank Nancy Pelosi and Harry Reid for joining forces with Obama to give the government more control of our healthcare system! On behalf of the 1,000 employees of Vanderbilt hospital who lost their jobs, and on behalf of an entire nation who can look forward to long wait times and rationing of care. And higher insurance premiums to top it all.

Paying more, getting less–that’s the legacy of this big government train wreck about which Pelosi so memorably informed us, “We have to pass the bill so that you can find out what’s in it.” Now we’re finding out. And what a horrifying discovery it is.

One last time–thanks Obamacare!

Nathan Harden is editor of The College Fix and author of the book SEX & GOD AT YALE: Porn, Political Correctness, and a Good Education Gone Bad.

Follow Nathan on Twitter @NathanHarden