Plenty of gifts to choose from for cowboys and cowgirls and wanna-bes

Dale and Judy Pralle drove from Fort Lupton to shop at Murdoch's in Longmont on Wednesday. They were shopping for a toy John Deere tractor for their 3-year-old great grandson. (Lewis Geyer/Times-Call)

In this gift-giving time of year some people think of brands such as Armani and Gucci. Others lean more toward Stetson and Carhartt.

Shoppers along the Front Range are lucky: There are stores to cater to both styles.

Dale and Judy Pralle drove over from Fort Lupton specifically to shop at Murdoch's Ranch & Home Supply last week. The two were browsing through miniature tractors and construction equipment. For proper gift giving, you've got to know the givee, and the Pralles obviously knew their targets.

"They like this store compared to Walmart or Target -- they're kind of like country people," Dale Pralle said. "My daughter-in-law, we're going to get her a gift certificate from here because that's what she wants.

Saddle Up owner Dick Van Proosdy was an auto technician for 50 years before selling western saddles and tack full time. Photo taken Wednesday. (Lewis Geyer/Times-Call)

"Look around -- this store has just about everything you'd want."

Or even some things a shopper may not know they want, such as an LOL Sock Monkey. Murdoch's assistant manager Jill Haskins paused while some shoppers walked by before she let the slingshot-like fur monkey with the Tarzan yodel fly down the aisle.

As with any other store this time of year, toys are a big thing, Haskins said. Normally Murdoch's would have two aisles worth; this time of year they have six.

But it's the type of toys Murdoch's has that sets the store apart, she said, pointing to a playset kids can set up to play pretend rancher.

"The brand is called Country Life," Haskins said. "The barn, the animals, the fence, the feedbag's back there. It's got everything."

It sits next to the John Wayne play set, which comes complete with stagecoach.

Clothing is a big seller at Murdoch's this time of year, said Donna Harris, the store's clothing manager. Both she and Haskins have been with the store 11 years.

"Anything with bling on it," Harris said. "Sequins, sparkles -- any of that stuff is big right now. Lots of boots ... and this is kind of basic, but we sell lots of Carhartts, coats and bibs (overalls)."

The bling is reflected in the selection of women's and girls' belts, which are always big sellers around the holidays, Haskins said.

"Because of the price," she explained. "It's not like everyday somebody's going to pick up a $119 belt. But at Christmas they do."

Bling is an adjective that doesn't apply to Carhartt clothing, but Murdoch's sells a ton of it this time of year, Harris said. In early November a shipment of 17 pallets of Carhartt clothing came in. The usual shipment during the year? About 10 to 12 boxes, she said.

The store also sells a ton of western jewelry and knick-knacks of all types. Some of the most popular the past couple of years have been the Painted Ponies collectible figurines, Haskins said.

Detail from a western saddle on sale at Longmont's Saddle Up Western Saddle & Tack Shop, 12490 County Line Road. (Lewis Geyer/Times-Call)

Clothing is also a big seller this time of year at Whiteside's Boots, a store just south of Loveland on U.S. Highway 287 that was started by John and Jeri Whiteside in 1985.

Boots and "warm stuff" are the popular choices, Jeri Whiteside said.

"We used to sell a lot of exotic boots, like ostrich, at Christmastime," she said. "But now, with the economy not as good, we sell a lot of work boots."

In the past, Whiteside said, people would come in and spend $400 just on one pair of ostrich-skinned boots. Now, she'll see them come in and buy $400 worth of practical clothes. At least, that's mostly the case, she said.

"There are still the little kids that want a pair of cowboy boots for Christmas, so we sell a lot of those," Whiteside said.

Cashier Lexi Johnson rings up a John Deere toy dump truck at Murdoch's Ranch & Home Supply, 2255 Main St. in Longmont. (Lewis Geyer/Times-Call)

Outside of clothing, Whiteside's offers a bunch of western-themed accessories -- belt buckles, silver jewelry, perfumes and after-shaves "that are cowboy oriented," she said.

A hot item this season are the glass "red Solo cups" -- named after the Toby Keith song of the same name.

For the westerner with equine leanings, Saddle Up Western Saddle & Tack Shop, 12490 County Line Road, offers a variety of gift items but none so extensive as its collection of saddles.

The business buys, sells, trades and consigns all kinds of saddles. Owner Dick Van Proosdy, 72, started more than a dozen years ago with about 12 saddles in his basement, sort of as a retirement hobby, and last week had about 200 in his store, no two alike.

About five years ago his daughter, Danna Golden, joined him in the business.

Saddle Up specializes in all the practical things a horse lover would need -- halters and bridles and the like -- but there's also plenty of bling, along with western jewelry, purses and western-themed prints and signs.

"Over the summer we had some folks who were touring with the Grateful Dead and they were just hitting random shops. ... They knew absolutely nothing about horses whatsoever," said Golden. The couple ended up buying a bunch of spurs and spur straps, she said -- pink for the lady and black for the man.

It's the smaller items that Saddle Up sells most of this time of year, Van Proosdy said. But occasionally people will give saddles as gifts. Or at least, promise someone they'll buy them a saddle. That's actually fairly common at Christmas, Golden said.

"Saddles are a hard thing for somebody to come in and buy for somebody else," said Golden. "So really, January is where we would get those sales -- but they will tell them they're going to get them a saddle (at Christmas)."

Then, it'll be time for Van Proosdy to use his saddle-fitting talents to make sure the right saddle is purchased for the horse. He said he's actually refused to sell a certain saddle to someone because it would have been wrong for the horse. That lady got mad at him, he said. But his top priority is fitting the saddle to the horse, he said. Fitting the rider to the saddle is secondary to him he said, -- whether it's the holidays or not. The horse comes first.

"When I do fittings the horse talks to me," Van Proosdy said. "Some people tell me I'm crazy, but I say, 'He's talking to you too, you're just not listening.'"

Tony Kindelspire can be reached at 303-684-5291 or at tkindelspire@times-call.com.