ANN ARBOR, Mich. (AP) - Ty Isaac’s wait is over.

He gained a career-high 114 yards, including a 76-yard touchdown, to help Michigan beat UNLV 28-7 Saturday.

Isaac had to sit out last year after transferring from USC and was handed the ball just 10 times over the first two games this season with the Wolverines.

“I’ve been here for a year without playing, doing a lot of practice-squad stuff,” he said. “I know that stuff helps your team, but it feels a lot better when you can put it on the scoreboard and help your team win.”

Isaac took a toss sweep to the left and needed to break only one tackle with a stiff-arm before racing down the sideline for Michigan’s longest run since Denard Robinson went 79 yards on a play against Air Force in 2012.

Isaac’s previous best day on the ground was an 87-yard, two-TD game as a freshman for the Trojans at California in 2013 when he finished the season with 236 yards rushing on 40 carries.

Michigan established its running game in last week’s win against Oregon State with the offensive line opening holes for De’Veon Smith, who had career highs with 127 yards rushing, 23 carries and three scores. Smith, though, looked sluggish against the Rebels, running for just 33 yards on 13 carries.

“We don’t ever talk about any running back controversy - just so you know - from here on out,” coach Jim Harbaugh bristled. “Quarterback controversy, I’ll address that. Whenever you want to know who the starting quarterback is, I will talk to you about that.”

Harbaugh continued to defend his starting QB, Jake Rudock, who has six turnovers in three games.

“His job is to win football games,” Harbaugh said.

The Wolverines (2-1) have won two straight after opening with a loss at Utah in Harbaugh’s debut as their coach.

Rudock was 14 of 22 for 123 yards with a TD and an interception in a lackluster performance that included him missing a wide-open teammate in the end zone and misfiring on at least another couple of throws. He threw a 5-yard pass to Smith after Michigan cornerback Channing Stribling made an interception on the fifth play of the game. The graduate transfer threw his fifth interception on his 78th pass of the season after throwing just five interceptions in 345 attempts last year at Iowa. Rudock has also lost a fumble this year.

Michigan led the Rebels (0-3) by 21 points after Isaac’s run midway through the second quarter then didn’t score again until early in the fourth.

UNLV avoided getting shut out with 9:17 left when Blake Decker threw a perfectly lofted 6-yard pass to Devonte Boyd in the corner of the end zone.

Decker, who was knocked out of last week’s loss with a groin injury, completed half of his 16 passes for 96 yards with a TD and two interceptions. Backup QB Kurt Palandech led the Rebels to the Michigan 14 before getting sacked and throwing an incomplete pass in the end zone on the last two plays of the game.

“I am proud of the fact that we fought into the fourth quarter,” coach Tony Sanchez said. “People had to keep playing against us. Disappointed in the results.”

Even though the Rebels, five-TD underdogs, were much more competitive than expected, they were not satisfied.

“We’re upset,” tight end Jake Phillips said. “We didn’t come here to lose the game. We didn’t come here to stay in the game or survive. We came here to win.”

___

AP college football website: www.collegefootball.ap.org