The worst nightmare of the Republican Party has come true as a new Bloomberg poll found that 66% of Americans want to keep their Obamacare.

According to a new Bloomberg National Poll, “The majority of Americans — 60 percent — say the law has so far meant no real change to their own health care. About a quarter say it has resulted in big changes, while 15 percent report small differences. Fifty-six percent favor keeping Obamacare with perhaps “small modifications,” while 10 percent would leave it as is. That’s the highest level of acceptance yet in a Bloomberg poll.”

The Bloomberg poll is the Republicans’ worst nightmares come true. Fifty-three percent said that that they oppose the law, but only thirty two percent of those polled want the law repealed. Republicans have painted themselves into a corner with their repeal or bust stance. They have nothing to offer the fifty six percent who want to keep the law, but modify it. Support for repealing the ACA has dropped to a new of 32%, so Republicans don’t have anyone other than their base supporting repeal.

On top of the political fallout from getting the reaction to the ACA entirely wrong, Republicans are being handcuffed by their own congressional dysfunction. House Republicans, who are getting pummeled on the campaign trail over their repeal position, have been begging Eric Cantor to get to work on a Republican ACA alternative. Cantor tried for months to fashion a bill, but negotiations broke down into dysfunction, because House Republicans can’t agree on what should be included in it.

Meanwhile, Democrats have been using the repeal position against Republicans on the campaign trail. It seems impossible to believe, but Republicans never imagined that the American people would want affordable healthcare. The darkest Republican fear concerning Obamacare has always been that once people got it, they would never want to let it go.

Obamacare is on its way to becoming as untouchable as Social Security and Medicare. With two thirds of the country wanting to keep their Obamacare, it is virtually impossible for the GOP to get rid of it. Americans may still hate the term Obamacare, but more and more they want to keep their affordable health insurance.

The ACA has turned into a political loser for Republicans, and public acceptance of the law has turned into a never ending nightmare for Republicans.