President John F. Kennedy Signs HR 3935 Public Law 87-30 Minimum Wage Act, May 5, 1961. (Photo: John F. Kennedy Presidential Library)

Each Monday, we turn to a day in the newspaper's history for a look at what the Editorial Board found worthy of comment. We will preserve the punctuation and capitalization of the original editorial column. Below is an editorial from March 10, 1961:

Minimum Wage

It's very easy to favor raising minimum wage and difficult to register against — at first glance. There is a strong humanitarian motive cited by proponents.

However, there could be some faulty reasoning involved. We've all jumped at "good deals" before, only to regret it later. What looks like a good deal isn't always that.

Particularly unfortunate about the present legislation is the plan to extend coverage to include retail business. This industry provides marginal employment for beginners, teenagers, part-time housewives and others whose productive worth is limited. An out-of-line wage would automatically eliminate many jobs. A wage boost is somewhat less than good if you lose your job.

Life Magazine recently commented editorially: "That is certainly not going to help the unemployed any. Some jobs just aren't worth more than $1 an hour and to make them illegal is to eliminate them."

Sen. Goldwater was cited the case of a Michigan retail firm which did $2 million in business in a recent year and had a net profit of $34,000. Had the minimum wage law been in effect, the firm would have lost $100,000. In the Senator's words, "The company would have had either to fire some of its employes (sic.), or to go out of business entirely, depriving all of its 135 employes of jobs."

The New York Herald Tribune has described the proposal "A bad bill at the wrong time," referring, of course, to the recession. Sen. Fulbright concurs with this thinking, arguing that it would be "poor timing" to press it under present domestic and world conditions. Some leaders of both parties therefore can see serious objections.

There are a few "you don'ts" which could be listed about this bill.

You don't get the unemployed back to work by raising minimum wage. You don't help depressed areas with wage boosts which raise construction costs of needed new plants. You don't raise the living standard — poor or not so poor — by raising costs and prices.

Experience has shown a minimum wage hike can cost jobs. When the last minimum raise went in effect in 1956, despite an expanding economy, the Labor Department noted "significant declines" in employment in most of the low wage industry segments studied.

Our feeling is that the individual states can do a far fairer and more effective job of handling wage and hour laws than can the federal government. They can better make legislation fit varying local needs and conditions.

The federal bill will be voted on soon in Congress. Why not contact your representative now.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1BYtXEM