Some of the biggest names in the sharing economy recently came to D.C. to meet with a small bipartisan group of lawmakers on issues affecting the companies’ burgeoning business models. One of the most popular ideas that came out of that session, which included representatives for Lyft, Handy and Airbnb, was a regulatory “timeout” in which employers can tinker with worker classification without running afoul of federal laws.

To get a sense of whether that’s actually feasible, and how it might work, Bloomberg BNA checked in with a couple of former Labor Department officials from opposite sides of the political spectrum. The bottom line, they said, is that it won’t be easy.

“I think it is possible that they could get something on the federal level with respect to certain limited benefits, and perhaps taxes, but it would be an extraordinarily complicated bill,” Seth Harris, a former deputy labor secretary in the Obama administration, told Blomberg BNA. “As far as I know, it would be entirely unprecedented. That seems to suggest that it’s either extraordinarily difficult or that it can’t be done.”

The ‘Sandbox’

Some business representatives who attended the meeting call the idea a “timeout.” Rep. Eric Swalwell (D-Calif.), who co-chairs the new House sharing economy caucus with Rep. Darrell Issa (R-Calif.), said he prefers the terms “safe harbor” or “sandbox.” Whatever handle you give it, the idea is to push the pause button on worker classification requirements for a period of one or two years in which employers can experiment with offering certain forms of benefits and training without having to suddenly reclassify workers.

Some sharing economy businesses have come under fire for classifying workers as independent contractors who aren’t eligible for minimum wages, overtime, workers’ compensation, unemployment insurance, or automatic tax withholding. Company representatives told caucus members that they’d be interested in expanding their relationship with workers, but are concerned about the increased cost and potential liability that comes with having full-blown employees.

“I think there are opportunities to look at these different options,” Swalwell told Bloomberg BNA last week. “I would be in favor of having that safe harbor for a defined period,” he added. “I think that’s better than the kind of Wild West scenario we have now where the companies and the users live in fear that it’s going to be shut down at any moment and workers have to fear about what protections they have and whether they’re being taken advantage of.”

The experiments may include allowing employers to pay into a portable benefits system, where gig workers can pool pro rata benefits paid by various employers based on hours worked. They could also include more training for the drivers at Lyft or the home repair workers employed by Handy. Employers often shy away from such training because it can be considered a sign that they exercise sufficient control over workers to create a traditional employment relationship.

Could It Work?

Any timeout would likely require legislation, and is probably still a long way off. The trouble is that there are a number federal tax and employment laws—including the Fair Labor Standards Act, the Family and Medical Leave Act and the Affordable Care Act--that would have to be updated. That’s not to mention the myriad of state and local red tape that could still tie up the experiment.

“At the federal level, it could be one legislative vehicle I suppose, but it would have to hit a variety of different laws where this could be an issue,” Alexander Passantino, who served as the Labor Department’s acting Wage and Hour Division chief at the end of the George W. Bush administration, told Bloomberg BNA. “There are a lot of different issues beyond tax and wage and hour that go into the consideration of worker classification.”

Just because it would be a heavy lift doesn’t mean Passantino and Harris think this proposal is a bad idea. Speaking about the timeout and other proposals in the air, Both men said they’re happy to see at least some lawmakers starting to take notice and recognize that there are unique issues that need to be addressed. In a Congress that’s seen little agreement among the parties over workplace rights, it’s a decent start.

“This is new ground,” Harris said of labor and employment issues in the sharing economy generally. If the parties can hold back on knee jerk reactions, he said, there could be room for a new organizing principle. As of now, “folks really don’t know what the right answer is,” he said.

Access timely and reliable insight and information on a wide range of labor and employment issues with a free trial to the Labor & Employment Law Resource Center .