Bloomberg News Sen. Max Baucus, pictured Nov. 6

Updated with comments from oil-producer groups.

A Democratic Senate committee chairman has proposed to wipe out decades’ worth of depreciation rules and replace them with a system of slower write-offs that would help pay for a significant cut in the U.S. corporate tax rate.

The changes – the biggest in decades in the arcane area – also would extend to treatment of other business expenses, and would take away some important existing tax breaks for advertising, research, and resource extraction. New curbs also would come for swaps of property and accounting for certain kinds of inventories.

The proposal, the latest in a series by Senate Finance Committee Chairman Max Baucus (D., Mont.), is sure to run into resistance from some big firms, particularly among heavy industries and capital-intensive businesses, such as oil producers and some manufacturers. Some small businesses also are likely to raise concerns, since they typically aren’t subject to the corporate tax and wouldn’t benefit from a rate reduction.

But aides believe that many public companies ultimately will support the changes, because they would get more benefit to their bottom lines from a rate cut than from the existing depreciation rules.

Small businesses would be rewarded with an expansion of a separate system that allows them to write off many purchases in the first year. The limit for those write-offs, which has fluctuated over recent years and currently is $500,000, would be set permanently at $1 million a year.=

Two groups representing oil and gas producers, the American Petroleum Institute and the Independent Petroleum Association of America, raised concerns on Thursday.

“Changes to cost recovery and repeal of legitimate accounting methods … could unintentionally hit the brakes on America’s energy and manufacturing renaissance,” said Brian Straessle, a spokesman for the American Petroleum Institute. “People’s jobs are at stake, so lawmakers had better get the details of tax reform right.”

An official of the National Association of Manufacturers, Dorothy Coleman, praised Mr. Baucus’s willingness to take comments on his ideas. But she added in an interview that the draft raises “a few red flags,” including the changes to treatment of research and advertising expenses, as well as drilling costs and inventory accounting.

The current depreciation rules typically allow companies to write off the cost of equipment faster than it actually depreciates. Congress has even speeded up the accelerated depreciation system at times, particularly during economic slowdowns, in order to encourage more business investment.

The new system generally would turn away from that approach, and seek to match tax depreciation periods to the equipment’s actual economic depreciation rate.

It also would simplify the fiendishly complex rules, reducing the number of basic depreciation rates from more than 40 to 5, and switching to a system that lets businesses depreciate pools of similar assets instead of individual pieces of equipment.

The plan overall would generate huge amounts of revenue for the government – hundreds of billions of dollars, perhaps as much as $700 billion. That would finance a significant reduction in the U.S. corporate tax rate, which at 35% is the highest in the developed world. Aides aren’t sure yet exactly how many points could be shaved through the changes. Mr. Baucus has said he is aiming to get the U.S. rate below 30%, and the depreciation changes could allow him to get most of the way to that goal.

The immediate outlook for the proposal appears dim, because of partisan division over the broad goals of major tax legislation. But if Congress gets around to moving a major tax overhaul, depreciation is likely to get serious consideration. That’s because in practical terms, it represents the biggest pot of money available to finance a big rate cut.

Some conservatives likely will criticize the proposal, because it turns away from their goal of immediate write-offs for most kinds of business investment.

But even Mr. Baucus’s GOP counterpart, House Ways and Means Chairman Dave Camp (R., Mich.), is thought to be considering curbs on current depreciation rules.

Other countries have lowered their corporate tax rates in recent years, and sometimes have used depreciation curbs to finance the rate cuts. They also have relied on increases in their value-added taxes. The U.S. doesn’t have a VAT, making a big rate cut harder to achieve.

More:

Baucus’s Latest Proposal: Press Release | Discussion Draft

Baucus Unveils Tax-Code Cleanup Proposal

Baucus to Float Plan On Corporate Taxes