'We fumbled': Apologetic Obama forced to let insurers sell canceled policies ... but only for one year

Obama will allow insurers to keep offering plans that they've already been canceling by the millions

'I completely get how upsetting this can be for Americans,' he said, 'particularly after the assurances they got from me'

The insurance industry warns that the move 'could destabilize the market and result in higher premiums for consumers'



'I'm not a perfect man,' he said, but claimed that he didn't know in advance how disastrous the healthcare.gov launch would be

'We fumbled the rollout on this health care law,' Obama admitted

The president acknowledged for the first time that millions of insurance cancellations have come because of the Obamacare law

Congress has proposed its own fixes, but Obama has chosen an administrative fix that he says won't require legislation

He stopped short of promising that '100 per cent of the people 100 per cent of the time' would find the Obamacare website working by Nov. 30



Obama has bowed to pressure, saying he intends to permit the continued sale of individual insurance plans that have been canceled because they failed to meet coverage standards under the Affordable Care Act

President Obama has changed course in mid-disaster, announcing a new policy allowing health insurance companies to keep selling the policies they have canceled by the millions as a consequence of the Affordable Care Act.

'Insurers can extend current plans that would otherwise been canceled, into 2014,' he said.

The president of the health insurance industry's largest trade group, however, warned after Obama's speech that his plan 'could destabilize the market and result in higher premiums for consumers.'

'Premiums have already been set for next year based on an assumption of when consumers will be transitioning to the new marketplace," according to Karen Ignagni, the president of America's Health Insurance Plans.

'If now fewer younger and healthier people choose to purchase coverage in the exchange, premiums will increase and there will be fewer choices for consumers.'



In his rare appearance in the White House briefing room, Obama also said he didn't know how bad the healthcare.gov website's rollout would be.



The president stopped short of promising that all Americans would find it functioning normally by the Department of Health and Human Services' self-imposed Nov. 30 deadline.



And he conceded for the first time that the policy cancellations are 'often' coming ' because they no longer meet the law's requirements.'

Americans receiving those letters, he acknowledged, are 'understandably aggravated about it.'

'That’s something that I deeply regret,' he added later, 'because it’s scary getting a cancellation notice.'



The announcement drew jeers from Republican lawmakers and unusually aggressive followup questions from reporters.

SCROLL DOWN FOR VIDEO



President Barack Obama wants to 'fix' Obamacare with a sleight-of-hand exercise designed to take pressure off of his administration It 'doesn't even come close to fixing the problems that so many Americans are facing right now as a result of cancelled health care plans and skyrocketing premiums,' said Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell.'But it does represent the clearest acknowledgment yet that his oft-repeated pledge "if you like your plan, you can keep it" was false all along.' 'The only "fix" is full repeal followed by step-by-step, patient-centered reforms,' McConnell said. Texas Republican Sen. John Cornyn declared in a statement that Americans have had 'enough with temporary fixes and deadline extensions.' 'We should dismantle this law, so Americans can choose the insurance plan that works for them, not President Obama,' Cornyn said.

Obama made the announcement during a hastily called late-morning press conference. The fix he offered will be temporary – in effect only for 2014 – unless another course correction is offered later.

'I completely get how upsetting this can be for Americans,' he said in response to the wave of cancellations, 'particularly after the assurances they got from me ... I hear you loud and clear.' House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi let the cat out of the bag Thursday, saying that Obama would offer an administrative fix and allow Americans to renew their canceled insurance plans Unlike a Republican plan scheduled for a vote Friday, Obama's version closes the previously canceled policies to individuals who were not already enrolled in them.

Republicans want a retroactive fix applied to all policies that consumers hold as of Dec. 31 of this year. They also are demanding that consumers should be able to join existing plans held by family members. His new approach 'won't solve every problem for every person,' Obama said, 'but it's going to help a lot of people.'

The president’s proposal would also require insurers to tell consumers how their policies fall short of compliance with the Affordable Care Act's minimum standards.

RELATED ARTICLES Previous

1

Next Worse than anyone thought: Just 27,000 people signed up to... Bill Clinton criticizes Obama saying President 'should honor... Democrats slide as Obamacare tanks: Christie takes one-point... 'OMG, he's hot! All I have to worry about is getting him... Share this article Share Obama's remarks were scheduled for 11:35 a.m. but started after noon. Twitter was awash with jokes about the delay.

'If you like your 11:35am speech, you can keep it,' quipped one commentator. 'Maybe Obama is late because he's waiting for the site to load first,' snarked another. Obamacare's early implementation 'has been wrought with a whole range of problems,' the president admitted when he finally made it to the podium.

'We fumbled the rollout on this health care law,' he said. But he insisted that the butt-of-jokes website has 'gotten a lot better over the last few weeks' despite problems with 'information technology procurement' that are inherent in the federal government. Obama said the flawed website rollout wasn't his fault since aides didn't tell him it was doomed to fail Asked whether all Americans would be able to access and use healthcare.gov by Nov. 30, Obama would only promise that 'the majority of people who go to the website will see a website that's working the way it's supposed to.' 'It's not possible for me to guarantee,' he cautioned, 'that 100 per cent of the people 100 per cent of the time going to this website will have a seamless, smooth experience.'

And he told reporters that he didn't know ahead of time how bad the launch would be. 'I was not informed directly that the website wasn't working the way it was supposed to,' he said. If his aides had warned him, Obama added, he wouldn't have been promising a smooth introduction. 'I don't think I'm stupid enough to say this is going to be as easy as shopping around on Amazon or Travelocity,' he said. But he didn't say whether the rollout would have been delayed. The administration released figures Wednesday showing that just 26,794 people nationwide enrolled in a private health plan through the online federal marketplace between Oct. 1 and Nov. 2. Anotehr 79,391 people bought plans through state-run exchange websites.

And the president has come under increased pressure to fix what Republicans have called a disastrous outcome of the Obamacare system – a raft of new wide-ranging minimum medical insurance requirements that most individual policies don't meet.

The healthcare.gov website has been a universally acknowledged catastrophe for the Obama administration, including crashes, leaks of personal information and gibberish-spouting login pages

Sen. Mary Landrieu (L) had offered her own legislative fix, but Obama is moving forward with his own band-aid approach that doesn't require Congress to act

With insurers killing off those plans, an estimated 5 million Americans have already received cancellation notices, putting the lie to Obama's frequent promise that 'if you like your plan, you can keep your plan.'

Politico reported Thursday that White House aides including Chief of Staff Denis McDonough, will brief House Democrats on the plan Thursday after the president speaks.



Democratic politicians, particularly senators who face tough re-election fights in 2014, have been running for the exits in recent weeks, seeking cover as the Obamacare system implodes



And former President Bill Clinton made waves inside the Democratic Party this week by insisting that Obama should keep his pledge.

Clinton's move was both a political hand grenade and a maneuver for 2016, when his wife Hillary Clinton, the former secretary of state, is eyeing a presidential run of her own.



Putting distance between her and Obamacare will help her chances of dodging association with the flailing program, especially since she proposed a similar policy – the widely mocked 'Hillarycare' – during her husband's 1990s presidency.

If you like your 11:35am speech, you can keep it — John Podhoretz (@jpodhoretz) November 14, 2013

Maybe Obama is late because he's waiting for the site to load first. — Dana Loesch (@DLoesch) November 14, 2013

Getting some more healthcare talking points #whyobamaislate pic.twitter.com/UfddA4UipO — Charlie Spiering (@charliespiering) November 14, 2013





Both Democrats and Republicans have proposed legislative fixes to force changes in Obamacare that would let Americans keep their insurance plans, regardless of the law's new minimum-standards requirements.

By acting on Thursday, the White House hopes to avoid a slew of Democratic defections to a Republican House plan scheduled for a vote Friday.

But he also said he was open to working with Congress on additional fixes.



The Obama administration was also reacting to a statement from House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, who said Thursday morning that walking back the insurance cancellations 'can be done administratively. The president will offer a proposal today, is my understanding.'



Rep. Fred Upton is the face of the most aggressive Obamacare fix offered to date, short of a complete repeal

The White House has quietly talked up instead a proposal from Democratic Sen. Mary Landrieu of Louisiana, but House Republicans favor the much tougher measure from Michigan Rep. Fred Upton.

Both plans would keep millions of Americans in private insurance plans, pulling them out of the federal health care exchanges.

Upton's bill would allow insurers to keep offering the cancelled policies. Landrieu's would force them to do so.

Republicans in the House are resisting the Landrieu approach. Requiring insurers to sell specific plans, they say, would represent the same kind of government intervention in private commerce as the Obamacare system brought to the table in the first place.

But the president's planned announcement may make both of them moot, since he can enforce an administrative fix without going through Congress.

During a closed-door caucus meeting on Thursday, some House Democrats insisted that they will vote for the Upton Rep. Bill in order to save their own skin in the 2014 midterm elections.

Former U.S. President Bill Clinton started the fire last week by saying Obama should keep his promises

According to Politico, New Jersey Rep. Bill Pascrell said, 'I am beginning to think members of the administration haven't read the [Obamacare] bill. I am voting for Upton tomorrow.'

Pennsylvania Rep. Mike Doyle said he had told the White House told the White House that 'members of Congress aren’t judged by administrative fixes; they’re judged by their voting records.'

'And people want to be on the record that we made a commitment to the American people that they could keep their insurance if they like it, and we want to fix that.'

Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius told a Senate committee last week that retroactively letting insurers sell canceled policies might not be effective.

'Companies are now in the market with an array of new plans,' she warned. 'Many have actually added consumer protections in the last three-and-a-half years.'