University of Pittsburgh Medical Center employees plan to walk off their jobs on Thursday to protest the hospital's alleged harassing of workers who want to form a union and to call for an immediate hike of the system's minimum wage to $15 an hour, according to the Service Employees International Union.

In March, UPMC said it would increase the minimum starting salaries for entry-level positions to $15 an hour by January 2021.

Additionally, average service worker pay at these facilities will exceed $15 an hour by January 2019, the health system said. The pay changes begin on January 1, 2017.

[Also: Kaiser Permanente nurses strike in California, pick up support from Bernie Sanders]

"While the $15 wage increase is an important victory, hospital workers are striking for their union rights and an end to UPMC's practices of harassing, surveilling, discriminating against and illegally disciplining workers who want to form their union," organization leaders said in a statement.

In late 2013, the National Employee Labor Relations Board Office of General Counsel approved settlement agreements between two UPMC hospitals and the Service Employees International Union, according to the NELRB. The settlement resolved most charges filed by the union over incidents which allegedly occurred when the SEIU had been in the early stages of organizing a UPMC union.

Under the agreements, UPMC Presbyterian Shadyside agreed to offer reinstatement and backpay to two employees who were discharged after supporting the union, and to reimburse two other employees who lost wages due to a suspension and other actions, the NELRB said.

[Also: UPMC cost management tool slated for market under Health Catalyst deal]

A remaining charge relating to the use of company email to communicate about the union went to trial before an administrative law judge, who ruled on the side of SEIU, according to the union.

"It has come to our attention that some UPMC employees have been approached to join a national initiative to walk off the job tomorrow," said UPMC in a statement. "The care of our patients is paramount and we are fully prepared to provide the highest quality care for all patients who rely on us to help them during their most vulnerable times. We respect employees' rights to engage in legally protected activities and will not to prevent the participation of any employees who choose to join."

Thursday's strike in Pittsburgh is also expected to include employees working in other industries such as fast-food, home care and nursing home facilities, plus faith leaders, students, families and community members, as part of a global effort for a $15 minimum wage, according to the SEIU.

"We are striking in protest of UPMC's unlawful interference with our union rights so that we can have a seat at the table to make UPMC truly responsive to hospital workers, our patients and our community," said Nila Payton, a receptionist at UPMC Presbyterian. "Pittsburgh is a city of people who stand up for ourselves and the raises we won are only a first step in holding UPMC accountable to our city."

Twitter: @SusanJMorse