Our nation has proven time and time again that long-term partnerships yield long-term success. Achievements ranging from the space program, the development of the Internet, and the mapping of the human genome all demonstrate how partnerships among the federal government, higher education and the private sector can push innovation into the stratosphere and beyond.

This month, The Science Coalition is releasing a report, “Sparking Economic Growth 2.0,” underscoring the diversity of companies spun off from research conducted at the nation’s research universities. The report highlights the thread linking federal investment in fundamental research to economic growth and the development of the innovation economy.

Two of the companies highlighted, ColdQuanta and Line-Rate, are examples of companies developed from research conducted at the University of Colorado at Boulder, where 71 companies based on CU-Boulder technologies have been spun off over the last 20 years. In addition to now being worth many millions, these companies have brought new high-tech jobs to Colorado that did not exist before.

Funding from federal agencies was crucial to the research that ultimately underpinned these companies. As with many companies created out of CU-Boulder, they simply would not have existed without the long-term investment by the federal government in basic research. Likewise, the MAVEN mission to Mars, which will launch in Florida next month, is a prime example of a strategic partnership among CU-Boulder; the University of California, Berkeley; NASA; Lockheed Martin; United Launch Alliance; and Exelis, Inc. That partnership has injected more than $300 million into Colorado’s economy and provided an unparalleled educational opportunity for graduate and undergraduate students who have worked on the project.

Today, however, such partnerships — and all their benefits — are at risk. The ongoing short-term focus in Washington and the non-strategic, wholesale budget cuts mandated by sequestration are eroding our nation’s three-way economic partnership, responsible for nearly all of our scientific achievements and much of our economic growth since World War II.

We must all work to reverse this trend. Each of the three legs of the innovation stool — higher education, the federal government, and industry — must know the other two are in it for the long run so all three can keep up the legacy of innovation that fuels the national economy, and that gives the nation a key strategic advantage in the global economy.

Colorado’s economic strength in particular thrives on this three-way partnership. With a research diamond encompassing CU-Boulder, Colorado State University, the Colorado School of Mines, and CU’s Anschutz Medical Campus; the state’s 24 federal laboratories; and our aerospace, bio-medical, energy and telecommunications industries, we have a truly diverse economy fueled by a multibillion-dollar steady stream of innovation.

All of us understand the imperative for the U.S. to balance its budget, pay its bills, and not bury our children’s future under a mountain of debt. At the same time, however, growing our nation’s economy and strengthening the private sector won’t happen if we remove the building blocks of innovation formed by successful public-private partnerships.

Continued erosion of those building blocks, whether by catastrophic cuts or via the next short-term budget crisis in Washington, will destroy the launch pad needed to get our nation’s economy soaring again.

Philip P. DiStefano is the chancellor of the University of Colorado at Boulder.