We never quit! Pro-lifers know it sometimes takes many repeated attempts to pass life-saving legislation. Recently, Sen. John Cornyn (R-Tex.) reminded Americans from the floor of the Senate just how many times it took to pass the landmark Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act.

But the lives that law saved made it worth everything we did!

The same holds true for our work to defund Planned Parenthood. The scandals of this summer have exposed their abuses to the nation – and millions of Americans are saying they don’t want their tax dollars to go to this abortion behemoth!

SIGN THE PETITION! Congress Must De-Fund Planned Parenthood Immediately

Democrats in the U.S. Senate, to their shame, have repeatedly filibustered and blocked us from even getting votes to end Planned Parenthood’s funding and to end the anti-life abuses in Obamacare, but we haven’t given up.

And we never will!

So National Right to Life is strongly supporting and working to pass a new effort to cut about $400 million in Planned Parenthood’s funding and repeal several odious provisions of Obamacare in H.R.3762 – the Restoring Americans’ Healthcare Freedom Reconciliation Act of 2015.

Budget reconciliation is a process Congress can use only on certain kinds of legislation. But the genius of this approach is that budget reconciliation is one of the few procedures where senators in opposition cannot filibuster to block a bill. They have to allow a vote!

That means a bill can be passed with the support of a majority of senators – 51votes – instead of the 60 votes needed to stop a bill-killing filibuster.

And that would make it much harder for pro-abortion Democrats in the Senate to kill our efforts to pass legislation to cut funding to Planned Parenthood!

The budget reconciliation process is not a slam-dunk, but getting the bill through Congress is doable! We’re working hard to make our support known to members of Congress and to win their votes.

But we need to do more!

First, we need all pro-lifers to contact their representatives in the U.S. House of Representatives to urge them to vote for H.R. 3762, as this bill would save many, many lives if enacted. You can email your representative and senators by clicking here – then you just enter your address, and in a minute or less you can send an appropriate email to your representative in the U.S. House of Representatives.

If we pass this bill in the House, that’s just our first step, though. We also need to pass it in the Senate, with the 51-vote threshold.

So we need your help to communicate with grassroots pro-lifers all across America, to get them to flood their senators’ and House members’ offices with calls, letters, and emails demanding we pass a budget reconciliation bill that cuts Planned Parenthood’s funds and significantly rolls back Obamacare!

LifeNews Note: Carol Tobias is the president of the National Right to Life Committee.