Bipartisan caucus collects stories, feedback from caregivers to work to shape new legislation

Peggy Whitt paints her toenails Friday while her mother, Margaret Markowski, not shown, participates in activities at Stepping Stones, an adult day care program in Loveland. Whitt, a Loveland resident who takes care of her mother, gets a little time to do things for herself when her mom is at Stepping Stones. ( Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Family caregivers say there's no real way to measure the pain and grief involved in caring for an aging and ill loved one and going through the system to get their loved ones the help they need.

Loveland resident Peggy Whitt says her experience is not something she could have prepared for or even expected. But she's not alone.

More than 584,000 Coloradans are providing care on an unpaid basis for aging or disabled love ones, according to the American Association of Retired Persons.

That unpaid care is estimated to cost about $7.4 billion, with a national average of 62 hours of care per week for about a third of the nation's 42 million caregivers.

Sen. Michael Bennet (D-Colo.) met with caregivers and the AARP last month in Fort Collins to talk about a bipartisan caucus he helped launch called Assisting Caregivers Today. He heard stories from caregivers who were struggling to get help, one of whom discussed how she was taking care of a parent with dementia only to be diagnosed with early onset dementia herself.

Bennet also introduced bipartisan legislation called the Recognize, Assist, Include, Support and Engage (RAISE) Family Caregivers Act to require a national strategy to recognize and support caregivers.

The solutions, Bennet said in an interview, need to be focused not on theoretical or philosophical ideas but based on caregivers' realities. Senators themselves are finding themselves in these same situations, he added.

Advertisement

"The quality and quantity of offerings is not what it needs to be," Bennet said.

The first step for the caucus, according to Bennet, is hearing people's stories.

AARP is helping in that effort by collecting caregivers' stories at act.aarp.org/iheartcaregivers/.

In 2012, Whitt suggested that her mother and father, living in Philadelphia at the time, move in with her.

Whitt, now 60, says both her son and daughter had already moved out for college. She had just bought a new house six months prior. She ended up giving her parents her bedroom and reorganizing a lot of her space.

Luckily for both she and her parents, Whitt was working as a geriatric care manager. This was even luckier considering she's a registered nurse and there were only two registered nurses in the Front Range who were certified in geriatric care.

Despite this experience, Whitt says it was still a challenge.

"If I can barely do it, there's no way somebody without an advanced (certification) can do it," she said about figuring out the services available, what Medicare and Medicaid cover and getting help navigating the system.

As a geriatric care manager, Whitt said 99 percent of the time she wouldn't have recommended to clients to move their parents in with them.

But she said despite her medical knowledge, she knew it was the right thing to do. And other options were just too expensive.

Knowing what to do for her parents medically was easy for Whitt, she said. However, what was harder was losing her own space and her routine.

She was also dealing with her own health problems and then had to quit her job to take care of her parents full time.

Her father died in 2012, which she said was very difficult for her, because it left her alone in taking care of her mother, with whom she didn't always get along. Her mom has vascular dementia and other health problems.

Whitt started taking her parents to Stepping Stones Adult Day Care Program a few years ago, and she increased the number of days for her mom after her dad died.

"When she's not stressed, she can come here," she said. "It gives her a sense of purpose. She calls it 'going to work,'" Whitt said of her mom.

At first, her parents were resistant. But she said she told them: "If I can't have somebody to help me, I can't help you guys."

And through a consumer-directed Medicaid program, she's able to have someone come help her with her mom at home.

Still, it all takes a toll on a caregiver's emotional health and financial well-being, she said.

"It burned out my passions and desires," she said.

Whitt attends a support group but also gives back by volunteering. And she seeks the help of neighbors and friends, which she encourages all caregivers to do.

"It's hard to tell, even as an educated woman in the field what could or would make a difference," Whitt said.

However, a start would be putting more money into the programs that help caregivers navigate services.

Saja Hindi: 970-669-5050 ext. 521, hindis@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/SajaHindiRH.