(This story was updated Jan. 6, 2015, to correct Adam Trent's name in the caption above.)

On the web • adamtrent.com • theillusionistslive.com • Watch Adam Trent on "America's Got Talent": nbc.com/americas-got-talent/video/the-illusionists/2806694

Boulder's Adam Trent is working on a magic trick that few other magicians have dared attempt: He wants to make yesterday's stereotypes about cheesy, old magicians disappear and replace them with something new. Something modern, funny, cool and — here's the kicker — savvy enough to entertain a technologically unshockable young generation.

Turns out, they have not seen it all, Trent says.

The magic world is calling him "the futurist," the next big thing for magic. Others call him "Justin Timberlake meets David Copperfield"; he has been known to dance on stage, and he's an admitted boy-band wannabe.

Trent, 29, started his magic shows as a teenager in Boulder, and he has been performing in New York since Nov. 26 with a group of magicians who were the first to hit Broadway in nearly two decades. The last magician on Broadway: David Copperfield, as he launched his career.

"I always wanted to do Broadway," says Trent, whose run with "The Illusionists: Witness the Impossible" at the Marquis Theatre concludes Sunday, Jan. 4. "I didn't think it would happen like this."

The crew of Trent and six other magicians from around the world premiered their stage show earlier this year at the Sydney Opera House in Australia and were well-enough received to land a spot at the Marquis.

After their Broadway run concludes, "The Illusionists" embark on an 18-city tour that starts in Washington, D.C. (Tuesday through Jan. 11). No Colorado dates have been set, but "The Illusionists" are scheduled to play Salt Lake City June 23-28.

Adam Trent, appearing on "Wizard Wars," Epiosode 103. The Boulder magician is part of a group who were the the first magicians to take Broadway since David Copperfield. (Dale Berman / Syfy)

In addition, Trent is hoping to give Boulder a private peek into the world of a famous, young magician. He says he has visions of soon playing the Nomad Theater, where he used to do his early shows.

Before Trent hit Broadway, you might have caught him on the SyFy Channel's newest competition show, "Wizard Wars" — his episode aired Sept. 2.

"Wizard Wars," hosted by judges Penn and Teller, challenges "bright and innovative" young magicians to use original magic using a random assortment of everyday objects.

Trent broke onto the TV scene in 2012 with a guest spot on the Disney Channel's "Shake It Up." After that, he hosted a Travel Channel series, "Scambushed," in which he traveled the country as a magician exposing scams to tourists.

"I pickpocketed them or sold them a fake thing," Trent said. "It's a very similar world between con artists and magic."

Except the intention, of course. Both rely on distraction, illusions and playing with someone's mind.

Trent also made a pilot for an MTV hidden-camera prank show, which has not yet aired. And last summer, he taught Joan Rivers magic on her show, "Joan Knows Best," not long before her death.

TV shows help sell tickets, Trent says, but the stage is where he started. After graduating from Fairview High School, he moved to Los Angeles to get a degree in finance and marketing. Then he worked on cruise ships for four years and toured the country performing for colleges for another few years.

Several thousands of shows and a decade later, Trent says even if he performed the exact acts that Boulder arts fans might have seen in the beginning, "it would be unrecognizable."

"Now I've worked with professional songwriters who have had big hits on the charts," Trent says, "and the team I work with on my magic is David Copperfield's original team."

Old-school magicians virtually went to war with technology, Trent says, but today's generation has grown up with special effects and movies that far exceed fantasy.

"How do you compete with that in person?" he says.

Instead of fighting it, Trent says, he uses technology to enhance his performance. He uses giant LED screens to seemingly clone himself and teleport across the stage. He can do close-up magic for large audiences, with projection cameras. He even has used 3D glasses for his magic before.

He calls his performance "a magic show for people who don't necessarily like magic."

And that's the goal of "The Illusionists," too, he says. "The Illusionists" want to do for magic what Cirque du Soleil did for the old-school circus: replace goofy clowns with seductive and intriguing aerials; swap tacky costumes for exquisite and sexy style, and give the whole experience a sophisticated, fantasia-like adult edge.

"The general public has a negative stereotype of magic, because they're used to seeing Bob the Birthday Party Guy and bad magicians, like your weird uncle," Trent says. "This show is more than just magic. It's performance art — people incorporating music or comedy in interesting ways, where adults actually want to get a babysitter."

That said, it's worth noting one reason Trent hopes to visit Boulder soon is to visit his 1-year-old niece.

"As much as I make fun of the uncle who does magic tricks, I am going to be that uncle who does magic," Trent says.

Who knows? Maybe by the time she's old enough to understand, magic will have a completely different reputation.

Aimee Heckel: 303-473-1359, heckela@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/Aimeemay.