If you are planning on traveling to Mexico, officials with the U.S. State Department wants you to be careful. They issued an updated warning about the risk of traveling to certain places in Mexico, including Sonora, which is just south of Tucson.

But some Nogales, AZ residents feel the warnings are painting a negative picture of Mexico, particularly the border cities.



"I think it's ridiculous," Nogales resident Tony Velasquez said. "I think it's a scare tactic to retain most of the shoppers and residents on the U.S. side to affect the economy along the border and to affect the economy along the Mexican border."



According to the State Department's news release, millions visit the country safely each year but American citizens have been the victims of violent crimes and robbery by organized criminal groups in various Mexican states.



Rodney Kaiser, owner of Sal's Bike Shop in Nogales, AZ, has been running his shop for about 5 years. He describes the atmosphere on the border as "very controlled" and said he's always felt safe living there.



He also said he hosts bike riders that pass through the city on their way to Mexico and said he's worried the warnings will make them change their mind.



"They might be reluctant to come down and do that," Kaiser said. "We've hosted a whole bunch of people in the last year."



Kaiser, who was born and raised in Nogales, believes people who travel to Mexico "should have common sense" and simply be aware of where they're going.



"You have to know where you are and you have to just pay attention," Kaiser said.



Velasquez said he acknowledges that violent crimes and robberies do take place in certain areas of Mexico, but not in Nogales, AZ, and he encourages people who have doubts to visit the city and see for themselves.



"You can walk, shop, look around, take a tour of both Nogaleses and you will, on your own, determine that it is an extremely safe community, both sides of the city," Velasquez said.



For more on the travel warnings, CLICK HERE.



Copyright 2016 Tucson News Now. All rights reserved.