<p>Submitted The twin villas in the Esperanza neighborhood at Paseo.</p>

Submitted By Whalen Public Relations

Stock Development has completed construction on three twin villa inventory homes and has begun construction on the final four twin villas in the Esperanza neighborhood at Paseo.

"Sales at Paseo have been even stronger than anticipated and Paseo is nearing sell out," said Tim Clark, vice president of sales at Paseo. "We have accelerated our construction program begun construction on the final building to ensure that construction of the twin villas is complete by the end of the year."

The twin villas were designed by Stock Construction specifically for Esperanza. Every twin villa or single-family home sold includes a $40,000 credit toward a pool or additional options and upgrades.

Floor plans available are the Coronado, a two bedroom, two-bath plan with 1,575 square feet under air, and The Granada, a three-bedroom, three bath design with 1,891 square feet of living area.

The Twin Villas are situated along a long cul-de-sac and feature a combination of lake and nature preserve views. All homes feature large barrel tile roofs and brick-paver driveways and walkways. Prices start in the $380s.

Esperanza is accessed via a landscaped entry bridge directly across from Paseo's Village Center. Esperanza consists of approximately 100 acres in the northern phase of Paseo and is encircled by the Six Mile Cypress Slough.

Paseo's Village Center includes a full-service concierge, a bistro, an ice-cream parlor, a pub, an Internet café, a coffee shop, a fitness center, a business center and library, spa services and a 90-seat theater.

The free-form pool has earned a Pinnacle Award for Best Pool Design. It includes elaborate waterfalls and rockscapes, as well as a poolside gazebo serving refreshments. Adjacent to the main pool is a large spa, a fitness-oriented lap pool and a children's water playground.

The sports center includes six Hydro-Grid tennis courts, a fishing pier, four bocce ball courts and a basketball court. Three additional pool complexes are also open in the town home courtyards.

There is also a Lifestyle Park with four chickee huts, a sand volleyball court, horseshoe pits, grilling areas, a children's grass play area and two pickle ball courts. The park is open to all Paseo residents. It joins a lakefront park with a chickee hut, seating and hammocks on the west side of Paseo.

Paseo's sales center is at 11940 Palba Way. From Daniels Parkway, one-half mile west of I-75 at Exit 131, turn north on Palomino Lane. After 1.5 miles, turn left on Penzance Boulevard. Paseo's gated entry is one-half mile ahead on the right. Online at paseo-ftmyers.com.