Georgia Southern University Police officers block traffic at the entrance of Park Place Apartments on Lanier Drive, where officials say one victim was killed by a gunshot Friday night.

A 17-year-old Statesboro youth faces charges of murder in connection with the Friday night fatal shooting of a 46-year-old man at Park Place Apartments, police said.

The victim, identified as Eric Alexander Reese, was a resident of Park Place, the Statesboro Police Department announced in a press release Saturday morning.

Lester Parrish, of University Pointe Apartments on Harvey Drive, was arrested Saturday morning at the Avenue at Southern on Georgia Avenue, and charged with murder, aggravated assault and possession of a firearm during the commission of a crime, police said. He is being held at the Bulloch County Jail without bond awaiting further court action.

Statesboro police officers responded to Park Place on Lanier Drive at approximately 8:30 p.m. Friday "in reference to an altercation involving firearms," the press release says.

Upon officers' arrival, Reese was located and was deceased. Responding officers at the scene made multiple arrests, police said.

At the scene Friday night, police said five people, including one juvenile, were taken into custody. They said that after the shooting, several people ran across Veterans Memorial Parkway into a nearby field, where the five were detained.

Bulloch County Coroner Jake Futch said Friday night that he was called to East Georgia Regional Medical Center in response to a victim with a gunshot wound in the chest.

The Statesboro Police Department, Bulloch County Sheriff's Office, Georgia Southern University Police and Georgia State Patrol responded to the scene Friday night.

Anyone with information concerning this case is asked to contact the police department's Investigations Bureau at the Statesboro Police Department at (912) 764-9911. Anonymous tips may be submitted to www.tipsoft.com or by sending a text message beginning with "TIPSSPD" to 274637 (CRIMES). All information is strictly confidential.