Bill allowing new McLaren hospital in Oakland attracts foes to Senate hearing

A wide spectrum of business groups, health systems and labor unions all testified Tuesday against a bill that would allow Flint-based McLaren Health Care Inc. a special exemption to build a new hospital near Clarkston.

Senate Bill 1073, sponsored by Majority Leader Randy Richardville, R-Monroe, would allow McLaren to transfer beds from its McLaren Oakland in Pontiac to the new hospital. Such a transfer has been denied by the state and the courts in recent years because it doesn’t meet state certificate-of-need requirements.

Richardville adjourned the packed hearing Tuesday without taking a vote, saying he wants to talk with his caucus members more about the issue before moving forward.

He said the amount of opposition was not a concern. because he said he tries to do the right thing whether there are people on his side or not.

Richardville said many of the groups opposed to the bill — including the Detroit automakers, Michigan Manufacturers Association, Small Business Association of Michigan, Michigan Nurses Association, UAW and Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan — oppose it because they think it is undermining the certificate-of-need process.

“They believe this is a slippery slope, and so once you make an exception or once you make a change, then the whole thing is going to fall apart,” Richardville said. “Yet while I’m in this chair, that’s not going to happen. So that doesn’t concern me.”

The opposition, which also includes many competing health systems in the area, said the proposed hospital is not needed and would only further dilute the already-low occupancy rates at hospitals in Oakland County and drive up medical costs that businesses pay.

But McLaren CEO Phil Incarnati said no evidence exists to support those claims and said it is dangerous for residents in and around Clarkston to have to drive long distances to a hospital.

Incarnati said it is arrogant of critics of the bill to tell residents of northern Oakland County that they won’t die in an ambulance trying to navigate gridlocked roads to another hospital.

He said bill will save lives in Pontiac by keeping hospital open and save lives in Clarkston by stopping people from having to drive too far.

Without the bill, Incarnati said, he may have to close McLaren Pontiac, where 1,435 people work. Future investments in Michigan also may not happen, he said.

“We want to stay, but make no mistake. At some point in time, McLaren will build a new, state-of-the-art facility,” Incarnati said. “Our home is right here in Michigan. As we grow into a system of the future, our new investments may not be.”

Also supporting McLaren at the hearing was Oakland County and several unions from the building trades, whose members would benefit from building the hospital and the estimated 700 construction jobs it would create.

“I can think of no other company that comes before the Legislature begging to spend $300 million, asks not one cent of taxpayer money to create 700 construction jobs, 1,500 to 3,000 medical jobs and be turned away by politics and competitors,” Incarnati said.

Chris Gautz: (517) 403-4403, cgautz@crain.com. Twitter: @chrisgautz

Related Links