‘Tis the season for New Year’s resolutions. As a major election year, 2014 will be full of plans and promises to make health care more affordable and of higher quality for patients. This is understandable as health care costs continue to escalate nationally, severely impacting family incomes and forcing cuts to federal and state education and infrastructure budgets.

Even as the Affordable Care Act is implemented, there remains the question of what states can do to improve the quality of health care delivery while simultaneously controlling health care costs.

That was the charge to the bipartisan State Health Care Cost Containment Commission I co-chair with Mike Leavitt, the former governor of Utah and the former secretary of Health and Human Services. The release of the commission’s recommendations this month is timed to coincide with the 46 state legislative sessions set to convene in 2014, including here in Colorado.

The commission included a diverse group of stakeholders from the public and private sectors. We spent a year studying and identifying the most effective state policy tools available to reduce health care costs while improving quality. All 12 commission members were surprised at the powers that exist at the state level to transform the current system. It is clearly a job that should not be left to the federal government to solve. To be truly effective, solutions like the following must be tailored to the unique health care markets and cultures of individual states.

Use the governor’s bully pulpit to convene and build consensus among health care providers, payers and patients to take voluntary action to reduce cost. It is not written in any state constitution, but governors possess impressive political powers to get things done beyond executive orders and laws that can take years to pass. Governor-led working groups are prime opportunities to solve the chief problem of escalating costs.

Drive payment reform. Over the next several years, about 80 million individuals will be receiving/purchasing care through a state entity. Medicaid enrollments are projected to be about 70 million; state government workers will comprise up to 4 million; and another 6 million to 8 million will purchase health care through state exchanges. States have enormous purchasing power to transform the delivery system from a fee-for-service model to one that provides integrated, patient-oriented, cost-effective care. Paying for the quantity of medical services regardless of outcome simply begets volume without value.

Encourage consumers to make informed decisions. Under Gov. John Hickenlooper’s leadership, Colorado was one of two states to pass bipartisan legislation to set up Connect for Health Colorado, a state health insurance exchange marketplace that allows Coloradans to compare health plans and shop for health insurance. States can also require the public reporting of provider performance and prices on a timely, consistent, statewide basis. These report cards can facilitate meaningful comparisons, empower choices and market competition. The best providers and insurers will embrace the opportunity to improve performance and compete to keep us healthy.

Streamline health care regulations and reform laws. In most states, there are outdated regulations that hamstring efforts to adopt payment structures that reward value over volume of care. Current state regulatory barriers too often impede the use of bonus payments, shared savings, and shared risk/accountability — all imperative for successful payment reform. Expanding the role of nurse practitioners and physician assistants, reforming malpractice laws, and rethinking state benefit mandates will also be important.

Promote wellness and prevention. Virtually every state is involved in reducing obesity and addiction and promoting healthy living. They recognize that such efforts are dollars and lives saved through prevention. State programs encourage fitness and nutrition in schools; expand recreation areas like playgrounds, bike and walking paths; and improve access to healthy foods. One study estimated that if the average body mass index (BMI) was reduced by just 5 percent, total health care costs could fall as much as 8 percent in nearly every state.

These are just a few of the recommendations for replacing the nation’s reliance on fragmented, fee-for-service care with coordinated care accountable for cost control and quality gains. We know success is possible. For the past several years, Colorado implemented numerous initiatives to reduce costs, improve the way services are delivered and how providers get paid. These efforts are already showing improvements, with a reported net savings of $6 million in 2012-13 and the potential for even greater savings going forward.

Also, in 2009, Colorado instituted a hospital provider fee that receives federal matching dollars, making it possible to expand Medicaid to cover tens of thousands of Colorado’s most vulnerable citizens without drawing any money from state coffers or raising taxes. And, since 2008, Colorado has reduced the number of uninsured children by more than 64,000 through expanded eligibility and improved outreach and enrollment efforts.

These are just a sampling of the immense powers at the state level to deliver health care cost and quality improvements with staying power. States have a profound economic interest in finally cracking the code of health care cost containment. It is no longer just a health care issue, but a means to free up neglected investments in education, highways and infrastructure and stimulate job and wage growth.

Some resolutions are better kept than others. The Miller Center report provides the direction needed to keep this critically important resolution. Let 2014 be the year when state leaders do their part to deliver better health care at lower costs and restore our states’ economic health.

Bill Ritter is the former governor of Colorado and co-chair of the State Health Care Cost Containment Commission, spearheaded by the University of Virginia’s Miller Center (www.millercenter.org).