Old buddies Dan Liss and Josh Carpenter got the idea after accidentally running into each other in London.

Liss, a 25-year-old Harvard graduate, was in investment banking. Carpenter, a 26-year-old Rhodes Scholar, was studying at Oxford.

Both were concerned about all the stories emanating from their home country about problems with the Affordable Care Act. The stories seemed to have a common theme, the two agreed: Confusion.

"I was tired of it -- the stories were all about the politics and not the people," Carpenter said. "There just wasn't enough objective information out there."

So Liss, who once worked for New York Mayor Mike Bloomberg, and Carpenter, a native of Florence, decided to do something about it. Carpenter thought it would be great to target his home state with a grassroots effort to inform people about the ACA, often called Obamacare.

Thus "Bama Covered" was born.

Liss and Carpenter have enlisted an extensive list of consultants and advisers providing pro bono help with such things as marketing, digital mapping and legal advice.

Bama Covered has also assembled a big-name volunteer board of directors which includes Dr. Neal Berte, president emeritus at Birmingham-Southern College, former Alabama Supreme Court justice Sue Bell Cobb, Auburn University professor emeritus Wayne Flynt and Dr. Max Michael, dean of the University of Alabama at Birmingham School of Public Health.

Liss and Carpenter have a detailed plan mapped out to recruit students at most of Alabama's four-year and two-year colleges and universities. For example, the plan for the section of Central Alabama calls for recruiting about 175 students at UAB, Samford and Birmingham Southern, with additional outreach to other smaller schools in the area.

But Liss and Carpenter stress it's an ever-evolving work in motion, and numbers are subject to variation as they get feet on the ground. So far, the two will only say they have "several hundred" students.





"We'd love to come out and announce right here that we have 1,000 students. But we are well on our way," Carpenter said. "There a ton of energy. It feels like a campaign."

Carpenter and Liss are quick to point out this is a nonpartisan effort.

"Our goal is not enrollment," Carpenter said. "Our goal is education. Our goal is democracy at its finest."

Liss has undergone the training to be a navigator while Carpenter holds the designation requiring less training: certified application counselor. But essentially he can do some of the same things a navigator can do, such as help people complete eligibility forms for health insurance coverage.

While all of the 1,000 students recruited will be trained to represent Bama Covered in a professional and nonpartisan way, some will also be trained as certified application counselors, they said.

The group has applied for 501(c)(3) tax exempt status. The organizers admit it is operating on a shoestring budget but have recently hired two staff members.

"It's about empowering students, and it doesn't take a lot of money," Liss said. "It's about people."

Once trained students might attend high school basketball games, farmer's markets, music events, art festivals or any number of venues where people are present. Some of what the students will do is provide referrals and contact information for other resources such as established outreach groups like Enroll Alabama and Birmingham Health Care.

"The law may hurt you or it may help you, but wouldn't it be good to know which category you're in to make an informed decision?" Carpenter said.

For more about how to volunteer go to BamaCovered.org.