The Eye

'Wayward Pines' Season 2 Update: M. Night Shyamalan And Author Blake Crouch In Talks

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Facebook/"Wayward Pines" Official Page) "Wayward Pines" producer M. Night Shyamalan and author Blake Crouch are apparently in talks about a possible Season 2.

There could be hope for a second season of "Wayward Pines" after all!



Although it was originally planned as a limited series, the finale seemed to be open-ended enough for a possible continuation. At the TV Critics Association Summer Press Tour, Fox's Dana Walden told Deadline, "M. Night Shyamalan and the author of the the book series (Blake Crouch) just started conversations about it. Perhaps it would be another miniseries event ... If the author can lay in the future book series."



Shyamalan earlier told Deadline about his and Crouch's conversations. He said, "I did ask [Crouch] to come over to my house, which he did. We did sit down for a few days, and we talked about all kinds of things, and we both felt very good about our time together.



"We both made a pact saying if we did decide to do something more here that we would approach it with a very high level of integrity and not let the opportunity dictate it because we're both happy to walk away ... So I am happy to walk away, especially with such a wonderful reaction and all that stuff. But honestly, Blake and I do have an idea."



Executive producer Chad Hodge insisted that the finale wasn't meant to tease a second season. He told Entertainment Weekly, "It was the end. Period. Really what it does is it comes full circle. Just as Ethan woke up in episode 1 and found himself in this strange town of Wayward Pines in a hospital bed with a nurse standing above him, and then he walks up Main St. to find this strangely odd town and people staring at him, it's actually partly shot-for-shot exactly what we did in the first episode as Ben comes up Main St. and sees people staring at him."



In the finale, Ethan made a shocking sacrifice to save everyone. After some time had passed, Ben woke up in a hospital bed and realized that the town's troubles were far from over. If there is a Season 2, it would revolve around the First Generation, who has now taken over the town.



What do you think? Is continuing the series a good idea? Vote in the poll!





SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.