Bins and fog on an eerie Canberra street at nine on a winter's evening. Photo: Murray Foote

A sunny Sunday may have had territorians thinking the worst of winter was over, but by Wednesday the jackets will be getting another workout when a predicted cold snap is likely to bring snow to the Brindabellas.

Wednesday is tipped to reach a maximum of 9 degrees, but Weatherzone meteorologist Tristan Meyers expects "the most interesting day" of the coming week to feel much colder with even thunderstorms possible.

"At times the wind chill will make it feel like 5 degrees and showers during the day will make it feel like 3 degrees," he said.

Steam rises off Lake Burley Griffin on a misty morning shortly after sunrise. Photo: Bradley Schulz

"Wednesday is likely to bring another snow event for NSW, nothing like the widespread snow earlier this season but there'll definitely be a dusting on the Brindabellas and it could spread to the Blue Mountains from late morning."

Advertisement

A high pressure ridge forming later in the week will bring frosty mornings, Mr Meyers said, but temperatures should improve thanks to sunny days.

Early risers on Sunday suffered through a particularly cold morning when overnight temperatures dipped to almost minus 4.7 degrees, close to six degrees below average and much colder than the forecast minimum of zero, Mr Meyers said.

But this weekend will be warmer with tops of 15 degrees.

"Canberra had a run of cold nights since Friday when it got down to minus 3.5 and Saturday when it was minus 3," he said.

"Notoriously Canberra seems to jump what people estimate in the morning."

Mr Meyers said the mornings will warm up by Tuesday, with a low of 2 predicted, and overnight temperatures for the rest of the week will trend around average.

Overnight temperatures for Monday were tipped to reach minus 2, but Mr Meyers said it was likely to be colder.

"The reason for that is there is cloud around, but the wind is pretty low below 10km/h and that's when you get cold nights," he said.

"It could be minus 4, there will definitely be frost on the ground."

The ACT has had its coldest start to August in five years thanks to unseasonably cold mornings but it hasn't stopped the territory's budding photographers.

Sunrise appears to be one of the favourite times to capture the ACT at its best for the Canberra Times winter photo competition.

To enter send a maximum of three photos to photocomp@canberratimes.com.au as attached JPEG files and include your name, address, phone number, photo title, a description of the photo and the date it was taken.

Photos must be between 150 kilobytes and one megabyte. Winners will take home a share of the $1000 prize.