Dunbar Township plans industrial park

Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

Dunbar Township supervisors Thursday night adopted a resolution that will pave the way for sewage expansion at the Dunbar Industrial Park, which will be constructed off Route 119 by Fay-Penn Economic Development Corp.

Plans call for the township to expand sewage lines, build roads and prepare the infrastructure for the industrial park, according to chairman John Tabaj.

Kenny Martray of Widmer Engineering said the sewage project, which is expected to cost an estimated $5 million, is a joint project that will involve both Dunbar Borough and Dunbar Township.

The project will be funded through grant funds provided through Obamacare and the Army Corps of Engineers, Martray said.

“The sewage project isn't going to cost the township any money,” he said. “It was 100 percent grant funded, and no matching funds are required. That doesn't happen very often.”

In addition to expanding sewers to the new industrial park, Tabaj said, the project includes the expansion of the Dunbar Borough sewage system. Plans also call for expanding sewage lines along Highway Supply Road, Eighty Acres Road and the Joseph A. Hardy Connellsville Airport.

Tabaj said Fay-Penn Economic Development Corp. is actually constructing the industrial park and building the roads which will be required to support the development.

“The sewage and the roads are actually going to be constructed at the industrial park at the same time,” he said.

In other business, Cindy Efaw of 430 Main St., Juniata, addressed the township supervisors about what she considers to be a safety hazard on her street.

Efaw said the Postal Service recently decided to install a cluster of mailboxes along Main Street where it claims to can no longer deliver mail to individual homes. The mailboxes are sitting on concrete blocks and are surrounded by mud. Residents are having a difficult time getting their mail out of the boxes.

“These mailboxes are actually creating a safety hazard to residents, but we cannot get anyone from the Postal Service to listen to our safety concerns,” Efaw said. “That's why we decided to bring the issue to the township's attention.”

However, the township supervisors said they cannot help the residents because they do not have jurisdiction over the federal government.

“You need to take this issue up with the Postal Service,” Tabaj said. “There really isn't anything the township supervisors can do about it.”

Efaw said the residents in the neighborhood recently signed petitions saying that the mailbox clusters are causing a safety hazard. She contacted U.S. Sen. Bob Casey's office for assistance, but she said no action has been taken to address the problem.

“I've contacted Fred Reynolds of the Connellsville Police Office, and I've even called Curtis Williams of the Postal Service in Pittsburgh, but no one has been willing to help us,” she said. “I came here because I thought the township supervisors might be able to help us.”

Cindy Ekas is a Trib Total Media contributing writer.