The logos of both the videogame maker Kabam and the University of California, Berkeley. Kabam

Videogame maker Kabam has agreed to pay nearly $18 million for naming rights to the football field at the University of California at Berkeley.

The deal with the university does not put a new name on California Memorial Stadium, the distinctive oval that is the longtime home of the UC Berkeley’s Golden Bears. Kabam’s rights extend to the field alone.

Kabam and the university said the 15-year deal places the company’s name on the two 25-yard lines, along with signage at the 50-yard line above the Cal team bench and additional directional signs.

The San Francisco game company said it struck the deal in part because three of its four cofounders went to the school, as did nearly 10% of the company’s local employees.

“We love the opportunity to create a unique athletic and academic partnership that honors Kabam’s roots to Cal and ties to the continuous improvement of UC Berkeley,” said Kevin Chou, Kabam’s chief executive, in a statement.

Kabam also plans to create a scholarship program, gaming zones in the stadium for fans and have employees give guest lectures at the school’s classes.

While selling naming rights is more common to pro football, the Kabam deal is not unprecedented. The University of Maryland, for example, sold naming rights for its field at Byrd Stadium to Capital One.

Such deals are becoming increasingly popular with college athletic programs that are under increasing pressure to raise their own money independent from their schools. For UC Berkeley, it helps to offset the $321 million that was spent to renovate its stadium, which opened in 1923 and is built on a fault line.

By selling naming rights to fields, the schools also avoid the potential backlash that could come with changing the names of popular stadiums, many of which are of benefactors or famous coaches of years passed.

John Wilton, Vice Chancellor for administration and finance, said the school was careful to ensure the agreement with Kabam included contingency clauses if something were to happen to the company.

“One of the reasons it took time to finalize the contract, and time from our legal department, was looking through the possible scenarios and contingencies that cross your mind with a startup or relatively young company,” he said.

Kabam can also drop out of the agreement if Berkeley were to be enmeshed in a scandal, he said.

Sandy Barbour, UC Berkeley’s director of athletics, said the school struck the agreement with Kabam because the company was willing to get involved with the school in larger ways than simple naming rights. “It was essential that we find a naming rights partner that would promote a meaningful association with our department and the campus as a whole,” she said.

The naming rights will take effect in 2014, when the field will be called “Kabam Field at California Memorial Stadium.”