Call 573-815-1776 or email tribtalk@columbiatribune.com to contribute.

Jim Robertson, managing editor

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Or, use your facebook account: facebook Need an account? Create one now.

“I find it ironic that Bruce Springsteen has canceled a tour for a concert two days prior to the concert in North Carolina in objection to the LBGT law. How ironic that he does not want to go against his core conviction yet he does not allow other people to go against their core convictions. What is the world coming to when people can’t have their own opinions?”

Robertson replies: Opinions are one thing, but laws are another. The cancellation is his way of expressing his opinion. Calling Trib Talk is yours.

“I just wondered if there is still a no-call list. We seem to get all these erratic phone calls from all over the country that we didn’t when we were on the no-call list. I had updated my phone number on the no-call list, but I’m still getting them. Also, I just wanted to compliment Lorry Myers’ ‘Storytime.’ Her columns are always so to the point and so good.”

Robertson replies: You can double-check online to see whether your telephone number is listed on the Missouri no-call list by going to www.ago.mo.gov/divisions/consumer/no-call or by calling 866-289-9633. You may also register a complaint about unwanted calls at the same website if you have the offending telephone number.

“I don’t know who the clown was or the exact amount, but the comment was, ‘Well, it will only raise taxes by $185 a year.’ Does this nimrod have any idea what that means for someone like me who is elderly, handicapped and living on a fixed income?”

“Politics is nuts these days. Just like the nut, if you turn it to the right, you tighten things up. If you turn it to the left, you loosen things up. The nut ought to stay still in the middle.”

“I keep reading about Gary Ward’s letter regarding picking up trash after football games. I thought the athletic department was supposed to be self-supporting. This doesn’t sound like they’re self-supporting. It sounds like they take money from the university.”

“I read where each candidate for president in 2012 spent $1 billion. I thought that to be incredible, but I later learned that same year $5 billion was spent on potato chips. Methinks the potato chip expenditure was more beneficial.”

“In the years abortion has been debated, why has not the father, or sperm donor, been implicated in the process? A woman did not wake up on a Sunday morning pregnant with no assistance, so let’s put emphasis on responsibility for the cause of the pregnancy. How, you ask? The mother to be or not to be must disclose who the father is, whereupon he will be served a summons and assessed a fee for the cost of the abortion at the least. Might slow his impregnating another woman as a benefit, too.”

“Downtown student apartment competition — much like sorority and fraternity houses, could there be a competition for the No. 1 ranking of a student housing project downtown? Let’s say they volunteer to clean up the sidewalks from cups and upchuck after the bars close the next day, with a roving trophy to stay on display in the winner’s lounge for the month. The residents could receive free benefits like discounts from restaurants and a raffle for 10 free parking spaces for that month in a city garage.”

“If the university continues to pay people salaries when it can’t even find a job for them, the oversight committee from the state legislature can’t come any too soon. People need to speak up for the janitors and the people that do the real hard work around the university for virtually no pay.”

“It was an interesting story about Mitt Romney. He was driving down the road with his grandchildren and asked them what they thought of Trump, and somehow they all came to the conclusion that there was something bad about him. I guess thinking that his grandchildren were the future, he figured out that this guy was not what this country needed.”

“I’ve gone and researched in my Bible, and the Bible does say in the end days, ‘Ye shall be ruled by women and children.’ Isn’t that interesting? It seems that everybody is run by their children, and now we have Hillary Clinton running for United States president, and who could be more of a child than Donald Trump? Come on, folks. These are the end days. It’s time to make up your mind. Do you love God, or do you not? You had better do it quick.”

“I wanted to congratulate Rudi Keller for an excellent article on the graduate student election. I had never seen the quote from Hank Foley saying he’d hate to ‘go to war with these kids.’ What a patronizing, stupid thing to say. It just proves that this so-called new leadership is just as clueless as the people they replaced.”