SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

A recent Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals decision that struck down a law preventing “habitual drunkards” from being considered people of “moral character” in immigration benefit determinations was a “brazen display of judicial activism” that “endangers” communities, according to Senate Judiciary Chairman Chuck Grassley (R-IA) and Sen. Jeff Sessions (R-AL).

“Because of this decision, countless aliens in Alaska, Arizona, California, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, Oregon, Washington, and several territories, who abuse alcohol to the extent that they are habitually drunk – even those with multiple driving-under-the-influence convictions – will now be eligible for benefits under our immigration laws,” Grassley and Sessions, the Chairman of the Subcommittee on Immigration and the National Interest, wrote Tuesday in a letter, obtained by Breitbart News, to Attorney General Loretta Lynch.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Last month the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals struck down the long-held statute, passed by Congress, rejecting aliens who are “habitual drunkards” from being defined as a person of “good moral character” when considering the alien for immigration benefits. The court specifically held that since alcoholism is a disease it does not have bearing on a person’s character.

According to Grassley and Sessions, not only does the Court’s holding smack of judicial activism but is places the nation’s communities at risk.

“There is a rational basis to deny immigration benefits to habitual drunkards, as distinguished from alcoholics who do not drink, in light of their manifest threat to public health and safety,” the lawmakers wrote in their letter to Lynch. The letter went on to say:

Yet the Ninth Circuit failed to recognize this clear rational basis, and concluded that it was unconstitutional to deny immigration benefits to a Mexican national living in the United States illegally, whose medical records document a “ten-year history of alcohol abuse, during which he drank an average of one liter of tequila each day,” – and whose abuse of alcohol led to at least one DUI conviction. As noted by the dissent, alcohol accounts for up to 55% of fatal driving events.

Grassley and Sessions further chastised the holding as a usurpation of Congress’s authority to determine who is allowed to remain in the U.S. and for how long, pointing out that the Supreme Court “has repeatedly emphasized that ‘over no conceivable subject is the legislative power of Congress more complete than it is over’ the admission of aliens.”

“If Congress directs the Executive to deny immigration benefits to an alien because he is a habitual drunkard, the Judiciary must ensure fidelity to the plainly written direction of Congress – not to rewrite the law because it disagrees with the policy decision,” they wrote.

Grassley and Sessions pressed Lynch and the Justice Department to defend the statute and explain to them by May 6 how it plans to move forward with the case.

Read the letter: