Buy Photo Manasquan beach in 2013 with no dunes. (Photo: Asbury Park Press file photo)Buy Photo

Another Jersey shore town that was pummeled by Superstorm Sandy has decided it doesn’t want protective sand dunes.

Manasquan’s dunes were washed away in the October 2012 storm. And despite assertions by many coastal experts that the dunes prevented the damage from being even worse, borough officials have decided not to rebuild them.

They say rebuilt dunes wouldn’t give that much more protection, and that a recently widened beach will add some security. And some residents say they like being able to see the ocean from their homes again — despite warnings from some experts that they are playing with fire.

“This is a monumental decision the town has made,” Mayor George Dempsey said. “We’ll have to wait and see if we made the right one.”

The Monmouth County town of 6,300 has long been popular with vacationing families and year-round residents drawn to its mile-long beach and asphalt-paved beach walk. For years, that walkway, and the houses next to it, were protected by 5- or 6-foot sand dunes. Even before Sandy hit, some residents grumbled that they couldn’t see the ocean from their front porches. And that was after a 1992 nor’easter picked up the beach walk and smashed it into thousands of pieces.

“You spend a lot of money to rent a place, and it’s so nice to see the ocean from your home,” said Patricia Clayton of East Windsor, whose family has rented a beachfront home in Manasquan for 35 years. “We were so disappointed when they put in dunes. You couldn’t see anything. It blocks the view of the beach and the ocean.”

Stewart Farrell, director of the Coastal Research Center at Stockton University, said Manasquan is taking a tremendous gamble by forsaking dunes.

“Sandy beat them badly and subsequent storms will do even more if they reject replacing the meager dunes they had pre-Sandy,” he said. “That is just the way it is: Love the view now, lose the house later.”

Some residents said the dunes made things worse, that water-driven sand was propelled into their homes. Althea and John Ridley, who lost a beachfront home, blame the dunes as much as the storm.

“The amount of sand that came pouring into the houses was responsible for a good portion of the damage,” she said. “We had 4 feet of sand in our garage.”

Manasquan officials had been agonizing since then over whether to rebuild the dunes; the Federal Emergency Management Agency approved the town for $2.8 million to $3.2 million to rebuild the dunes according to federal standards — payable upon completion of the project — with the town responsible for 10 percent of the cost.

Dempsey said the dunes would provide only 3.5 or 4 feet of protection — not enough to warrant the cost. A study by the town said there would be no difference in Manasquan’s flood insurance rates with or without dunes, and that they would do nothing to prevent inland river flooding, also a major problem during Sandy.

At a town hall forum on the dunes, the overwhelming public sentiment was not to rebuild them. The borough council ratified that decision on Monday.

Manasquan is one of several Jersey shore towns that don’t want dunes, despite Gov. Chris Christie’s stated intention to erect them along the entire 127-mile coastline. The privately owned Jenkinson’s beach in Point Pleasant Beach, Manasquan’s neighbor to the south, is suing federal, state and local governments to prevent dunes. Bay Head has hundreds of holdouts who refuse to sign easements to permit dunes, and Margate has thus far wrestled the state to a draw in court over plans to build dunes there. Pockets of resistance remain on Long Beach island as well.

John Ridley said he and his wife, who currently rent a beachfront house, are trying to decide whether to buy another one in Manasquan despite their experience during Sandy.

“We had a great view of the ocean,” he said. Looking out from the front porch of his rental to the beach and the waves, he said, “How can you not love this?”

Copyright 2015 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1MmkFoG