Presidential candidates reached out to supporters Thursday with New Year's Eve messages and, in some cases, fundraising appeals.

Several candidates, including Republican front-runner Donald Trump appeared on the Fox News New Year's Eve special.

"I have a very big lead and I intend to keep it," Trump said, claiming that he would be Democratic leader Hillary Clinton's "worst nightmare" if he is nominated.

Trump also posted a video on Facebook wishing his followers a Happy New Year and thanking them for "all of the tremendous support that I have received."

"2016 is going to be the last year of the Obama presidency," Cruz said. "2016 is going to be the last year before Hillary retires permanently to Chappaqua."

He also promised to eliminate Obamacare, abolish the IRS, and destroy ISIS in 2017 if elected, comparing the 2016 race to the 1980 election in which Ronald Reagan became president.

"Like 1980, 2016 is going to be a very, very good year," he said.

Many candidates in both parties posted New Year's photos and comments on Twitter, thanking their followers for support.

Democrat Bernie Sanders appeared at a campaign event in Iowa, where the first caucus of 2016 will be held on February 1, urging them to "stand up and say loudly and clearly enough is enough."

"You here in Iowa have a chance to make 2016 a year that people in the future will look back on and say. 'Thank you, Iowa, for leading the political revolution,'" Sanders said.



Paul also used his resolutions to poke fun at rivals Trump, Cruz, and Marco Rubio, and at his own hair.



The celebratory messages from the campaigns on Thursday night were at times mixed with pleas for donations as the closely-watched fourth quarter fundraising deadline for 2015 approached.



Campaigns have been releasing fundraising estimates and setting expectations in advance of the deadline, with Cruz, Clinton, and Sanders indicating they had particularly strong quarters.



While campaigns will certainly welcome donations in 2016 as well, it may be too late to get your free Marco Rubio bumper sticker.

Each candidate was trying to outpace the others in both dollar amounts and numbers of donors for the quarter, and to prove that they are carrying the most momentum into the new year. Official figures should be released by the Federal Election Commission in the coming weeks.