Bad news continues to rain on the Rockies. After enduring a two-hour, 15-minute rain delay in the first game of Saturday’s doubleheader at Coors Field, right-hander Jordan Lyles mowed down the Giants for three innings. But misfortune struck with two out in the fourth inning when Lyles landed wrong on his left foot after delivering a pitch to Hunter Pence. Manager Walt Weiss and trainer Keith Dugger came to the mound to check on Lyles, who stayed in the game.

After a third consultation on the mound, Lyles was removed from the game in the fifth inning after he hit Joe Panik. The diagnosis is a sprained toe on Lyles’ left foot; he is listed as day to day.

By the time he was removed from the game, the Giants took control. Lyles, clearly hampered by the foot injury, gave up three more hits after suffering the injury and also committed a throwing error to first base that cost the Rockies a run.

His final line Saturday: six runs and seven hits allowed in four-plus innings.

Last year, Lyles broke his left hand while covering a play at the plate and missed 54 games.

Bullpen moves. The Rockies shuffled their bullpen before the doubleheader, reinstating right-hander Brooks Brown from the 15-day disabled list.

To make room on their 25-man roster, the Rockies placed left-handed reliever Ken Roberts on the disabled list because of left elbow inflammation. The Rockies don’t think it’s a serious injury.

“I had a little bit of an issue with my shoulder during spring training, but I was still able to get loose then,” said Brown, who is 0-1 with a 4.50 ERA in 12 appearances. “But over the last week or 10 days, I had trouble staying loose, especially when I had to sit back down after throwing.

“But the three rehab starts were good, and then in the last one I threw really well and was able to stay loose.”

Weiss said he will continue to use Brown the same way he did before Brown went on the disabled list.

“He will be in the same role,” Weiss said. “Sometimes one inning, sometimes one-plus. He’s a nice piece to have because you don’t have to match up with ‘Brownie.’ He gets lefties and gets righties.

“It makes it a lot smoother late in the game when you go to the ‘pen.”

Roberts, who gave up three runs and four hits while facing just seven San Francisco batters in the series opener Friday, said it was the first time the elbow pain flared up during a game.

“I would usually feel it the day after,” he said. “Hopefully it’s just some inflammation and I tweaked something in there.” Patrick Saunders, The Denver Post

Giants’ Tim Hudson (2-3, 4.01 ERA) vs. Rockies’ Chad Bettis (0-0, 5.73), 2:10 p.m. Sunday, ROOT; 850 AM

Bettis’ line doesn’t look very good, and he’s 1-2 with an 8.37 ERA in 39 games (10 starts) at Coors Field. Now for the bright side: Colorado has won both of his starts this season — May 14 at the Los Angeles Dodgers and May 19 vs. the Philadelphia Phillies. Hudson is coming off a terrific outing against the Dodgers, pitching 6 scoreless innings while allowing just five hits and two walks. Coors Field, however, has chewed him up. The 17-year veteran is 0-2 with a 6.80 ERA in nine games in LoDo.

Monday: Rockies’ Eddie Butler (2-5, 4.38 ERA) at Reds’ Jason Marquis (3-4, 6.91), 11:10 a.m., ROOT

Tuesday: Rockies’ Jorge De La Rosa (1-2, 6.51) at Reds’ Michael Lorenzen (1-1, 3.79), 5:10 p.m., ROOT

Wednesday: Rockies’ Kyle Kendrick (1-6, 6.58) at Reds’ Mike Leake (2-3, 4.14), 10:35 a.m.

Thursday: Off