Buy Photo Wausau Center mall, Jan. 5, 2016 (Photo: Robert Mentzer/USA TODAY NETWORK-Wisconsin)Buy Photo

I was born in Wausau and remember the downtown before the mall. Old-fashioned downtowns with standalone department stores and mom-and-pop shops were struggling everywhere in the 1970s.

The mall represented a paradigm shift. The idea of having three major departments stores plus parking all under one roof was revolutionary. People celebrated in the streets when the mall opened.

Today, big box stores and the Internet have ushered in a new era with a more cost-effective model of selling traditional department store products.

Retail malls like the one in Wausau are no longer profitable. For the five years ending January 20th, U.S. markets were up sharply. The S&P 500 Index was up 47.5 percent. Over that same period, Sears stock was down 75.6 percent. JC Penney was down 79.5 percent, and Bon Ton, Younkers' parent company, was down 84.4 percent. All have negative earnings and junk-bond credit status. These stores and the malls they inhabit are on the backside of a paradigm shift in the way we shop.

Similarly, CBL & Associates Inc., the owners of malls across the country, has been caught in this same shift. Its stock is down 33.9 percent over the past five years. Every other press release from their corporate headquarters is about the sale of non-productive malls and includes a promise to shareholders to re-focus on their core business, which is large malls in large metropolitan areas. Re-purposing the Wausau Center mall is not within their corporate mission or skill-set.

It is also hard to argue that CBL is in any position to “save the mall.” Here is the lay of the land. Sears owns its store. Younkers has a third-party landlord. CBL owns the remaining retail spaces. The city owns the parking facilities, the ground underneath the mall and the air above it. It is not CBL's mall alone; it cannot help us with the Sears and Younkers spaces.

Giving CBL a $4.1 million, subsidized-interest, 20-year unsecured loan for the purpose of stealing Younkers from its current landlord and relocating them in the former JC Penney space accomplishes nothing. We are still down one anchor store with two shaky ones remaining.

Winters (Photo: Courtesy of Keene Winters)

Let's take control of the redevelopment of the mall instead of handing it off to CBL. The No. 1 thing the public wants is a high-quality movie theater. Let's get that done.

Begin by approaching Sears and offering to buy half of their store. Allow them to skinny-down their operations in Wausau to just their profitable lines of tools, appliances and automotive service. Structure the lease to the movie theater company to cover the cost of renovations plus 2 percent interest over 20 years. That fixes the Sears end.

Next, open a dialogue directly with Younkers and its landlords. See what could be done to keep Younkers in its current place for the next 10 years. One department store without competitors could find a profitable niche in this market. That stabilizes the Younkers space for now.

Third, buy the former JC Penney space from CBL at fire-sale prices like everyone else is doing, and get serious about re-purposing the mall. This space has the most redevelopment potential because it could have windows to the south and west with spectacular views over the valley, and because a skywalk to the former Masonic Temple could incorporate that space into the design.

We could have a hotel and convention center, an osteopathic medical college, a University of Wisconsin learning center or a corporate headquarters. There are lots of possibilities and combinations. Think more in terms of the kind of space the Dudley Tower offers. We need to have a place for good-paying jobs downtown if we are going to fill all the downtown residential development we are planning.

We need to recognize that a paradigm shift has taken place and that re-purposing the mall is the only way to save it. We also need to understand that CBL & Associates cannot do this for us. We can and should take control of the destiny of our own downtown. We can do this.

Keene Winters represents District 6 on Wausau City Council and is a candidate for mayor. His website is www.wausaudistrict6.com.

More views on Wausau Center mall:

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1Vkwq2V