The Outdoor Industry Association is grateful to Boulder Congressman Jared Polis for supporting Trade Promotion Authority for the Trans-Pacific Partnership. (Mark Leffingwell / Staff Photographer)

A love for the outdoors and desire for adventure is part of being a Coloradan. This spirit is embodied from the weekend adventurer to our elected officials in Washington D.C. People are beginning to realize the benefits of healthy communities and healthy economies that come from investing in outdoor recreation by providing funding for and access to outdoor places.

Colorado is a national leader in its support of outdoor recreation and is reaping the benefits it brings to the state. This was exemplified a couple of weeks ago in the creation of the Colorado Outdoor Recreation Industry Office and the appointment of industry veteran Luis Benitez to lead it. This came along with Great Outdoors Colorado's announcement at the Outdoors Summit of their new Inspire Initiative, which is investing in helping kids get outdoors across the state.

Congressman Jared Polis understands the benefits of investing in outdoor recreation. He is a strong advocate for the outdoor industry and a leader in promoting the outdoor lifestyle in our state and across the country. With major industry leaders like La Sportiva, Kelty, Spyder, Sierra Designs and numerous others headquartered in his district, he has seen the benefits that come from the $13.2 billion outdoor industry in Colorado and the 125,000 jobs it creates.

Advertisement

Congressman Polis demonstrated his leadership once again when he stood up for the industry by voting for Trade Promotion Authority (TPA), an important step in the right direction on the path to passing the Trans Pacific Partnership (TPP). The passing of this legislation will allow the White House to negotiate the best deal for this trade agreement. It will establish and enforce the strongest environmental and labor standards, increase market access for U.S. manufacturers of outdoor products, and make it more affordable for more Coloradans to purchase the proper equipment to enjoy the vast outdoors in their backyards.

Outdoor Industry Association has consistently supported the Trans-Pacific Partnership along with dozens of industry professionals from the very beginning to make sure the outdoor industry's interests are represented. Our industry pays an average of 17 percent in import tariffs while most products are taxed less than three percent. That translates to higher costs at outdoor retailers.

By lowering tariffs, the cost of a Gore-Tex Trail Runners, for example, could decrease by over $10. These cuts in cost help drive people outdoors while making the gear they rely on more affordable.

As in any outdoor adventure, it is important to have a leader with a clear sense of direction who is willing to make the difficult decisions. Congressman Polis is one of those leaders in Washington D.C. He is able to envision the big picture and is willing to rise above partisan politics to do what is right.

We thank you, Congressman Polis, for your vote for TPA and your support of the outdoor industry.

Steve Barker is the executive director of the Outdoor Industry Association in Boulder.