Filings offer rare look inside vast Koch political network and its efforts to mold public policy.

This photo taken May 22, 2012, shows Charles Koch in his office at Koch Industries in Wichita, Kan., where Koch Industries manages 60,000 employees in 60 countries. (Photo: Bo Rader, AP)

WASHINGTON — The Virginia conservative group at the center of the Koch brothers' far-reaching political network saw its revenue and spending decline sharply last year, the organization's new tax filings show.

Freedom Partners Chamber of Commerce, the main policy and funding outlet for the billionaire industrialists Charles and David Koch, collected nearly $57.5 million during the 2013 fiscal year — less than a quarter of the more than $255 million the group took in during the same period in 2012 as it spent heavily to mold the nation's political and policy debates ahead of the presidential election.

The dramatic drop came as the group and its affiliates took an intentional time-out from fundraising to conduct a months-long audit of its operations and priorities after Republicans failed to win the White House or the Senate majority in 2012. Fundraising for many groups falls in a non-election year.

In all, the organization handed out nearly $41.8 million in grants during the 2013 fiscal year.

Among the larger recipients: Generation Opportunity, which received three grants totaling $6 million. The group hit millennials with provocative ads, fliers and free pizza as it urged young adults to opt out of federal or state health insurance exchanges created under President Obama's health care law. Killing the 2010 Affordable Care Act has been top goal of Koch-affiliated groups, and experts had warned that Obamacare could not survive without young, healthy people signing up for insurance coverage.

More than $9 million of Freedom Partner's 2013 spending went to the Themis Trust, a voter database shared with other conservative groups. That's a sharp uptick from the previous year and underscores the Kochs' long-term commitment to building a significant infrastructure to compete with a Democratic data operation that helped Obama's team turn out key voters in 2012.

By all public indications, the Koch network has rebounded financially from its lull in 2013.

The group emerged from its recent donor retreat planning to spend $290 million. A key Koch-affiliated organization, Americans for Prosperity, is the top outside spender in political advertising this year, a recent analysis by the Wesleyan Media Project shows. Its ads have pilloried vulnerable Democratic incumbents in the Senate for supporting the health care law.

"The continued overreach by the White House along with political games in the Senate have led to a growth in our membership," Freedom Partners spokesman James Davis said in an e-mail. "We will continue to advance the principles of a free society and hold elected officials accountable for bad policies, such as Obamacare, that hurt the lives of millions."

Republicans need to net just six seats to take control of the Senate in November.

Freedom Partners' 42-page tax filings offer a glance into the ties between an array of often little-noticed conservative groups and the Kochs' efforts to reach discrete demographic audiences.

The Libre Initiative Trust, a group targeting Latinos, took in $3.3 million. It has conducted community fairs where it offered free dental screenings to Latino children, while talking to their parents about its "economic freedom" agenda.

Concerned Veterans for America received nearly $5.3 million. It has advocated curbing some federal spending for veterans' programs and is in the midst of a "Defend Freedom Tour" that mixes country music concerts with a message blasting the Obama administration over the Veteran Affairs' patient backlog scandal. It plans stops in North Carolina and Louisiana in the coming weeks, two states key to Republicans' hopes of a Senate takeover.

Other recipients include:

• Public Notice, a policy group focused on reining in government spending, received more than $7 million.

• The Center for Shared Services, which has handled human resources functions for the network, received two grants, topping $7 million.

• Heritage Action Fund for America, which helped push last year's federal government standoff over conservative efforts to kill the Affordable Care Act. It received $500,000.

The tax filing also shows the organization's shifting allegiances.

The Center to Protect Patient Rights, an Arizona group once central to the Koch network, received just $150,000 last year. A year earlier, Freedom Partners had shifted more than $100 million to the group.

The Center to Protect Patient Rights became entangled in a major campaign-finance investigation last year. California regulators concluded that the organization acted improperly when it failed to disclose that it had funneled millions into two state ballot-initiative fights. Koch officials have said they were not aware of the group's role in the California campaigns.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1u4918p