Ben Carson told a crowd in Kalamazoo, Michigan, that “we’re making an attempt to push god out of our nation,” and that Barack Obama does not get to decide if America is a Judeo-Christian nation. He didn’t say a word about his probable presidential run, but his political proselytizing sounds like an appeal to his future political base. The only problem is the long list of controversial statements collected by the media.

Carson’s lecture, organized by the Kalamazoo Christian School Association, drew over 1,300 people, including local young people brought in from a half-dozen community organizations to hear the doctor’s message and life story. Tickets cost $50 each, but the proceeds were donated to charity.

Ben Carson’s speech was originally described as a look at how faith and family helped him achieve success, but it regularly mixed in his political views. According to MLive, Carson talked about his opposition to Obamacare, the idea that American education has been “dumbed down,” and his contempt for political correctness.

And he has proved that he doesn’t believe in political correctness.

As previously reported by the Inquisitr, Ben Carson said that the United States “is very much like Nazi Germany, I know you’re not supposed to say ‘Nazi Germany,’ but I don’t care about political correctness.”

As MSNBC reported, Dr. Ben Carson has also said that Obamacare is “the worst thing that has happened in this nation since slavery… It is slavery, in a way.”

He also said of the new revamped AP history curriculum, “I think most people when they finish that course, they’d be ready to go sign up for ISIS.”

Dr. Carson had some strong allegations against the president too, saying that if someone really wanted to understand Barack Obama’s plan for America they should, “read ‘Mein Kampf,’ and read the works of Vladimir Lenin.”

Despite the many quotes that some might consider extreme, Ben Carson seems to have high political ambitions.

The doctor said that there is a strong “likelihood” that he will be running for president. Although stopping short of officially announcing his candidacy, the renown neurosurgeon will release the biographical infomercial A Breath of Fresh Air: A New Prescription for America that details his life growing up.

In another sign of his impending candidacy, Carson cut ties with Fox News despite being a long time contributor. (Broadcasters cannot keep a presidential candidate on the air unless they give equal air-time to political rivals.)

Still, even with his ad hoc statements, Carson’s story may carry some appeal with voters. He grew up in dire poverty in a plight stricken home in Detroit. His single mother, working multiple jobs to support the family, forced young Ben Carson to read two books a week, which eventually brought up his grades and started him on the road to one day become a famous neurosurgeon.

Whether that will be enough to be taken seriously as a candidate is still a problem for Ben Carson.

[Image Credit: Gage Skidmore/Wikimedia Commons]