As health care reform continues to evolve, one Lehigh Valley health insurance and employee benefits agency believes it has the diversity and staying power it needs to be competitive in the market.

“Some brokers made themselves obsolete while they were looking at the changes in the industry. We saw an opportunity to increase our value, and we have grown a lot stronger because of it,” said Tom Groves, principal and founder of The Equinox Agency LLC in Allentown.

The health insurance broker has more than 500 clients throughout the Greater Lehigh Valley region, and the changes from the Affordable Care Act are expected to create further growth and awareness of the agency, according to Groves.

Groves, who formerly worked at Highmark Blue Shield in the marketing and sales department, started the firm in 2005.

Four years later, Dan Gagnier and Dan Bonstein joined Groves as business partners – bringing years of experience in the health care industry as well as a portfolio of clients.

Today, the Lehigh Valley office has 17 employees in such positions as benefits advisers, enrollment specialists and tech experts. The firm's clients primarily are in eastern Pennsylvania, and the company provides health insurance services to a wide range of employers from two to 600 workers. The privately held company brings in $3 million in revenue annually.

Gagnier said Equinox has been adding 60 to 100 clients a year. In the next couple of months, Equinox intends to hire at least two full-time employees, having already added one new staffer this month. And with clients in Delaware and Maryland, Equinox anticipates opening satellite offices in those states in the future.

“We are a benefits broker that helps employers find benefit plans from providers such as Blue Cross, Aetna and Geisinger,” Gagnier said.

According to Bonstein, the firm essentially sets up health care plans with a defined contribution model for groups and individuals.

“We act as a conduit to get clients the best plans and rates,” Bonstein said. “The first step with any new client is to establish priorities as far as deductible levels and co-insurances and put together a plan suitable to their needs.”

Groves said Equinox is considered an independent contractor that handles its own overhead and staffing. It gets paid by the health insurance carrier when it provides a client to the carrier.

Gagnier added that, while the firm gets paid by the carrier with employer groups ranging from two to 100, it gets compensated differently for clients with more than 100 employees. Equinox then goes to that larger employer to negotiate pay.

In the last two years, Equinox has focused a lot of energy on strengthening departments at the office, Gagnier said, especially building customer service and broadening the technology that staffers have at their fingertips.

In recent months, the firm made significant investments, primarily expanding staff and technology. It added a human resource information system that streamlines some of the services it offers to clients and gives clients notice of government regulations.

For example, employers are required to give employees specific notices about their health care plans. Equinox is able to generate reports for employers to stay in compliance on that aspect of reform.

“When this health care reform passed, we saw potential from the destruction in our industry,” Gagnier said. “I think it is important that our business model is completely different than other brokers, and our staff members are in specific departments.”

Equinox sees some good points in health care reform, such as having employers carry preventive care and using plans that have unlimited maximums. But other points seem to drive the firm's growth, as employers question how the reform will affect them. Employers ask Equinox about issues from converting to electronic medical records to dealing with taxes.

“I think we are relatively excited about the reform because, from a broker perspective, it generates interest in our business,” Gagnier said. “More employers will want us to handle their health care plans. It will make their lives easier.”