After months of conversations about race and justice, Mayor Michael Hancock has identified four key areas to address as Denver pushes for equality.

“I think we’ll walk away from this experience a better city because of it,” Hancock said Saturday at the Race and Justice Community/Youth Summit at the History Colorado Center. “We’re pouring a lot into these conversations; a lot has been said.”

The discussions began in December, when Hancock challenged the community to engage in the topics of race and justice. In the ensuing months, at least 40 conversations were held around the city.

Four themes surfaced time and again, according to Hancock: the importance of youth voices, a desire for increased engagement between police officers and community members, the need for improved education about the judicial process and recognition of the community’s accountability in effecting change.

“This is not just about police officers,” Hancock said. “There is a part here for the community to recognize they have a role in building these relationships.”

Keynote speaker Ryan Ross, dean of student development at the Community College of Denver, also focused on the community’s role.

“Today, if we make it so, Denver can be a role model or a beacon for other cities,” Ross said. “Now is the time, not because it’s what’s trending on social media but simply because it’s the right thing to do at the right time in our city. Today, we have a special opportunity to embrace these conversations and take this movement to the next level.”

Following the addresses, Denver police officers led the audience through role-playing situations where young people were asked to handle common law enforcement scenarios.

“We want people to understand the role of law enforcement officers,” explained Officer Alan Ha. “At the same time, we as public servants want to know what the public is thinking. This was very honest two-way communication.”

Roughly 100 people attended, including students. Kalina Gallardo, 17, said she had hoped more young people would participate but was pleased with the summit overall.

“It’s been really eye-opening, very educational,” Gallardo said. “It’s really starting to create this family relationship. We can start to appreciate each other and really find what it means to be good to one another.”

A series of eight community forums will be in Denver throughout the summer to build off Saturday’s summit.

Anna Gauldin: 303-954-1666, agauldin@denverpost.com