These little-known facts about penis size — from when size really matters to the country with the most penis enlargements — will blow your mind away.

The pressing sexual question asked by men from all walks of life is, does penis size matter? This hotly debated topic stems from men’s preoccupation with the glorified male body part and what they believe it says about their manhood. While some men pride themselves over their above-average size, and others tuck themselves away in a corner, the truth is the vast majority of men have more than enough bulk and length to sexually perform.

It’s time to take a load off your minds and separate fact from fiction with these little-known penis size facts that will blow your mind away:

1. Average Erect Penis Size

The average erect penis is a little more than 5 inches long and 1.5 inches in diameter. Specifically, a 2013 study published in the Journal of Sexual Medicine found the average American man’s penis is 5.6 inches (14.2 centimeters) long when erect and 4.8 inches in circumference. Only 15 percent of men are over 7 inches, and only three percent are over 8 inches.

2. Penis Size Does Matter… For One-Night Stands

Men looking for one-night stands may feel under a lot of pressure for a night of meaningless sex. A 2014 study presented at the meeting of the Association for Psychological Science in San Francisco, Calif., in June, found girth, not length, matters for one-time partners, but not for long-term ones. The researchers speculate this preference could be because the vagina’s pressure-sensitive nerve endings can detect the sensations of stretching, which could detect penis girth. Larger girths tend to bring the clitoris closer to the vagina during sex, which is believed to help women achieve orgasms.

3. The Most Desirable Penis Size

Penis size does matter for one-night stands, but what about for the others? Less-endowed men can rest assured bigger genitalia isn’t always better. In an ASAPScience video, “Does Penis Size Matter?” Mitchell Moffit and Gregory Brown found a penis in proportion with the male body is much more desirable by women. It is a man’s confidence, enjoyable personality, and attraction that are strong predictors for sexual satisfaction, and weigh far higher than disproportionate penis size.

4. Penis Anxiety Doesn’t Correlate With Penis Size

No matter how well-endowed men are, they are likely to experience penis anxiety when they think about the perceived size of their penis. A 2013 study published in the Journal of Sexual Medicine found even men who were average or above-average, along with a less endowed package, expressed feelings of inadequacy and self-consciousness. Thirty-five percent of men surveyed were happy with their penis size and 30 percent reported dissatisfaction with their size.

Penis anxiety was highest among gay, bisexual, and older men. It is believed the prevalence of penis shame among gay and bisexual men could be attributed to the opportunities to compare body parts. However, in older men, this insecurity could derive from fears about the physical ability to perform.

5. Germany Has The Most Penis Enlargement Procedures

The answer to whether or not penis size matters is arguable, but Germany has risen to the occasion. As the world’s capital for penis enlargement, it's clear size matters — at least to them. 2014 data by the International Society for Aesthetic Plastic Surgery found 18 percent of all penis enlargements in the world are done in the land of the 2014 FIFA World Cup champions. This translates to roughly eight out of every 100,000 adult males who reside in the country. Venezuela, Spain, and Mexico shortly follow Germany with the countries with the most penis enlargement operations.

6. Best Way To Appear Larger Is Losing Fat

There are a plethora of penis enhancement creams, pills, and procedures that promise to increase a man’s penis size, but the truth is there is no scientifically proven way to increase penis size. Psychology Today suggests losing the pot belly by exercising, eating less meat and cheese, and more plant foods to shed the weight. A big belly can touch the base of the penis and actually make it look smaller. Losing belly fat will help make your penis look bigger in size.

7. Erect Gay Penises Are Bigger

On average, the size of a gay man’s penis is a third of an inch longer. A 1999 study published in the journal Archives of Sexual Behavior found erect gay penises tend to be this length, and suspect it might have something to do with prenatal hormones that affect the structure and size of genitalia, and certain structures of the brain that affect sexual orientation. Penis size was self-reported.

8. You Can’t Predict Penis Size Without Looking At A Penis

Scientists have tried to connect the size of men’s penises to the size of their feet, noses, thumbs, earlobes, and index fingers. A 2006 study published in the West African Journal of Medicine tested the well-held belief that a man’s penis size can be predicted by his physique and the size of his buttocks, with people of small physique and flat buttocks likely to have long penile lengths. While this relationship may have a scientific basis, the researchers found large buttocks are more predictive of longer penile length than small buttocks, but penile length has no relationship to physique. Overall, you cannot predict penis size without looking at the penis.

Keep these eight little-known penis facts in your back pocket and blow someone’s mind away.