During book signings I am often asked, “What happened to civility and bipartisanship in politics?” The question usually follows my presentation about the extraordinary bipartisan cooperation among the Republicans and Democrats in the Florida Legislature during the 1970s and 1980s — often described as the “Golden Age” of Florida politics.

I believe the problem started in 1994.

Democrat Bill Clinton was elected two years earlier without even a majority vote in the country.

Texas billionaire Ross Perot, a Republican, harbored such dislike for incumbent President George Bush that Perot funded his own campaign to drain off enough Bush votes to elect Clinton — perhaps not deliberately.

The conservatives in Congress felt Clinton was a liberal who won the presidency through a trick orchestrated by Perot.

After Clinton took office, angry conservative Republicans coalesced around a firebrand Republican member from Georgia, Newt Gingrich. The minority leader, Congressman Bob Michel of Illinois, although popular, was far less strident than Gingrich.

Gingrich crafted a plan to take over the House of Representatives in the next election — 1994 — around a very clear “Contract with America.”

Gingrich won, and history was changed forever. Clinton fought back behind the vitriolic counter attacks against Gingrich by Louisiana lawyer and lobbyist James Carville, equally vitriolic.

The nastiness goes on, some 20 years later.

Can civility and bipartisanship be re-found today? The answer is yes, but it will take leadership from both parties — and yes, even fringe “parties” like the tea party and its counterparts on the left.

There have been examples of leadership since 1994, but most of it has hardly been discernible.

Former U. S. Sen. Richard Lugar, a proven Republican conservative from Indiana, offered to work with President Obama on selected legislation but was quickly targeted by the tea party and lost re-election.

Arch-conservative Orrin Hatch, the senior Republican senator from Utah, reached across the aisle to help his longtime friend, Sen. Ted Kennedy of Massachusetts, with problems of a personal nature and was criticized by some in his party.

And during the height of bickering about the Affordable Care Act, veteran Republican Sen. Olympia Snowe of Maine sent positive signals to both sides about the need for cooperation and bipartisanship.

Closer to home, former U.S. Sen. and Florida Gov. Bob Graham has teamed up with an equally outstanding politician — conservative Republican Lou Frey of Orlando — to create an initiative to “re-create” civility and bipartisanship in Florida and across the country.

The national Concord Coalition has been doing the same thing with modest success to date.

Recently, an “odd couple” if there ever was one — former President Clinton and former President George W. Bush — created a project to train new leaders, with an emphasis on civility and bipartisanship.

Will it work?

Not for some time, and not unless bold and courageous leaders among all the parties step forward in support.

Robert W. McKnight is a former Florida state representative and senator who represented South Florida during the 1970s and 1980s. Much of this column is based on his book, “The Golden Years … The Florida Legislature.” McKnight writes political commentary for newspapers, television and social media. He can be reached at bob@flpoliticalcommentary.com.