Perspective is the thing we have least of in our politics. And as the USA celebrates Presidents' Day, it is tempting to lament the lack of respect given to the Oval Office these days - especially its current occupant.

Barack Obama has been subjected what seems like an unusual amount of paranoid projection from high places during his five years in office. In addition to the daily drumbeat from Right-wing talk radio, websites and television, by the end of the 2012 election, no less than 89 books had been published with little purpose other that to propagate a monstrous image of the incumbent.

Among their titles: The Great Destroyer: Barack Obama's War on the Republic; Trickle Down Tyranny; To Save America: Stopping Obama's Secular Socialist Machine; and The Blueprint: Obama's Plan to Subvert the Constitution and Build an Imperial Presidency. These themes are often eagerly carried forward by conservatives in Congress trying to play to the base. For example, during the State of the Union address in January, Representative Randy Weber tweeted that the president was a "socialist dictator" and Senator Ted Cruz summed up his Wall Street Journal article with this tweet: "In the nation's history, there is simply no precedent for an American president so wantonly ignoring federal law."

There is, however, plenty of precedent for presidents being accused of tyranny, dictatorship and a determination to destroy the Constitution. Let's start with a quick survey of the quartet of presidential greats enshrined in Mount Rushmore.

It's easy to assume that the original founding father, George Washington, was uniformly beloved and respected by his contemporary countrymen. But when our first president presided over the shaky young republic, newspapers like the Aurora called on him to resign the office while declaring that "that the mask of political hypocrisy has been alike worn by Caesar, a Cromwell and a Washington". His one-time ally Thomas Paine turned on him viciously after the Jay Treaty with Britain, writing, "the world will be puzzled to decide whether you are an apostate or an imposter". Pamphlets published by early partisan opponents such as William Duane denounced Washington's "tyrannical act", "monarchical privilege" and "Machiavellian policy".

One space over on Mount Rushmore, Thomas Jefferson attacked political opponents and was attacked in return with accusations of being an "infidel" and a "howling atheist" in the 1800 election. One advocate for Jefferson's impeachment proclaimed: "That self exalted tyrant shall be hurled head long from his political zenith to dwell with Jacobins and devils in the pit."

The now-sainted Abraham Lincoln was subject to particularly vicious attacks while presiding over the Civil War. "Confederates called Lincoln a 'tyrant', a 'fiend' and a 'monster'," recounts Don E. Fehrenbacher in his essay The Anti-Lincoln Tradition. "In speeches, sermons, and songs, in books, magazines, newspapers, pamphlets, and broadsides, they also portrayed him as a simpleton, a buffoon, a drunkard, a libertine, a physical coward, and a pornographic story-teller."

A Wisconsin newspaper editor named Marcus M Pomeroy wrote that Lincoln was "but the fungus from the corrupt womb of bigotry and fanaticism" and a "worse tyrant and more inhuman butcher than has existed since the days of Nero".

Fast forward to the final member of the Mount Rushmore quartet, Teddy Roosevelt, and the accusation of subverting the Constitution was common, at pace with his unprecedented 1,081 executive orders (compared to Obama's 168 to date). On Wall Street, the famed Trust Buster's reputation was lower than a stock in freefall – his biographer, Edmund Morris, recounts how "rumors that [T.R.] was an alcoholic had strengthened into reports that he was insane".

And so it goes. In more recent years we have seen the profitable 1990s cottage industry of hating Bill and Hillary Clinton, which summoned up a vast array of conspiracies including secret communist allegiances, drug-dealing and murder. The Bush Derangement Syndrome of the last decade saw liberal protesters echoing the sentiments expressed by the musician, actor and activist Harry Belafonte who called the president "the greatest tyrant in the world, the greatest terrorist in the world".

Some people will look at this record of unhinged insults and see the ugly beauty of democracy – the right to criticise public figures regardless of accuracy.

Freedom of the press and freedom of speech are indeed sacred things. But others will look at the historic record of hate and slander and see convenient excuses for their own vitriol – wrapping partisan bile in high-minded historic parallels. The real takeaway consists of this: today's hyper-partisan appeals to ancient anxieties will not look any better in the rearview mirror of history than the unhinged attacks on the Mount Rushmore quartet.

John Avlon is Editor-in-Chief of the Daily Beast