For U.S. House, Pa.: Re-elect Rothfus, Shuster, Kelly & Barletta

Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

On Nov. 4, vote to keep Pennsylvania Republicans Keith Rothfus (12th District), Bill Shuster (9th), Mike Kelly (3rd) and Lou Barletta (11th) in the U.S. House.

Representing his constituents admirably, Mr. Rothfus, of Sewickley, deserves a second term. He favors reducing taxes and regulations, repealing ObamaCare and increasing domestic energy production. Challenger Erin McClelland, a Harrison Democrat, supports dubious “pay equity” legislation (there are ample laws already on the books), parrots other liberal talking points and brags of her union endorsements.

Mr. Shuster, of Hollidaysburg, chairs the powerful House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee. Against ObamaCare, “stimulus” and EPA overreach, he's for tax and regulatory reform, strong defense and gun rights. Democrat opponent Alanna Hartzok, of Fayetteville, also favors gun rights but supports a job-killing hike in the minimum wage, extreme environmental policies, following the United Nations' lead internationally and “campaign finance reform” that mocks free speech.

Mr. Kelly, a business-friendly Butler car dealer, advocates forcing government to live within its means and curbing its growth. How refreshing it is to hear his straight talk from the floor or during committee hearings. Political-novice Democrat challenger Dan LaVallee, of Cranberry, offers few details in urging “new leadership to get our economy moving” but supports a higher minimum wage and spending more on ineffective Head Start.

Mr. Barletta, co-founder of a small business who's outspoken about federal debt, jobs and domestic energy, maintains the anti-amnesty immigration stance he took as Hazleton's mayor. His opponent, Susquehanna Township civil rights lawyer Andy Ostrowski, supports gun rights and is moderate — for a Democrat — on some other issues. But he lacks Barletta's experience and record of constituent service.

Re-elect Keith Rothfus, Bill Shuster, Mike Kelly and Lou Barletta.