When the Chino Valley fire district’s new paramedic squads go into service in late fall, it will be the beginning of a new model of emergency medical service, according to the deputy chief in charge.

Changes are taking place to improve the quality and expertise of medical aid, according to Deputy Chief Jeremy Ault, who is in charge of emergency services. More sophisticated methods of field treatment and expansion of paramedic duties under the federal Affordable Care Act are part of the emergency service that has come to dominate the role of fire departments like Chino Valley, Chief Ault told members of the Chino Rotary Club recently.

Methods include heart attack detection equipment that allows patients to bypass the emergency room and go directly to a hospital’s specialized cardiac unit, saving valuable time.

With the Affordable Care Act and insurance companies increasing stress on prevention, paramedic services are looking to the time when they will check up on discharged patients to make sure their care is being handled in a way to prevent readmission to the hospital, according to Chief Ault.

He demonstrated the computerized Lifepaks and breathing equipment now in use, which permit paramedics to look at all parts of the heart and clear breathing passages more efficiently. The computers take multiple pictures to spot problems, information that can be relayed directly to cardiac physicians waiting at the hospital. The units also measure intake of oxygen and exhalation of carbon dioxide to determine how the lungs are functioning.

When the district’s four paramedic units go into service, two in Chino and two in Chino Hills, they will be able to respond to the hospital with the ambulance for followup, as well as bring home the paramedic that usually accompanies the patient. This will free up the engine that also responded, for subsequent calls.

Chief Ault reviewed the history of the local paramedic service, going back to 1975 when Chino Fire Department was one of the first in the county to participate. The state set up standards for licensing in 1968, and the TV show “Emergency,” based on Los Angeles Fire Department, popularized the concept.

Chino started with one paramedic unit, then added another for the hills. Thus, the squad and the engine would respond to medical calls until 2000, when the district opted to put four paramedics on an engine and stop using the squad. This has now been changed to the earlier model. Two fire-paramedics go in each new squad and three instead of four will now be on the seven engines. Four will be assigned to the ladder truck as now.

Stations 5 (Ramona Avenue) and 7 (Riverside Drive) in Chino and 2 (Butterfield) and 6 (Peyton Drive) in Chino Hills will have the new squads.

“The level of service we aspire to is the absolute best we can,” Chief Ault said. His department aims to lead the industry, he said.