Spring Reins of Life (SROL) will have its 2nd Annual Open House and Equine Assisted Psychotherapy (EAP) Demo and Fundraiser for Veterans and Youth 1 to 6 p.m. Sunday at Foxx Creek Farm in Hillsborough

Two young boys working to “get a horse and bring it back to us” at last June’s Open House. (Photo: Photo courtesy of Spring Reins of Life) Story Highlights Spring Reins of Life, a 501c3 non-profit, offered equine assisted services

They work with veterans, at-risk and hi-risk youth and teens and bereaved children

Horses are used for therapeutic intervention and to promote emotional growth and healing

You don't associate horses and healing, but Spring Reins of Life offers just that.

Spring Reins of Life (SROL) will have its second annual Open House and Equine Assisted Psychotherapy (EAP) Demo and Fundraiser for Veterans and Youth 1 to 6 p.m. Sunday at Foxx Creek Farm in Hillsborough.

"This is our second open house and the only time we invite the general public to the farm to see the facility, meet the horses, see demos and what we do," said Director of Equine Services and Co-founder Christianna Capra. "It's a family-friendly, all-day event. We have a food catering truck, tricky tray, prizes and two live bands, Gina Leigh/The Real Jersey Gina and Danny Rongo Music, games, prizes, crafts, face-painting, live demos with the horses."

Spring Reins of Life, a 501c3 non-profit, offers equine-assisted services. "There is no riding or mounted work in our program, as it's a different kind of therapy," Capra said

SROL is a volunteer-run organization whose mission is to serve trauma survivors in New Jersey and New York with the assistance of horses. The volunteers work with veterans, veterans' families, at-risk and high-risk youth and teens and bereaved children.

"We serve groups that have a real need for our services, but often have no ability to pay for them, particularly veterans and at-risk youth and teens. The fundraiser will help," Capra said. "A lot of times our horses enable people to open up for the first time. Many people don't respond to formalized or structured therapy. A lot of trauma survivors can't or don't want to talk about it."

"The horses seem to connect to people up in a way that structured therapy doesn't always, fostering peace and rebuilding trust," Capra said. "The field of equine-assisted services is growing rapidly. Horses are a perfect choice to serve as guides in this area as they build self-awareness, awaken the sense of sight, sound, smell and touch. Most survivors or people who have had traumatic experiences don't live in present moment experiences. They are lost in the past."

She said having a large animal around "gets you present very quickly. It might be something simple like we ask them to pick out a horse that has some resemblance to themselves, and they have to think about that and focus on the horse. Then we ask them to bring the horse back, and they have to figure out how. We've had people use everything from their hoodies to yarn, string, ribbon or a halter."

Horses resting during an EAP session (Photo: Photo courtesy of Spring Reins of Life)

She said exercises like that help people face and conquer fears, and handle and manage something bigger than themselves.

SROL is an Equine Assisted Growth and Learning Association (EAGALA) certified program offering Equine Assisted Learning (EAL) and Equine Assisted Psychotherapy (EAP). It serves Somerset, Hunterdon and Mercer counties and New York City. Capra said that the program offered a team approach, featuring licensed mental health professionals and certified equine specialists, along with horses selected for their ability to work with people who are troubled or suffering.

She said has worked with people of all ages, including children as young as four and five years old.

"Children that age often can't express themselves and don't have the life experience to understand their feelings," she said. "They often don't know how to say the words, and the horses step in at a level that allows them to come to grips with their pain."

Capra has been passionate about horses since she was a young child. While she has been a rider her whole life, she said this field has helped her find a new way to interact with horses that is very rewarding.

Youths from New City Kids after an explorative painting session with horses. (Photo: Photo courtesy of Spring Reins of Life)

"I love riding and know what it can do for a person, however there is much more to horses and their interactions with people," she said. "We believe very strongly in our team approach, with the horses, licensed specialists and health practitioners for the best results for our clients.

"Gaining local recognition and support in the community is our lifeline," she added. "We are a volunteer run nonprofit org allowing nearly 90 percent of our fund-raising to be dedicated to programming. We hope a lot of people are able to come to our open house and see what we do."

Take action

Spring Reins of Life's second annual Open House and Demo will be conducted from 1 to 6 p.m. Sunday at Foxx Creek Farm, 281 Longhill Road, Hillsborough. Tickets are free, although tax deductible donations are welcome: www.srol-june14event-2015.eventbrite.com. For questions, call 347-886-2798, or email: info@springreinsoflife.org .

For more information visit www.springreinsoflife.org

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1IC8WUS