3 people transported to hospital after car goes into Lake Loveland Saturday

The Loveland Fire Rescue Authority and Loveland Police Department work to pull out a vehicle that went into Lake Loveland late Saturday night. One woman was rescued from the water. ( Justin King/ Loveland Fire Rescue Authority )

Loveland Fire Rescue Authority and the Loveland Police Department responded to an incident Saturday night where a vehicle went into Lake Loveland.

The one occupant of the vehicle was rescued and she and two civilian rescuers were transported to an area hospital, according to Sgt. Bob Rabson with the Loveland Police Department. There were no fatalities.

Rabson said that the driver of the 2004 Subaru Legacy, identified as 22-year-old Annaliese Bucich, was stopped at a red light facing north on Colorado Avenue. When the light turned green, instead of turning left or right onto Eisenhower Boulevard, she somehow drove straight into the lake. The vehicle ended up about 75 feet from shore, he said.

A diver with the Loveland Fire Rescue Authority prepares to go into Lake Loveland Saturday night in search of any victims there might be after a car accidentally plunged into the lake. (Justin King / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

A passerby witnessed the car enter the water and swam out to the vehicle. The person broke out the passenger window and pulled the driver out, Rabson said.

The call came into 911 dispatch at about 10:02 p.m., said Michael Cerovski, on-duty battalion chief with the Loveland Fire Rescue Authority.

The fire department arrived on scene at 10:07 and had divers in the water by 10:20 p.m.

Cerovski said that they were told on the way to the scene that there were possibly two people in the vehicle, and that civilians had rescued one occupant.

"That occupant was saying her boyfriend was in the car," Cerovski said. "We treated it as a rescue out of the gate. After an hour and several back-and-forths with interviewing the woman, we finally learned she was not accurate. There was not another person in the vehicle."

Advertisement

Still, divers searched the area and the vehicle.

"When we don't have reliable information, we have to assume the worst," Cerovski said.

Rabson said that later, police learned that the boyfriend whom they had thought was in the vehicle, was working at The Pourhouse in downtown Loveland, where he is a cook.

Cerovski said the Fire Authority helped police remove the vehicle from the water.

Investigators are still determining what factors might have contributed to the accident, including possible intoxication, according to Rabson.

Cerovski said three Loveland divers went into the water. Two divers from the Berthoud Fire Department responded to the scene to assist, as well as three Larimer County divers, although the Larimer County contingent was never deployed into the water.

Loveland Fire Rescue Authority called for as many divers as possible in case rescuers needed to "recycle" divers and take turns in the water, according to Cerovski.

The divers are trained in cold water and ice diving, and used dry suits to dive into the slushy water as temperatures dipped below 20 degrees.

"It was very dangerous for our rescuers," Cerovski said. "The (civilian) rescuers had no protection at all. We have a lot of gear we wear."

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com, Twitter.com/jessicabenes.