Insurance companies, which have spent the past several years trying to get devices and apps into policyholders' cars to monitor driving, are now maneuvering to get their foot in the door of increasingly connected homes.

American Family Insurance, Liberty Mutual and Bloomington-based State Farm have paired up in recent months with companies — including Google home automation unit Nest — that provide smart products for residences. In return for using the devices, policyholders may qualify for discounts on their home insurance.

"These are double-edged products," said Bob Hunter, insurance director for the Consumer Federation of America and a former Texas insurance commissioner. "If properly controlled for privacy and only installed with the policyholder's permission and total transparency, they can make a home safer and reduce the likelihood of death and destruction, but without strict protections, these could be a threat to a family's privacy and intimacy."

Canary, one of State Farm's partners, says on its website that it once recorded a baby's first steps.

State insurance regulators, Hunter said, are likely to monitor the discounts offered to policyholders and possibly act on any unfair denials of claims that arise from the devices. The "possible intrusive privacy implications," however, might not be insurance regulators' purview, he said.

Insurers' potential movement into policyholders' home turf was discussed in September at the Telematics Update conference in Chicago. The event has traditionally focused on devices and apps used to monitor driving in return for discounts, but "it's not the only place where behavior-based information is going to change the insurance industry," Robin Harbage, a former Progressive executive, told the crowd at the event.

Nest Nest Labs Nest is Google's home automation unit. Nest is Google's home automation unit. (Nest Labs)

Harbage cited smart home products like Nest, which also has thermostats and cameras.

"Clearly, we're going to see behavior-based ratings on home" insurance too, predicted Harbage, now with consulting firm Towers Watson.

Younger consumers are likely to be more open to the idea, Towers Watson found in a survey released in September.

Nearly 90 percent of millennials said they were open to signing up for a "usage-based insurance" policy — like those that monitor driving behavior, or usage, in exchange for discounts — compared with 74 percent for other age groups.

Take Aaron Fisher, 23.

The creative technologist for New York social media agency We Are Social tweeted on July 10 to insurer Travelers about his desire to "get a discount or free Nest Protect with" his renter's insurance. Nest Protect is a smoke and carbon monoxide alarm.

Fisher told the Tribune recently that his current smoke alarm expires in early 2016.

Nest Protect TNS Nest Protect is a smoke and carbon monoxide alarm. Nest Protect is a smoke and carbon monoxide alarm. (TNS)

"I enjoy privacy, but when it comes to Google Nest's claims regarding what data they share with insurance companies, and my willingness to make my home safer while saving money, I view the issue as a nonstarter," Fisher said. He said he also owns the voice-recognition device Amazon Echo, which he acknowledges could, theoretically, be used for data mining.

Michael Bennett, 59, who works as a marketing director in the health care industry, also believes that the potential safety benefits of home monitoring technology outweigh privacy concerns.

Bennett already had Canary when he learned about the discount that his insurer, State Farm, was offering. He got a 10 percent discount on his insurance.

Bennett, who lives in Eugene, Ore., said he has no concerns about the affiliation between Canary and State Farm.

"I can't think of anything that State Farm could gather from Canary that would be invasive," he said. Canary has already paid off above and beyond the State Farm discount, Bennett said, because it alerted them to an intruder in their home while he and his wife were dining out. They arrived home before the police and scared off the burglar, who was later caught thanks to video recorded by Canary, he said.

Here's what four insurers are doing in the realm of home monitoring:

American Family

A deal between Nest and American Family, announced in June, is for the company's smart smoke and carbon monoxide detector.

"Get a new Nest Protect at no cost and a 5 percent insurance discount," American Family says on its website. The offer, the first that American Family has struck with a provider of connected-home devices, is currently available to Minnesota policyholders.

Nest Protect "speaks to tell you what and where the danger is, sends phone alerts, and tests itself to make sure it's working," American Family says.

The insurer's discount program, called Safety Rewards, "doesn't involve sharing your personal data," according to a "frequently asked questions" page on the website. Monthly reports will include such information as whether the batteries are working but "do not include information about alarm events."

Participants must share the home's ZIP code and the names of the rooms where Nest is installed; and the status of the batteries, smoke and carbon monoxide sensors, and Internet connection.

"If the Safety Rewards program evolves over time, we may request other data, but would secure your permission," American Family terms and conditions say.

An accident investigation or litigation might compel American Family to turn over the data. Installation and use of the device is also subject to Nest's own legal agreements, including its privacy statement, according to American Family terms of service.

American Family spokeswoman Janet Masters says the company will use the data to ensure the device is working properly and to send tips to customers. "For example, we might contact a customer about replacing a battery, as well as send a new one," she said. "Other than that, we are not collecting any other data from the device at this time."

So far, 6,285 American Family policyholders have signed up, of which 48 percent have installed their devices, Masters said.

Liberty Mutual

Nest, on its website, says it has also formed a partnership with Liberty Mutual in 10 states, including Illinois.

Liberty Mutual's website says it's giving away the $99 Nest Protect for free to home policyholders who switch from other carriers. The Liberty Mutual customers may also qualify for 20 percent off the fire portion of their premiums if they sign up for "new smart home discounts."

"We believe customers seeking to monitor their homes with devices like Nest Protect demonstrate responsible behavior," including helping to mitigate such incidents as fires, Liberty Mutual spokeswoman Karen Pevenstein said. "As a result, we offer these customers discounts on their home insurance policy." Data that Liberty Mutual collects from the program doesn't influence the company's decisions about policy cancellations, renewals or claims, she said.