Rick Van Glahn is running in the Republican primary for the 11th District seat in Congress. (Photo: Courtesy of Rick Van Glahn for Congress)

Rick Van Glahn was unsuccessful in his first bid to unseat Rep. Rodney Frelinghuysen as Congressman to the 11th District.

That was mid-term 2014, before the madness of a 2016 primary season where perceived political outsiders have been embraced by a public clamoring for a change in the status quo.

And Van Glahn is back on the campaign trail, confident and focused on ending Frelinghuysen's 22-year reign with a victory in the June 7 Republican primary.

"I ran the first time because I found it unsettling that nobody ever ran against Frelinghuysen," said Van Glahn, a home-improvement contractor and 25-year Denville resident. "I thought it was un-American that people wouldn't challenge him and to make him prove he was worthy of the seat."

Van Glahn ran a respectable campaign, collecting 7,828 votes to 15,697 for the popular 11-term Congressman, whose family name is on roads, buildings and even one municipality in New Jersey.

"I had to sell my arboretum," Van Glahn joked, referring to Morris County's Frelinghuysen Arboretum.

Van Glahn admits to being a political outsider, but is a lifelong conservative Republican who says Frelinghuysen is not the conservative some make him out to be.

"I believe in conservative Republican ideals, less taxes, smaller government, things like that," he said. "Unfortunately, the Republican party doesn't always resemble that. It's a little bit intimidating to go against Rodney Frelinghuysen, but this time, I am in it to win it. He purports himself as a conservative Republican. He is not a conservative Republican. He really needs to go."

A deacon at Resurrection Parish Catholic Church in Randolph, Van Glahn says he is "pro-life at every stage," but believes the country has bigger problems than the social issues he believes "are meant to distract us from what is really going on."

He is more concerned about tax reform and reducing the debt, repealing Obamacare and working to help small-business owners such as himself to open and thrive. Frelinghuysen, he says, too often votes in the wrong direction.

"Congressman Frelinghuysen consistently votes for higher taxes and bigger spending, more government," Van Glahn said. "He votes for trade deals that I don't agree with, which tend to ship jobs off-shore. He has voted to increase the budget time and time again, voted to increase the debt ceiling time and time again, things that go against my grain as an American citizen as a taxpayer and as a small-business owner."

He used Obamacare as one example to criticize Frelinghuysen's voting record.

"That's showboating to say 'Yes, I'm against it,' but then when you vote on budgets that fund Obamacare, what good is it?" Van Glahn said. "You can't have it both ways."

Van Glahn sees a variety of less-intrusive methods that could lower the cost of healthcare in the United States.

"There didn't have to be this sweeping change where the government got so involved," he said. "They could have done it incrementally, tried different things. Try buying (healthcare insurance) across state lines. That would make it more competitive, better service, less dollars. Let's get the lawyers out of it. Let's try health savings plans. Let's try tort reform. Let's try 'loser-pays legislation,' where if you bring a frivolous lawsuit against a doctor or hospital, right now, these doctors and hospitals would rather settle than these claims rather than go through a long, drawn-out lawsuit. But if we had it where the loser who brought this frivolous lawsuit against somebody had to pay for damages or court costs, we wouldn't have a whole lot of those things. Let's try that."

He wants to help solve other challenges to small businesses in New Jersey, where he refers to the climate as "Outrageously prohibitive."

"The tax situation in New Jersey is terrible," he said. "The regulations in New Jersey are terrible. I'm a small-business owner. I get a piece of mail at least once a week from the state that says I owe them this, or there is a new regulation for that. It's outrageous Years ago, people could hang a shingle out, start a business and support their family. It's almost impossible to do today."

Both Frelinghuysen and Gov. Chris Christie, he said, have failed to address the dire forecast for the business climate in New Jersey.

"It was disappointing to me to see (Christie) running around as a presidential candidate, touting his success in New Jersey when we are No. 1 in people leaving the state, we're the worst in businesses coming into the state," he said. "I don't see any improvement at all."

Van Glahn would attack the problem in Washington in part by reforming the federal tax structure and readdressing trade bills.

"Driving jobs off-shore in the name of free trade is not working," he said. "It started with NAFTA and it's gone on all these years. They claim every time they sign one of these agreements that it creates 250,000 jobs. Well, I'd like to see these jobs created, but I don't see it. It's all been driven offshore because you can do it cheaper somewhere else."

Van Glahn is concerned about immigration as well, but sees it as more of an economic issue than a social one.

"We have people who are coming into our country that are receiving aid and benefits that should go to our citizens," he said. "If we cut those benefits off, we would see self-deportation and a decrease in people coming here illegally."

Van Glahn has backed his commitment to the community and his church through volunteer work, including serving as a Scout master when his boys were of age. Now 55 and an empty-nester with his wife, Peggy, politics has become his passion and he wants to take that passion to Washington.

"Am I an outsider? Yes, I am an outsider to the political process," he said. "But not to the Republican party and their ideals. But yeah, I'm not part of the clique. I'm not part of the establishment. I'm a small-business owner who just wants to make a difference."

Part of his strategy would be holding regular town halls, something he said Frelinghuysen doesn't do. Van Glahn praised his opponent for having "an amazing energy level, he will go to 10 things on a Saturday, he's at every pancake breakfast and Boy Scout function," but "It's not all pancake breakfasts and glad-handing."

"He never holds town hall meetings, you can't get an answer out of his office," Van Glahn said. "A representative should be accessible to the voters.You have to be able to answer their questions and you have to be able to explain your reasoning. I just think that's the job."

Regardless of the primary outcome, he will support his party, including its presumptive nominee for president, Donald Trump.

"I always said that no matter who the nominee is, I would support him," Van Glahn said. "If (Trump) does half of what he says he's going to do, we'll be in good shape. I'm going to support him and help him do what he says he's going to do."

Staff Writer William Westhoven: 973-917-9242; wwesthoven@GannettNJ.com.

Read or Share this story: http://dailyre.co/1TvWU29