The Chicago Blackhawks, with former Avalanche coach Joel Quenneville behind the bench, are one victory from winning the Stanley Cup for the third time in six seasons. (Pet peeve: You can’t win “three Stanley Cups.” While it has been reconfigured over the years, there is only one, the one that has been both maltreated and revered for more than a century, and that’s part of the charm.)

Even if the Tampa Bay Lightning comes back to win Games 6 and 7 in the NHL Final, the path the Lightning will have taken to win its second championship in 11 years includes lessons — or encouragement — for the Avalanche.

The Blackhawks and Lightning tore down and rebuilt too.

They took advantage of early first-round picks to land stars, savvily found strong players in the second round and beyond and made other sound organizational moves to land key contributors.

The Blackhawks also managed to pare in the salary cap age, adjust and not slip … at least not much or for long.

Avalanche coach Patrick Roy, such a crucial part of Colorado’s championships in 1996 and 2001, often has cited the Blackhawks as an organization to emulate.

That’s what makes the Avalanche’s regular-season achievement in 2013-14, when it won the Central Division with 112 points and finished five ahead of the Blackhawks in Roy’s first season as an NHL coach, even more remarkable in retrospect.

Then came last season’s first-to-last slide in the Central Division. That led to the curious sight of four Avalanche players — Matt Duchene, Ryan O’Reilly, Nathan MacKinnon and Tyson Barrie — playing key roles in Canada’s championship at the IIHF World Championship in the Czech Republic rather than helping lead Colorado deeper into the NHL playoffs.

Some conclusions about the Colorado regression were indisputable, including the defense’s weakness at moving the puck, spending way too much time in the defensive zone, a puzzlingly horrible power play given the personnel and a lack of scoring capability beyond the top two lines.

It also would be unfair to completely dismiss the injury toll as excuse-making, because while much of it came after the season’s tone was set, it still was extraordinary and lessened the chances of a stirring stretch-run recovery.

As I’ve been watching the Stanley Cup Final, matching teams that landed cornerstones with high picks after lean years, it has struck me at times that we’re overthinking this.

The Avalanche needs Duchene, Gabe Landeskog, O’Reilly, MacKinnon and Erik Johnson, the No. 1 choice in the 2006 NHL draft who was having a career year before undergoing knee surgery in late January, to be stars.

Not just be stars in streaks, but stars, period.

They need to be (or become) to the Avalanche what Jonathan Toews (age 27), Patrick Kane (26) and others are for the Blackhawks, and what Steven Stamkos (25), Victor Hedman (24) and others are for the Lightning. Stamkos doesn’t have a goal in the Final, but he had 43 in the regular season while still at less than full strength after coming back from a broken tibia.

The biggest challenge there should be for Duchene, who went third overall in the 2009 draft, behind John Tavares of the Islanders and Hedman, the Swedish defenseman considered to be on the verge of greatness. It’s past time for Duchene to step up among the elite. MacKinnon’s slippage in his second year isn’t a shocker, considering he’s still a teenager … unless it’s more a sign of things to come than his electrifying rookie season was.

Absolutely, Colorado should sign a top-flight defenseman in the free agency period. It also should sign O’Reilly to a contract extension or trade him. But the biggest step would be for the core to answer the challenge and live up to the faith … and be great.

Terry Frei: tfrei@ denverpost.com or twitter.com/ TFrei