Some of the biggest stories in American sports this summer have been triumphs for women.

Of those, the U.S. victory in Women's World Cup soccer is the most obvious and the most celebrated — but it is not the most important.

On the cultural-significance scoreboard, the winner is the rise of women coaches in men's professional sports. Suddenly there are two female assistant coaches in the National Basketball Association, and one in the National Football League.

This is going on as the NFL tries to live down its poor reputation with women, most notably caused by its coddling of domestic-abusers such as Ray Rice and Ray McDonald. But don't assume the Arizona Cardinals' hiring of Jen Welter to work with linebackers in training camp is a public relations move.

Nor is tokenism at work in the NBA's Sacramento Kings hiring Nancy Lieberman as an assistant coach. Or the San Antonio Spurs having Becky Hammon, who has been an assistant coach with the team since before last season, serve as head coach of the Spurs' entry in the NBA Summer League.

These hirings are important nods to Welter's, Lieberman's and Hammon's very real qualifications — Lieberman is a member of both the Basketball Hall of Fame and the Women's Basketball Hall of Fame, for example -- and to the value of considering women for nontraditional roles in any walk of life.

When sports franchises break racial, sexual or gender barriers, they don't do it to be politically correct. They do it because the players or coaches in question are right for the positions. Think of the Dodgers and Jackie Robinson.

Advertisement

Hammon showed how good she is by coaching the Spurs' squad to the Summer League championship last month. This shouldn't be a surprise. A star player in college at Colorado State and the WNBA with New York and San Antonio, she is part of the generations of female athletes empowered by Title IX, the 1972 law that prohibits gender discrimination in federally funded education programs — including sports.

Naturally, many of those great athletes are turning into great coaches.

Women's influence in men's sports is growing and will continue to do so.

To assume men won't accept women's leadership, strategizing and tutoring is to give both men and women too little credit. Men are accepting it.

At a time when a woman leads the presidential polls, it's nice to see America acknowledge that a woman is also quite capable of coaching the pick-and-roll or coverage of a deep seam route.

— Contra Costa Times