On a cool spring Sunday morning, a parade of cars filed into Lafayette, packing parking lots and pavement in the blocks surrounding the home campus of the non-denominational Flatirons Community Church.

Dressed mostly in casual attire — jeans and sneakers supplant the "Sunday best" here — and armed with their morning coffee, flocks of people exited their vehicles and streamed toward Flatirons' beige brick building at 355 W. South Boulder Road.

Inside the expansive structure that formerly was a Walmart, the traditional trappings of faith were absent. Draped in wood, metal and stone, the church's lobby appeared more outdoor retail than organized religion.

Some churchgoers veered over to the coffee station for a quick warm-up; others used a bay of computers to check their kids in for the children's ministry, a collection of age-specific rooms tucked off a long, winding hallway.

Advertisement

The soundtrack to this hustle and bustle was a pulsing rock beat, a harbinger for the main event: the morning service.

Four years ago, Flatirons combined the vacant Walmart and Albertsons buildings and popped the top on the former grocery store to create an auditorium for 4,000 people. In this space, millions of dollars helped create a high-tech concert hall that boasts a projection screen, 150 stage lights, mounted cameras and a soundboard.

Flatirons hosts four services here each weekend.

Beneath the spirited lights on this recent Sunday, a band bellowed contemporary Christian songs as audience members bobbed their heads along with the Coldplay-esque tunes.

The opening act soon gave way to a sermon by lead pastor Jim Burgen, who put a modern spin on a Bible story, spoke of sin and redemption and even tossed in a Prozac joke for good measure.

With a vision "to bring the awesome life of Christ to a lost and broken world," Flatirons officials applied a simple methodology that, on its face, seemed almost counterintuitive:

"How can we make it not churchy?" said Paul Brunner, executive pastor.

Tommy Staudt performs with his band on the stage at Flatirons earlier this month. The church hosts four services in Lafayette each weekend. (Paul Aiken / Staff Photographer)

That appealed to folks like Lacy Williams, 25, who was disenchanted by other churches. Williams, waiting with friends outside Flatirons after the busy Easter service, said the Lafayette church attracts a wide swath of people.

"I felt like ... something really spoke to me," she said.

John Scruggs was born again at Flatirons.

The 56-year-old Superior resident has attended Flatirons weekly for about six years. His teenage son had spoken highly of his own experience at the church.

Scruggs grew up Episcopalian, his wife Catholic, and said he admires the straightforward approach the church takes in its teachings of the Bible. Flatirons also is a short motorcycle ride away, he said.

"You almost feel like he's talking to you," Scruggs said of Burgen. "He's teaching you lessons that you can apply every day."

Flatirons' massive following has created some side effects, among them what some locals jokingly call a "Jesus jam."

The churchgoers' vehicles — which typically sport at least one sticker bearing the church's rugged Flatirons logo — clog Lafayette's major arteries on Saturday nights and Sunday mornings.

Each of the rock concert-like services typically results in a bumper-to-bumper bottleneck. To manage the traffic, Flatirons inked an agreement in August 2011 with the city of Lafayette to pay off-duty police officers to direct the thousands of vehicles that come and go from the church.

Last year, Flatirons paid more than $24,650 for the off-duty police services, according to records obtained by the Camera. That tally was just above $26,400 in 2013 and was about $18,400 in 2012.

City officials say they're working with church leaders and the Colorado Department of Transportation to help mitigate traffic issues. But some residents are not pleased with the weekly ritual.

"They'll come; they'll sit; they'll get up and leave, and a whole other group of people will come," said Susan Regan, a Lafayette resident of 17 years. "My thing is the traffic and the wear and tear on my town."