New Boys & Girls Club of Fremont County Chief Executive Officer Steve Hinson (far right) talks on Thursday to a couple of members. (Not Provided / Daily Record)

The chief executive officer at Boys & Girls Club of Fremont County walks into his new position with more than a decade of nonprofit experience.

Steve Hinson, 31, was an employee at Kiwanis International for four years and Big Brothers - Big Sisters for seven.

"At Kiwanis, I started off working for a major campaign that they were doing. It's a 110 million campaign partnership with Unicef, where I focused on fundraising. The last year and a half, I managed the fund-development staff for the foundation ... raising money for our annual fund, our endowment and also that campaign," he said. "Before that, I was out in New Mexico, working with Big Brothers - Big Sisters of Central New Mexico, as part of their fundraising team."

Hinson has a masters in Business Administration from the University of New Mexico and a bachelor's degree in Communication.

He said he always has been drawn to youth-serving organizations, especially the Boys & Girls Club.

"(As a teen), I worked with some amputee kids as a counselor," he said. "I had the opportunity to watch these kids grow up. They grew up to be some incredible young adults. One of them is a Para Olympic athlete, one's trying out for it, one's a lawyer. Being able to be a fixture in a community and watch this generation grow up and see the amazing things they are going to accomplish is something I think is very exciting."

He said the local club is doing well.

Advertisement

"We're in a position where we're not taking care of problems, we're growing for the future and we're building on accomplishments that are already in place. We've got a terrific foundation — a very strong organization and extremely impressive staff, just a really talented board," he said. "I feel really lucky to be able to be a part of such a great team and its been a lot of fun getting to know the kids and know the programs and seeing the way this club is transforming lives."

He said he was drawn to Cañon City.

"I lived in New Mexico previously, and I love the West (and) I do have a strong appreciation for small towns," Hinson said. "I'm from a small town in Indiana called Thorntown, about 1,200 people. I like the pace and the close-knit community of a small town and also the way that organizations can really make a tangible impact in the lives of the community."

The previous chief executive officer, Jennifer Pierceall Herman, left in September.

BGC Board Vice President Terry Hamilton said he is impressed with Steve and his background.

"The staff so far responded very well to him in just the short week and a half he's been here. There seems to be a really good fit there," he said. "What we're hoping is ... 20 years from now, he's still the director of our club."

Sarah Rose: 719-276-7648, roses@canoncitydailyrecord.com