FORT COLLINS — “Stalwart Rams” is in there somewhere.

On Monday, Colorado State coach Mike Bobo sheepishly admitted that after the win over Savannah State Saturday, he had to be instructed by senior tackle Sam Carlson in some of the Rams’ post-game traditions, including singing the fight song both on the field and in the locker room.

“After I got finished talking, (Carlson) got everybody together to sing the fight song, and I didn’t know we did that in the locker room,” Bobo said. “So he helped me out there because he’s been around. We’ve done that there and I don’t want to (fool) with any kind of tradition. He led the team and I texted him last night, ‘I appreciate how you did that and helped me out.'”

CSU players sing the fight song and the alma mater on the field, accompanied by the band, and then the fight song again a capella after wins in the dressing room.

Said Carlson: “CSU’s been singing that in the locker room after victories for as long as I can remember, so I wanted to make sure we kept that going. His mind’s going a bunch of different ways after a game anyway, so I was like, ‘Hey, we have to sing the fight song.’ So I just started off, ‘One, two, one, two, three four…’ and off we go. . . Coach looked like he was at least trying to mouth the words back there.”

“I thought it was awesome,” Bobo said. “My whole life I’ve seen these other universities that sing the fight song with the band and get everybody involved in the pride of the university. We didn’t do that at Georgia. I’ve always wanted to do that. I enjoyed it. I got a few of the words down, but I have to do better. I definitely don’t know the alma mater, but I’ve got the swaying back and forth down.”

Carlson, from nearby Wellington and Fort Collins’ Poudre High, is starting at right tackle and will be a game captain for the second straight week Saturday.

“He’s playing as well as anybody we’ve ever had at the offensive line position,” Bobo said. “Every day, he takes it serious, he’s trying to get better. He’s tough, he’s athletic, he can bend, and he cares about Colorado State. He loves putting on the uniform, and he takes pride in it. When one of your better players who’s a senior and is from this state, becomes one of your leaders, I think that’s always a good thing for your football team.

“He was not an outspoken guy when we got here. When I had my exit meetings with all the players, every player to a man, when I asked who the leaders are on the football team, said Sam Carlson. . . He is stepping up in that leadership role, making him a little bit uncomfortable, but he has accepted the challenge.”

Said Carlson: “It’s something as a senior I need to do, lead this team. The faith that they’re placing on me isn’t anything I can’t handle. . . Historically, I’ve always been kind of a lead-by-example type of guy, so for me to step out of my comfort zone and lead this team vocally and stuff like that is something I definitely need to be able to do. It’s a good thing and I need to get better at it.”

Carlson noted that Saturday’s game against Minnesota “is kind of going to let us know where we are.”

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or twitter.com/TFrei