To become an Olympian is a dream come true for Nico Hernandez.. but now he has his sights set on something more.

"I picture that in my mind, just being in Rio, being on the podium, getting the gold medal," he explained. "That's my motivation, really. I think about that everyday, you know."

He made the team by going 4-1 in the Olympic Qualfiers in Reno, Nevada to earn the 108 weight class spot on Team USA.

"I was happy, you know, I've been working for this a long time. I thank God everyday for the blessings he gives me. But yeah, I've been working for this," said Hernandez.

Winning a spot on the team was just a moment in time, but it took a lifetime of work to reach this point.

He went on, "A lot of people think you just go in the ring and fight. They don't see what you do behind closed doors."

For every bit of training Hernandez has put in over the years his one-two punch of dad and coach has been right beside him.

Lewis Hernandez explained, "Me being not only a father, but also a coach, it's twice as hard in the corner because your emotions get involved with your fighter. But at the same time, you have to be the one that tells him what to do because he's listening to you. He's depending on you."

Now the duo will turn their attention to continentals, essentially a tournament that determines which of the 2200 worldwide Olympic boxers will get to fight under the bright lights in Rio 2016.

"Then it's going to come down to skill. You can be well-prepared, well-trained, but a lot of it is going to come down to what you were blessed with," the elder Hernandez said. "To me, I believe God blessed him with hands, you know, differently. He's used them and I've coached him all these years. But we've learned together through it all. I'm super proud of that kid. It's been a long road, and we're here."

While both Nico and Lewis are confident the former will place in the top 3 in Continentals, there are two other opportunities to earn a spot in Rio before the games begin next Summer.