Pierre, SD

Members of an adult-learning class in Pierre aren't missing much this spring when it comes to the big cottonwood tree along the Missouri River. And that's just the way NASA wants it.

Millimeters matter in this school assignment -- close up, and far off in space.

"NASA, as everyone knows, puts satellites into orbit, and they take pictures of earth and see what's going on from way up above in outer space," Anne Lewis of the South Dakota Discovery Center in Pierre said. "However, they need data collected here on the ground to ground truth in what they're seeing in space."

That's where the adult-learning class from Right Turn, Incorporated comes in. It's part of a worldwide program under NASA called Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment. The South Dakota Discovery Center in Pierre is affiliated with the GLOBE initiative, working through Right Turn and its Executive Director Mary Gates.

Class members keep detailed records of leaf development on a specific cottonwood tree along the Missouri River near downtown Pierre to compare with satellite readings.

"So by getting all these data points from all around the world, they can look at their data, compare it to the data they're getting on the ground and see how it matches up," Lewis says.

The process requires NASA-like detail and precision and instructs students not just in teamwork and data management responsibilities but also different math, weather-monitoring and earth-sciences educational problems.

It's the kind of educational opportunity that can capture the imagination of students who might have had trouble in more traditional classroom settings. And that fits in well with the Right Turn mission.

Nineteen-year-old Kristina Newling says the format, particularly on projects such as the NASA monitoring work, truly is inspirational as well as educational.

"This is so much better," Newling said. "It's so much more hands on work. And it's more real life. And it's amazing."

That's true -- up close or from a long way up in the sky.

Lewis says an essential part of the project is a state Department of Environment and Natural Resources Department grant funded by the EPA for watershed protection and public education.

"There are just so many applications to this beyond what NASA can do, starting with an educated and informed citizenry in how to care for the environment and particularly our watersheds," Lewis said.

The class monitoring began in March and will last through the full greening of the cottonwood tree this spring.

News

Outdoors {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.