Expand and engage at every opportunity, even when it leads to failure.

That’s the advice former Massachusetts Governor Mitt Romney imparted on about 500 students seated on the Jacksonville University green Saturday.

“With 16 years of education, the world you know has been greatly expanded...,” he said. “Keep expanding your world. Dig deeper, search further, learn much, much more.”

The former Republican presidential contender took the stage for the university’s 2015 spring commencement as the day’s keynote speaker.

“As much as you think you know about the world, you will find, even after an entire lifetime, that there is much more you don’t know than what you do know,” he said.

He told the graduating seniors that getting the most out of life can come from marriage, children, public service and even hurt and disappointment.

MITT ROMNEY DELIVERS: JU's Keynote Graduation Address

The 68-year-old politician served as Massachusetts governor from 2003 to 2007, where he made national waves by passing landmark health care coverage legislation, which some believe served as the blueprint for the Obama administration’s Affordable Care Act.

He made two unsuccessful bids for president in 2008 and 2012, winning the GOP primary during the 2012 elections.

Drawing from his own experience with failure, he joked.

“I’m asked ‘How did it feel to lose to President Obama?’ Well, not as good as winning,” he quipped.

Romney used the Jacksonville visit to publicly back another political contender, fellow Republican and mayoral candidate Lenny Curry.

Earlier in the week, Romney held a fundraiser for Curry in Ponte Vedra expected to generate about $300,000. The final tally from the event was unclear, but a source knowledgeable of Curry’s fundraising operations said the campaign received a pledge of $250,000 before the event began.

Mayor Alvin Brown, a graduate of the university, spoke briefly before Romney but avoided much of his campaign rhetoric.

He told the students he hoped they would remain in Jacksonville as they embark on their careers.

“Because Jacksonville is truly the best place in America,” he said.

In all, about 540 students walked across the stage Saturday, and nearly 900 graduated, in total, according to the university.

In addition the keynote speech, Romney received an honorary doctorate degree, bestowed upon him by University President Tim Cost.

During the 20-minute speech, peppered with Bible verses from the books of Genesis and Psalms, Romney didn’t spend much time waxing politics.

However, he briefly criticized Washington for being “inept, powerless and without an effective strategy” to face the country’s biggest challenges.

“America needs your passion, your impatience, your participation in the political discourse. Engaging in your world includes engaging in citizenship,” he saidl

He implored students to get involved this election season.

“For the sake of preserving freedom, vote,” he said. “Please vote.”

Rhema Thompson: (904) 359-4693