Mexican restaurant's menu features fifth-generation entrees

Amy Urbina prepares an order for a customer at Grandma's Kitchen on Thursday, in Erie. ( Jeremy Papasso / Daily Camera )

In the Urbina family, grandma's kitchen has always been the place where everyone wanted to be.

When Fran Urbina and her two daughters, Amy Urbina and Natasha Gonzalez, opened their first restaurant, appropriately named Grandma's Kitchen, in historic downtown Erie, they simply figured their extended family got a little bigger.

"I had a big family — nine brothers — so my grandmothers were used to cooking for a lot of people," Fran Urbina said. "We'd make a big ol' feast every Sunday, and they taught me how to do it, too. Now we're doing it for everybody here. We want everybody who comes in here to feel like family, too."

Since opening on July 17, the Urbina's Erie "family" has steadily grown to the point where they pack the 46-seat dining area on Friday and Saturday nights and stand outside on Sunday mornings waiting for Fran Urbina's menudo.

"I've already got some people who have been in here enough that I know what they're going to order before they sit down," Fran Urbina said.

Most often, they're ordering a family recipe passed down from Fran Urbina's own grandmothers, Carlota Romero and Eforicia Seguera.

Eforicia, who was from Mexico and part Native American, was married at the age of 14 to a judge in New Mexico, where she largely ran a family farm. She taught Fran and her daughters how to can food and make fry bread and stuffed sopapillas — now two of the more popular items on the Grandma's Kitchen menu.

Carlota was an English teacher from Rocky Ford, and with more than a dozen grandkids had to make do with what she had and stretch her food supply. Carlota's creamy red beans are a popular side dish at the Erie eatery.

Amy Urbina said her mother has been talking about opening a restaurant for years, and when the longtime restaurant space at 656 Kattell St. opened up the timing was right.

"We been wanting to use her grandmothers' recipes in a restaurant and share them with people," Amy Urbina said. "It's been fun."

Erie Chamber of Commerce Executive Director Elle Cabbage said the Mexican restaurant has been a nice addition to the downtown area.

"They're fitting in very well," Cabbage said. "They're a block off of Briggs Street, a little off the main drag, but as people continue to come down and visit all the breweries they're going to head from there to visit all the restaurants. So they're in a good spot."

Grandma's Kitchen is open from 7 a.m. to 8 p.m. Monday through Friday, 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. on Saturdays and 10 a.m. to 7 p.m. on Sundays, serving breakfast, lunch and dinner. The restaurant also does takeout.