Topics: 2016 GOP primary, 2016 Republican primary, Barack Obama, Donald Trump, Elections 2016, Immigration, Islam, Marco Rubio, Terrorism, Elections News, Politics News

There’s only one thing that frightens conservative and Republican elites more than Donald Trump’s unstoppable metastasis throughout the Republican Party: the ugly truth that they are responsible for creating the conditions in which he is thriving. There’s a strong current of denialism among Republicans and conservative pundits as they struggle to explain the rise of Trumpism while begging off culpability for nurturing and enabling the xenophobia and nationalism that power the Trump movement. It’s much less traumatic for them to push blame off onto an external actor, someone who managed to corrupt the movement from without. The outside agitator they’ve settled on is, predictably, Barack Obama.

You see it everywhere – Trump is a reaction to Obama’s weakness and detachment, Trump was spawned by Obamacare’s party-line passage, Trump is the product of Obama’s liberal politics, etc. The moderately liberal Democratic president is presented as the most influential figure in conservative and Republican politics, while the actual leaders of the movement and the party are little more than witnesses to its collapse.

It’s fanciful nonsense that has been debunked more times than should be necessary, but this ridiculous theory managed to bubble up all the way to Obama himself this week. At a press conference with Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, the president was asked by a reporter about this idea that he bears ultimate responsibility for Trump. Obama rightly dismissed the idea as laughable and placed blame where it belongs: on the Republican leaders who prioritized obstruction over governance and surrendered their agenda to extremists within the party. But he also made a sharp observation about how Trumpism fits in with mainstream Republican politics.

Here’s what Obama said about Trump and the rest of the GOP field, highlighted for emphasis:

OBAMA: He’s just doing more of what has been done for the last seven and a half years. And, in fact, in terms of his positions on a whole range of issues, they’re not very different from any of the other candidates. I mean, it’s not as if there’s a massive difference between Mr. Trump’s position on immigration and Mr. Cruz’s position on immigration. Mr. Trump might just be more provocative in terms of how he says it, but the actual positions aren’t that different. For that matter they’re not that different from Mr. Rubio’s positions on immigration, despite the fact that both Mr. Cruz, Mr. Rubio, their own families are the products of immigration and the openness of our society.