Buy Photo Southern Ocean Medical Center in Stafford is seen in a 2011 file photo. (Photo: FILE PHOTO)Buy Photo

Nurses from Jersey Shore University Medical Center and Southern Ocean Medical Center approved a 21-month contract that will increase wages by up to 12 percent and increase staffing levels, the union said Tuesday.

A Health Professional and Allied Employees union official said the upfront cost will pay off for the hospital and consumers in the long-run by helping to make sure patients get high-quality care and don't need to return for more expensive treatment.

"In the bigger picture you're putting money where you need to and have the best patient outcomes," said Bridget Devane, the union's public policy director.

The contract is for about 1,200 nurses at Jersey Shore University Medical Center in Neptune and Southern Ocean Medical Center in Stafford, two hospitals that are owned by Wall-based Meridian Health.

The previous contract was set to expire Oct. 31. And it came as The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare, tries to rein in health care costs in part by penalizing hospitals that don't provide high-quality care.

For example, Medicare lowers reimbursements for hospitals that see patients return for care within 30 days of being discharged. The reason: Hospitals are expensive and are under more scrutiny for their safety.

In the latest report from Leapfrog, a health care watchdog that grades hospitals nationwide on their safety measures, Jersey Shore University Medical Center received an A, and Southern Ocean Medical Center received a C.

A Meridian spokesman couldn't immediately be reached for comment.

Negotiations between Meridian and the union were contentious. The union said it filed a charge against the hospital chain with the National Labor Relations Board because its members were disciplined for posting comments on social media. The hospitals agreed to create a new social media policy, and the union withdrew the complaint, the union said.

The new contract includes:

Wage increases of 7 percent to 12 percent.

Improved health insurance that includes lower premiums for a majority of members.

Staffing improvements that include ensuring nurses who float among different units have proper training.

"It makes sense economically," Devane said. "When you staff hospitals properly, you’ll have better outcomes."

Michael L. Diamond; 732-643-4038; mdiamond@gannettnj.com

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1NoSxo7