Watch the latest video at video.foxnews.com

If Republicans keep fighting amongst each other and don't pass laws that help all Americans, Hillary Clinton "has a very good chance of being elected president," Fox News' Bill O'Reilly said Thursday night."If the GOP takes my advice and then nominates an honest person to run for president in 2016, it will win."If Republicans continue to fight each other, don't compromise, the party will lose, and President Hillary Clinton will waltz into the Oval Office," he said on the "O'Reilly Factor" on Thursday. "Republicans have to wise up, come together, and pass new laws that will help all Americans."The first priority, said O'Reilly, is to stimulate the economy so workers make more money."Did you know that about 70 percent of all American workers earn less than $50,000 a year?" he said. "I didn't know that. That means the folks are struggling. They are living in a very insecure way."But President Barack Obama is "clueless," and Democratic policies constrain private industry, said O'Reilly, and there is no room for wage improvement."The Democrats lost this week because take-home pay has gone down on President Obama's watch," said O'Reilly, calling for Republicans to lower corporate income tax to about 20 percent."That will give companies more money to expand, thus creating jobs," he said."When there are more jobs, there is more competition for workers and salaries go up."Further, O'Reilly said, Republicans should enact a six-month tax amnesty on corporate money that is held overseas, to allow companies to bring it back and invest it in the United States.Republicans should also embrace raising the minimum wage , said O'Reilly, a policy that Obama complains that Republican lawmakers refuse to back."That will encourage young people to get into the marketplace and other folks to get off the dole," O'Reilly said. "Ten dollars an hour is not going to break anyone. And with the corporate income tax cut, the minimum wage rise will not affect profits."Further, the Republican Party would benefit from being seen as helping people who don't have much money, which would be an "image changer," he said.He also said Republicans should set the capital gains tax at 15 percent to encourage private investment."If Republicans do those things, the economy will surge, employment will rise and so will wages" said O'Reilly. "If President Obama vetoes those things, he will go down in history as a villain. The economy is the overriding challenge for the GOP."O'Reilly also said it would be a "complete waste of time" to try to repeal Obamacare , as the president will veto the attempts."If a Republican gets elected President in 2016, then you repeal it," he said. "Remember, there are some good things about Obamacare, like insurance companies can't throw you off the policy if you get sick. So the GOP should be patient on the Obamacare stuff."Improvements with border security are also needed, said O'Reilly, and if Obama enacts an executive amnesty order, Republicans should cut the funding and make it impossible to carry out.And finally, he said, states should decide social issues, leaving the federal government "in charge of defending us from harm, ISIS, the terrorists and making sure the economy gives everyone a fair shot at prosperity."