A new CNN poll shows that 69% of Americans believe that Russia is a threat to the US, up 25 points from a similar survey in 2012. Hey Barry! The 1980's are calling and you're still asleep.

Thirty-one percent now say they don't see Russia as a threat, down from 53% two years ago. The poll indicates that Americans place Russia in the same ballpark as North Korea (71%) and Iran (70%) when it comes to being seen as a threat to the U.S. Only 11% of those questioned say they have a positive view of Putin, with 68% saying they see him in a negative way. "The numbers are pretty clear on the Russian president. Americans really don't like Vladimir Putin, whose unfavorable rating has jumped 14 points since early February," Holland added. [...] The poll indicates that more than seven in ten believe that there's no justification for Russia's actions in Ukraine and more than eight in ten say Russia has violated international law. Four in ten say they worry about the possibility of nuclear war with Russia and nearly half believe that a new Cold War is likely in the next few years. The poll was conducted for CNN by ORC International from Friday through Sunday, with 801 adults nationwide questioned by telephone. The survey's overall sampling error is plus or minus 3.5 percentage points.

Yes, Romney was right and our Harvard-educated president who boasts of a "smart" foreign policy was wrong. Not that anyone remembers that. Or the "Russian reset." Or Obama's chumminess with the thug Putin. All of that has disappeared down the memory hole as the administration seeks to make people forget their silly pretension about Russia ("Look! A Squirrel!")

Unfortuntaely, America is very dependent on Russia's good graces. Afghanistan supplies move largely through Russian territory ever since Pakistan cut us off almost entirely. Russian "assistance" in Syria and Iran is felt to be necessary, although where they are helping is something of a mystery. And we need Russian spacecraft to get to and from the International Space Station.

But all of that pales next to what Putin is about to do in Crimea. And the American people have finally awoken to Russia as more than "competitor" and views them as much an enemy is Iran.