Bayfield: Winter Festival. Celebrate ice, snow and cabin fever at this festival Friday through next Sunday. Activities include ice golf, a polar plunge, a 5K obstacle course run and a run/bike/ski event on the ice road from Bayfield to Madeline Island. The obstacle course race is $50, and the Run on Water event is $15. Most of the other events are free and take place around Bayfield. See bayfieldwinterfestival.com.

Cable: Fat Bike Birkie. Once a year, the snow-covered American Birkebeiner Ski Trail is opened to fat-tire bikers for this 47K or 20K race. Bikers will hit the trail at 9 a.m. Saturday at the Telemark property, 42225 Telemark Road, Cable. Racers must be 13 or older for the 20K and 18 or older for the 47K; registration is $85. See birkie.com.

Eagle River: Klondike Days. Festival organizers have announced this will be the last year for this winter festival, held Saturday. Events include a living history encampment re-creating the conditions of the 18th and early 19th centuries, traditional Ojibwe dance performances, lumberjack and chain-saw carving competitions, a snowshoe race, dog sled weight pulls and children's activities. Tickets bought in advance are $12 for adults, $5 for children ages 6-16 or $35 for a family of two adults and three children. Day-of tickets are $15, $6 and $40. See klondikedays.org.

Milwaukee: Journal Sentinel Sports Show. There's something for every outdoor enthusiast from hunters and anglers to campers and skiers at this show Wednesday through next Sunday at the Wisconsin Exposition Center at State Fair Park, 8200 W. Greenfield Ave. Celebrating its 75th anniversary this year, the show will feature hundreds of exhibitors, seminars, demonstrations and interactive activities. The show is open noon to 9 p.m. Wednesday through Friday, 10 a.m. to 9 p.m. Saturday and 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. next Sunday. Tickets are $6.50 in advance and $8 at the door. Children 12 and under get in free with an adult. See jssportsshow.com.

Oshkosh: Hops and Props. Taste from more than 300 beers while strolling among historical and modern aircraft at the EAA AirVenture Museum, 3000 Poberezny Road, from 7 to 10 p.m. Saturday. Visitors can also enjoy live music, coffee and hors d'oeuvres. The event is open only to those age 21 and up. Tickets are $75 ($65 for EAA members). There is also a VIP Dining Experience from 5:30 to 7 p.m. that includes a five-course meal paired with Founders beer. The dinner is $125 ($115 for members), which includes admission to the festival. See eaa.org.

Wausau: Medieval to Metal: The Art & Evolution of the Guitar. Immerse yourself in guitars at this exhibit at the Leigh Yawkey Woodson Art Museum, 700 N. 12th St., through May 31. Forty stringed instruments will be on display, and visitors can also explore a hands-on Sound Lab, luthier's studio, guitar collectors' stories and more. There will also be special performances in the gallery on Thursdays from 5:30 to 6:30 p.m. The museum is open 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. Tuesday through Friday (until 7:30 p.m. the first Thursday of the month), and 12 to 5 p.m. Saturday and Sunday. Admission is free. See lywam.org.

Michigan: Suds and Snow. There's something about pairing beer with the great outdoors. Sip beer, wine and cider and enjoy a 1/2-mile hike through the woods at Timber Ridge Resort, 4050 Hammond Road East, Traverse City, from 1:30 to 6:30 p.m. Saturday. The festival also includes live music and food for sale. Tickets are $25 in advance or $35 at the door and include one pint of beer. See sudsandsnowtc.com.

Minnesota: Aldo Leopold Weekend. Our western neighbor will celebrate the life of Wisconsin conservationist Aldo Leopold Saturday and next Sunday at the Minnesota Valley National Wildlife Refuge, 3815 American Blvd. E, Bloomington. On Saturday, visitors can attend a phenology workshop; registration is required and is $15. On Sunday, there will be a bird language workshop, a screening of "Green Fire," a monarch presentation and a guided hike. All of those are free. See fws.gov/refuge/minnesota_valley.

—Chelsey Lewis

Please send notice of events three weeks in advance to: All Over the Map, Travel Section, P.O. Box 371, Milwaukee, WI 53201 or to jsfeat@journalsentinel.com, with All Over the Map as the subject.