Top 10 for Tuesday: 10 Reasons To Give a Hug Today:

National Hugging Day is an annual unofficial event devised by Rev. Kevin Zaborney in 1986. The date chosen was because it falls between the holidays and Valentine’s Day, known to be the most depressing time of year. The in-between, not Valentine’s itself However, Valentine’s has been know to throw people into a bit of a slump as well.

1. Hugs are a feel-good for both parties. They are fun to give and fun to receive. Bear hugs are the best!

2. Hugs are free, unless you hug someone who doesn’t want to be hugged, that may cost you. Be prudent.

Advertisement

3. Not everyone gives the best hugs, especially if it is out of their comfort zone. I say, keep doing it until they get the hang of it, practice. Also read #2 one more time, just in case.

4. A hug is a connection, a bond.

5. It can mean I care, I understand, I will miss you, I missed you, it is great to see you!

6. Every body needs a hug.

7. My parents were not hugging people, so I did not grow up in that environment, but I grew into it. I think I am blaming my Italian friends, however my cousin Jimmy gave the best bear hug I ever had and he was all Irish. His personality lit up the room. You couldn’t wait to hug and be hugged by him.

8. After I started to go away on trips or if my parents were going away on a trip I started hugging them. It was just something I started, in case they might miss me, I guess. It is never too late to start. I wish I would have hugged my parents sooner and longer. That is my tip and advice to all those who still have the opportunity.

9. It was after 9/11 that I began distributing more hugs with my family and friends. My kids were in middle school and I had stopped hugging them regularly. That horrific day was a lesson to all of us. Hug and hug often.

10. You are never too old or too young to get or give a hug. Greeting a friend? Give them a hug especially if you haven’t seem them in a long time or if you will not be seeing them for a while. A hug connects you till next time.

Here is your lead in, it is National Hug Day!

O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O

Warning: Hugs: may not be covered by your insurance company, but they are part of an affordable care act. Hugs are free and the payback is a healthy choice.

A hug is going to make you and the hugged feel good.

Go for it!

IOU’s are acceptable.

Mary Ann Fiebert is married and has two kids, and is also a member of our Community Media Lab. She is not a perfect person but is female so it’s as close as you can get. lol. Look for her Top 10 List every day on delcotimes.com.