Thousands of people gathered at the Nugget Casino in Sparks on Thursday to see Donald Trump speak. The Republican candidate and celebrity, familiar to the spotlight, started his day in Reno by filming a phone interview with Bill O’Reilly. Shortly after, he began his speech.

Trump started the rally off by discussing the success of the debate the night before.

The crowd was supportive. They were cheering loud and interactive the entire time, something that he noted throughout.

“The American dream isn’t dead, but we can make it bigger, better, stronger,” Trump said, assuring people he had big plans to accomplish if he were to win the election.

As a man known for his money, he said he plans to bring America out of debt. One way he would do this is by removing ObamaCare.

Trump said he plans to build a wall on the southern border of the United States. He said Mexico is one of the hardest countries to become a legal citizen in, and that we as Americans need to follow their example and be more strict on who we let into our country. He plans to build a wall to change this, and at the expense of Mexico.

“I may be a lot of things, but I’m a good deal guy,” Trump said. He plans to use his deal-making skills if he wins the presidency.

Multiple times in his speech, Trump said he is a phenomenal communicator. He knows how to talk to people, including those of other countries and political parties.

At the end of the speech, Trump turned to the audience for questions.

Someone asked if he would be taking a salary while president and he said he would not.

“I wish I could start tomorrow, I really do,” he explained to a cheering crowd. Trump was very enthusiastic and explained that for the past eight years he has sat back and waited for someone to change the country. He was tired of this and decided to run so he could do it himself.

Many students from the University of Nevada, Reno, were in attendance. A few students were wearing hats with Trump’s slogan, “Make America Great Again!” and were interested to see him speak.

Student Amanda Bliss, 18, attended the speech with an open mind, but was unsure on where she stood with Donald Trump running for presidency.

“He is a very good businessman and with his skills, he could definitely turn America around,” Bliss explained. She agreed with many of his points and is going to keep him in mind in the future election.

Another college student, Tyler Valley, 21, was also in attendance. Although he thinks that Trump is a great speaker, he is unsure on his capability to be the next president. He believes that his ability and power to run his own companies might conflict with his ability to run our country.

“America is the biggest world power and I just think there is a huge difference between being the head of America compared to the head of a company,” Valley said.

He said he worried that Trump’s cockiness will affect the relationships America has with other countries in the future.

Jordy Addeo is a junior at the Don Reynolds School of Journalism at the University of Nevada, Reno. She is a Douglas High School graduate.