CIOs seeking to fortify their IT staffs sometimes run into some, shall we say, interesting personalities while meeting job candidates. To close out 2014 with a chuckle, CIOs share their most interesting interview tales, which include people who don’t like people, college graduates who want to be CIO, and, uh, cartoon character impressions.

Covanta Covanta Holdings Corp. CIO Stu Kippelman

Candidate channels Robin Williams: While interviewing a candidate for a systems administrator position several years ago, Covanta Energy Corp. CIO Stu Kippelman told the man that he looks for ways in which IT staff can tackle problems from a different angle. Mr. Kippelman said the candidate hopped up on his desk, and quoted a scene from the film “Dead Poets Society,” in which the late Robin Williams climbs his desk to teach his students to look at things differently. He hired the candidate.

Bill Martin/Royal Caribbean Cruises Ltd. Bill Martin, CIO of Royal Caribbean Cruises

Flattery will get you nowhere: Bill Martin, CIO of Royal Caribbean Cruises Ltd. said that a candidate interviewing for a position as head of enterprise architecture told him: “You are a true legend in the industry and…” Mr. Martin said: “The comment made me laugh … out loud. He didn’t get the job. Didn’t even get through the interview.”

Alltech Alltech Inc. CIO Tim Arthur

The force is weak with this one. Tim Arthur, CIO of Alltech Inc., asked a candidate: “If you could do anything in the world and get paid to do it what would it be?” The candidate told him he loved to do cartoon and film character voice overs. He proceeded to spend the next 20 minutes impersonating Yoda, Darth Vader, Marvin the Martian and many other characters. Mr. Martin thought: “Oh my Gosh, please make this guy stop.” He didn’t get the job.

SAIC Bob Fecteau, CIO of SAIC Inc.

College grad seeks CIO role. During one ill-fated interview, SAIC Corp. CIO Bob Fecteau asked a fresh college graduate what role he sought within the company’s IT department. The grad replied: “I want to be the CIO.” Mr. Fecteau responded: “If you are going to be the CIO what job would you want me to do?” That quickly ended the conversation. Mr. Fecteau said this sort of exchange “happens more than you might think.”

Teva Teva Pharmaceuticals CIO Guy Hadari

Don’t like people? Good luck with that. During an interview, Guy Hadari, CIO of Teva Pharmaceuticals Industries Ltd., asked a proficient manager with high-potential what he wanted to do next. In part, his reply was “I don’t like people.” Mr. Hadari said he knew immediately that this manager would struggle to become an IT executive. He said it’s not enough anymore to be a great programmer or architect – IT leaders must also be skilled in communications to work with business stakeholders engagement and manage change. In other words — people skills.

Creative Solutions in Healthcare Creative Solutions in Healthcare CIO Shawn Wiora

Wait, what’s my name again? A nervous job candidate introduced himself to Creative Solutions in Healthcare LLC CIO Shawn Wiora as… Shawn Wiora. “They were so nervous. It was kind of endearing.” Not endearing enough; he didn’t get the job.