Loveland native selected to create poster to mark the park's centennial

Jim Disney has a true adventurous spirit having succeeded in reaching 1,000 summits during his life including North America's highest peak, Denali in Alaska. The Loveland native was commissioned by the Rocky Mountain Conservancy to create a poster celebrating Rocky Mountain National Park's centennial. ( Kenneth Jessen / Special to the Reporter-Herald )

This is Rocky Mountain National Park's official centennial poster that depicts a majestic ram and the park's highest mountain, Longs Peak. (Courtesy of Jim Disney)

Commissioned by the Rocky Mountain Conservancy (formerly the Rocky Mountain Nature Association), Jim Disney was selected to create a poster that celebrates Rocky Mountain National Park's centennial.

Disney combined a majestic ram with Longs Peak in the background with a dramatic sky to represent the park in all of its splendor. And why not since Disney has reached the summit of Longs Peak nearly 100 times! In addition, he has been Artist in Residence twice and has climbed all 128 named peaks in the park, many of them twice.

Of this honor, Disney says, "For 50 years, I have been very fortunate to share my love of Rocky Mountain National Park with my paintings and photographs, so to have my artwork on the official centennial poster is a great honor."

This Loveland native started his professional career as an artist in 1963, and his work has been shown all over the United States. He has been heralded as a great landscape artist, with museums and collectors seeking his work.

His paintings have concentrated on landscape images of Rocky Mountain National Park, the Indian Peaks Wilderness and other Colorado mountain subjects. In 2011, the Colorado Mountain Club for its centennial, selected paintings and drawings done by Disney for a book "100 Years Up High."

Disney has served as Open Lands Visual Artist for Larimer County and in addition, he completed two terms as a Larimer County commissioner.

Advertisement

Printed on durable paper, the centennial poster is available at the park's visitors centers for $7. Disney will be signing his poster on Wednesday at Hidden Valley and on Thursday at the Holzwarth Historic Site as part of the kick-off celebration.

See nps.gov/romo/planyourvisit/events.htm for more information.