WASHINGTON. — U.S. Rep. Frank LoBiondo was one of only 14 House Republicans to vote against deep cuts in social programs in order to balance the federal budget within a decade without raising taxes.

The budget resolution was the product of negotiations between the House and Senate, and still must be approved by the other chamber. The measure sets overall spending goals, though the actual amount for military and domestic programs will be approved in separate bills. It calls for increases in defense spending and reductions in programs to aid the poor such as food stamps and health care.

Passing a budget resolution would enable Senate Republicans to use a process known as reconciliation to repeal the Affordable Care Act, which has insured 253,000 New Jersey residents, by majority vote rather than having to overcome a 60-vote threshold. President Obama is expected to veto any bill to repeal the health-care law.

LoBiondo (R-2nd Dist.) voted against the original House measure last month, citing "proposed reductions in the food stamp program, freezing student loan aid, and financial restraints on those nearing retirement" that are "vital to the families I represent."

His opposition to the final budget was a "consistent vote," spokesman Jason Galanes said Monday.

The resolution passed last week with the support of 226 Republicans, including four of the other five New Jersey representatives. The fifth, Rep. Scott Garrett (R-5th Dist.), missed the vote but would have supported the measure, spokesman Chris Carofine said.

The budget "represents an important step in addressing the chronic overspending that has plagued Washington far too long," said Rep. Leonard Lance (R-7th Dist.).

All six New Jersey House Republicans earlier voted to eliminate the tax on multimillion-dollar estates. The tax affects estates worth more than $5.4 million for individuals and $10.8 million for couples. Only approximately 5,400 estates, including 130 in New Jersey, will have to pay the tax next year, the White House said. The Congressional Budget Office said repealing the levy would cost the U.S. Treasury $270 billion over 10 years.



Jonathan D. Salant may be reached at jsalant@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @JDSalant. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.