City could see up to 16 inches by event's end, meteorologists say

Boulder County was blanketed Saturday by a blizzard that is expected to continue throughout Sunday and possibly leave the city with a total of up to 16 inches of snow

As of 9 p.m. Saturday night, Boulder had received 8 inches of snow, according to the National Weather Service.

The event left the city on accident alert all day Saturday, and caused multiple highway closures.

U.S. 36 was closed in and out of Boulder at Table Mesa Drive, at around 6 p.m., with dispatch officials relaying multiple driver reports of nearly impossible driving conditions up to Davidson Mesa. At 9:20 p.m., dispatch reported the highway had reopened.

A tow truck driver talks to a motorist whose car slid off westbound U.S. 36 going from Louisville to Boulder on Saturday evening. (Paul Aiken)

Eastbound U.S. 36 at McCaslin Boulevard was closed down earlier in the day, at about 3:30 p.m., with eastbound traffic being directed onto McCaslin. As many as 50 cars were stranded or severely delayed due to numerous slide-offs and other related problems. It was reopened at 5:15 p.m.

NWS meteorologist Jim Kalina in Boulder said early Saturday that narrow bands of snow through the area after midnight had already left 10 inches on the ground in Westminster, and another 8 in Superior, while downtown Boulder had not reported significant snowfall until much later in the day.

A secondary front coming through the Boulder and Longmont forecast for later on Saturday was expected to bring most of the snowfall, however, and by mid-afternoon that forecast had held true.

According to the National Weather Service, snow accumulated at a rate of up to 2 inches per hour late Saturday afternoon in and near the foothills, and across the Palmer Divide during what has been described as a "long duration winter storm."

Snowfalls in Boulder County were projected at 2 to 4 inches during the day Saturday, 4 to 8 overnight, another 1 to 3 Sunday, and possibly another 2 inches on Sunday night.

Hudson Wilkins hula hoops from a snow covered rock in Boulder as the snowstorm hits the city on Saturday afternoon. (Paul Aiken)

Those totals varied wildly on Saturday, however, with Superior receiving about four times the amount of snow measured in Erie. In the city of Boulder, totals by evening varied from 6 to 8 inches, though the official reading, taken by meteorologist Matt Kelsch.

Motorists should expect hazardous winter driving conditions to continue on Sunday, with possible road closures in the high country. Secondary roads could also become impassable to vehicles in areas that see the heaviest accumulations.

Temperatures topped out at 30 on Saturday, sinking down to 12 at night. Sunday's forecast high is 16, before a plunge down to 5 on Sunday night. Monday should warm up to 25 during the day, with a low Monday night of 15.

And looking just a little farther ahead, the weather service cautions that "Another threat of accumulating snow and colder temperatures is lurking for late Wednesday into Friday."