Fuller's Extra Special Bitter from Fuller's Griffin Brewery in London is 5.9% ABV. (Photo: Todd Haefer, The (Appleton, Wis.) Post-Crescent)

Beer Man is a weekly profile of beers from across the country and around the world.

This week: Fuller's Extra Special Bitter

Fuller's Griffin Brewery, London

www.fullers.co.uk

The rebirth of American brewing is a mixed blessing. While it's gratifying to see thousands of new breweries around the country offering every style known to mankind, resurrecting extinct styles and even inventing new ones, it also has meant the shrinking of imported beer on the store shelves.

I used to spend a couple of hours in liquor stores perusing through two to three shelves of just ales from Great Britain. Old Nick barleywine, Belhaven Wee Heavy, Theakston's Old Peculiar, Gale's Pride, Samuel Smith Oatmeal Stout, Adnam's Broadside and McEwan's Scotch Ale were just a few of the excellent beers I commonly found.

Now, I am lucky to find 10 British beers on the shelves, their availability crushed by hundreds of repetitious American pale ales.

Fuller's is another British import I have trouble locating. Three of its ales — the ESB, London Pride and Chiswick Bitter — have been named Champion Beer of Britain, which no other brewery has done. I have written about Fuller's Porter in the past, a robust porter that is maltier and a touch less bitter than most American offerings.

Fuller's is a brand name for beer produced at the Griffin Brewery, but the company that runs it is officially Fuller, Smith & Turner P.L.C.

Fuller's ESB, at 5.9%t ABV, is a prime example of the bitter style. Now, bitter in Great Britain does not mean the beer is excessively bitter; it is just the British term for a pale ale. Extra Special Bitter simply means the beer is a touch stronger — around 1% ABV stronger.

Judicious use of caramel malts in Fuller's ESB result in a reddish-brown color and toffee malt flavor. The aroma is biscuit and toffee coming from a fluffy cream-colored head. There is a bit of hop bitterness in the background, although nothing like a typical American pale ale.

The caramel and toffee notes are what makes this ESB special. The beer is not candy-sweet, but the malts stand out in a way that U.S. breweries have trouble replicating. The hops are grassy, but not overused, allowing for the full malt flavor to shine. Add to this a solid mouthfeel and medium carbonation, and it's easy to see why this beer wins awards.

Many beers are available only regionally. Check the brewer's website, which often contains information on product availability by mail. Contact Todd Haefer at beerman@postcrescent.com. To read previous Beer Man columns, click here.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1wtekAJ