Turns out that Mr. Market is also Dr. Market. The healthcare sector doesn’t get a dispensation from the basic laws of economics.

This seems abundantly clear in an important new study that substantiates the intuitive thought that hospital mergers create monopoly power and drive up prices. More from Marketplace:

Over his career, Carnegie Mellon economist Martin Gaynor has been published 69 times – papers like “Equilibrium Misperceptions,” “Efficient Efficiencies Analysis,” and “Productivity Consequences of Alternative Land Division Methods in China’s Decollectivization.” “Most of one’s work is read by other academics, and my mother. But not by many other people,” he said. Gaynor thinks his latest – a paper out Tuesday called “The Price Ain’t Right”– will be different. Three of the nation’s largest insurance companies – Aetna, Humana and UnitedHealth – have let researchers have a look at the negotiated prices they pay for services and procedures like C-sections, MRIs and hospital stays.

All told, we’re talking about claims data for 88 million customers, some $682 billion of healthcare bills. No one has ever had such exhaustive access to real price data before. “We have this large body of evidence covering many, many years that consistently shows if you happen to live in an area with only one hospital you are going to pay a lot more,” Gaynor said.

That helps explain why a C-Section in one Oregon market costs more than $15,000 and can run for as little as $3,000 in St. Louis, where there’s lots of competition. For years, hospital executives have defended these prices saying it’s about quality, or that they see sicker patients, or lots of folks on Medicare. “That’s just not true,” said co-author Yale economist Zack Cooper.

Cooper said the team, including John Van Reenen from the London School of Economics and the University of Pennsylvania’s Stuart Craig, controlled for all those factors. And Cooper said market power matters more than the rest. The report found after decades of mergers, nearly a third of U.S. markets have monopolies, or are close to having monopolies.