Democratic presidential candidate, Sen. Bernie Sanders speaks at a rally at the Macomb Community College, Saturday, March 5, 2016, in Warren, Mich. (Photo: Carlos Osorio, AP)

Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders claimed a victory over front-runner Hillary Clinton in the Kansas caucuses, the Democratic Party announced Saturday, as results were still being tallied in Nebraska and Louisiana.

The Democratic contests played as Clinton and Sanders prepared for a Sunday debate in Flint, Mich, where the poisoning of the municipal water supply also threatens the state's political leadership.

"I believe that if we have the courage to look at our problems right in the face, not bury them, we can address them,'' Sanders told a crowd Saturday night in Warren, Mich. "We can resolve them.

“I worry very much about what is going on in American democracy today,’’ he said. “What democracy is not about is billionaires buying elections.''

Earlier he lashed out at Republicans' plans to either cut or privatize Social Security. He called the proposals "crazy,'' while he said Clinton has offered only "vague'' plans to bolster the program.

In Louisiana, with a large contingent of African-American voters, Clinton sought to build on decisive recent victories throughout the South, including in Alabama, Arkansas, Georgia, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas and Virginia.

Sanders, meanwhile, pushed hard in Kansas and Nebraska and by Saturday afternoon his campaign had moved to Michigan and Ohio. There, he once again took aim at the corrupt influences of big money in politics and promised supporters that he would always confront the problems facing the U.S.

Both candidates and their campaigns were clearly looking beyond Saturday, before the results had been tallied.

In a Saturday speech in Detroit, President Bill Clinton sought to highlight his wife's long experience in government. He said candidate Clinton's plan to build on the Obama administration's landmark Affordable Care Act made more sense than Sanders' "Medicare-for-all'' plan.

Even as they highlighted their differences, the tone of the Democratic race remained decidedly civil, in sharp contrast to the Republican field. Saturday, Bill Clinton acknowledged Sanders' effort to call attention to the Flint crisis, though he credited Hillary Clinton with addressing it first, offering help to Flint Mayor Karen Weaver.

"She’s the best change maker I’ve ever seen,” Bill Clinton said. “You’ve got to pick a president.”

Heading into Saturday's round of voting, Clinton had 1,066 delegates to Sanders' 432, including super-delegates — members of Congress, governors and party officials who can support the candidate of their choice. It takes 2,383 delegates to win the Democratic nomination. There were 109 at stake on Saturday.

Copyright 2016 KTVB