MOSES LAKE – Voters chose to keep the Moses Lake School District funded with the levy, but they won’t get a new high school.

Proposition 1 for the renewal of the Maintenance and Operations Levy passed with 64 percent of the vote, according to the Grant County Elections Office. The levy required a simple majority of 50 percent-plus-one for approval.

Needing a 60 percent super majority for approval, Proposition 2 for a $98 million bond had only 54 percent approval when the first election results were released Tuesday night.

After the first round of counting, 4,018 votes were in favor and 3,351 votes opposed the bond. Officials counted 7,369 votes.

The results left the atmosphere in the banquet room at Michael’s on the Lake subdued for the partial victory. Members of the bond committee, the board of directors and Superintendent Michelle Price tried to see the positive, but also said the ones who will feel the bond’s defeat the most will be the students.

“Obviously, we hoped that the voters would see the need for the new high school and what that would mean for the district, but they sent the message that they’re still not ready for that yet. That means we’re going to consider other measures like the proposed change to a year-round model and other alternatives for a short-term solution,” Price said.

When the results were released, the people in attendance said they were trying to understand why the campaign failed, but Price commended everyone for the work they did.

“The campaign committee and our volunteers put in so much time and effort to get the message out and convince voters that our need was genuine. We had many voters telling us they recognized that need and said they would support the bond. Unfortunately, it just wasn’t enough to reach the super majority,” Price said.

Price added the district could run another bond as early as April, but likely won’t.

The Moses Lake School District is scheduled to shift from their current class schedule to a year-round format beginning with the 2016-2017 school year and board member Vicki Groff said the ramifications will impact more than what happens in the high school halls.

“People may be surprised to see it affect students in terms of getting summer jobs and having access to facilities like the aquatic center,” Groff said.

The election will be certified and finalized on Feb. 23.