A man accused of planting a bomb outside a building in Colorado Springs told investigators he was angry at his accountant, but there are at least two major problems with that scenario.

Accountant Steven Douglas DeHaven had died six months earlier. Second, building tenants say there were no tax preparation businesses there for at least 17 years. In fact, records indicate DeHaven worked out of his house, not in the building that was bombed.

One of the tenants, the Colorado Springs chapter of the NAACP, believes it’s far more likely that suspect Thaddeus Cheyenne Murphy was targeting his group instead.

Henry Allen Jr., president of the Colorado Springs branch of the NAACP, said Murphy’s professed motive is pocked with holes and appears to be a way to decrease a possible stiffer penalty.

Even the timing of the Jan. 6 bombing seems to point to the NAACP office as being the target, Allen said. The office had taken a holiday break beginning Dec. 23. Office phone messages and a note posted on the door said it was to reopen on Jan. 6 — the day of the bombing.

“It’s very suspicious to me. That can’t be a coincidence,” Allen said. “Why did he wait until the day the office was reopened? Why didn’t he bomb it over the Christmas vacation?”

Allen, who worked 14 years as an El Paso County sheriff’s deputy, mostly as a patrol officer, said suspects often play down their motives for committing a crime because it affects the length of their sentence.

Murphy, who is being held without bond, faces up to 20 years in prison for a federal charge of igniting an incendiary or explosive device that damages or destroys a building and 10 years for a charge of being a convicted felony in possession of a weapon.

“Murphy was interviewed by federal law enforcement, where he stated that the target of his criminal actions was not the NAACP, but that he had a different motive. The investigation continues regarding the motive for the attack,” said Jeffrey Dorschner, spokesman for U.S. Attorney John Walsh.

Allen said on the day of the explosion, two NAACP volunteers and the building owner, Gene Southerland, were the only people working in the building at 603 S. El Paso St. It contains only two operating businesses, the NAACP and Southerland’s hair salon, called Mr. G’s Hair Design Studio.

No one was hurt in the Jan. 6 bombing, which knocked items off of office walls and charred the side of the building.

Surveillance video after the bombing helped identify Murphy’s F-250 pickup and led federal agents to Murphy, then on parole for a 2009 theft conviction out of El Paso County.

Agents interviewed Murphy on Feb. 19. Murphy confessed that he made a pipe bomb in his garage from Internet instructions.

Murphy said he needed tax records from “2006 to the present” from DeHaven, who “operated a business out of the building located at 603 S. El Paso.” DeHaven wasn’t returning his calls, and Murphy told agents he believed he had destroyed his tax returns. He needed the returns to file for bankruptcy. He just “flipped out” and built the pipe bomb as a warning to DeHaven, he said.

“Murphy admitted the rationale for the pipe bomb was rage,” an arrest affidavit says.

The one piece of evidence suggesting that a tax preparation business operated out of the targeted building is a sign attached to the building saying “Income Tax.”

But Allen, who has been attending meetings or working in the building since 1998, said a tax business has not operated at the building for at least the past 17 years.

Attorney Elvin Gentry also found Murphy’s story to be laced with inconsistencies.

Gentry represented DeHaven in a 2010 federal tax fraud case in which DeHaven overstated tax deductions including charities for 84 clients between 2003 and 2006 by nearly $142,000.

DeHaven was sentenced to three years in federal prison on Sept. 10, 2010. Following his release in 2013, he lived in Arizona, and he died at the age of 62 on June 23.

Gentry and court documents indicate that DeHaven operated his business out of his home, nearly 5 miles away from the NAACP office.

Allen said he wouldn’t want to jump to conclusions that the NAACP was Murphy’s real target, but he added that it makes more sense than Murphy going after DeHaven.

“I don’t know why we all jumped on the bandwagon that he was going after his accountant,” he said.

Kirk Mitchell: 303-954-1206, denverpost.com/coldcases or twitter.com/kirkmitchell