Dylan Farrow (Photo: Frances Silver, AP)

Olympics roundup

The Winter Olympics are in full swing. This weekend, Russia claimed its first gold medal of the 2014 Games by winning team figure skating, with Canada getting silver and Team USA clinching bronze. Snowboarder Sage Kotsenburg won the first U.S. Olympic gold in Sochi, beating out favorite Mark McMorris. Staale Sandbech received silver, and McMorris finished with bronze. Jamie Anderson won gold for the U.S. in slopestyle, beating out Enni Rukajarvi, who earned silver, and Jenny Jones, who took bronze. For all of our Olympics coverage, head to http://www.usatoday.com/sports/olympics/2014/

AOL CEO apologizes for 'distressed babies' remark

It's been a rough few days for AOL CEO Tim Armstrong and things could get worse. He's ignited a firestorm of protests from emloyees and others about the company's move to scale back its 401(k) contribution match and blaming it on the company's health care costs associated with the births in 2012 of two "distressed babies" and the higher costs of the Affordable Care Act. Employees expressed outrage and by Sunday, the company had reversed its change to the 401(k) contribution match and he had apologized for his remarks. But the mother of one of the babies wants a personal apology and posted an article Sunday on Slate.com My Baby and AOL's Bottom Line, describing the health problems of her daughter born four months premature on Oct. 9, 2012.

Justice Dept. will extend benefits to same-sex couples

In a major victory for same-sex marriage rights, the Justice Department will soon grant married gay and lesbian couples the same rights in legal matters as other married couples. The new policy, announced by Attorney General Eric Holder on Saturday evening in New York, marks the latest step by the Obama administration to extend rights to same-sex couples that are afforded to married, heterosexual couples.

Calif. company recalls 8.7 million pounds of meat



A California meat company is recalling more than 8.7 million pounds of meat in four states after processing "diseased and unsound" animals without federal inspection, federal officials said. The Department of Agriculture's Food Safety and Inspection Service said it has received no reports of illness linked to the meat from Petaluma-based Rancho Feeding Corp. The products were distributed to retailers in California, Florida, Illinois and Texas in the form of beef carcasses and boxes of beef oxtail, liver, cheeks, tongue and and other meats weighing 30 to 60 pounds, the service said Saturday.

Creator pulls 'Flappy Bird' from app stores



The creator of mobile hit Flappy Bird is kept his word in removing the popular game from iOS and Android app stores. The game no longer appears in searches on both Google Play and Apple's App Store. When viewing the Top Charts from an iPhone, Flappy Bird is absent from the Free Games chart it had topped for the past week. Also, if you view the developer page for Dong Nguyen within iTunes, Flappy Bird is no longer featured. The removal of the game followed a tweet by Nguyen on Saturday, saying he planned to yank the popular game from app stores. "I cannot take this anymore," he wrote.

Dylan Farrow fires back against Woody Allen

Dylan Farrow has fired the latest volley in her war of words with adoptive father Woody Allen. On Friday, Allen wrote an op-ed in The New York Times, arguing that his former partner Mia Farrow had coached Dylan to say he abused their daughter during their high-profile split in 1992 in retaliation for his relationship with Soon-Yi Previn, the daughter she adopted with former husband Andre. "I have never wavered in describing what he did to me. I will carry the memories of surviving these experiences for the rest of my life," Dylan Farrow said, responding via The Hollywood Reporter. She dismissed his account as nothing more than 'the latest rehash of the same legalese, distortions and outright lies he has leveled at me for the past 20 years."

Snow, rains bring modest relief to West

Rain and snow was sweeping across parts of the thirsty West for a third day Sunday, but experts say it will take much more wet weather for the region to catch up after months of drought. Seattle-Tacoma International Airport recorded 2.9 inches of snow Saturday night, shattering the record for the date set in 1957. The airport averages only 6.8 inches of snow annually, AccuWeather reported. Parts of Washington state have faced mild drought conditions. Parts of Oregon and California also saw snow and rain. However, AccuWeather long-range forcaster Mark Paquette said the latest storms have hung a little north of the prime drought areas that stretch from San Francisco and northwestern Nevada down to Los Angeles.

Iran says warships headed close to U.S. borders

Iranian warships dispatched to the Atlantic Ocean will travel close to U.S. maritime borders for the first time, a senior Iranian naval commander said Saturday. The commander of Iran's Northern Navy Fleet, Adm. Afshin Rezayee Haddad, said the vessels have already entered the Atlantic Ocean via waters near South Africa, the official IRNA news agency reported. The ships, carrying some 30 navy academy cadets for training along with their regular crews, are on a three-month mission.

Court documents: Woman faked pregnancy, took baby

Awoman who claimed she was pregnant has been charged with kidnapping a newborn who was found alive in a plastic crate after a two-day, three-state search. The newborn's mother, Brianna Marshall, reported 6-day-old Kayden Powell missing from a Wisconsin home early Thursday. While police were questioning her stepsister, Kristen Smith, they found a prosthetic pregnancy belly, baby clothes and a stroller, but no baby, according to court documents. Kayden was found in subzero temperatures, wrapped in blankets, behind a gas station in eastern Iowa on Friday. Temperatures dropped as low as minus 11 on Friday morning and minus 23 with wind-chill factor.

Beatles 50th anniversary of 'Ed Sullivan' appearance

Sunday marks exactly 50 years since the Beatles performed on The Ed Sullivan Show. In homage, a retro marquee with the exact wording welcoming the Fab Four to America replaced Dave Letterman's sign on Thursday and is staying up through the weekend.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1lRI48g