Sen. John Cornyn’s staff announced earlier today that the senior senator from Texas has signed onto an amendment to “make all federal government employees subject to Obamacare.”

Cornyn’s statement reads:

“Congress should never exempt itself or the federal government from a law it forces onto the American people. Obamacare is bad for everyone in the country, which is why I have fought it tooth and nail for the better part of four years to see that every American is exempt. But until we can defund, repeal or replace it, everyone in the country ought to be treated exactly the same and there should be no special deals for anyone.”

The senator’s position on the Affordable Care Act is crystal clear (he’s against it) but what does he mean when he says that “everyone in the country ought to be treated exactly the same and there should be no special deals for anyone?”

He’s signing on to an amendment to be introduced by Sen. Rand Paul of Kentucky, who has also argued that members of Congress and other federal employees should be “subject to Obamacare.” Paul, son of former Rep. Ron Paul of Texas, told Fox News Sept. 23 that if Republicans can’t stop Obamacare, they can at least make sure that every federal employee will be subjected to its rules.

“Congress should never exempt itself from any laws,” he said, and argued that Chief Justice John Roberts should have to sign up for Obamacare, too.

Fine and all, but it gets a bit confusing.

Congress hasn’t exempted federal workers from Obamacare.

To being with, workers whose employers provide partially- or fully-subsidized health coverage — as Congress does — aren’t eligible for the health exchanges.

So if federal employees don’t have to use Obamacare that makes them exactly like every other employee in the country whose bosses provide some form of coverage as a benefit.

But it gets weirder than that. The Affordable Care Act already singled out many employees, especially those who work for or serve in Congress. Unlike any other group of employees in America, it requires those employees to give up their employer-provided coverage and enter the exchanges. (Not everyone: Paul’s amendment would expand that rule to justices and others.)

That’s not treating them like everyone else, it’s singling them out.

So far, so good. Unsurprisingly, staffers have asked — well, if we have to give up the insurance plans we like, will our bosses (the government) share the cost of our premiums, like most other employers in the country do?

The Office of Management and Budget said yes. Some in Congress have said no way — and thus the talk about ending special treatment got serious.

Of course that’s not special treatment — if the same thing private employees would be asking for if their bosses suddenly decided to stop providing group health plans.

But here’s a question you might be asking: If Obamacare is as good as the President claims, why would employees who are pushed off their employer plans and into the exchanges need any help to pay their premiums? Isn’t the purpose of the exchanges to make the insurance cheaper for those who need it most?

That’s a good question. But it has a better answer, and it’s an answer that works whether you think Obamacare is a good idea or a bad one.

The exchanges — for good or ill — are designed to make insurance more affordable for people who buy it on their own, or who would buy it if only it were more affordable.

So, for people who don’t already have employer-provided insurance, the rates provided through the exchange will likely be much better than what they would have to pay if they went looking for a policy on their own today. And for people who make low or mid-level incomes, the government subsidies provided will make them even cheaper.

But the out-of-pocket costs for premiums on the exchange will likely still be more than a worker would pay if he or she had employer-provided coverage. That’s because in those cases, the company picks up most of the costs. (And that’s why those folks aren’t eligible for the exchanges in the first place.)

What’s worse, from the point of view of the federal employees, is that because they have better than decent jobs, many of them will either make too much money for the government subsidies or make enough so that the subsidies are very small.

It’s complicated, and some are arguing that there is a conflict in the statutes that will allow the federal employees to stay in the same plans they’ve always had. (If they’re right, then the employees will truly be treated as other employees across the country.)

But most think that the law will mean a change in coverage for federal workers, especially those who work for Congress. And if Paul and Cornyn are successful, everyone who gets a paycheck from Uncle Sam will be buying their own insurance through the exchanges.

Whether the government should continue to offset their health costs, using a stipend or some other means, or not is grounds for a perfectly legitimate debate. But it has very little resemblance to any goal of making sure that federal workers are “treated the same” as everyone else.

It’s a strange goal in the first place. Federal workers haven’t ever been treated the same as the rest of us. After all, they get a paycheck from Uncle Sam and we don’t.