Louisiana's oil and gas executives know that Democratic Sen. Mary Landrieu is a friend of the industry. They know about her experience, her committee assignment and her position against lowering ozone emission standards.

But they also know that she voted for President Barack Obama's Affordable Care Act, and that vote more than anything else is why many of them will be supporting Republican Rep. Bill Cassidy in December.

"[Landrieu] has worked hard for the state and the industry. It's not her we're rebelling against. Her votes have been down the line with the administration," said Don Briggs, who is also president of the Louisiana Oil and Gas Association. He said the ACA is the "albatross around our necks" because of all the extra expenses coming from the law's employer mandate, an issue many business leaders are worried about.

Landrieu didn't carry any of the oil and gas rich parishes in Southwest Louisiana in the November primary. She didn't even come close, especially when Cassidy's and Republican Rob Maness' votes are combined. That's after touting her position on the Energy and Natural Resource Committee and after being competitive in that part of the state in her previous runs for office.

Bill Fenstermaker, whose Lafayette-based company works closely with the oil and gas industry, said the people of Acadiana are conservative by nature. He said his and his neighbor's problems with Landrieu are with her support for the president.

"I like Mary. She's a nice person, but I don't like some of the things the administration has done," Fenstermaker said. "She did not vote on the conservative side with Louisiana. She voted with the administration."

Chris John, a former congressman who now works as president of the Louisiana Mid-Continent Oil and Gas Association, said the idea that oil and gas had abandoned Landrieu is Republican spin. He points to Landrieu out-raising Cassidy in the industry as evidence, and he believes the industry still stands with her.

"To say the oil and gas industry abandoned her is absolutely incorrect," John said. "Sen. Landrieu has not blinked on the oil and gas industry. She's been its biggest supporter in D.C."

John said he knows Washington and knows how much Landrieu's seniority means for the state. Landrieu will lose her position as the committee chair but if she returns to the Senate, she will still be the ranking minority member. If she loses, that position will go to Maria Cantwell, D-Wash., who leans much further to the left than Landrieu.

John said if people look ahead to 2016, seven traditionally Democratic states hold elections where voters could oust sitting Republicans, much in the same way Republicans swept states with sitting Democrats this year. He said the industry doesn't need Cantwell to rise to committee chair if that situation plays out, which will happen if Landrieu loses and Democrats take the Senate in 2016.

"Bill Cassidy is a good vote for oil and gas, but he would be the No. 100 senator. It's about how long you've been there. The choice is clear," John said.

Fenstermaker questioned how effective that seniority is since Landrieu was unable to pass legislation to build the Keystone XL pipeline, an issue he said that was important to the industry.

Briggs said he does understand that clout is a legitimate factor in Washington, but it's not an issue that's going to resonate with the average voter working in the oil patches.

"The average voter doesn't see or understand that. They watch TV and see Obamacare hit them in the eye," Briggs said.

Landrieu will probably need to earn back some of the support from Southwest Louisiana to win her election. She got just 18 percent of the white vote in the primary. For example, though she's never won Lafayette Parish, she lost it by more than 24,000 votes to Cassidy and Maness' combined totals. She only lost it by about 9,200 votes in 2008 and about 9,400 votes in the 2002 runoff.

John said Landrieu can win the voters back by making the election about the two candidates instead of a referendum on the president.

"If people site down and take a deep breath...and look at what they offer, the choice is clear," John said.

Dan Borne, who is president of the Louisiana Chemical Association, thinks it might be too late for Landrieu amid extreme dissatisfaction with Obama and the Senate's leadership. He said the same issues that concern Briggs and Fenstermaker are the same that concern most voters in Louisiana.

"Taken together, these [issues] alienated some of the strongest of her traditional allies," Borne said. "She tried with the Keystone pipeline vote, but even if it had been successful, she'd still have to deal with a presidential veto. Like so many of her Senate colleagues, she appears to be caught in a Republican riptide that will be difficult to reverse."

* * * * * * *

Cole Avery is a legislative and state politics reporter based in Baton Rouge. You can reach him on Twitter @cole_avery1 or email ravery@nola.com.