TRENTON — On Monday, state Senate President Stephen Sweeney praised Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey for introducing the OMNIA line of discount health plans, and warned colleagues he would block legislation that interferes with cutting costs that are "killing consumers."

The day before he delivered his speech to a Senate committee, Sweeney's office shared a draft of his remarks with a Horizon executive and former Democratic adviser who reviewed it and recommended changes, officials from Horizon and Sweeney's office confirmed.

Hours before the hearing, Sweeney's press office emailed a copy of his testimony to reporters as an attachment in a Microsoft Word file. "Bill Castner," of "Horizon-BCBSNJ" is listed as the "author" in a drop-down menu of information about the file.

Castner was hired by Horizon in January as senior vice president of corporate and regulatory affairs. He previously was the executive director and general counsel for the Assembly Majority Office and chief counsel to Gov. Jon Corzine.

Kevin Drennan, who works for Sweeney (D-Gloucester) as executive director for the Senate Majority Office, told NJ Advance Media he wrote the talking points for his boss and shared a draft of it via email with Castner for "feedback."

Sweeney to defend Horizon's new health plan

"I am not denying I talk to Bill Castner about this, and that we are friends," Drennan said, "but I wrote those talking points."

Sweeney is no newcomer to the issue of soaring health care costs, Drennan stressed. Sweeney championed a "patient-centered" pilot program to contain costs in the public employee health benefits plan that began in January, he said.

A joint statement from Sweeney and state Senate Majority Leader Loretta Weinberg (D-Bergen) who has been critical of OMNIA, said such give-and-take from all sides of a policy issue is not unusual.

"We may disagree on certain aspects of the tiered network issue, but let's be clear: Senate leadership has, should, and will continue to closely work with businesses, unions, hospitals, insurance companies, and consumer groups on the best way to address health care costs and transparency," according to the statement.

Sweeney's remarks to the Senate Commerce Committee at the Statehouse Monday came at a critical time, as lawmakers were discussing ways to regulate tiered insurance products more aggressively. Sweeney has the power to stop a bill from getting a hearing or a vote.

"I applaud giving consumers the choice of products aimed at improving care and reducing costs," according to Sweeney's remarks. "So I stand with the trade unions, public employee unions and business groups that have told me — both publicly and privately — that tiered products, whether they are offered by Horizon, Aetna or others, are positive alternatives to high-deductible plans for consumers."

OMNIA is a line of health plans that give consumers a 15 percent break on their monthly premiums, and smaller copays if they use "tier 1" hospitals and providers. Horizon has negotiated deep reimbursement cuts with half of the hospitals in New Jersey in exchange for the flurry of new patients who presumably will come their way.

Since OMNIA's announcement in September, many hospitals Horizon relegated to "tier 2" status — requiring OMNIA policy holders to pay more to use them — have waged a legal and public relations war against Horizon.

Many of the tier 2 hospitals are located in cities, serve the poorest patients, and are run by the Catholic church. They've persuaded some lawmakers the loss of patient volume will force them to merge or eventually close. Just being assigned to tier 2 hurts their reputations, they say.

Horizon has responded to the challenges in part by beefing up its lobbying and public relations office, hiring Castner away from Gibbons, a statewide lobbying and legal firm. Horizon also hired Tom Wilson, former chairman of the state Republican Committee and spokesman for GOP Gov. Donald DiFrancesco who most recently was a partner at the Kaufman Zita Group, a lobbying and public relations firm.

When asked if Castner wrote Sweeney's testimony, Wilson said no. "Mr. Castner only responded to content he was provided," Wilson said.

"It is common for staff or members to seek feedback from stakeholders they trust and respect," Wilson said in a statement. "Mr. Castner appreciated the chance to offer his thoughts on those parts of the remarks pertaining to the adequacy of current laws governing tiered networks, transparency, and value based care. Although the Senate President didn't accept all of our recommendations, we're still proud to support his statement in favor of tiered products and the urgent need to focus on lowering the cost of healthcare for consumers."

Wilson said there was a "coordinated attack" by OMNIA opponents Monday, when lawmakers and hospital executives who oppose OMNIA held a press conference before the Senate hearing. A lobbyist emailed lawmakers talking points and a copy of a yet-to-be introduced bill that would delay OMNIA's next open enrollment period. Weinberg introduced the bill on Thursday.

"We understand that the lobbyists and PR firms hired by OMNIA's critics have worked closely with a few legislators to coordinate their attack," Wilson added. "That's what lobbyists and PR firms do. What we don't understand is why those critics continue to defend the status quo and refuse to do anything to lower the crushing cost of health care in New Jersey."

Rich Levesque, vice president at the lobbying and public relations firm MWW, representing two of the tier 2 hospitals, confirmed he emailed the lawmakers "talking points" before the press conference. He also attached the draft bill which he said came from Weinberg's staff. He did not write the bill, he said.

"When people are participating in a press conference, it's obvious that they'll first want the information about what they are supporting — so, it's only natural that we would share information from the legislators who wrote and sponsored the bill, as well as information from other participants at the event," Levesque said.

Weinberg said she didn't attend the press conference but sent a letter she wrote "all by myself," she added dryly. The bill came from her chief of staff, and is the product of negotiations with Assemblywoman Valerie Vainieri Huttle (D-Bergen) who will introduce the same measure.

"I never met with Richard. I met with the hospitals several times with the OMNIA (Horizon) people, Weinberg said. "A lot of what we do comes from the input we get on both sides and as a legislator we make a decision."

Last month, former Govs. Brendan Byrne, Jon Corzine and Richard Codey, who is also a state senator, signed an "open letter" to Gov. Chris Christie to ask he stop Horizon from selling OMNIA because it threatens "to erode the bedrock of New Jersey's healthcare marketplace."

The letter was written at the request of Saint Peter's University Hospital in New Brunswick by Ruthi Byrne, a public relations professional and wife of former Gov. Byrne. St. Peter's is a tier 2 hospital.

Susan K. Livio may be reached at slivio@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @SusanKLivio. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.