GILSUM — AIDS Services for the Monadnock Region has been a community stalwart for local HIV/AIDS patients for the past 25 years.

And the nonprofit agency, founded in 1989, has for the past 15 years provided case management services to clients across the region.

But times are changing, in large part because of new government mandates.

Many of the agency’s patients independently managed their care, but with the Affordable Care Act in place, patients are required to get care from an AIDS service organization in order to get subsidies for medication and health insurance.

As a result, the local agency’s caseload grew 60 percent in nine months — from 21 to 33 clients — and was too much for its part-time case manager, according to Susan MacNeil, its longtime former director.

“We had just outgrown our capacity,” MacNeil said. “We had been told by the state to expect this would occur.”

In response to the increase, AIDS Services for the Monadnock Region partnered with the Southern New Hampshire AIDS Task Force of Nashua. The task force took on the local agency’s clients and continues to maintain the Keene office, with Suzanne Mueller now as full-time case manager.

It was a move that will serve more people across the state, according to Christine Adamski, bureau chief of infectious diseases at the N.H. Department of Health and Human Services.

“Number one, we all want the same thing: We have to make sure they’re getting all the care that they need and that all the services are met,” Adamski said.

Local client Felton Ray Staton says the medical services he’s now receiving are adequate, but something is missing, he said.

Before, the organization was “like a family. Susan makes it feel like home. For a person with HIV, you need that feeling,” he said. “Now it’s corporate; I don’t feel that feeling when I go to the office.”

Staton moved here from New York about 15 years ago. For a time, he was incarcerated at the Cheshire County jail, and that’s when he learned that a former girlfriend had given him HIV, he said.

It was MacNeil who broke the news to Staton about his HIV. When Staton got out of jail, McNeil became a major presence in his life, pushing him to go to the doctor and urging him to take his medications. She also fought for him when he faced discrimination in the community for having HIV.

“She saved my life,” Staton said.

With the transition, MacNeil said she was relieved to know local clients will continue to get necessary medical care and case management without any interruption.

But those are just some of the services the former organization provided; MacNeil said she wants to ensure that local education about HIV and AIDS continues.

She’s focusing on keeping that part of AIDS Services for the Monadnock Region alive. Those efforts include the AIDS quilt tour, in which MacNeil and Staton go to area schools and speak to students about the disease.

This August, while AIDS Services for the Monadnock Region was in the midst of the changes, Staton said he was feeling discouraged.

“It just brought me down,” he said. “I wanted to just fade away.”

And then Staton received a framed picture of a high school class he had spoken to at Conval Regional in Peterborough. Around the frame, each student wrote messages of thanks. Many told Staton they thought his story was “strong and powerful.”

“This is proof that it matters,” MacNeil said.

This year, Staton and MacNeil have spoken at Fall Mountain Regional High School, and they will be at Keene High School next week. Keene students are also making an AIDS quilt panel for Bonnie White, a former local client who passed away this summer.

MacNeil is reaching out to other community organizations and stakeholders in search of grant funding to continue the agency. She’s trying to get funding and community partners aligned by March of next year. If she meets that deadline, the agency will continue with a name change and a slightly new role in the community, she said.

If she can’t make that deadline, “I think we would just have to dissolve,” she said. But she said she’s hopeful the public outreach in the community can continue.

“I feel really good about it,” she said. “It’s the right framework; it’s good and it’s meaningful work; and it’s important for all of us to lock on.”