The Hug that Ended a Presidential Campaign: President Barack Obama is greeted by New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie upon his arrival at Atlantic City International Airport, Oct. 31, 2012, in Atlantic City, N.J. Credit: Associated Press

Imagine you've been adrift at sea on a raft for the last five years. When you finally reached land, you'd probably have a lot of questions, such as: "Has Alex Rodriguez had his Hall of Fame ceremony yet?" or, "Why is this Lena Dunham famous?" or, "Did that cutie pie Anderson Cooper ever find the right girl to settle down with?"

When discussing politics, your first question might be, "How is President Chris Christie doing?"

In fact, it was only a few years ago that the tough-talking governor of New Jersey appeared to be the future standard-bearer for conservatives nationally. His bombastic style led Republicans to search out grainy Internet videos of him yelling at people at town halls. He was Trump before people knew they wanted Trump.

But then Christie made a mistake that would haunt him the remainder of his political career. In the wake of a storm that battered the East Coast in 2012, Christie partnered with President Barack Obama in shoveling federal aid to New Jersey. And this episode ended with The Hug That Ended a Career.

In October of 2012, Obama was greeted on a New Jersey airport tarmac by Christie, who extended his hand while Obama put his arm on Christie's shoulder. This was immediately deemed a "hug," as if Christie had engulfed Obama in a passionate fleece tornado.

For Christie, his partnership with Obama ended up being a Faustian bargain. He was re-elected governor of New Jersey in 2013 in a landslide; but his standing with national conservatives — who were previously bummed out he didn't seek the presidency in 2012 — was irreparably ruined. (This despite Fox News host Greta Van Susteren analyzing the "hug" video as if it were the Zapruder film, frame-by-frame, before declaring, "That's no hug!")

Nevertheless, Christie now finds himself a footnote in the 2016 presidential race, bumped from the main debate stage Tuesday night in Milwaukee. When polls are taken, Christie is now running well behind Rand Paul, John Kasich, Mike Huckabee and "Why are you calling me? Don't you know Antiques Roadshow is on?"

The Christie example isn't the only way an Obama bromance has shaped the GOP primary. Back in 2010, young former Florida Assemblyman Marco Rubio was running for the U.S. Senate against Republican governor Charlie Crist, an oleaginous human-like substance who seeks public office like New York rats seek pizza. But proving Obama is the Typhoid Mary of Republican politics, Crist had previously hugged the president at a 2009 rally, torpedoing Crist's campaign and likely killing his future in elective politics. Rubio became a U.S. senator and is now the GOP cognoscenti's choice to take on Hillary Clinton in the presidential general election.

Even Wisconsin Rep. Paul Ryan knows the potential toxicity of a public embrace. When Ryan recently became speaker of the House, former Speaker Nancy Pelosi appeared to go in for a little cheek-to-cheek action; Ryan dove out of the way as if someone had lobbed a grenade at him from the House gallery. In Ryan's case, a picture would have been worth a million tweets.

But snap decisions and shareable memes appear to be how we conduct politics these days. This is unfortunate for Christie, who is a solid conservative and man of substance. In the debates so far, he has been in the top-tier; he doesn't say crazy things like the pyramids were once Subway franchises or speculate about the reproductive cycles of debate moderators. (In fact, Donald Trump actually gave Hillary Clinton a fiscal hug by donating money to her, which she probably prefers, as it saves her from smelling of Old Spice and Aqua Net hairspray.)

With the GOP field currently turned on its head — the people most likely to be able to do the job of president are the ones most quickly fading into the background — Christie seems to be leading the charge to oblivion. He has become a voice of reason in a year when rationality is treated as if it were a prisoner in Guantanamo Bay.

And thus, it appears the time has passed for Christie to get the passionate embrace he really needs — from actual Republican voters.

Christian Schneider is a Journal Sentinel columnist and blogger. Email cschneider@jrn.comTwitter:@Schneider_CM