WASHINGTON -- Last week the House voted 280-140 to repeal the medical device tax, a 2.3% excise tax charged to the makers and importers of artificial hips, pacemakers and other medical equipment. Now, the debate moves to the Senate where passage of the Protect Medical Innovation Act, the repeal bill's official title, is much less certain.

The medical device tax was implemented in 2013, and is expected to yield $26 to $30 billion in revenues over the next decade, which will be used to help finance other aspects of the Affordable Care Act, namely healthcare expansion.

With billions at stake, a fierce tug-of-war was inevitable. The medical device industry has already spent $110 million lobbying Washington since the law took effect, according to the Center for Public Integrity, a government watchdog. (Five Democrats have co-sponsored the Senate bill, including the two senators from Minnesota -- Al Franken and Amy Klobuchar -- where device giant Medtronic's operations are headquartered.)

Proponents of the tax believe that repealing it would have a ripple effect, encouraging more requests from insurance and health providers, who now pay similar taxes that help bankroll health reform. The taxes' critics, however, say the levies stifle innovation and unfairly burden private enterprise.

"It's putting pressure on the ability to fully fund research and development activities, [and] it's making investment in start-ups and smaller companies less attractive for venture capital investors,"J.C. Scott, head of government affairs for the Advanced Medical Technology Association (known as AdvaMed), told MedPage Today.

Within the last 2 years, Scott said, companies that were planning to open new facilities have had to shelve projects. "We're talking about jobs that would otherwise have been created," he said, adding that firms have cut employee 401(k) plans and instituted hiring and salary freezes.

"Tax policies should not pick winners and losers, and this obviously does that," said David Burton, JD, a senior fellow in economic policy at the conservative Heritage Foundation. "The government shouldn't be discouraging people from manufacturing medical devices any more than it should be subsidizing them."

Joseph Antos, PhD, Wilson H. Taylor Scholar in Health Care and Retirement Policy at the American Enterprise Institute, views the medical device tax debate as a "phony issue." He argued that while businesses pay the tax, they then raise prices on their products, which forces insurance companies to hike their premiums, ultimately passing the cost on to consumers and taxpayers.

"This is just a clever way to squeeze money out of people. You tax the business, the customers pay," he said.

Antos believes the chances of repealing the bill are strong based on the level of bipartisan support it's received.

"If [Massachusetts' Democratic Sen.] Elizabeth Warren supports it then you know it's a money issue for constituents," he said, and not a philosophical one.

But there are challenges. Not all Republicans are excited about the bill, because a repeal would cut revenues. "They're against taxes, but they're also against deficit spending," Antos said.

A tried-and-true strategy to win passage for the repeal would be to incorporate it into another "must-pass" bill, he said, pointing to the pending Supreme Court ruling in King v. Burwell as a possible route for such an approach. If the court declares that the Affordable Care Act's subsidies to participants in the federally run insurance exchanges are illegal, Congress will likely begin drafting a bill to try to restore the subsidies in some fashion. Including a device tax repeal in that bill provides the best hope for passage, Antos suggested.

Jon Kingsdale, PhD, director of Wakely Consulting and the former director of the Commonwealth Health Insurance Connector Authority, the independent agency that oversaw Massachusetts' health reform, said he doesn't know if a repeal bill will be passed, but if it is, the potential for a full ACA repeal will be a bit "rosier."

"Every bit of ... revenue or reductions in cost that is chipped away brings the Congressional Budget Office's projections [indicating cost savings from the ACA] closer to either zero or the ACA costing money," he said.

Kingsdale also noted that "medical device manufacturers get a windfall from the Affordable Care Act," referring to a rise in company stock prices after health reform was implemented.

Ultimately, a repeal of the tax would be a short-term gain and a long-term loss, he said.

"There's a risk that they will shoot themselves in the foot."