From Yale Medical School to the slums of Bangladesh, Dr. Bonita Stanton has learned that expensive treatment doesn’t guarantee the best outcomes and that more patients could benefit from routine and preventive care provided outside of hospitals — services many can’t access.

chris pedota/staff photographer Dr. Bonita Stanton discussing her appointment on Wednesday, Feb. 24, 2016.

Stanton, who served as a dean, a researcher who published 300 peer-reviewed articles and an adviser to the World Health Organization, will mold the curriculum based on those principles as the founding dean of New Jersey’s first medical school to open in 50 years.

Stanton was welcomed Wednesday by dozens of officials from Seton Hall University and the parent company of Hackensack University Medical Center, organizations that are creating a medical school at the former Hoffmann-La Roche pharmaceutical site in Nutley and Clifton.

The appointment of Stanton is an essential move toward accreditation of the school, which is expected to welcome its first class of students in 2018.

“The vision of optimal health outcomes for all people regardless of race, ethnicity and socio-economic status has served as my guiding star for many years,’’ said Stanton, who served four years as vice dean for research at Wayne State University School of Medicine in Detroit.

“I am honored and delighted to accept the opportunity to lead the development of an integrated education, research and care delivery system at a new school of medicine with such visionary partners,’’ she said at the event held at Seton Hall.

Stanton’s plans merge with multiple trends in medicine today. The Affordable Care Act is revamping payment systems away from fee-for-service to financial incentives to keep people healthy and out of hospitals.

There is an emphasis on creating more community-based care that is not only improving patient outcomes but lowering the cost of medicine. There is more coordination of care through electronic records to end unnecessary treatment.

What it means for patients and physicians is relying on evidence-based standards that in many ways is a return to basics — ensuring that asthma patients get the right medication and comply with doctors’ orders, or better monitoring of seniors with congestive heart failure to keep them from cycling in and out of emergency rooms.

“Through the application of these basic principles, we will be optimizing the health as well as health outcomes for every individual,’’ Stanton said. “Right now it’s so dependent on income, job, what kind of education you have. We don’t need to have it that way.

“Those that are slipping through the net are in the greatest need,’’ she said. “I need us to have a transformation.”

Stanton has served in key positions at many hospitals and universities, including the University of Maryland and Children’s Hospital in Michigan.

She served as a health consultant to the World Bank, lived in Bangladesh for five years and conducted research and treated women and children in the slums of Dhaka, the capital. A Roman Catholic, Stanton said her faith was not a condition of employment.

“Her extensive and diverse background reflects her innate desire to improve the lives of others through her medical training and abilities,’’ said Robert C. Garrett, president and CEO of Hackensack University Health Network.

Stanton noted that Hackensack University Medical Center and its affiliates are already moving toward newer care models. The hospital has 60,000 people and 800 providers in Accountable Care Organizations.

The ACO is a system in which payments to physicians and hospitals are tied to quality measures and reductions in the total cost of care for that patient population resulting in financial reward to providers if goals are met.

Additionally, Stanton and other school officials and professors will revamp curriculum plans. Instead of having two years of classwork and two years of clinical work, students will have hands-on experience in their first year of school, Stanton said.

The school will follow the trend of medical schools moving away from dissections of cadavers to learning from 3-D images and dissection of organs, she said.

Email: layton@northjersey.com