Local couple buys 1875-era building and has begun restoring it

Given that their business often involves consulting with downtown businesses and business organizations, Jon and Peg Schallert of Longmont-based The Schallert Group have for years kept their eye on downtown Longmont, hoping to find the right building to relocate their business.

The pair say they've found it, and recently purchased 321 Main Street, an 1875-built building, for $389,000. Jon Schallert says that his research shows that the building housed Longmont's first bank, and the couple are doing what they can to restore the building to its former glory.

"The last 18 years of our own company we've been consulting with downtown programs and downtowns all over the country," Jon Schallert said last week. "It wasn't until we saw this building that we said, 'We're going to buy this.'"

The Schallerts moved their business to Longmont in 2006. The Schallert Group is a nationally recognized business consulting company that specializes in assisting small businesses and even whole communities become "destinations" for shoppers and visitors.

Because of its experience with old buildings, the Schallerts hired Orion Environmental Inc. to begin deconstruction of 321 Main's interior, removing the decades-upon-decades of stuff that has been added to the floors, walls and ceilings. MW Golden Constructors will be the general contractor on the remodel.

"We're saving the original tile, moldings, things like that," Orion supervisor Steven Rivera said last week, as his crews ripped up carpeting that covered generations of dust. "We're taking it back to its original framing."

Advertisement

Jon Schallert said his research, both at the Longmont Museum and the Denver Public Library, shows the building he and Peg bought was not the original one on that site. That wooden building was built in 1871 — the year of Longmont's founding — and was later moved to where it still exists today, on Third Avenue.

The building he bought was built in 1875 and housed the Emerson and Buckingham Bank, he said. Giving a tour of the building last week he shined a flashlight up onto one of the original ceiling beams, revealing the word "Buckingham" written in what appeared to be charcoal in an ornate, cursive font.

321 Main St. is the building behind the man on the wagon in this undated photo of a Pumpkin Pie Days parade in downtown Longmont. (Courtesy of Longmont Museum)

The front half of the building was built first, Jon Schallert said, and the back half and a garage added later, at some undermined date.

Schallert said that so far the deconstruction has revealed some surprises, both positive and negative. On the down side, he said that at some point, the entire original facade was stripped from the front of the building. Some of the original tin ceiling is intact, but not much, although he said he has found a company in Missouri that said they could recreate the tin in the same Italian-style pattern.

Uncovering one wall revealed some beautiful antique wallpaper, although it doesn't look like there's enough there to salvage, the Schallerts said, adding that an architect told them the wallpaper was hand-painted in France.

Jon and Peg Schallert, who recently bought 321 Main Street and intend to return it to its historic look, say they like what an architect friend of theirs told them: that they don't truly "own" such a building, but are merely stewards. (Lewis Geyer / TIMES-CALL)

On the positive side, they've uncovered some marble tile, and the front of one of the fireplaces was marble and cast iron and will be refurbished.

"The one picture that the Denver Public Library has of this building shows little teeny (marble) tiles throughout," Jon Schallert said.

The next major project will be asbestos removal, which should occur in the next week or so, he said.

Schallert travels frequently around the country but also hosts events in Longmont, such as his two-day Destination Business "BootCamps," and he also hosts Skype discussions with business leaders that his clients can view through his "Destination U." program.

"We've never been in a venue where we could have 30 to 40 people in the audience and listen to them live," Schallert said.

Schallert said he wasn't sure exactly how much he and Peg will spend to return 321 Main back to its glory days, but he concedes "you could easily spend a couple hundred thousand on this."

The two say they'll explore every avenue they can to obtain grant money to help in the restoration. Either way the work will be done in stages, Jon Schallert said. They hope to have the interior ready to go by spring, he said.

On the building's second floor is an 1,100-square-foot apartment that was once lived in by noted artist Gamma Acosta, whose work is still visible on the outside wall.

And speaking of people who used to live there, the basement of 321 Main looks like something out of TV's "Ghosthunters." At one end is a shoulder-height tunnel that looks to be about 30 feet deep.

"I've heard several stories about the basement from contractors," said Orion's Rivera. "One guy said he was bent down working (in the tunnel) and he smelled perfume."

The worker quickly fled, Rivera said, not even pausing to clean up the mess he had made.

Peg Schallert said that whenever they need to go in the basement they make it a point to assure whoever — whatever? — that the new owners mean no harm, they're simply trying to restore the grand old building back to its original grandeur.

Jon Schallert said he and Peg appreciate what an architect friend of theirs told them: that they don't truly "own" a building such as this; they're merely stewards of it for the time that they have it. The Schallerts agree with that sentiment, they said.

"Our goal should be to carry it forward for generations so that others can see it and appreciate it," Jon Schallert said.

Contact Times-Call staff writer Tony Kindelspire at 303-684-5291 or tkindelspire@times-call.com