There’s a new charitable organization in town. Well, it’s not exactly new, but it’s likely new to you.

And a group that focuses on helping women achieve their educational goals is a group that everybody should know about.

If you ask what P.E.O. stands for, you’re likely to receive a blank stare. And that’s something that chapter President Nancy Silva Sutton and Vice President Liz Snyder hope to change.

P.E.O. is a philanthropic educational organization with a mission to celebrate the advancement of women.

As part of that goal, the organization is involved in educating women through scholarships, grants, awards and loans, and offering both two- and four-year degrees at Cottey College, a school fully funded by P.E.O. in Nevada, Missouri.

P.E.O. was born on the campus of the Iowa Wesleyan College by a group of women in 1869. The seven founders enjoyed a strong bond after studying together throughout college and, and with a promise to strengthen their bond, they formed a college sorority.

P.E.O. ultimately morphed from sorority to a community group for women.

Today P.E.O. has 250,000 women, and chapters in all 50 states and Canada.

The original members were passionate about education, and today the organization helps women by offering loans, scholarships and awards, as well as need-based grants to women whose education has been interrupted and who find it necessary to return to school to support themselves and their families.

Silva Sutton and Snyder were members of a Roseville P.E.O. chapter for decades, and they decided that a new chapter was needed to share the message and to involve more women.

Like a sorority, a chapter’s letters aren’t recycled, so when a chapter in Santa Clara found their aging membership dwindling, they were thrilled for Silva Sutton, Snyder and a group of Granite Bay and Roseville women, who volunteered to relocate the chapter.

Chapter GM, as the group is known, was established in 1929.

“Thus began the expansion of the chapter by friends and family members over the course of the next 85 years,” said Karen M. Blair, past president of the Santa Clara Chapter.

Blair talked about the chapter’s involvement with the sick and the needy during the Great Depression. She also shared stories of knitting, sewing and baking for “our boys” during World War II.

“We now pass our letters and history on to you – the ‘girls of Granite Bay,” Blair told a room full of women at a recent relocation ceremony.

Today the newly formed chapter has 23 members, who range in age from 30 to 90, generations of women sharing life lessons and skills.

The women of Chapter GM can’t wait to get started.

“P.E.O. helps women, from graduating seniors through PhD programs, and we do it through local, state and international scholarships,” Silva Sutton said. “We give funds to the broader P.E.O. group, who select scholarship recipients.”

In addition, members of the local chapter will recommend qualified scholarship candidates to the national organization and help those candidates through the application process.

“Often times, individual chapters help assist local students with funding as well,” Snyder said.

It feels great to give back to the community, but P.E.O. sisters get from the organization as much as they give.

“So many of the women who are in the organization were ahead of their time,” Silva Sutton said. “They were attending college when it was uncommon for women to do so. The experiences they’ve shared with us, like their military service, is just incredible.”

Chapter GM members attend monthly meetings, social events, book groups and outdoor adventures.