That furious clicking sound isn't the Sunday "60 Minutes" stopwatch run amok. It's the rapid percussion of candidates' heartbeats as they enter their final 30 days to make the sale before Tuesday, Nov. 4. What's at stake in three realms:

Congress

The U.S. Senate passed the Affordable Care Act in December 2009 with, memorably, no votes to spare. The difference-makers were 12 Democratic senators from states that, in 2008, had favored Republican John McCain over Democrat Barack Obama. The Weekly Standard notes that history hasn't been kind: While two of those 12 have since won re-election, seven have resigned, died, been defeated or decided not to face voters again. The remaining three — in Alaska, Arkansas and Louisiana — now risk losing their seats. Friday's lead headline on Politico asked, "Are the big 3 Senate races slipping from Dems?"

Three other Democratic seats — in Montana, South Dakota and West Virginia — are virtually certain to go Republican. If GOP candidates do win six or more Dem seats, as many (but not all) pundits expect, they'll own majority control of the Senate. And no sentient forecaster sees any risk that Republicans will lose their current dominance in the House.

Hmm. If you're a Democratic president gliding into your final two years, a rebuke of this magnitude could be your ticket to irrelevance. You have no clout beyond your limited executive powers, and a legislative branch unified against you. The greatest impact, though, might be on the third branch of government: Obama has tipped the federal appellate courts leftward, but imagine how his nominees would fare in a Republican Senate, especially after Democrats changed filibuster rules specifically to grease the skids for Obama's choices.

All of which would torment a president who must wish he had stressed a broader agenda (e.g., immigration, tax reform, the environment) during his first two years, when Democrats ruled both chambers.

Silver lining? Obama would have the chance to build a legacy the way Ronald Reagan and Bill Clinton built theirs: by forcing himself to find a way to work with the opposition party. Republicans haven't been welcoming to Obama, but they, too, should want accomplishments, to shake off the 'party of no' moniker, to position their party for the presidential race of 2016.

Not every pol has a price, but Obama could help set the price of many who do. Plus, striking deals with foes who can't override your vetoes beats two years of movies in the White House theater.

Illinois

We'll soon roll out Tribune endorsements for statewide, legislative and county races, as well as two proposed amendments to the Illinois Constitution. We could make the case, more forcefully than in other of this century's elections, that Illinois voters should put up or shut up.

All of us who live here ought to reflect on last spring's Gallup measurements of how Americans view their home states. Illinois respondents had the lowest opinion; Illinois would lose 25 percent of its population if all the citizens who rank it as "the worst possible place to live" moved away. Connecticut and Rhode Island tied for second-lowest, each with 17 percent of their residents in similar furies.

Trust in state government? Guess who finished last, by far — with 35 percent declaring "none at all." Next-lowest: Maryland and Rhode Island at 20 percent.

Your state's tax climate? Illinois ranked worse than every state but taxaholic New York, New Jersey and Connecticut.

The Illinois story has a few upbeat plot lines. But people who live and work here know their state best. And people who could create jobs and investments here see Illinois for what it is: an arrogant big spender, astonishingly in debt, whose tax and regulatory policies offer the easiest possible excuses for locating elsewhere.

Here, too, the stakes are enormous. If up-close reality and nationwide perception don't improve, Illinoisans will continue to watch other states grow their economies while ... Illinois ... withers.

General Assembly

Under current management, Illinois has been sliced and diced to protect as many incumbents — especially Democrats — as possible. (Yes, thanks, Twitterati, for reminding us that Republicans would do the same if they could. True.)

As a result, here's what you ought to realize about legislative "contests." Of the 137 Senate and House districts on the ballot — not every Senate seat is up — only 55 are contested. As in, voters can choose from more than one candidate. Never mind that several of those 55 districts are so egregiously gerrymandered that one candidate will win in a landslide.

So the politicians who run the General Assembly have insulated themselves from an outright revolution by disenfranchising as many voters as they can. But there will still be select opportunities to express yourself Nov. 4 on the state of this nation, the state of this state. Come on out. Vote.

Join in the discussion on the Chicago Tribune Editorial Board’s Facebook page or on Twitter by following @Trib_Ed_Board.