Democracy is a messy business, wherever you find it. And so I found myself in Abuja, Nigeria, as an election observer with the National Democratic Institute for the 2015 Nigerian presidential election conducted on March 28.

The election had been postponed from its originally scheduled date of February 14, purportedly to give an international military task force the opportunity to quell the violence in the Northeast part of the country perpetrated by Boko Haram, a vicious group of insurgents who have now sworn allegiance to the Islamic State. While the effort to put down the insurgents seemed to enjoy some measure of success, the residual benefit of the postponement was to get permanent voter cards in the hands of a significant number of people who did not have them on the originally scheduled date.

Nigeria’s population of more than 178 million renders it the most populous country in Africa. Nigeria also enjoys the biggest economy in the continent. While Nigeria has flirted with democracy over the past several decades, alternating between democratic and military rule, the Nigerians are proud to have managed 16 consecutive years of democratic elections.

The international community and many Nigerians acknowledge, however, that the national elections since 1999 have been fraught with corrupt electoral practices, including ballot box stuffing, exaggerated voter turnout and underage voting. If you consider that more than 800 Nigerians were killed in the aftermath to the 2011 election, you begin to understand the gravity of Nigeria’s ambition in 2015 to conduct elections that were both credible and peaceful.

I had the opportunity to meet with President Goodluck Jonathan; the chairs of the two major political parties; a cardinal and an imam, both of whom were part of a National Peace Commission; and with the chair of the Independent National Electoral Commission (INEC).

Among these dignitaries, the person with the toughest assignment was Professor Attahiru Muhammadu Jega, the chair of INEC, who was tasked with designing an electoral system that could not be undermined by efforts to corrupt the outcome. In an effort that can only be described as heroic, Jega and his team designed a system that utilized the permanent voter cards for every registered voter, and a card reader intended to record the document and identify the voter through a photograph and fingerprints.

When voting day arrived, I monitored a number of polling units in the outskirts of Abuja. The process was uneven at times, especially when the poll workers and materials showed up a couple of hours late. And, as many had predicted, the fingerprint technology on the card reader proved to be problematic.

But that was not the real story for me, or for most of the international delegations monitoring the elections that day. The real story concerns the positive attitude of Nigerian voters. They were patient, waiting in line for hours to be accredited and in a different line again in the afternoon to cast their ballot. They were determined to exercise their right to vote, and they were adamant that Nigeria could conduct a violence-free election.

As I made my way through the throngs of people lined up to vote, I was impressed by the pride these people took in exercising this most basic of rights in a functioning democracy.

At the end of the voting, in every one of the 150,000 polling units in the country, the votes were publicly counted and many voters remained at the site to observe. With darkness descending, cars encircled the voting tables and headlights were used to illuminate the uncounted ballots. I am not sure I have ever witnessed such direct democracy in action in my lifetime.

It is difficult to decide what the best outcome is of this election. For the first time in Nigeria, a sitting president was ousted by the challenger, and even called his opponent to concede. The aftermath of the election has been marked by the absence of violence, and the public seems to have generally accepted the results. And the process itself, while imperfect at times, was a marked improvement in credibility over the previous elections.

If we think about the need for the roots of democracy to deepen throughout the developing world, Nigeria’s election is a hallmark moment — hopefully a turning point for the country and for the continent.

Former Colorado Gov. Bill Ritter Jr. is director of the Center for the New Energy Economy at Colorado State University.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.