NEW YORK (MarketWatch) — Treasury yields closed higher Monday after a measure of U.S. core inflation met expectations, and gauges of manufacturing activity in Europe delivered a positive surprise.

The core personal consumption-expenditures index increased by 0.1% in January, in line with a consensus forecast from economists polled by MarketWatch, despite larger-than-expected declines in personal income and consumer spending.

The PCE is the Federal Reserve’s preferred gauge of inflation, said Tom Tucci, managing director and head of treasury trading at CIBC World Markets Corp.

German manufacturing expanded more quickly than economists had expected, according to Germany’s purchasing managers’ manufacturing index for February. The improved outlook for Europe increased the appeal of risky assets like stocks.

The yield on the 10-year note recorded its largest one-session gain in two weeks, TMUBMUSD10Y, -0.88% closing 8.1 basis points higher at 2.083%, according to data from Tradeweb.

The yield on the two-year note TMUBMUSD02Y, -1.27% was up 3.6 basis points to 0.662%. The yield on the 30-year bond TMUBMUSD30Y, -0.49% added 8.5 basis points to 2.685%.

The 10-year yield closed higher on Friday, snapping three days of declines and clinching its largest one-month yield gain since June 2013.

Bond yields move inversely to prices.

New corporate issuance also weighed on Treasury prices Monday, Tucci said. Pharmaceutical company Actavis announced $20 billion in new debt Monday, which could draw investors away from the sovereign debt market.

Bond investors are looking ahead to Friday’s nonfarm payrolls report for February, with a focus on average hourly earnings data, wrote David Keeble, head of interest-rate strategy at Crédit Agricole. Analysts polled by MarketWatch expect the report to show the U.S. economy added 238,000 new jobs in February.

European debt yields moved higher Monday, with the yield on the 10-year bund TMBMKDE-10Y, +0.00% closing 2.9 basis points higher at 0.357%, ahead of Thursday’s European Central Bank meeting. Investors expect the ECB to announce its first purchase of 60-billion euros in private and public debt at a news conference following the meeting.

The ECB is also expected to release revised economic-growth forecasts, which could further rattle bond markets, as signs of renewed growth could undermine demand for “safe” assets like sovereign debt.

“With a new set of economic forecasts, there is an added kick to this week’s ECB meeting, in part because it is the first time in a while that some forecasts, particularly growth, would have to be raised,” Keeble wrote in a research note.

More from MarketWatch