Photo: Jennifer Zielinski

UPDATE 7:10 p.m.

A witness has come forward with a harrowing first-hand account of an accident that sent a three-year-old girl to hospital Sunday afternoon.

Carolyn said she and her husband were behind the Mustang that struck the girl in a pedestrian-controlled crosswalk.

The elderly driver of the Mustang got Carolyn's attention well before the accident happened.

“I mentioned to my husband the driver was going very slow to the point it was unsafe,” she said.

Carolyn saw the child's father activate the crosswalk lights and watched in horror as the family of three stepped from the curb.

“The car in front of us was not slowing down. I said 'Oh my God, he's not going to stop,'” she said. “The dad tried to pull the daughter out of the way.”

The Mustang struck the stroller.

“We saw the car pushing the stroller and it was going under the car. We saw bits of the stroller flying through the air,” she said, adding her husband has first aid training, so they immediately did what they could to help.

Carolyn said at first the little girl was limp and lying on the pavement, but then she began to cry, “which was a very good thing.”

A puppy that was also struck was alive, but bleeding from the mouth Carolyn said.

Carolyn was shocked at the behaviour of the driver.

“The driver was out of it. He was not rational. The elderly driver didn't even seem to know what happened,” she said, adding the father of the child was irate with the elderly driver who wandered around the scene seemingly without comprehension he had struck the child.

Understandably, Carolyn and her husband were rattled by what they had just witnessed and have a warning for everyone to check for traffic before stepping out into a crosswalk even if the lights are activated.

She also has concerns over the competence of some elderly drivers.

A three-year-old girl was rushed to Kelowna General Hospital Sunday afternoon after being thrown from her stroller when she was struck by an elderly driver.

According to police on the scene, a mother who is eight months pregnant was pushing her three-year-old daughter in a stroller across Bernard Avenue at Richmond Street, with her husband and dog.

Despite the fact they were in a marked and signalled crosswalk, the stroller was struck by an elderly male driver in a Mustang.

Police say the man didn't appear to see them and drove right into them. Witnesses say the man was driving slowly, approximately 30 km/h, but did not slow down.

The stroller was thrown in the air and the child ended up several feet away. She was rushed to hospital, where she is in stable condition. She is believed to have suffered from bruises, abrasions and possible broken bones.

While the parents were not hit, the mother was taken to hospital to be checked over as she is pregnant and was under extreme stress.

The dog was also reportedly injured in the incident, but its condition is unknown.

The elderly man's car is set to be towed away. Police say they will be recommending charges and he may lose his licence.

Bernard Avenue was closed off by police for just over an hour Sunday afternoon.