Attorney General Pam Bondi would like her previous four years in office to be remembered for closing down pill mills and cracking down on human trafficking.

And they will. But they will also be remembered for her tenacious defense of the state's same-sex marriage ban, her failed lawsuit against Obamacare, and her inserting herself in conservative causes only tangentially related to the state of Florida.

It's these last few that Democratic challenger George Sheldon hopes voters remember about Bondi.

The long-time politician and child welfare advocate is running a David vs. Goliath campaign. Through Oct. 3, Sheldon has raised about $700,000, while Bondi has hauled in more than $3 million. Libertarian candidate Bill Wohlsifer is even further behind, having raised $34,821.43.

The differences between the candidates are stark.

"You can go issue by issue by issue. On almost every issue, she's wrong," Sheldon told the Sun-Sentinel editorial board. While Sheldon credits Bondi's work on pill mills and human trafficking, he says her siding with polluters in a lawsuit to stop cleanup of the Chesapeake Bay led some moderate Republicans to support Sheldon.

Pam Bondi's stance on gay marriage draws criticism Orlando Sentinel's Scott Maxwell talks with FOX35 about Attorney General Pam Bondi's stance on gay marriage. (Video by FOX35) Orlando Sentinel's Scott Maxwell talks with FOX35 about Attorney General Pam Bondi's stance on gay marriage. (Video by FOX35) See more videos

Late last month, three Republicans – former Associated Industries of Florida counsel Mary Ann Stiles, former counsel to President Gerald Ford Benton Becker, and Miami businessman Carlos de la Cruz, Jr. – formed the Sheldon Bipartisan Committee.

Campaign records show De La Cruz contributed $500 to Bondi's campaign before she became involved in the Chesapeake Bay lawsuit. Afterward, he donated $3,000 to Sheldon and formed the committee.

Rather than become involved in the affairs of other states, Sheldon wants to use the attorney general's office for consumer protection and fraud prosecutions, especially Medicare and mortgage fraud. He said he would drop opposition to same-sex marriage lawsuits.

"There are very few offices that have the ability of an attorney general to look at issues affecting the public," Sheldon said.

Bondi did not appear before the Sun-Sentinel editorial board or fill out its candidate questionaire, but in previous campaign stops, she has said that if reelected she will continue to focus on crime and human trafficking. She frequently mentions Florida is the No. 3 state for violations of human trafficking and she wants to lower that number the way she did the number of pill mills.

Another oft-repeated line from her stump speech is that, when she was elected, 98 of the top 100 pill mills in the country were in Florida, and today, there are zero.

Wohlsifer's platform focuses on ending the war on drugs, legalizing industrial hemp, and reforming the justice system to include the end of mandatory-minimum-sentencing laws.

Across the half dozen polls of the race that have been conducted, Sheldon consistently places eight points or three points behind Bondi. He does worse when the poll includes Wohlsifer.

Regardless of the polling, Sheldon said people should vote for him because he will bring to the office a level of independence.

"I want to be the people's lawyer, not the governor's," he said.

dsweeney@sun-sentinel.com, 954-356-4605 or Twitter @Daniel_Sweeney

Pam Bondi

Age: 48

Residence: Tampa

Family: Married

Education: B.A. in criminal justice, University of Florida, 1987; J.D., Stetson University, 1990

Occupation: attorney

Political career: assistant state attorney, 1992-2010; elected as attorney general, 2010

Campaign coffers: $3,282,458.90 through Oct. 3

Top three non-newspaper endorsements: Florida Police Chiefs Association, Florida Professional Firefighters, Florida Chamber of Commerce

George Sheldon

Age: 67

Residence: Tallahassee

Family: Single

Education: B.A. in government, Florida State University, 1969; J.D., Florida State University, 1978

Occupation: attorney

Political career: elected to state House, 1974, re-elected in 1976, 1978, and 1980; deputy attorney general, 1999-2003; Secretary of the Department of Children and Families, 2008-2010; Acting Assistant Secretary for Children and Families in the U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, 2011-2013

Campaign coffers: $716,700.78 through Oct. 3

Top three non-newspaper endorsements: Florida SEIU, Florida Planned Parenthood, Palm Beach County Human Rights Council

Bill Wohlsifer

Age: 60

Residence: Tallahassee

Family: Married

Education: B.A. in political science, University of Central Florida, 1991; J.D., St. Thomas University, 1996

Occupation: attorney

Political career: Senior Assistant General Counsel, Dept. of Business and Professional Regulation, Division of Florida Condominiums, Timeshares, and Mobile Homes, 2008-2011

Campaign coffers: $34,821.43 through Oct. 3

Top three non-newspaper endorsements: former New Mexico Gov. and Libertarian presidential candidate Gary Johnson, former California Superior Court Judge and Libertarian vice presidential candidate Jim Gray, Nixon-era dirty trickster Roger Stone