The O+ Festival in San Francisco this weekend would seem a typical indie arts event, with performances by local musicians and displays of funky art. But in a twist that highlights a longstanding problem in the creative economy, the artists involved will be paid not in cash but rather in something they may need just as badly: health care.

The three-day festival, which began on Friday, pairs musicians and visual artists with doctors, dentists and other health advisers who donate their services through a pop-up clinic. Joe Concra, a painter who helped start the festival three years ago in Kingston, N.Y., describes the exchange of art for health treatment as a barter system that recalls a time before co-pays and H.M.O.’s.

“This goes back to, ‘Hey, doc, my tooth hurts; here’s a chicken,’ ” Mr. Concra said. The festival estimates that about $100,000 worth of music, art and health services were exchanged at the most recent edition, in Kingston last month. (It expanded to San Francisco for the first time this year.)

In the national debate over health care and the Affordable Care Act, one sliver of the population has received relatively little attention: musicians, artists and other creative workers, who are often self-employed and frequently uninsured. A recent survey by two arts groups found that 43 percent of artists of all kinds said they had no health insurance; for musicians, the number was 53 percent. The national average, according to the Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, is 17.7 percent.

A network of advocates and industry organizations are working to guide musicians through the changes to the national health care system, which, among other things, extends young people’s coverage under their parents’ policies and offers subsidies for buying insurance plans. But the effort remains small, and musicians, managers and other business representatives said that they — like much of the nation — were simply confused by it all.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Their frustration over the Affordable Care Act is only the latest problem musicians have had with health issues. Richard Buckner, an independent singer-songwriter who has a modest national following — but, at 49, no medical or dental insurance — said that he rang up an $8,000 dental bill after a front tooth fell out while he was on tour this fall. (Knowing the tooth was loose, he said, he had tried to avoid singing songs with a lot of P’s and F’s in them.) To raise money for the bill, he scheduled three more tours, through January.

“All three of those tours aren’t going into my self-employed income,” said Mr. Buckner, who lives in Kingston, and last year received $700 in free dental work at O+ there. “They’re going directly to the dentist.”

Photo

Even for those able to afford insurance, it can be a burden. The Dap-Kings, a popular Brooklyn retro-soul group that played with Amy Winehouse, arranged for a group plan that costs its nine members a total of $14,000 a month, said Gabriel Roth, the band’s leader.