Editor's note: Due to the volume of letters received, the following have been edited for brevity.

Personal esponsibility ignored by Black Lives Matters protesters

To the Editor:

Bill Clinton enraged Black Lives Matter protesters by defending Hillary's support of the 1994 Crime Bill that resulted in numerous African-Americans serving long prison sentences from violent gang crimes. He argued that "gang leaders who would get 13-year-olds hopped up on crack and send them out onto the street to kill other African-Americans are not good citizens." While well-intentioned, anyone who would disagree or be enraged by this position commits an unintended atrocity: They degrade the black individual.

It appears the BLM protesters lay the blame for criminal and often violent actions taken by individuals on a bigoted, oppressive environment created by the privileged establishment, rather than the actual choices made by a particular person in a particular place and time. In this climate, it is politically acceptable to make a diagnosis of racism based on statistical inequities, rather than case-by-case investigation. When the enforcement of a rule or law results in a greater number of African-Americans punished, it is deemed racist. This tendency is evident in the popular analysis of criminal sentencing, high-school suspensions and hiring practices.



While there is truth to the existence of this so-called establishment and its resultant "institutionalized racism," allowing those who would commit violent crime to abdicate their personal responsibility because they are members of an oppressed "people" marginalizes the autonomy and identity of each person.

Dr. Martin Luther King inspired us to make our judgments based on the content of one's character. How will a person, black or otherwise, be judged by their character, when their individuality is considered secondary to the group to which they belong?

Sam Colabufo

Syracuse

Clinton didn't keep her promise to create Upstate jobs

To the Editor:

Running for Senate, Hillary Rodham Cinton's goal was to create 200,000 jobs for Upstate New York. Instead the region lost 25,000 jobs. Clinton says she worked hard to create jobs but insists she could do more if she's elected president.

That's encouraging.

Peter Salit

Liverpool

Clinton exaggerates NY crimes attributed to Vermont guns

To the Editor:

Hillary Clinton recently stated that many guns from Vermont are used a great deal of crime in New York state. False! Post NY SAFE Act stats from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (2014) show less than 1 percent of guns in New York state used in crimes originate from Vermont; 55 guns, to be exact.

Remember when running for Senator she promised 200,000 jobs to New York state? The state lost over 26,000 jobs during her tenure. And yet now she uses the same old tired ploys, carpetbagging and snake oil sales promising more jobs again to draw more votes. Why wait for an election to create more jobs? Hopefully on April 19 voters will see through her smoke and mirrors.

Tom Adessa

Auburn

What did Clinton say to Wall Street? Release the transcripts

To the Editor:

Sen. Hillary Clinton gave three speeches to CEOs and senior executives of Wall Street corporations for which she received over $600,000. However she refuses to release audio, video or written transcripts of what she said.

What could she tell Wall Street executives for over $200,000 per speech that they did not already know? Or, more likely, what did she promise she would do for them if she was elected?

Sen. Bernie Sanders questions her qualifications due to her and her husband's closeness to Wall Street firms. She can end this controversy is she is honest and transparent.

Be honest with us, Sen. Clinton. Release the transcripts.

Gene Tinelli

Jamesville

Sen. Clinton was a friend to Upstate agriculture

To the Editor:

Twelve years ago this month, Senator Hillary Clinton came to Madison County to help launch the Upstate Institute at Colgate University. She engaged in roundtable discussions with 70 college presidents, business and community leaders, and later addressed 2,000 on our region's needs. Ideas she spoke of then became part of her efforts at university-industry collaborations, in places like Rochester and Albany, with focuses on nanotechnology and biotechnology.

Two years later, when local citizens, red and blue, fought New York Regional Interconnect, a company that planned to spend millions bringing high-voltage towers and electric power from Canada to New York City -- through but not to Central New York -- she was there by our side. At the Public Service Commission hearings in November 2008, Senator Clinton officially opposed NYRI. This was real, not theoretical, opposition.

During her time as senator, Clinton also supported upstate agriculture, initiating programs like "Farm to Fork" that bring produce from our region to New York City. She legislated, as she always does, for our children, and for the monitoring of pediatric medicines.

Hillary Clinton determined to be a presence in all 62 New York counties, representing all 19.7 million of its citizens. And this Upstate New Yorker remembers.

Jane Pinchin

Hubbardsville

Clinton's honesty trumps wild promises of her opponents

To the Editor:

I am baffled by continuing claims that Hillary Rodham Clinton is not honest and cannot be trusted. In her speeches, debates, and interviews, and the grueling 11-hour testimony before the Senate Benghazi committee, I heard careful, knowledgeable responses. From other candidates I hear willingness to say anything that will get an emotional response or offer inspiration, however untrue or unrealistic.

Clinton has said that she will not promise what she knows she cannot deliver. Isn't that more honest than her opponent's talk of "Medicare for all" and "Free college"? No president can enact such programs alone. Negotiation with those elected in gerrymandered Congressional districts will be required just to maintain and improve the Affordable Care Act. Tuition-free public higher education would require substantial taxpayer-supported funding from the states and cities as well as the federal government. Is that likely? Hillary's pragmatic honesty has led her to plans for reducing college debt and improving the Affordable Care Act.

Honesty also has been shown in Hillary's confession of mistakes made over her long career, for example, using the email arrangements with which she was familiar, since it was not against the law or the State Department regulations.

Secretary Clinton offers realistic, experienced leadership in both domestic and international affairs. She is a pragmatist who announced in Syracuse specific plans for economic improvement instead of impossible dreams.

Wanda Warren Berry

Hamilton

Did super delegate Miner jump the gun on voter's wishes?

To the Editor:

A March 6 Post-Standard article mentions that Syracuse Mayor Stephanie Miner is a "super delegate" who is pledged to Hillary Clinton. The article then goes on to quote Mayor Miner, "It's good for voters to have an active, direct role in electing the president." I am trying to understand how this works. If the voters have an active, direct role in electing the president and the primaries have not been held for the voters to indicate who they want as their nominees, how can Mayor Miner, who as a delegate is supposed to reflect the voters' choice, be able to pledge her vote for Hillary Clinton when she does not know what the voters' choice is? It sounds like the voters' choice has already been made without their input. So much for the active and direct role the voter has in the presidential election process.

Rick Portine

Fayetteville

Attacks on Clinton show how much she is feared

To the Editor:

The vehemence of the attacks on Hillary Clinton is a clear indication of how she is feared by her opponents. Putting their misogyny aside, they must realize that she is the most qualified and best prepared for this office of any who have sought it in the last 50 years.

These Republicans were shamefully joined by Sen. Bernie Sanders in the guise of a Democrat. Absent from his Senate seat for almost two years, he assures his captive audiences in the various colleges that he will give them a free education and free them of their student loans. This expense will be transferred to the taxpayers who are already saddled with a do-nothing Congress, the cost of his salary and that of his staff, ,and an idled Supreme Court brought about by his duplicity.

Edward A. Kissane

Syracuse