Patricia Black Gibson stands next to a bailing wire horse sculpture on Friday. She entered the piece into the sixth annual UAACOG Recycled Art Show. (Sarah Rose / Daily Record)

Needle-nose pliers, enamel and partially-rusted bailing wire is all she needs to construct her sculptures.

Patricia Black Gibson, a local artist who entered two pieces into the sixth annual UAACOG Recycled Art Show, makes sculptures of everything from horses to humans.

She said her first piece was made in 2000 when she was trying to keep her mind off of the throbbing headache she had.

"I had several bags full of quelled up bailing wire ... and I sat down for just a minute and thought, 'You know, I can do something with this.'"

Gibson said she then made a horse, even though she never had taken any formal art class.

"The house was for sale at the time and the woman who bought it put it in contract. She said, 'I will buy the house, but you have to leave that sculpture,'" Gibson said. "And so I agreed and she ordered a few more and it just kind of blossomed from there."

The tallest piece she has made so far is more than 9 feet tall.

"A group asked me to make Jesus on the cross for an Easter display, so that's how that one came to be," she said.

Gibson said most of what she makes is much smaller than that, however.

"I found that most people don't have table space, shelf space, so I'll do the sculpture and attach it to a frame and they can hang it," Gibson said.

She said it usually takes 10 to 14 hours a day for about five days to complete one sculpture.

"Typically, I'll just work off of a picture if someone has a specific animal they want me to do. Otherwise, it's just my own deal," Gibson said.

She said even though she's fared well in art shows, she doesn't consider herself an actual artist.

"There was one art gallery that wanted to make a big deal out of what I do," Gibson said. "And I just didn't follow through ..."

A bailing wire bison sculpture Patricia Black Gibson entered into the sixth annual UAACOG Recycled Art Show (Sarah Rose/ Daily Record)

She said making sculptures is one of her favorite pastimes, and she doesn't do it to make a great deal of money.

"It keeps me sane because you're so immersed in it that you don't think about other issues going on in your life," Gibson said.

To purchase a sculpture, call Gibson at (720) 215-2703. She also is looking for used wire to use in her art.

The community is invited to the art show at the Council of Governments, 3224 A Independence Road. Hours for the show are 9 a.m. to 6 p.m. Saturday and Sunday and Nov. 22; 5-9 p.m. Nov. 21; and 9 a.m. to 2 p.m. Nov. 23. There is no admission charge. For more information, call 275-1675, ext. 119.

Sarah Rose: 719-285-5157, roses@canoncitydailyrecord.com or twitter.com/sarahfaithrose