Marijuana plant-growing competitions. Pot-brownie judging. Pipes. Vaporizers. Rolling papers. And, oh, by the way, there’s also a county fair taking place.

But excuse the Denver County Fair organizers for making hay with marijuana while public interest is high.

Organizers said Tuesday that the fair’s “Pot Pavilion” will now occupy an entire floor of the National Western Complex during the event, which runs Aug. 1-3.

“Originally, the pot pavilion was going to take just half of the third floor,” said fair director Dana Cain. “But the response has just been enormous. We’re having to turn away sponsors.”

There will be no actual cannabis on the premises. Plant, bud and brownie judging will take place at an off-site licensed facility, then shown via video at the pot pavilion. But sponsors and vendors will be showing and selling smoking accessories. Entrance to the third floor will be restricted to people ages 21 and over.

Denver-based OpenVape, a maker of vapor pens, is paying $10,000 for a major sponsorship of the pot pavilion. Edibles manufacturer Medically Correct is in for $5,000.

“We’re excited to be part of the first pot pavilion,” said Bob Eschino, co-founder of Medically Correct. “I can’t wait to see the pie-eating contests.”

Prizes will be given for fastest joint-rolling — using oregano in place of weed. Pot pavilion sponsor Medically Correct will be arranging shuttle rides to nearby dispensaries and recreational stores.

The pot pavilion’s $19.95 poster — an image of a cherry pie with a crust cut-out resembling a marijuana leaf — is outselling the fair’s main poster tenfold.

Cain noted that creating the pot pavilion took some give and take with the fair’s landlord, the National Western Stock Show.

“With the stock show folks, some of them are fairly conservative,” she said. “We knew they’d have some concerns. But we got all our ducks in a row. There’s no pot, and everything takes place on a separate floor.”

Steve Raabe: 303-954-1948, sraabe@denverpost.com or twitter.com/steveraabedp