Area hospitals are making the rounds with Central Texas officials to seek support for access to federal funds they haven’t received since 2011.

Matt Maxfield, CEO of Seton Medical Center Harker Heights, said all three area hospitals, including Metroplex Hospital in Killeen and Baylor Scott & White in Temple, are seeking resolutions of support for Texas House Bill 2913.

“This is not an expansion of Medicaid, understand that,” he said. “This is not ‘Obamacare.’”

State Rep. Jimmie Don Aycock, R-Killeen, and state Rep. Molly White, R-Belton, co-authored HB 2913, which was filed March 10 and is pending with the House County Affairs Committee.

The bill allows hospitals in Bell County the option to have a local provider participation fund to participate in the Texas Health Care Transformation Quality Improvement Waiver, Maxfield said.

During the legislative session in 2011, policymakers created the waiver and a payment pool for uncompensated care, he said.

The Texas waivers were intended to help improve assets, availability, delivery and funding for all safety net hospitals in the state, Maxfield said.

It allowed the Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services to pass funds from the federal government to the hospitals through intergovernmental transfers.

“While the waiver has worked well in many hospitals across the state, hospitals in counties without boards for public hospitals, such as Bell County, have been in a substantial disadvantage,” Maxfield said.

The proposed bill would allow local hospitals to access the funds they previously haven’t been able to, with Bell County commissioners securing the funds, he said.

Commissioners approved creating the fund March 2.

Without a local provider participation fund, communities can only receive enough federal funds to cover about 13 percent of the costs associated with uncompensated care, said Dan Posey, Baylor Scott & White Health’s vice president for government affairs.

The creation of a provider participation fund would allow the three area hospitals access to $100 million in supplemental payments, Posey said.

The Harker Heights City Council approved a resolution supporting the creation of the fund Tuesday, and Killeen council members also approved a similar resolution.

Carlyle Walton, CEO of Metroplex in Killeen, briefed Killeen council members on the legislation March 17, explaining funds not accessed by the county can be reallocated to other counties.

“Due to the limited ability of our county to fund uncompensated care, Texas provides a legislative vehicle that is county-specific for hospitals within the county based on unanimous agreement to create an investment fund,” Walton said.

Maxfield said all three hospitals provided testimonies March 26 to the House County Affairs Committee, where the bill is pending.

If passed by the committee, the bill would move to the House for a full vote. Then it would head to the Senate for passage and finally to the governor for his signature before it becomes law.

Herald staff writer Natalie Stewart and Alex Wukman with FME News Service contributed to this report.