Buy Photo Rev. Jesse Jackson and state Rep. Alicia Reece, D-Roselawn, met with Enquirer editors and reporters last year to discuss voting rights. (Photo: The Enquirer/Patrick Reddy)Buy Photo

The Rev. Jesse Jackson Sr. says Hamilton County's glitch-filled Election Day last week is part of a broader problem with voting in America.

Because rules and equipment vary from place to place, he said, access to the polls isn't assured for everyone, particularly minorities.

"Hamilton County's issue reminds us again that we're putting too little time into making voting work for everyone," Jackson told The Enquirer's editorial board Monday. "It's not that complicated. Let everyone participate."

Buy Photo The Rev. Jesse Jackson meets with the Enquirer editorial board. (Photo: Enquirer/Patrick Reddy)

Jackson, a civil rights leader and former presidential candidate, was in Cincinnati to meet with local ministers and some corporate officials related to his work with the Rainbow PUSH Coalition, the civil rights group he founded in the 1970s. Election issues have been a recurring theme for Jackson, who also has generated news and controversy by speaking out about discrimination, poverty and the relationship between police and the communities they serve.

His comments about voting came less than a week after Hamilton County struggled with the introduction of new electronic sign-in technology that caused delays and confusion at several polling places. The board of elections still is investigating the problems, but board officials said last week that the computer may have been excluding some registered voters because an incorrect date was entered into the system.

Other problems included poll workers who didn't know how to use the technology, the failure to use paper backup sign-in books at some locations, and the inability in some instances to print stickers that ensure voters receive the proper ballots.

Jackson didn't suggest the troubles were directly tied to discrimination, but he said leaving decisions about elections in the hands of the 50 states creates a wide range of complications, some of which disenfranchise minority voters. He favors a constitutional amendment that would guarantee the right to vote nationwide and set universal rules for all the states, from how elections are run to voter eligibility.

"What happened in Hamilton County, it's so typical," Jackson said. "We're still schizophrenic about democracy. We tout ourselves as the world's greatest democracy and we do so much to undercut it."

Jackson also addressed other issues in the news.

On the presidential campaign:

"I hope this election process next year won't be as ugly as it has been entertaining," he said.

Jackson, a Democrat, said he likes and respects Democratic front-runners Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders, but he did not endorse one over the other. When asked if he sees a Republican he can support, Jackson said the GOP primary has been ugly and suggested it might hurt the party's nominee in the general election next fall.

"I want all of them to keep running," he said of the primary.

Buy Photo The Rev. Jesse Jackson meets with the Enquirer editorial board. (Photo: The Enquirer/Patrick Reddy)

On Ben Carson, the only black candidate in the GOP field:

"I think it's good he's running," Jackson said. "Dr. Carson is a brilliant physician. I'm glad he's in the process. I don't identify with his politics."

On the "strike" by black football players at the University of Missouri:

Jackson said he's encouraged that black athletes, who demanded the resignation of the school president, are taking a stand after minority students complained about racial slurs and discrimination on campus. Students elsewhere, including some at the University of Cincinnati, also have formed groups and are speaking up more about racial issues on campus.

"The problem is pervasive around the country," Jackson said.

He said black athletes, in particular, often struggle because their college life is so dominated by sports that they end up unprepared when they leave school. He said providing more mentoring and tutoring, as well as longer scholarships to carry them beyond their playing days, would give them a better chance to succeed.

On Ohio's Issue 1, the recently approved amendment that changes the way legislative districts are drawn:

Jackson said gerrymandering, the creation of district boundaries based on politics instead of geography, too often does a disservice to minority voters, limiting them to a few urban districts while white candidates thrive in most of the others.

"Anything that reduces gerrymandering has to be fairer than it used to be," he said.

Buy Photo The Rev. Jesse Jackson meets with the Enquirer editorial board. (Photo: The Enquirer/Patrick Reddy)

On opposition to Medicaid expansion:

Jackson said he marvels at how many poor, uninsured people, especially in the Deep South, oppose expanding insurance for the poor because of their dislike for President Barack Obama, who has championed the cause.

Kentucky, for example, has been a leader in implementing a state-run health care exchange under Obamacare, insuring thousands. Yet Kentucky just elected a governor who opposes that system.

"You've got people without insurance fighting against insurance," Jackson said. "It's an odd couple."

Read or Share this story: http://cin.ci/1iO4bvW