Buy Photo Dr. J.D. Hickey, new CEO of BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee, holds dual medical and law degrees from Duke University. (Photo: Kathleen Greeson / For The Tennessean)Buy Photo

Dr. J.D. Hickey moved to the corner office of BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee on Sept. 1, taking the reins of a company that is navigating change in nearly every aspect of its industry.

Hickey is tasked with running the insurer at a time when reforms, and consumer demand, are reshaping the way nearly everyone pays for — and accesses — health care and insurance coverage.

The Affordable Care Act set out to reform much of the health care landscape. The impact on health insurers is immense. The companies sell more directly to members while trying to work with providers to keep medical costs down.

The challenges to insurance, be it managing costs, talking to newly empowered consumers or thinking about balancing premiums with access to care, make headlines. For Tennesseans the changes add fear to an issue that, for many, is already complex.

"Health coverage is a kitchen table issue for many people. We touch people the best and worst times in their lives," he said. "You make these changes and you will have an impact. ... A lot of it requires a fair amount of self-education. They tend to go to family members. They tend to go to providers. We try to be here for as many of those questions as we can be."

Traditionally, the bulk of BCBST members came from employer-sponsored plans. That is changing. It insured 3.3 million people at the end of September, nearly one-third from what it calls its retail book, which includes the federally run health insurance exchange, Medicare Advantage and a program that allows TennCare members to choose from three managed care organizations.

It's a health insurance era marked by rapid change. The company is "blessed with pretty much every national competitor" as it tries to attract consumers to increasing numbers of retail products, Hickey said.

In the broader health insurance space, there are massive proposed mergers as insurers look for cost savings and efficiency. Hickey said BCBST's 70-year history as an independent Blues plan is a strength that differentiates it from national insurers.

It recently had to re-earn one of its top five accounts, which had plans with both BCBST and a national competitor. BCBST won not only its account but the account from its competitor as well.

"When we asked them afterward what was the difference, there were a few big things," Hickey said. "One was when they had an issue, when they had a priority, we were there. We were there in an hour, and it’s not a regional representative who is going to go pass something back. It’s me. ... It’s Dr. (Andrea) Willis (chief medical officer) if it’s a medical issue."

Hickey, 44, who holds dual medical and law degrees from Duke University, talked to The Tennessean about where he's spending his time, how he wants to compete in Tennessee and whether he wants to stay the course as an independent insurer.

Buy Photo Dr. J.D. Hickey says he’s still getting his arms around his new post as CEO of BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee. (Photo: Kathleen Greeson / For The Tennessean)

You've been in the top job about six weeks. What's your day to day?

I’m still getting my arms around it, to be clear. I try to focus my attention on the four to five things that I can most be impactful for. A big one of those is team building and team dynamics. I’m a fairly big believer that it takes deliberate day-to-day energy to create a sort of connected, coordinated team that is functioning at a high level.

It's no surprise. Any CEO gets pulled into the biggest priorities of their team, and a whole bunch of my time is spent in and around the individual market right now. That’s a market that is still very much in flux as seen by the (Community Health Alliance) news. It’s frankly changing so fast that a fair amount of my time and energy goes there.

There could be about 600,000 Tennesseans eligible to buy plans on the exchange, which is now in its third open enrollment, particularly with the ending of BCBST's grandfathered and grandmothered plans. What are you thinking about this enrollment season?

This is a market we’re deeply committed to making work. I think we’ve got the broadest presence. We went in early, we went in all the counties. We tried to cover all the metallic levels. Anybody that has been anywhere near this market over the (past) few years realizes it has not been smooth. I think the combination of legal, political, operational challenges has been quite severe, and all you’ve got to do is spend a few hours on one of our call lines — it’s still difficult.

People call in with something that should be straightforward like changing a wrong date of birth — something that would take literally less than five minutes on any of our other products — (and it) will require multiple calls both to us and the federal call center and a couple of hours to change. It’s a new program. We’re still front and center, and a bunch of changes can only be made by federal call centers. It makes our average call centers' time and stats on the marketplace lines fundamentally longer and more challenging than the rest of our business.

At the same time it’s getting better. People are getting more familiar with the products.

A whole lot of choice is now left to the individual, which I think is increasingly the way health care decisions are going to be made. It does put the onus on individuals to make sure they get educated.

There are still challenges, and I hear about them from readers. I'm curious about reputation — there's a saying in the power utility industry that you can spend 10 years building a solid reputation, but it only takes one hurricane to wash it away. It strikes me that health insurers are in a similar position, and now customers can shop around.

You’re putting your finger on one of the things we struggle with every day, on an hourly basis. On a macro level, we view ourselves as playing a key role in helping keep cost control, or medical inflation, under control, or to at least a manageable level. At the same time, how do you manage that against making sure people have access to the care that they need? Those will be difficult. You only make those decisions when you feel like you can still put an attractive product out into the market that has great alternatives in the same community that has, at least, good, if not better, outcomes and cost profiles.

But no, that’s tough. That’s absolutely tough. ... What you see here is, increasingly, individuals want more access to control, their own health experience and expenditures. A whole lot of our investments are in things like consumer tools to try to increase the transparency both from quality and cost perspective to help individuals try to make healthy choices.

What opportunities are you looking at?

Maybe not all of our customers are aware that we are fundamentally changing the way we reimburse providers for care … in Medicare Advantage, where we made a big strategic push three years ago. We’ve been very pleased with the growth of that program. We’ve grown faster than each of our competitors combined over the last two years. Every physician is reimbursed to quality outcomes and overall cost management. Within 18 months, hopefully that will be true of 100 percent of our commercial physician network as well.

What comes with that, interestingly, when I think about our MissionPoint Health Partners partnership in Middle Tennessee, our Aspire Health partnership, also in Middle Tennessee, is when we reimburse care differently, the care setting tends to change. More and more of that care sort of migrates out of the institutionalized setting and out of our call center and is increasingly happening, sort of touchpoints are broadening to include technological ones, digital ones or in peoples' homes.

There are big ways care is changing in the background that we’re not just a part of, but we’re a big driver of here in Tennessee.

Is it going to stay independent, or is it going to go the way of many other insurers and be a party in a merger?

There is a long, proud history of being a high-performing, single-state Blues plan (that is a) mission driven, tax paying not-for-profit.

We’ve also been one of the highest-growing and some of the most positive margins in the system as well. We’re not just doing well, but we’ve been doing even better over the last few years. That’s in the face of what we would acknowledge as increasingly formidable competition.

I, personally, am very much wedded to our independence as a Blues plan. We are all about Tennessee. I think one of the things I bring to the role is a deep appreciation for what our employees can do. We have been part of some really big successes since I've been here, and if I think about going head to head against any of our growing competition, even though some of them are literally 10-times larger than us, I’d stack our team up against any of them.

I’d put our employee base and our model up against anybody out there. I think we’re very much proud of what we have. We attribute a whole lot of that to the fact that we’re local and independent. We plan to stay that way.

Reach Holly Fletcher at 615-259-8287 or on Twitter @hollyfletcher.

Dr. J.D. Hickey, CEO of BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee

Age : 44

Family : married with three children younger than 5

Education : Medical and law degrees from Duke University

Experience : Joined BCBST in 2011 as senior vice president and CEO of insurer’s Medicaid managed care organization. He became the chief operating officer in April 2012 and was selected by the board as the successor for CEO Bill Gracey in June.

Previously, he took the helm of TennCare in 2004 under Gov. Phil Bredesen when it was in “pretty severe financial and operational difficulty" because of the "unparalleled impact" the program has on people and their lives, he said.

He spent about a decade working for consulting firm McKinsey & Co. in two stints, one before TennCare and one after.

BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee

Headquarters : Chattanooga

Founded : 1945

It insured 3.3 million people at the end of September. The population of Tennessee is about 6.54 million.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1N9KOtQ