Appearing on the debut episode of POLITICO's "Pulse Check" podcast, CMS acting director Andy Slavitt said the new payment system, MACRA, is intended to make amends for the electronic health records Meaningful Use program and other onerous reporting requirements that have left doctors feeling over-regulated and overmeasured. | Bridget Mulcahy/POLITICO POLITICO Pro Q&A: How Andy Slavitt plans to win doctors' hearts and minds again

Andy Slavitt knows the Obama administration has lost doctors’ hearts and minds. But the acting administrator of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services thinks the new physician payment system unveiled on Wednesday is the first step to winning them back, he told POLITICO in an exclusive interview.

Appearing on the debut episode of POLITICO’s “Pulse Check” podcast, Slavitt said the new payment system, MACRA, is intended to make amends for the electronic health records Meaningful Use program and other onerous reporting requirements that have left doctors feeling over-regulated and overmeasured.

Story Continued Below

Not seeing the podcast? Click here to listen on Soundcloud and click here to subscribe on iTunes.

MACRA aims to “put physicians back in control,” Slavitt said.

Slavitt likened the MACRA rollout to how Apple unveils a new iPhone. “This is our biggest product launch of the year,” he said.

And to make it as seamless as possible, Slavitt ticked off key priorities needed for MACRA to be successful, including the broad ambition that it better reward physicians for quality care, while simultaneously consolidating the patchwork of measurement programs that attempt to track doctors’ performance.

Acknowledging that some providers have been wary of getting locked into the agency’s earlier care delivery pilots, Slavitt added that MACRA is intended to “create on-ramps and off-ramps” that will allow physicians to more easily enter and exit payment reform programs.

Meanwhile, CMS will sunset Meaningful Use and replace it with a new program called Advancing Care Information that offers more flexible standards.

Slavitt also said that the final nine months of his tenure at CMS are “not about jamming through a bunch of pet policy projects,” but setting the stage for his likely successor — who may ultimately be appointed by a Republican president and could work to dismantle the Affordable Care Act.

Atop his remaining agenda: addressing rising drug prices, which are affecting the entire industry but which Slavitt thinks “hits states hardest” because of their budgets.



He said that in some ways the current heated drug price debate resembles the 2010-11 discussion over provider payments. That led to value-based pilots like accountable care organizations to pay doctors and hospitals in new ways. Now CMS is exploring new tools and value-based models for drugs, and Slavitt said some pharmaceutical companies are contributing ideas for potential reforms.



During the wide-ranging conversation, Slavitt also reminisced on the difficult launch of the Obamacare exchanges — with his former company, QSSI, partially blamed for the HealthCare.gov failure in 2013 — and how he went from being a contractor to being CMS’ point man on the exchanges and ultimately leader of the agency, all in less than 18 months.

He also acknowledged that CMS’ army of acronyms and lengthy regulations haven’t always helped the agency communicate its message. “It seems like there’s a conspiracy to confuse consumers,” Slavitt said. And looking back on some of CMS’ initiatives, “nothing was ever done in a way that makes sense for normal people.”

That’s one reason that Slavitt has been stepping up his Twitter presence recently. “It's a great way to listen — and a great way to demystify this place,” he said. But Slavitt knows other federal officials are leery of his social media use; it “scares the crap out of my colleagues,” he conceded.