Offense struggles in first home loss since 2013

Gophers 23, Rams 20 OT What went right — The Colorado State defense played well for the most part. Minnesota gained 413 yards, but the Rams' defense kept them in the game. Punter Hayden Hunt helped flip the field, averaging 49.6 yards per attempt. What went wrong — The passing game misfired, eventually leading to a switch at quarterback. There were too many bad penalties (10 for 86 yards) and the Rams turned over the ball four times. They now have nine on the year. Who played well — Corner Tyree Simmons came in for an injured DeAndre Elliott and broke up four passes and linebacker Kevin Davis had 11 stops, including 1.5 for loss.

FORT COLLINS — Mike Bobo was positive his team would be tested Saturday.

The first-year Colorado State football coach was absolutely correct. In much of Saturday's game with Minnesota, the Rams came up with answers. Just not the last one.

Minnesota forced a turnover on the Rams' first play of overtime, then cashed in its chance with an 18-yard field goal from Ryan Santoso, his third of the game, to silence a sold-out crowd at Lubick Field at Hughes Stadium with a 23-20 victory.

"I thought it was a true test," Bobo said after his team fell to 1-1 on the season. "Like I told the guys in there today, I'm not, and I know they're not, about morale victories. We play the game to win the football game, and the bottom line is we didn't do enough to win the football game."

Advertisement

Much of the afternoon was controlled by the two defenses on the field and offenses that didn't take advantage of the chances presented. Colorado State only threw for nine yards in the first half as Nick Stevens struggled a week after throwing five touchdown passes. Minnesota's offense wasn't exactly clicking, either, as the Rams held firm against the run and came up with key stops to take a 7-6 lead into the break.

Colorado State running back Dalyn Dawkins breaks through the middle of the Minnesota defense for a big gain in the first half Saturday. Dawkins rushed for 92 yards and a touchdown in the game. (Michael Bettis / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

"The motto coming out today was we was going to get into a fight, and every time we stepped on the field, that's what it felt like. A fight,' said CSU corner Tyree Simmons, who had four pass break-ups in the game. "It kind of felt good when we hit somebody in the mouth or knocked a ball down."

CSU limited a Minnesota offense that rushed for more than 2,800 yards last year to just 186 on the ground, though freshman Rodney Smith was able to use the extra session to finish with 108 yards.

While the defense gave the Rams a chance, the offense never found a rhythm. The offensive line was called for three personal fouls for hands to the face, two in a row that pushed the Rams back from midfield back to the shadow of their own goal line. Blocks in the back negated big plays, too. There were also four turnovers, two coming off Stevens interceptions as he finished just 8-of-19 passing in the game for 51 yards.

Colorado State played without All-American wideout Rashard Higgins, who sat with a sprained foot. Still, there were plays to make in the passing game that just didn't pan out.

"I think we should have made a bigger statement with our receivers versus their secondary," CSU senior receiver Joe Hansley said. "They've got some guys now; those DBs are solid. We hit them with a couple of double moves, and those are hard to cover no matter who you are. We missed on a couple of those we should have hit. At the end of the day, we just didn't finish."

Down 13-10 after a Wyatt Bryan field goal, they finally did. Hansley was on the receiving end, but it was a different quarterback behind center.

Coleman Key entered with the Rams on the Minnesota 12 after Nick Januska recovered a fumble by Minnesota quarterback Mitch Leidner. Key's first pass was a touch high for fullback Nu'uvali Fa'apito in the end zone, and the Rams settled for the Bryant kick.

A drive later, Key hit Hansley in stride moving from right to left, and Hansley kept moving 49 yards to the end zone to give CSU a 17-13 lead.

In the final 4 minutes of the game, each team had a little something in the tank it hadn't used all game, with Leidner — who finished with career-highs with 23 completions and 45 attempts — guided the Gophers down the field, capping the 12-play, 80-yard journey with a 22-yard scoring pass to JK Maye, leaving CSU just 55 seconds to work with.

Key (who hit eight of 13 tosses for 91 yards) was able to hit Hansley for a 10-yard gain on fourth-and-8, then caught an open Steven Walker for a 23-yard pickup to the Minnesota 20 with 5 seconds remaining.

Minnesota called a pair of timeouts to ice Bryan, but he nailed the 37-yarder as time expired.

CSU had the ball first in overtime, but on the first play, Key hit Dawkins with a short pass, and he was hit as he turned. It was ruled a fumble (recovered by Scott Ekpe in what really looked like an interception).

"My initial thought was I didn't have possession of the ball," said Dawkins, who supplied CSU with most of its offensive life with 92 yards rushing and a touchdown. "Right when I turned around I got hit. It's life. I can't control that."

Minnesota countered with five straight runs by Smith, getting down to the CSU 1, then on third down called on Santoro to end the game.

"We were in position in fourth quarter to win despite what everything that happened in that ball game with penalties, turnovers and missing guys that were open," Bobo said. "We had a chance. We've got to do a better job of finding a way to finish at the end."

Mike Brohard: 970-635-3633, mbrohard@reporter-herald.com