A judge ordered two Broken Arrow teenagers charged in the death of five members of their family to stand trial.

Robert Bever, 19, and Michael Bever, 17, are charged with five counts of first-degree murder and were in court Tuesday. At the hearing, the judge determined there is enough evidence to proceed with a trial.

They are accused of stabbing to death their parents and three siblings, as well as wounding their 13-year-old sister on July 22, 2015.

In January, the state appeals court rejected Michael Bever's request to be tried as a juvenile. He was 16 when the murders happened.

1/21/2016 Related Story: Appeals Court: Younger Bever Brother To Be Tried As Adult

The brothers have pleaded not guilty to the charges.

Tuesday two Broken Arrow police officers took the stand.

One officer was there when the surviving sister was interviewed. She told them her brothers talked about murdering people for about a year and were buying and collecting body armor and knives.

She told officers she mentioned it to her parents, but said they didn't see it as a threat, more just boys seeking attention.

The officer also said she told them about the day of the murders. She described how her brothers lured her into the bedroom, slit her throat and stabbed her in the stomach and arms.

Robert told police after he slit his sister's throat he chased his mother down the hall and stabbed her. He said his sister made it outside and that he followed her, strangled her and thought she was dead.

Police also said Robert told them he planned to chop of the head of the other surviving sibling, his baby sister, but that he didn't have enough time because police arrived.

The other officer described his interview with Robert Bever. The officer said Robert looked up to serial killers.

According to the officer, he said there were too many people in the world and that if you killed more than one it was god-like. The officer said he described how he planned to murder his parents and siblings, and also said he wanted to go to populated areas outside of Oklahoma and kill them.

The officer said Robert talked about wanting to kill upwards of 100 people to become famous.

Bever Family Murders

Robert told police his parents beat him when he was 13 and remembered thinking he wished they were dead. He said his father dragged him up the stairs once because he left a light on and that his mother slapped him so hard it left a mark.

He said he believed his parents hated all the kids and kept having them for a tax benefit.

Prosecutors say the brothers planned the attack at the family's Broken Arrow home.

Robert said they were going to make two videos after the murders - one showing the bodies of their family, for law enforcement, and the other, with less blood, that could be shown on YouTube.