WASHINGTON — Friendswood Republican Rep. Randy Weber fanned partisan flames with an inflammatory tweet Tuesday night during the State of the Union, calling President Barack Obama the “Kommandant-In-Chef” (presumably he meant “chief”) and a “Socialistic dictator.”

On floor of house waitin on “Kommandant-In-Chef”… the Socialistic dictator who’s been feeding US a line or is it “A-Lying?” — Randy Weber (@TXRandy14) January 29, 2014

He didn’t stop there, calling out Obama for failing to protect the U.S. ambassador in Libya, and for blaming former President George W. Bush for his failures. His tweet about Libya was the only one time stamped after the president began speaking.

SOTU: I never said if you like your country you can keep it. He can’t blame Bush anymore. Will it be his phone and pen next time he blames? — Randy Weber (@TXRandy14) January 29, 2014

SOTU = Sorry Our Time’s Up. POTUS = Poor Obama Trashed U.S. We shouldn’t be surprised. He promised to “fundamentally change US” Boy is he?! — Randy Weber (@TXRandy14) January 29, 2014

Obama believes that fewer give to their country than the diplomats. That’s why he protected Chris Stevens in Benghazi… — Randy Weber (@TXRandy14) January 29, 2014

His tweets drew significant media attention from news outlets across the country, and polarized responses on Twitter. Most chided Weber for misspelling “chief” or attacked his aggressive tone. But the publicity gave Weber more than 400 new followers as of 2:00 p.m., almost 20 percent of his new total.

It also invited vandalism on Weber’s Wikipedia page. There’s name-calling. And the section describing the air-conditioning company he founded was changed to read that the company “focused on producing hot air for the state of Texas. He has carried this tradition forward with him to the federal government.”

The freshman congressman served four years in the Legislature before winning the U.S. House seat vacated by former presidential hopeful Ron Paul, no stranger to controversial statements himself. In past interviews, Weber said that he sees himself as a lawmaker with a strong commitment to conservative values.

“I’m so Republican, my first name starts with ‘R,’ ” Weber told National Journal in July. “I’m so right-wing—well, Randy Weber. You do the math.”

Until Tuesday night’s string of strongly-worded tweets, Weber had only mentioned the president three times on Twitter since November. His most inflammatory charge had been that Obama was “circumventing Congress” with the Affordable Care Act.

He couldn’t be reached Wednesday to discuss his tweets. His office said he was attending a 3-day GOP retreat. In an interview with Beaumont’s KJAC-TV before the speech, he predicted that Obama would go “around the Constitution” to enforce laws that “Congress hasn’t passed.”

During the State of the Union, the president announced an executive order to raise the minimum wage for federal contractors and promised that he was not afraid to “take steps without legislation” in other matters.

That led to mixed reviews in the Texas delegation, with Rep. Mike Conaway, R-Midland, calling Obama “the imperial president.” But Rep. Sheila Jackson Lee, D-Houston, said that the president was well within his rights and should take action to fight gridlock in Congress.