On Alberta’s new municipal affairs minister’s desk sits a proposed Calgary Metropolitan Plan, but a key issue to the region’s booming population remains up in the air, say city officials.

With ever-increasing droves living outside Calgary coming in to work using roads, transit and more, how does a city cover the cost to maintain and add to it?

“It’s something we’ve always had to deal with and always will have to deal with,” Coun. Jim Stevenson said.

Stevenson, who represents the city on the Calgary Regional Partnership, figures if the province sees municipalities playing nicely together, that will unlock further funding.

“There’s going to be more money that will come from the province ... money always motivates people to work together,” he said. “It’s already in place. The province has the money sitting there.”

But waiting with hands out might be a tad optimistic, Coun. Shane Keating said.

Keating noted Calgary council blew through its Municipal Sustainability Initiative funding in one go and it’s not clear how long it will take until more is offered.

It should not be up to the city to find every penny, he said, but until there’s a plan, it is.

Maybe the answer is taxes or usage fees or thinking outside the box, he said, pointing to U.S. municipalities.

“They have things called employment taxes, if you do not live in the municipality but work inside it,” Keating explained. He’s open to exploring it.

Officials from the city and surrounding communities are set to lobby the provincial government to legislate the Calgary Metropolitan Plan.

“It’s working fine except we have to have it legislated and it’s on the desk of the new minister,” Stevenson said.

“So we really have to be patient until he does that and hopefully he’ll do it soon.”

In the works for a decade, the plan will serve as a framework for how Calgary and 14 surrounding municipalities will grow, Stevenson said.

“It provides us with a boot print of how we carry on developing the whole region, from Banff to Strathmore, down to Nanton and up to Airdrie,” he said.

Several communities around Calgary have annexed land and started large developments in recent years, the most significant being a 2,500 acre project in Chestermere, which will essentially quadruple its population of 17,000.

Airdrie has a plan to grow to 90,000 over the next 20 years and developments are underway in Strathmore, Canmore, Cochrane, Langdon, and Okotoks.

“When we have all this growth on our borders, we have a demand for infrastructure that we have to provide but we don’t have the tax dollars for it, those tax dollars are going to adjacent municipalities,” Stevenson said.

Lack of consensus from some communities delayed the plan, Stevenson explained, until former Municipal Affairs Minister Doug Griffiths ordered them into mediation.

Stevenson said the framework was handed over to the government in August.

Municipal elections delayed efforts to legislate it; then Griffiths was shuffled out of the portfolio in December, replaced by Ken Hughes.

Municipal Affairs spokesman Cam Traynor said the new minister is aware of the issue and open to discussions, but added no time frame has been established for a decision.

Chestermere:

Chestermere is looking to grow in a big way.

Four new developments are awaiting final approval, which will effectively quadruple the town’s population in the coming years.

At 2,400 acres, Waterbridge is the largest of the four, proposed to butt up against Calgary’s eastern edge, running from the Trans-Canada Hwy. south to Peigan Tr.

“It’s massive,” said Mayor Patricia Matthews, noting an open house to discuss the master area structure plan was held earlier this week.

The proposed development will be divided into six communities with residential and commercial use.

Schools will be added and several parks.

The land was annexed in 2009, which officials thought at the time would last about 25 years.

“We’ve moved to a master area structure plan because of the size of the development — we want to ensure we fit this in properly with our existing boundaries and we plan the entire area out when it comes to road networks and pathways and drainage,” said Matthews.

Plans call for ground to be broken in 2015, “if everything goes without a hiccup or without a hitch,” said Matthews.

Chestermere’s population now sits at about 17,000 and Waterbridge will triple it, adding another 45,000 when complete.

“We anticipate that will be over the next 20 years,” said Matthews.

The mayor notes however, when the town last annexed land in the late 1990s, officials thought it would be enough for 25 years. It filled up in just 12.

Once Waterbridge is complete, Calgary’s border will end on one side of the street — Range Rd. 284 — and Chestermere’s will start on the other.

But Matthews said the town has no intention of one-day becoming a suburb of Calgary.

“No more than Calgary thinking they’re going to be taken over by Chestermere,” she said.

“The reason we’re putting so much time and effort into this is to ensure our independence and autonomy.”

The demographic of Chestermere is young families, said Matthews.

“A third of our population is under 21,” she said.

Growing at such a rate presents challenges.

“It’s primarily keeping up with the infrastructure,” said Matthews.

“We get our water from the City of Calgary through an agreement, so it’s less about actual water and more about being able to keep up putting pipes in the ground.”

Another development — Edgewater — sits directly south of the current.

“I anticipate they’ll get going imminently, if the snow ever stops,” said Matthews.

Another development — Bayfield, near Hwy. 791 and Hwy. 1 — will comprise mostly light industrial and commercial land.

— Dave Dormer

Airdrie:

Annexing a large, horseshoe-shaped swath of land west, north and east of Airdrie in 2012 should allow the city to grow for another half century.

“Why the city decided to do that size of a land base was to limit the incremental annexations, which ends up resulting in a lot of uncertainty between the city and (Rockyview County)” said Tracy Corbett, manager of planning for the City of Airdrie.

“The intention was a 50-year land supply and it would buy us time to do a number of studies to develop what the vision for that area will be.”

That work is underway, said Corbett, and includes a number of servicing studies along with a master transportation plan for the area.

A master stormwater plan was recently completed and a new municipal develop plan is expected to be finished soon.

“It’s got the growth management criteria in it and we’ll look at what the goals and objectives are, what we’re aiming for, and we’ve built a density strategy into it,” said Corbett.

Airdrie’s current population is about 50,000 and the pre-annexed lands — development currently underway — will allow it to grow to about 75,000.

One of the biggest challenges facing Airdrie is keeping up with the pace of growth, said Corbett.

“Last year, our growth rate was over 8.6% and we’ve been staying very high for very long,” she said.

“In 2009, it was 11%. In 2005 we were half the size we are now. It is mind boggling.

“Initially we were thinking we’d get to about 90,000 (population) by 2040, but there’s a really good chance we’re going to hit 90,000 at about 2030 — it really changes things.”

A number of developers have bought land in the annexed area and plans are starting to be formed.

“They’re champing at the bit because they’re building through their lands in the pre-annexation boundary at a much faster rate than they anticipated,”said Corbett.

“And it takes time to start an area structure plan, deal with the servicing and that sort of thing. We’re hoping to have all our plans and all our servicing strategies completed by 2015.”

— Dave Dormer

Strathmore:

Growing at an annual rate of 7% to 12% through the late 1990s and early 2000s, officials with the Town of Strathmore knew they would soon run out of land.

So in 2010, 18.5 quarter sections — about 1,416 hectares — were annexed in to the municipality.

“We were saying, we need 50 years of growth,” said town spokeswoman Tracy Simpson.

“What we did to prepare for that is upgraded our wastewater treatment plant so we’d have more capacity and we brought in a water line from Calgary.”

And those upgrades were essential, said Simpson.

“We’re looking at serving a population of 50,000,” she said.

“We’re prime for development.”

The town’s population is about 13,000 right now.

A number of area structure plans have already been approved and ground was broken on several projects fall 2013.

“They’re different sizes — one is a commercial development and they’ll be going by spring, just north of Hwy. 1, immediately adjacent to the existing Ranch Market,” she said.

A number of area structure plans for residential developments have been approved, which will be known as Westcreek, Wildflower Ranch and Lakewood Meadows.

Another residential area, Grandview Gardens, is targeting older, affluent Albertans.

“This is for snowbirds. It’s a gated community for adult living,” said Simpson.

“It’s not going to exclude anybody but the people who it attracts will be people who are retired and like to go south for the winter and have their places taken care of while they’re away.”

Well-known Calgary businessman W. Brett Wilson is behind another pair of residential developments, Prairies Edge and Prairies View, and both have already had their area structure plans approved.

— Dave Dormer

Langdon:

Growth in Langdon is showing no signs of slowing down.

“We just approved the last phase of Boulder Creek, which is near the Boulder Creek Golf Course on Hwy. 9 south,” said Rolly Ashdown, who represents Langdon on the Rockyview County council.

“It’s the last of 10 phases and it’s all pretty much built out now that this one is full.”

Another phase of the ongoing development, Hanson Park, was approved last month and another neighbourhood — Mornington is expected to start soon.

“I think that one will be 130 houses,” said Ashdown, noting no timeframe has yet been established.

“It’s market driven,” he said.

“Once the economy comes to a point where there’s desire for additional housing, the developer will get started.”

An even larger proposal, Langdon Meadows, will feature 242 single-family homes, 51 multi-family and 24 mixed-use lots.

Most residents of Langdon work in Calgary, said Ashdown, with the attraction to the area being larger lot sizes and lower taxes.

“Young families,” he said on Langdon’s demographic.

“I would say predominantly people in their mid-20s to mid-40s, a lot of people with kids.”

A new K-5 school recently opened and Ashdown said plans call for a high school to be built by 2018.

“Currently (students) go to Chestermere High and it’s bursting at the seams,” he said.

And like officials in Chestermere, Ashdown said he doesn’t anticipate Langdon ever becoming part of Calgary.

“Just the distance,” he said.

“Calgary would have to annex that far and Langdon is pretty much the end of Rockyview (County) so if that ever happened it would mean that Rockyview doesn’t exist any longer and I can’t see that happening.”

Sitting with a population of about 5,000 Landgon is the third largest hamlet in the province — behind Sherwood Park and Fort McMurray.

— Dave Dormer

Okotoks:

Water — or a lack thereof — has long been a thorn in the side of Okotoks developers.

Until recently, plans called for the town’s population to be capped at about 35,000, but the possibility of a water-sharing agreement with the City of Calgary could change that.

“It was the town’s policy, written right into the municipal plan,” said Steve Hanhart, team leader of the town’s planning department.

“It was more of a growth boundary, we defined an area we thought we could grow into, approximately the size of our water supply.

“Also built into that philosophy was the thinking that the community didn’t want to tie into Calgary (water) for a bunch of reasons, the loss of autonomy and those kinds of things.”

With the population now sitting about 27,000, Hanhart said a shift in thinking could allow Okotoks to growth significantly.

“Recently the town adopted a continued growth model,” he said.

“It signals a shift from the old plan to a new plan.”

As part of the “new plan,” the town has submitted an application for annexation to the province, including just over 2,000 hectares, which will allow for the current population to triple to about 82,000 over the next 50 or so years.

“The second thing we’ve done is received direction from council to pursue a water supply from the City of Calgary,” said Hanhart.

“It definitely is a process and won’t happen quickly.”

Public consultation will be necessary before the annexation is approved, which could take up to a year.

“It also requires we negotiate with the rural neighbour we’re proposing to take the land from,” said Hanhart.

Commercial development, said Hanhart, has been the largest sector of growth, and 2013 was one of the strongest on record.

Like Chestermere, Okotoks isn’t looking to become a part of Calgary in the future.

“The current thinking is no,” Hanhart said.

“The current thinking of just about every municipality in the region is we should collaboratively work together but we would remain autonomous.”

— Dave Dormer

Canmore:

With its proximity to the Rocky Mountains and the City of Calgary, Canmore has long been a popular destination for permanent residents and those wanting a home-away-from-home.

Along with revitalizing the downtown area, there are a few major projects on the go in Canmore, including the redevelopment of a former mobile home and RV park.

“It was called Restwell Trailer Park and now it’s Spring Creek Mountain Village,” said Alaric Fish, manager of development and planning.

“It was a mobile home park and now it’s a medium density, more of a mountain community, which is quite close to downtown.”

Two other developments — Three Sisters Mountain Village and Silvertip — are also underway, which could mean more than 4,000 new residents when complete.

When they’ll be done, however, really depends on the economy, said Fish.

“They’re so-called resort developments,” he said.

“With a downturn in the economy, there hasn’t been a lot of activity on those sites in the last four years.”

Three Sisters Mountain Village is found on the south side of the valley, stretching from the Nordic Centre almost to Deadman’s Flats, and includes some commercial property along with residential, said Fish, while Silvertip is on the north side of the valley and includes a golf course along with residential properties.

“Silvertip is probably in the order of 1,700 commercial and residential units,” he said.

“Three Sisters is more along the lines of 2,500 units.”

Mostly made up of Calgarians, with a sprinkling of U.S. and U.K. expats, Canmore saw explosive growth during the boom years in Alberta and today the town is home to roughly 12,300 permanent and 6,000 semi-permanent residents.

“In the short-term we are seeing things pick up,” said Fish.

“We were really busy in 2006 and 2007 but I don’t think anyone is really desiring to get back to that level of development.

“Something a little bit slower and more thoughtful is desired by the community but it’s tough to control market forces.”

The flooding in June 2013, said Fish, has caused planners to re-think some future projects.

“It’s got us looking at some areas we previously thought were OK for development and now we have a higher level of scrutiny on those lands,” he said.

“None of them were imminently about to be developed, but we’re re-assessing some of that now.”

— Dave Dormer

Cochrane:

Revamping their development strategy and keeping growth in check means Cochrane has lots of room to grow in the coming decades.

“We (annexed land) about 12 years ago that was supposed to last for about 35 years but the way we’re now developing, our density goals are eight to 10 units per hectare now, so even after 12 years, we still have a 50-year land supply,” said Mayor Ivan Brooker.

But that doesn’t mean development isn’t booming in Cochrane.

“It wouldn’t surprise me if this year, once everybody announces their growth rates, we will likely be the fastest growing municipality in all of Canada again,” said Brooker, noting the town grew by 7.4% last year.

“We used to have that recognition for quite a few years and we’ll probably be back there again.”

Along with being “a great place to live,” Brooker said its location makes Cochrane so desirable.

“We’re in the good corridor heading to the west, everybody likes to recreate out that direction,” he said.

“We have a community that now has a lot of housing options, we didn’t have a lot of diversity before which was one of our downfalls.”

The construction of high-end homes pushed land values up, said Brooker, putting the economic squeeze on some looking to relocate there.

“We didn’t have necessarily a great variety of entry-level (homes), and we have a lot now,” he said.

“You can go into any community in town and get into a starter home, condo or apartment.”

And that’s changing the demographic of who is moving there.

“Cochrane is one of the municipalities that has a larger income base,” he said.

“We have a very intellectual community and a very affluent community, but in the last few years we’ve increased the density of apartments. townhouses and even duplexes so we’re getting a lot greater variety — we’re targeting all areas of affordability.”

— Dave Dormer