Companies including Google and the Huffington Post are trying everything from deploying moderators to forcing people to use their real names to restore civility in online comments. AP FILE - In this Wednesday, Feb. 27, 2013 photo illustration, hands type on a computer keyboard in Los Angeles. Companies including Google and the Huffington Post are trying everything from deploying moderators to forcing people to use their real names in order to restore civil discourse on online comment threads. (AP Photo/Damian Dovarganes, File) (Photo: Damian Dovarganes, AP)

We’re encouraged to see that the compensation plan for economic recovery from the 2010 oil spill is coming into focus.

Last week, the PNJ’s Thomas St. Myer reported that $1.5 billion will be split between the most affected counties. A nonprofit corporation, Triumph Gulf Coast Inc., will oversee the payments. Directors, who met in Miramar Beach on Tuesday, said they expect to receive $300 million next year and then payments of $100 million each year until $1.5 billion is given out. That share is 75 percent of all the money in a $2 billion settlement worked out by state Attorney General Pam Bondi as compensation for damage to the economy. In addition to Escambia and Santa Rosa, the other counties include Okaloosa, Walton, Bay, Gulf, Franklin and Wakulla.

We support the yearly payouts for a couple of reasons:

•Having the compensation checks arrive annually will allow for better management of the money. Partial payments over more than a decade can ensure the proper projects get funded, rather than a money grab in 2016. It’s easier to drink out of a garden hose than a fire hose.

•Regular payments will allow Triumph to audit the money as it comes in and gets spent. A tidal wave of cash just increases the chance for chicanery, whether it’s from Washington, Tallahassee, Pensacola or anywhere in between. Since the time BP agreed to “make us whole” after the spill, we have urged that the compensation get close scrutiny so that every dollar is spent as intended in the counties that truly suffered through that summer of 2010 and beyond.

We’re confident the board of directors of Triumph have the political and business clout to make sure the counties get their money. It’s an impressive group that includes Stan Connally Jr., president and CEO of Gulf Power Co.; Pam Dana, senior strategic adviser for the Florida Institute for Human & Machine Cognition; Stephen Riggs IV, partner at Carr, Riggs & Ingram; Bob Bonezzi, co-founder of Bonezzi Development Co., and former state House speaker Alan Bense. By law, they will be able to hire a staff to ensure transparency in how the money is disbursed. That includes:

“1. An independent certified public accountant licensed in this state pursuant to chapter 473 to inspect the records of and to audit the expenditure of the earnings and available principal disbursed by Triumph Gulf Coast, Inc.

“2. An independent financial advisor to assist Triumph Gulf Coast, Inc., in the development and implementation of a strategic plan consistent with the requirements of this act.

“3. An economic advisor who will assist in the award process, including the development of priorities, allocation decisions, and the application and process; will assist the board in determining eligibility of award applications and the evaluation and scoring of applications; and will assist in the development of award documentation.

“4. A legal advisor with expertise in not-for-profit investing and contracting and who is a member of The Florida Bar to assist with contracting and carrying out the intent of this act.”

State Sen. Don Gaetz, a leader pushing the compensation legislation – the Oil Spill Economic Recovery Act – following the spill said at Tuesday’s meeting that “Triumph Gulf Coast represents the best and biggest opportunity for economic development in Northwest Florida’s history.

“A billion and a half dollars is real money,” Gaetz said at Tuesday’s meeting. “It gives us the chance ... not only to expand our existing economy but to diversify our economy. This is tens of thousands of jobs.”

Gaetz is spot-on with his assessment that all aspects of the region’s economy be considered. At the same time, we urge unity among the counties to do what’s best for the Panhandle. This is a once-in-a-lifetime windfall – we hope – and it’s no time for petty politics. There are projects that could benefit the entire region and they should be considered seriously.

Escambia County Commissioner Wilson Robertson echoed Gaetz’ comments: “If you put a big plant down in another county near us, if it’s in the Panhandle, if it’s in the Gulf Coast in the eight counties who were affected, we as a region are going to benefit.”

Read or Share this story: http://on.pnj.com/1EbuQgL