Walter Zelman

October 21, 2014

Editor’s note: As we approach the beginning of the second open enrollment period under the Affordable Care Act, Walter Zelman describes an effort he led during last year’s initial open enrollment period to enroll students in the California State University (CSU) system in coverage. Part 1 of this post provided background on the CSU system and the enrollment effort, the CSU Health Insurance Education Project, as well as a discussion of what worked well. Part 2, below, addresses what worked less well, as well as project results, lessons and policy implications, and next steps.

In addition to Zelman, authors of this post include Wendy Lee, now in a Masters of Public Health Program at Johns Hopkins; Natasha Buransombati, now in a graduate program in Nursing and Public Health at the University of Seattle in Washington; and Carla Bracamonte, now in an MPH program at California State University, Fullerton. As CSU students, Lee and Buransombati served as regional coordinators for HIEP and Bracamonte served as a coordinator, CSU Los Angeles.

IV. What Worked Less Well

Assessments as to what did not work must be rendered with caution. In most cases lack of success may have been due to lack of emphasis or time, to the relative inexperience of student educators, or the failure of project leaders to follow-up aggressively with CSU or administrative personnel.

Campus groups, social media, and web pages

Most striking and disappointing, was the difficulty in engaging campus groups. Many seemed supportive of the mission. But, in the end, most were unable to commit time and resources to the project, even after repeated engagement by project representatives. Most campus groups had specific goals and agendas, and promoting insurance coverage to students was not one of them. More time or resources might have produced more campus organization support, but these were not available.

Similar circumstances and limitations seemed to underlie a broader failure to make significant use of social media and web pages of groups and universities. It proved very difficult to get groups to use their social media sites for project messages, and students did not seem to gravitate to university social media sites in any great numbers, at least not for non-university purposes. HIEP access to these sites and university web pages through university administrators on individual campuses also proved challenging. The Chancellor’s Office would facilitate project contacts with web and social media personnel on various campuses, but reaching those individuals with specific requests or follow-up was often problematic, and efforts of project leaders tended to turn to other more fertile terrain.

Evidence from HIEP polls suggests that, in this case at least, social media did not have a major impact on student decision-making. Nor was it a major source of information. In the pre-open enrollment poll, only 9 percent identified social media as a “trusted source” of information about the “new health reform law and health insurance.” In that same poll, California State Government (65 percent), student health centers (53 percent), faculty/professors (44 percent), and student governments (18 percent) were all selected as more trusted sources. And in the post-enrollment poll, while 22 percent of those who enrolled in Covered California reported learning about their options through social media, significantly higher percentages of students reported learning about their options from other media sources, friends and family and campus sources

“Tabling”

Traditional “tabling activity” also proved to be only minimally effective. Even when student traffic approached modest levels the outreach was more “retail” than “wholesale,” with relatively few students being educated one at a time. Project leaders encouraged student educators to be more aggressive in these activities, but many student educators appeared reluctant to engage in such efforts.

Tabling activity did prove more valuable later in the open enrollment period, when students had more exposure to the issues and were more conscious of the impending enrollment deadline. Tabling also proved more successful when student educators paired up with Student Health Center tabling efforts. Among other things, the Student Health Centers had “giveaways,” a tool that HIEP educators were not allowed to employ.

Support from student government

Student governments are invaluable allies on CSU campuses. They have access to student email and volunteers. They have substantial budgets for staging events and other purposes. For these reasons, HIEP leadership identified them as a target group and expended considerable effort to win their support. A few approved strong resolutions supporting project goals; a few supported project forums or sponsored their own. But overall, efforts to engage student governments fell short of project goals.

At one point, the statewide organization of student presidents considered a strong resolution approving the project. Individually, a good majority appeared supportive. But objections of appropriateness and process were raised by some, and the effort collapsed.

One success was a press conference featuring student leaders from Southern California and CSU Chancellor White. Student presentations were compelling and press coverage in the Los Angeles area press was positive. A short video of the event was produced by the host school and posted on the HIEP web site and other campus sites. Other more personal successes occurred when a student leader from Sacramento got to explain the project at a gathering of student leaders in the White House, and when a group of CSU student leaders met Vice President Joe Biden outside the White House and informed a reportedly very warm and appreciative Vice President about the CSU’s education and enrollment efforts.

It is not completely clear why the effort to garner more student government support fell short. Most likely, it reflects the reluctance of some student governments to venture far from education-related issues. Inexperience on the part of some student educators in navigating student government processes may also have been a contributing factor.

Mass emails

There can be no doubt that the capacity to generate massive amounts of email to students was a great asset to the project. Most campuses sent out at least one email to all students, usually from a university vice-president or the president. Many student health centers, offices of financial aid, Educational Opportunity Programs, and other campus organizations also sent email to thousands of students, often more than once. That these efforts have impact could be seen in increased attendance at forums, and visits to the HIEP website.

Still, HIEP leaders had hoped for even more significant responses from campus-wide email. Most likely, the problem here lies with the volume of email students receive and the low probabilities of much of it being opened. The need here is for email to be sent by sources whose messages students are most likely to open and at times when students are more likely to open them. A modest amount of research into whose email students are most likely to open might have been worth the effort but was not undertaken in this case.

V. Results

A Post-Open Enrollment Poll

At the end of open-enrollment period, the project conducted a second student survey. To produce an accurate sample from the 15 staffed campuses, project leaders selected 7 campuses that closely reflected the demographics of the 15 staffed campuses. Institutional Review Board approval was secured on each campus. In order to capture a representative sample of the survey campuses, student educators were given gender and ethnic group targets for their specific campus, as well as an overall number of responses they should collect. The smallest of the campuses collected 220 responses, the largest 341. Student pollsters were also provided some instruction on how to approach students and request their participation. A total of 1,971 students completed the poll. On all but one campus response rates were well over 80 percent.

With two exceptions, the sample polled closely reflected the demographics — ethnic groups, income, and gender — of the 15-school population. The poll oversampled white students and, to a similar extent, under-sampled students of Asian descent. However, this error should have had limited effect on key poll findings, as these two groups responded very similarly on most issues, including percentages of uninsured individuals.

Reductions in the Numbers of Uninsured students

Poll results indicate a reduction in the numbers of uninsured students of approximately 60 percent, with the numbers of uninsured students dropping from around 25-30 percent (approximately 100,000 students) pre-enrollment to 10 percent (approximately 40,000 students) post-enrollment. (As indicated in Note 1, the 25-30 percent figure is an estimate based on the poll taken in September of 2013. For purposes of calculating the reductions in the numbers of the uninsured, the 25 percent figure is used.) Significant reductions in the percent of students uninsured occurred across all ethnic groups. Particularly striking was the reduction in uninsured Latino students, from over 40 percent to 13 percent.

About 33 percent of respondents (by extension, approximately 144,000 students on the 15 staffed campuses) indicated that they had signed up for Covered California or Medi-Cal. Fourteen percent reported signing up for Covered CA; 12 percent reported signing up for Medi-Cal. An additional 8 percent reported signing up for one of the two but were awaiting final confirmation. In light of sizable Medi-Cal enrollment delays, it is likely that most of this 9 percent signed up for Medi-Cal. Thus, it appears as if CSU student enrollment is about equally divided between the two programs.

Perhaps most striking of all, as indicated earlier, at least one third of students indicated that at least one member of their family had enrolled in Covered California plans or Medi-Cal. (Many reported that they did not know.) How many of these family members were previously uninsured is unknown. But adding family members and students together, the poll data suggests that at least 276,000 (144,000 students plus at least 132,000 family members) enrolled in Covered California plans or Medi-Cal. Clearly, many of these individuals were previously insured. Most likely they switched from a former insurance arrangement to Covered California because of the availability of subsidies there or because their prior plans did not meet ACA requirements. Some may have switched from private plans to Medi-Cal due to the new eligibility rules.

These levels of reduction in the numbers of the uninsured compare very favorably with reductions found in polls taken by the Commonwealth Fund and the Gallup Poll, and with projections derived from simulation projects run by the Urban Institute and a joint project of UCLA and UC Berkeley. Most of these studies found reductions to be more in the range of 25 percent, although the Commonwealth Fund poll found a reduction of 50 percent in California.

Other results

As had the pre-enrollment poll, the post-enrollment poll found strong evidence of the impact of the affordability factor. Forty-four percent of student respondents reported that the primary reason they signed up for insurance was that it was now affordable. Given its limited invocation by the project, a surprising 27 percent reported that they did not want to pay the fine.

Of the 10 percent still uninsured, only 9 percent reported that they did not want insurance. As indicated in Figure 2, a sizable portion of those still uninsured provided responses suggesting that if they were more knowledgeable about their options they might purchase insurance: Assuming the great majority of those now insured want to be insured, this finding suggests that the percentage of students who do not want or think they don’t need insurance, is in the low single digits. Clearly, as suggested above, whether or not students have insurance is more about affordability than invincibility.

FIGURE 2

Seventy-one percent reported having a somewhat or very positive view of the ACA, whereas 29 percent reported a somewhat or very negative view. During the six months before open enrollment closed a striking two-thirds of students talked to others about getting health insurance. Nearly half of students polled reported talking to family members about insurance. Others talked to other students, friends, and other individuals. In all, only one-third of students reported not talking to anyone else about health insurance coverage.

Providing some measure of HIEP’s outreach effort, 50 percent of all respondents indicated they had received at least a little information on campus about Covered CA or the new insurance law. Looking only at the responses of those who reported signing up for insurance, 45 percent said they learned about Covered California or Medi-Cal from campus sources; 22 percent mentioned social media as source of information. The numbers on social media suggest that it may have more educational power than HIEP was able to tap.

VI. Discussion: Lessons and Opportunities

A focus on public state university systems

The success of the HIEP project suggests a direction for other state enrollment efforts: a focus on low-income, college-aged populations in public universities and perhaps two-year community or junior colleges. Willie Sutton supposedly quipped that he robbed banks because “that’s where the money is.” The same logic should lead those seeking to enroll large numbers of young and healthy individuals to these campuses. Given their age and generally lower incomes, the ACA is likely to offer students many benefits, even if they are insured. Barring ideological opposition, their universities, including faculty, should want to see them access those benefits.

Students are gathered in one place and easy to access on campuses, in classrooms, and via email. They mostly trust their peers, faculty and university administrators seeking to educate them. They talk to each other and to family members, such that “word of mouth” works –reaching one reaches many. They are also tech savvy and not intimidated by online enrollment processes. Most of them have applied for financial aid online and already have the financial data they need for application purposes.

As a result, far from being one of the hardest groups to enroll, these students are actually the low-hanging fruit of the uninsured population. Almost all states have some university system like this one, distinct from the more prominent University of California-type systems that are generally populated by students from higher-income families who are far more likely to have health insurance

Two-year, community, or junior college students represent a similar, although somewhat different set of characteristics. Like students in four-year university systems such as the CSU, community college students are disproportionately low-income and members of ethnic minorities. They are also older than four-year college students, with an average age of 25 in California. And given their demographics, many are likely to be uninsured.

Increased age, and parenthood that comes with it, may render this latter group of students more conscious of the need for insurance, and thus even more likely than four-year college students to purchase it. But increased age also renders them more likely to be in the full-time work force (80 percent of California Community College students work), and more likely to have access to employer-sponsored insurance. They are also more likely to be enrolled part-time, making access to them more complicated than is the case with CSU students. Still, they should present an attractive target of ACA enrollment projects. Data on their rates of insurance is not available.

The Main Message: Affordability

The key to enrolling young people is affordability, and given the reductions in the uninsured rate achieved by HIEP it appears that the ACA has made insurance affordable enough. The combination of no-cost insurance through Medicaid and heavily subsidized insurance through state or federal government exchanges clearly has the capacity to attract large numbers of young adults. Success may require some education, and perhaps the threat of some penalty. But given affordable costs, most young adults will choose insurance over being uninsured. (Affordability should continue in California as Covered California has announced rate increases of around 4 percent for its second year. Subsidies will be adjusted as well, meaning many will see little or no increase in premiums.)

What is less clear is the value of emphasizing the lowest-cost Bronze level plans over the often higher value Silver level plans. HIEP chose to emphasize Bronze options, as a means of capturing student attention. There is no way of knowing whether or not that led to higher numbers of enrolling students or to higher numbers choosing Bronze over other metal levels when students actually enrolled. Unfortunately, in the post-enrollment survey, students were not asked what metal-level plan they chose.

Other Messages and Strategy

There are also no means yet, beyond impression and anecdotal analysis, of evaluating the messaging or other features of the HIEP effort. The peer-to-peer education approach seemed effective, but there was not much to compare it to. Both project leaders and student educators remained confident in the emphasis on affordability and, to a slightly lesser extent, the emphasis on accidents over disease. All recognized the enormous value in regular access to classrooms. All noted the difficulty in getting student groups to move from approval to active support, although there were some notable exceptions. All were disappointed with efforts to access university web pages and social media outlets and sometimes unimpressed with the value of those outlets.

Project leaders and educators both perceived great value in gaining the support of student governments, but had only limited success in that endeavor. They saw value in the campus-wide emails from university administrators, but thought they might produce more response than they did. By contrast, they saw great value in close ties to student health centers, Educational Opportunity Programs focused on the lowest income students, and student spokespersons.

Government as Messenger

In HIEP’s pre-open enrollment poll, more students (65 percent) listed California state government as a trusted source of information on new health reform law than any other source. (This question was not asked in the post-enrollment poll.) Student health centers (53 percent) and faculty/professors (44 percent) also drew strong levels of trust. This finding suggests that, at least in California, government — including the CSU system, individual universities, and even Covered California– may have been appropriate and trusted messengers.

While such a conclusion may seem surprising, the surprise may be unwarranted. Most students respect their universities and their faculties. In the CSU system, many are the first in their families to attend a four-year college. They, and their families, are extremely proud of this achievement. Most importantly, they recognize that the state is enabling that achievement by paying a sizable portion of their educational costs. Through Covered California (and the federal government), the state is now offering them financial support in accessing health care. In short, there may be good reason for many to have a positive view of state government and reason to assume that at least some state institutions — such as Covered California, the CSU, and individual universities — may be trusted messengers.

Whether or not such an analysis would hold true in other states is less clear. But it is certainly possible that polls and analysis indicating widespread distrust of government do not reflect the views of students — especially low-income and minority students — on public university campuses.

Costs of Enrolling College Students

Due to a very late start and other factors, HIEP spent only $700,000 of its $1.25 million grant in the original time frame. The post-enrollment poll indicates that approximately 133,000 students signed up for Covered California or Medi-Cal and that at least 133,000 family members signed up.

Obviously, much of the credit for this achievement belongs to Covered California and to the widespread visibility of the ACA and open enrollment nation-wide. Additionally, many CSU students and family members received enrollment assistance from Certified Enrollment Counselors who received payments for those enrollments.

Overall, there is no way to quantify the success of the CSU project. Still, it is very likely that few, if any, enrollment efforts were more cost-effective, especially given the largely young and healthy population that enrolled and the unique value of that population to the insurance pool.

Leadership at the Top

Finally, there can be no question regarding the value of support from the Chancellor’s Office and the Chancellor himself. Without that support, the task would have been infinitely more difficult. Especially given the controversy surrounding the ACA, support from the top and the political cover if afforded was essential to the success of the project.

Nor can there be any doubt about the value of the educational effort undertaken by Covered California. The constant reminders of opportunity and affordability left students far more conscious of choices they could make and would have to make.

Hopefully, those interested in pursuing similar efforts in CA and other states will benefit from and improve on the CSU experience.

VII. Next Steps

Given unspent funds, the project has been extended through the end of the 2014-15 open enrollment period.

Post-project assessments have focused on three potential adjustments in structure and goals. First, consideration is being given to organizational options entailing closer relationships with student health centers. These might include a range of options from closer ongoing consultation on more campuses, to housing of student educators in health centers, to subcontracting with health centers to assume responsibility for campus-wide efforts.

Second, the project will focus efforts on those harder-to-reach students who remain uninsured and on transfer students from community colleges who were not exposed to the CSU project. As indicated in Figure 2, about 60 percent of those still uninsured appear open to purchasing insurance and may find it affordable. Identifying these students is a challenge that HIEP leadership is currently reviewing. Efforts to reach community college transfers will focus on student orientations and on access to classes identified as most likely to be taken by those students.

Third, considering the likelihood that HIEP will close operations in Spring 2015, great consideration is being given to institutionalizing some of its activities on the various campuses. Ideally, mechanisms will be created by which incoming students — freshmen and transfer students — are routinely educated about health insurance, how it works, and their insurance options and responsibilities.

Similarly, there should be places on campus where students can ask questions or collect information about Covered California and the ACA. Conceivably, the approach or close of open enrollment periods could be noted in campus wide emails from university administrators. Efforts will also be undertaken to build some education about insurance into introduction to higher education courses offered to new CSU students.

The goal of institutionalization is linked to the consideration of placing greater focus on student health centers. Without question, they would be the most natural home for ongoing, institutionalized activity.