Look for lawmakers to pass a continuing resolution this week to keep state government operating until the House and Senate can agree on the state’s 2015-2017 budget.

One issue that educators are watching closely is how lawmakers will fund teaching assistants in the final spending bill.

As the Sanford Herald reported over the weekend, local school districts are pondering what it would mean to lose thousands of TAs:

Sen. Ronald Rabin (R-Lee, Harnett, Johnston) said the legislature was busy working toward a finalized budget, but that he was uncertain how it would affect teacher’s assistants. “Teacher’s assistants perform a valuable function,” Rabin, who voted for the Senate’s proposed budget, told the Herald on Saturday. “Everyone’s aware of that. The fact is we can’t afford everything everybody wants. We have a balanced budget mandate by law, and we have a finite number of revenues to spread across that.” Rep. Brad Salmon (D-Lee, Harnett) and Rep. Robert Reives II (D- Lee, Chatham) didn’t respond to calls for comment, but both voted for the House’s proposed budget. Lee County Schools Superintendent Andy Bryan maintained that teacher’s assistants provided a valuable function in kindergarten, first-, second- and third-grade classrooms. “Our board has taken the stance that they want to protect the classroom,” Bryan said. “We see teacher’s assistants as a very important part of making sure our classrooms are served well and are successful for our students.” Lynn Smith, chairman of the Lee County Board of Education, agreed, adding that the Senate’s proposal to reduce class sizes to ease the burden on elementary teachers would not be enough to serve students. “I know there’s been a conversation about putting money back in the budget to reduce classroom size,” Smith said. “But the fact is that not having someone in there for grades K-3 really makes it difficult for teachers to meet all the diverse needs of the kids that they’re serving.” Smith also pointed out that many teacher’s assistants, like Womble, served as bus drivers as well. “If we lose teacher’s assistants, I guess you’d have to go out and hire part-time employees to drive the buses,” Smith said. “Goodness, I don’t know how we’d deal if we lose our bus drivers.”

On Tuesday, the NC Association of Teacher Assistants, Aim Higher Now, along with dozens of parents and educators will speak out against the North Carolina Senate’s plan to slash 8,500 teacher assistant jobs.

The group is hoping to have an impact on the budget discussions before lawmakers adjourn for a week-long summer recess.