By Michaela Gibson Morris

Daily Journal

Federal legislation could broaden access to telehealth services in Mississippi and across the country.

Sen. Roger Wicker, R-Mississippi, introduced legislation earlier this month aimed at lifting telehealth restrictions in Medicare, inspired in part by Mississippi’s success. The bill would allow Medicare patients to use video conferencing, remote patient monitoring and technology to transfer patient data.

The proposed legislation is seen as a way to make telehealth services more widely available beyond special projects.

“We’re supportive of anything that can help us improve access and efficiency of care,” said Dr. Lee Greer, geriatrician who serves as North Mississippi Health Services’ chief quality and safety officer.

Telehealth encompasses a broad range of technology that can connect patients with their health care team or link health care providers with each other. In addition to video conferencing capability, medical instruments have gotten high tech makeovers. Nurses and doctors can listen to hearts, look in ears and throats and examine rashes or wounds from across the state or across the country.

Remote monitoring allows the health care team to closely track patients between visits and coach them on better care for chronic conditions. In announcing the bill, Wicker touted the success of a University of Mississippi Medical Center program for people with uncontrolled diabetes.

“Mississippi has actually been a leader in telehealth services,” said Michael Adcock, administrator for UMMC Center for Telehealth.

Both state and federal legislators have been champions for helping expand telehealth services, Adcock said. Mississippi law requires private insurers to cover telehealth services. Mississippi Medicaid pays for remote patient monitoring.

“We need Medicare to come along,” Adcock said.

Telehealth in action

Even without broad Medicare reimbursement, providers across the state have found ways to put telehealth services to work.

NMMC-Tupelo has partnered with Baptist Memorial Hospital-Union County to share the expertise of neonatologists using telehealth connections. Now the Tupelo-based system is taking the next step making four specialties – geriatrics, diabetes care, pulmonology and cardiovascular surgery – available for telemedicine consultations.

UMMC has 200 sites across the state with access to 35 specialties. The Center for Telehealth’s goal has been to create a collaborative environment so that providers across the state can put high-quality telehealth services into action, Adcock said.

“Telehealth is a very hot topic among people looking for ways to improve health of populations,” Adcock said.

Telehealth is helpful for vulnerable populations like the elderly who may have difficulty traveling beyond their towns or homes to receive care, Greer said. But it also has the capacity to improve access for younger adults, who are crunched for time as they work and care for families.

“Telehealth hits across the spectrum of care,” Greer said.

Telehealth services have the potential to save taxpayers, Wicker said. According to an analysis by the health-care consulting firm Avalere, the bill’s major provisions could save $1.8 billion over 10 years, he said.

“I am encouraged that our telehealth legislation already has bipartisan support, as well as the backing of the medical community and a number of health-care organizations,” Wicker said in a written statement.

michaela.morris@journalinc.com