A Harrington Park woman who developed North Jersey’s leading Asian-American health services program at Holy Name Medical Center in Teaneck was given an award recognizing her achievements Sunday at Montclair State University.

DANIELLE PARHIZKARAN/STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER Kyung Hee Choi, center, smiles after receiving the Evangelina Menendez Trailblazer Award with Robert Menendez, Jr., left, and journalist Soledad O'Brien, right. Choi, a resident of Harrington Park and the vice president of Asian Health Services at Holy Name Hospital in Teaneck, was honored with five other women during the sixth annual Women's History Month Celebration hosted by Sen. Bob Menendez, D-N.J., at Montclair State University on March 6, 2016.

Kyung Hee Choi was one of six women who given crystal bowls in the sixth annual Evangelina Menendez Trailblazer Awards program, part of Montclair State’s women’s history month celebration.

The awards were sponsored by Sen. Bob Menendez, D-N.J., in honor of his mother, who he said organized his family’s departure from Cuba in 1953, during the waning years of government run by the dictator Fulgencio Batista, before Fidel Castro imposed a new dictatorship.

The others who were named in the awards ceremony were:

Paulette Brown, the first African-American woman to become president of the American Bar Association;

Chelsea Collins, a sixth-grade language-arts teacher in Woodstown, Salem County, who is the New Jersey Education Association’s Teacher of the Year;

Michellene Davis, the corporate executive vice president of Barnabas Heath in West Orange;

Siomara Sanchez, a Cuban refugee who is the president of the National Association of Cuban-American Women;

Cindy Zipf, whose organization Clean Ocean Action campaigns against pollution in the waters in the New York-New Jersey region.

Choi, who quit her job as a managing director for JP Morgan after witnessing the terrorist attack on the World Trade Center in 2001, said she needed to find a way of helping other Asian-Americans navigate “tough cultural barriers.”

The program she started at Holy Name, she said, serves more than 250,000 people in the New Jersey-New York-Connecticut area, including 50,000 a year at Holy Name in Teaneck and two satellite locations in Closter and Englewood Cliffs.

Choi said the Affordable Care Act had been instrumental in bringing a higher level of health care to Asian Americans who participate in three programs aimed specifically at Korean, Chinese and Filipino communities.

Menendez paid an emotional tribute to his mother, his voice breaking and his eyes welling with tears as he recalled asking her why she would invite Cuban refugees whom she did not know to dinner, when his family had so little for itself.

“We may not have much, but we have more than they do,” he said was her reply. “From that, she instilled in me a duty to work for my fellow man.”

Email: norman@northjersey.com