Other prominent Catholics in the Obama administration like Denis R. McDonough, the White House chief of staff, and Tom Vilsack, the secretary of agriculture, have also developed strong bonds with the nuns and Catholic relief agencies on issues like immigration. Those connections have helped the administration to compensate, in part, for what has often been a contentious relationship with church elders.

Catholic bishops opposed the Affordable Care Act, rejected the compromise on contraception, and as Mr. Obama’s position on same-sex marriage evolved, the gulf between him and the bishops widened.

“There are a lot of social justice Catholics who were excited by his election,” said E.J. Dionne, a liberal columnist and well-known Catholic who moderated a panel discussion on poverty with Mr. Obama this year. But he added that “more conservative Catholics were skeptical of him from the beginning.”

The result, Mr. Dionne said, has been a “deeply complicated” relationship between Mr. Obama’s White House and the church.

Past presidents have confronted the same challenge. John F. Kennedy, who was Catholic, once remarked during his campaign in 1960 that the bishops would likely be for Richard M. Nixon and the nuns would be for him.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Arthur C. Brooks, president of the conservative American Enterprise Institute, and a Catholic, said Mr. Obama has sought the most sympathetic audience he could find.

“They are looking for allies where they can find allies,” said Mr. Brooks, who also participated on the panel with Mr. Dionne.

Those allies are easier to find when the problems do not involve issues like abortion or same-sex marriage. Hours after the Haiti earthquake struck in 2010, for example, the president of Catholic Relief Services called Mr. McDonough, then a national security aide to Mr. Obama, to help coordinate safe passage through the chaos on the devastated island. The food was delivered.

Mr. McDonough is among the most quietly religious Catholics on the staff, according to friends and co-workers. A native of Stillwater, Minn., Mr. McDonough was one of 11 children; one of his brothers used to be a priest, and another one still is. Colleagues say he can sometimes be seen early in the morning in the White House’s basement cafeteria, in quiet conversation with his priest.

Sister Keehan describes Mr. McDonough as “very Catholic, in the best sense of that.”

As the most senior Catholic in the administration, Mr. Biden served as Mr. Obama’s chief emissary to the church during the presidential campaigns. He filmed campaign commercials aimed at Catholic voters and used a lifetime of connections to help Mr. Obama win Catholics in 2008 and 2012.

In the West Wing, Mr. Biden, who occasionally takes out his rosary beads during meetings or when he is deep in thought, helped the president navigate the complexity of Catholic politics, finding support among liberal church members and helping to blunt opposition from conservatives.

He led the administration’s delegation to Rome for the inauguration of Pope Francis in 2013 and has been a main point of contact with Cardinal Donald Wuerl, the archbishop of Washington, since the pope’s visit this week was announced. Mr. Biden will host a delegation from the Holy See during Mr. Obama’s meeting with the pope on Wednesday.

And despite stark disagreements on policy, the vice president remains personally close to the American bishops.

“There’s knowledge, there’s respect and there’s authenticity instead of cynicism,” said John Carr, the director of the Initiative on Catholic Social Thought and Public Life at Georgetown University. “That doesn’t mean there aren’t profound disagreements.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Biden rarely misses Mass on Sundays, even while traveling. In 2010, he sat somewhat unnoticed in the back of a small church in Seattle one Sunday as he and his wife made their way to the Winter Olympics in Vancouver. In foreign countries, aides usually find a priest to say Mass in the vice president’s hotel suite, a service that is open to Catholic staff members, military aides and Secret Service agents who are traveling with him.

Over a breakfast of turkey sausage frittatas one morning this month, about a dozen Catholic leaders gathered at Mr. Biden’s official residence at the Naval Observatory for a discussion about the pope’s arrival.

There was little talk of policy, several participants said. Rather, Mr. Biden — still in mourning over the death of his 46-year-old son Beau Biden in May — led the group in a nearly two-hour discussion about the impact of Catholicism on his life and offered a tearful preview of the personal angst he would publicly demonstrate a day later, during an interview on the “Late Show With Stephen Colbert.”

“He was disclosing the way he feels about his faith, and how it has meant so much at these different parts of his life,” said Stephen Schneck, the director of the Institute for Policy Research and Catholic Studies at Catholic University.

Mr. Carr also attended the breakfast. He said Mr. Obama’s administration has made a number of what he called “unforced errors” when dealing with issues of faith, especially involving the Catholic Church and issues of religious liberty.

Those mistakes — such as the clash with the church over birth control — might have been avoided, he said, if the president had listened more to Mr. Biden, Mr. McDonough and other Catholics in the White House, who he said understand the concerns of church leaders, even if they don’t agree with them.

“This is at the core of who they are,” Mr. Carr said. “Some of the mistakes could have been avoided, and some of the advantages could have been maximized.”