Egyptian President, Abdel Fattah al-Sisi, delivers a speech during the closing session of the Egypt Economic Development Conference (EEDC), in the Red Sea resort of Sharm El-Sheikh on March 15. European Pressphoto Agency

Egypt’s effort to revive its stagnant energy industry has attracted billions of dollars in new investment recently, but the country still has to address bureaucratic and legal hurdles before it becomes an attractive business hub, some executives say.

“Egypt is a good place to invest because the best time to invest in a country or in a project is when you are at the bottom of the investment cycle…but there is a need to reduce bureaucracy and red tape,” said Patrick Allman-Ward, the chief executive of Dana Gas, an energy firm based in the United Arab Emirates that operates in Egypt.

Foreign energy companies operating in Egypt are also facing a situation in which state-owned companies are acting as partners and regulators at the same time, Mr. Ward said.

“It is a very strange situation to be in where your partner is also the person who is saying what you can and cannot do,” he said.

Egypt was once a mid-sized player among the Middle East’s massive energy industry, producing enough oil and gas for both domestic needs and a large amount of exports. Its energy industry was upended by the overthrow of president Hosni Mubarak during the Arab Spring in 2011. Continuing civil unrest since then has led to a slowdown in oil and gas exploitation activities as well as its inability to pay foreign firms for existing output.

President Abdel Fattah Al Sisi has launched an effort in the past nine months to reinvigorate his country’s energy industry. Among the changes: cutting government energy subsidies to consumers, using foreign aid to reduce debt owed to foreign firms to $3.1 billion from about $7 billion, and introducing new mechanisms to resolve commercial disputes.

The country of nearly 90 million is also letting gas producers push for higher prices, depending on distance from shore, reservoir depth and the costs of the development of the discovery. Some energy companies are now allowed to offset signing bounces–a one-off fee paid to seal an exploration deal–against receivables rather than pay upfront.

Egypt, which produced 5.1 billion cubic feet per day of gas and 675,000 barrels of oil per day during 2013-2014 fiscal year, is now targeting 5.4 billion cubic feet per day of gas and 695,000 barrels a day for 2014-2015.

The initiatives were featured at the center of an economic conference last weekend in the Red Sea resort town of Sharm el-Sheikh. The biggest deal was signed with British oil major BP PLC, which plans to invest around $12 billion with its partners to develop the West Nile Delta gas fields. The project has the potential to meet a quarter of Egypt’s gas needs.

The country’s oil minister Sherif Ismail said the deals showed that Egypt now has “a very good reputation in the energy world.”

“We don’t need to improve our image, we just want to showcase our reforms,” he said.