Matthew Kanode of Fort Collins removes flood debris from around a tree at St. Vrain State Park on Saturday. ( LEWIS GEYER )

FIRESTONE -- More than 100 volunteers got to wear stocking caps identifying them as "St. Vrain Floodbusters" when they showed up at St. Vrain State Park on Saturday to help rebuild campsites and clear debris from some of the still-closed park's more severely flood-damaged areas.

The response to the state's invitation for the public to participate in the cleanup day "was awesome," said Colorado Parks and Wildlife spokeswoman Jennifer Churchill.

Churchill said it demonstrated how much "people care" about getting St. Vrain State Park, which has been closed since Sept. 12, back into shape for a reopening now planned for next spring.

The 604-acre St. Vrain State Park, whose main entrance is off Weld County Road 7 north of Colo. Highway 119, experienced severe damage, particularly in its northern reaches.

"This is my home park," said Duane Braunagel, who was one of those assigned Saturday to rake flood-deposited debris from alongside one of the park's roadways.

Braunagel and his wife, Vicki, who volunteers as a bird monitor at St. Vrain State Park, lives in The Elms at Meadow Vale subdivision a few minutes away from the park.

Another of Saturday's rake-wielding workers was Westminster resident Jeff Carter, who said he's spent several years monitoring raptors there and heard about the cleanup through Friends of St. Vrain State Park, a volunteer habitat restoration organization whose existence preceded the September floods.

Advertisement

Marsha Wood, whose Frederick-area home on Silver Birch Boulevard is about 5 miles southeast of St. Vrain State Park, was part of a crew hosing mud and debris off some of the park's metal picnic tables. She said she decided to help after seeing the story in the Times-Call about the state's invitation.

Jern Landis and her 6-year-old daughter Elisha -- also residents of The Elms subdivision -- were among those helping clean and rebuild as many as 41 flood-marred St. Vrain State Park campsite pads.

"There's a lot of people here. This is cool," said Landis, whose husband, Cameron, is a resource technician at Lory State Park in Larimer County.

Vicki Leigh, Colorado Parks and Wildlife's statewide volunteer coordinator, said 115 people -- ranging in age from 6 to 75 -- participated in Saturday's cleanup effort, as well as 24 members of the AmeriCorps National Civilian Community Corps who served as crew chiefs, and about 25 Parks and Wildlife staffers.

"It's pretty well coordinated," Braunagel said.

There might have been even more people pitching in Saturday, but park officials decided beforehand to limit the day's workforce to about 75 to 100 volunteers who officials thought they'd be able to accommodate and oversee.

Volunteers clean up flood debris near Pelican Pond in St. Vrain State Park on Saturday. To see more photos, visit www.timescall.com. ( LEWIS GEYER )

"We had to turn away about 200 people," Leigh said.

When Colorado Parks and Wildlife announced in late October that it was recruiting volunteers for Saturday's effort, St. Vrain State Park manager Kathy Seiple said the park "is a special place for local residents and the many out-of-state campers who visit year round."

Said Seiple: "We are very appreciative of the outpouring of interest and concern for the park. This cleanup day will give us a chance to get together and make a dent in some of the work needed to get us up and running by next spring."

On Saturday, Seiple showed visitors where a lot of repairs already have been accomplished in the two months following the flood. But she said more work by contractors and park staff lies ahead before St. Vrain can safely be reopened, with a tentative target date sometime next spring.

Many of the parks' ponds and stream channels still need some form of attention, she said, but "the water is still high, and the ground is still saturated."

Seiple said Saturday's volunteers "will help us spread the word" about the extent of the flood damages that still need to be attended to and the need for the public to be patient before the park can reopen.

She said there may be further volunteer cleanup days scheduled in the months to come.

Colorado Parks and Wildlife officials reported in late September that the flooding had caused deep road washouts, structural damage to some ponds, shallow breaches from the river, and other utility and infrastructure damage.

The park's southern campgrounds and headquarters compound sit on higher ground and were largely spared from damage, but the northern campgrounds and areas of the park north of Weld County Road 241/2 and west of Coot Pond sustained varying levels of flood damage.

Although the St. Vrain River didn't create a new channel through the park, officials said in September, Blue Heron Reservoir was filled by floodwaters and Idaho Creek for a time flowed into a breach in the southeastern corner of that reservoir and back out through a breach at a boat ramp at the reservoir's northeast corner.

John Fryar can be reached at 303-684-5211 or jfryar@times-call.com.