Telltale Games recently dropped a trailer for The Walking Dead: Season 2.

However, folks who haven’t worked their way through the original episodes of the company’s intense interactive experience should probably skip over this trailer. The clip gives away some of first season’s twists, which could seriously dilute the game’s surprises. If you haven’t played season one, and you’re a gamer, then you really should.

For those who are up to speed with Telltale’s The Walking Dead video game, the recently-released season two trailer gives fan a glimpse at some of the things the writers have in store for the latest batch of episodes. It also shows that Clementine is a little older and wiser this time around.

Instead of playing someone who protects the little girl from the legions of the undead, players actually jump into Clementine’s shoes this time around. This should provide a somewhat different experience from season one, particularly since so much of the tension consisted of keeping her safe and sound.

Of course, she isn’t the only character from the first season who makes an appearance in Telltale’s latest zombie-filled adventure. MTV News points out that Omid and Christa appear in the trailer for The Walking Dead: Season 2. However, it’s unclear how prominently the pair figures into the storyline.

The Inquisitr previously revealed that The Walking Dead: Season 2 is presently scheduled to hit just in time for the holidays. The Steam release is all set for December 17, while Xbox Live gets the goods on December 18. According to Polygon, a release date for the Playstation Network isn’t available as of this writing.

Check out the official synopsis below.

“‘The Walking Dead: Season Two’ continues the story of Clementine, a young girl orphaned by the undead apocalypse. Left to fend for herself, she has been forced to learn how to survive in a world gone mad. Many months have passed since the events seen in Season One of The Walking Dead, and Clementine is searching for safety. But what can an ordinary child do to stay alive when the living can be just as bad – and sometimes worse – than the dead? As Clementine, you will be tested by situations and dilemmas that will test your morals and your instinct for survival. Your decisions and actions will change the story around you, in this sequel to 2012’s Game of the Year.

Check out the launch trailer for “All That Remains” below.

Are you planning to check out Telltale Games’ The Walking Dead: Season 2?