PITTSBURGH — Taking names and crushing dreams.

The Baltimore Ravens, the underdog nobody wants to see in the playoffs, are up to their old tricks. The Ravens upset the Steelers 30-17 on Saturday night at Heinz Field, a convincing win behind Joe “Cool” Flacco and an opportunistic defense.

Flacco, the new Eli Manning, continues to play his best when it matters most. A pedestrian quarterback during the regular season, he delivered a performance that conjured memories of his magical 2012 Super Bowl lap. Flacco finihsed 18-for-29 for 259 yards and two scores. He had just five completions for 74 yards at halftime before connecting on scores to Torrey Smith and former CSU star Crockett Gillmore, helping the Ravens advance to face the top-seeded New England Patriots.

“You have to play these games to win. You can’t play these games not to lose,” Flacco said. “It’s about playing aggressive football, not having a conscience.”

Terrell Suggs shoved Flacco into position to seal coach John Harbaugh’s seventh playoff road win, matching the NFL record. With the Ravens leading 23-15, Pittsburgh running back Ben Tate, signed earlier in the week, missed a block on the blitz, leaving quarterback Ben Roethlisberger eluding the rush. Roethlisberger escaped and tried to flip a desperate pass to Tate. Tate missed it. Pass protection and catching the ball out of the backfield are strengths of the injured Le’Veon Bell, the play explaining why he was sorely missed.

After Tate couldn’t corral the pass, it landed in linebacker Suggs’ belly. He fell to the ground and pinched the football between his knees, somehow preventing it from touching the soggy Heinz Field turf.

“Coach said it was the best interception he’s ever seen,” Suggs said with a smile. “I think he’s just gassing me up because we got the turnover.”

Flacco capitalized, finding Gillmore open for an easy 21-yard touchdown. Flacco faked the handoff to Justin Forsett, and the linebackers bit. It left Gilmore uncovered.

“They kind of lost me,” Gillmore said. “It was a nice little scamper into the end zone. I don’t think there was every a doubt we would win. As soon as the game plan was put in on Monday and Tuedsay we were ready. We are not here to sit out. We are here to play. If you can’t contribute, you won’t be a Raven. We have a championship attitude.”

News and notes: