A couple of weeks ago, the Herald-Tribune covered a tea party for centenarians who live at the Pines of Sarasota, and we asked readers to tell us if they knew anyone in the area 105 or older. Elizabeth Delaney, believed to have been the oldest person in Southwest Florida, quietly passed away in October at the age of 111, leaving the question of her successor wide open.

Thanks to many who responded, we now have a new roster of contenders, including five 105-year-olds from Bradenton to Venice.

Four people told us about the popular Mildred Hill, 107, who lives at Sunnyside Village, "goes to church almost every Sunday," volunteers at Bingo and is "a great woman to joke around with." Hill may be the oldest person in Sarasota.

But so far the regional honors go to Bill Sheetz, 109, who lives at the Englewood Healthcare and Rehabilitation Center. A former resident of Village on the Isle in Venice, Sheetz moved to be closer to his only daughter, Shirley Farr, according to his granddaughter, Sue Farr Forbes. She and her sister Sandy Sowers also live in Englewood.

If you know of someone in the area who's older than that -- any supercentenarians out there, at 110 or more? -- please let me know by email or phone.

NEVER STOP LEARNING

On Sept. 10, you can get a rich sampling of classes available from a new coalition of local adult education providers, the Sun Coast Alliance for Lifelong Learning. Recently four different outfits -- Adult and Community Enrichment at Suncoast Technical College, Lifelong Learning Academy, Longboat Key Education Center, and Pierian Spring Academy -- got together so they can make their opportunities available to a wider audience.

SCALL's Lifelong Learning Showcase and fundraiser will be held 8:30 a.m. to 2:30 p.m., at the Suncoast Technical College, 4748 S Beneva Road, Sarasota. You can choose four sessions from 32 offerings for $75. Tickets include coffee and lunch, and are limited to the first 225 registrants. Registration closes Sept. 8. You can sign up online, or call the Sarasota Technical College at 941-361-6590.

Follow Barbara Peters Smith on Twitter @BarbaraPSmith.