Iowa’s largest health-insurer will soon offer gift cards and fitness bracelets to members who participate in wellness efforts under a new set of insurance plans.

Wellmark Blue Cross & Blue Shield is teaming with the UnityPoint Health system and Hy-Vee pharmacies to provide the “Blue Rewards” plans. Members will face smaller co-pays and deductibles if they obtain care at UnityPoint clinics and hospitals and if they have prescriptions filled at Hy-Vees than if they go to other providers.

The plans will offer Hy-Vee gift cards of up to $100 and other rewards, such as FitBit bracelets, to members who do things such as select a primary care doctor, get an annual physical exam and talk to a dietitian. Members also can earn points by signing up to have Wellmark documents sent electronically instead of by mail.

The plans will be offered in 31 Iowa counties, including Polk and all of its neighbors. The Blue Rewards plans have “tiered networks” of providers, which are increasingly common in health insurance. Members will pay significantly higher copays and deductibles if they use clinics and pharmacies outside the primary networks. The amounts vary by plan, but they could amount to thousands of dollars in extra charges per year.

Wellmark Vice President Laura Jackson said her company hopes to enroll at least several thousand Iowans in the Blue Rewards plans, which are being sold to individuals and small businesses and will start taking effect Jan. 1. More than 300 employers and 200 individuals have already asked for price quotes, she said. “That’s really good early interest.”

She said premiums on the new plans will generally be $30 to $50 cheaper per month than her company’s standard plans. The main selling point should be that the insurer, Hy-Vee and UnityPoint will be working together to provide care, she said.

The new plans comply with requirements of the federal Affordable Care Act. However, they do not qualify for subsidies offered under the law, because Wellmark is not participating in the government’s online marketplace, healthcare.gov. The subsidies are generally available for consumers who make less than about $47,000 for a single person or $95,000 for a family of four and who are not offered coverage from an employer or government program. To obtain one of those subsidies, consumers need to purchase policies from carriers that sell on healthcare.gov. In Iowa, the main carriers are Coventry Health Care and CoOportunity Health.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1zK2Ppw