Alice Hyde Medical Center, in Malone, NY, has become the fifth regional hospital to join the University of Vermont Health Network.

The hospital unveiled the affiliation at a ceremony on Tuesday.

The affiliation means the University of Vermont Health Network - Alice Hyde Medical Center can now share health care services, expertise and administrative functions with other hospitals in the network.

“In that way we're able to reduce costs, day to day operating costs, and actually standardize systems and processes to make sure that things are done the same way, regardless of what hospital they're being done in,” said Doug DiVello, President & CEO, UVM Health Network - Alice Hyde Medical Center.

The UVM Health Network was formed in 2011, under the name Fletcher Allen Partners.

There are now five hospitals under the UVM Health Network: University of Vermont Medical Center (Burlington, Vt.), Central Vermont Medical Center (Berlin, Vt.), Champlain Valley Physicians Hospital (Plattsburgh, NY), Elizabethtown Community Hospital (Elizabeth, NY) and Alice Hyde Medical Center (Malone, NY).

“A patient who may have gone from Malone, two hours to Burlington, to access a specialist, under this new affiliation and this new relationship, that patient now may be able to get that care in Plattsburgh,” said DiVello.

The five hospitals had a combined $1.8 billion budget in 2014, according to network executives.

University of Vermont Health Network President & CEO John Brumsted says the Affordable Care Act has lead to reduced funds, putting pressure on hospitals to become more efficient.

“One of the best ways to do that is to come together and collaborate and really improve the quality of the health care services,” he said.

The New York Attorney General’s Office investigated the legality of the affiliation and how it will affect patients.

“Would this reduce competition and if it would, is it necessary in order to preserve essential services for the area?" asked Glen Michaels, Assistant Attorney General In Charge and Public Integrity Officer in the Plattsburgh office.

The AG’s office, AntiTrust Bureau and Health Care Bureaus decided reduced competition was better than no hospital at all.

“Many small hospitals without affiliating with larger organizations, can't make it today,” said Michaels. “And what we don't want, no one wants, is for people to be left without good medical care."

Because the University of Vermont Medical Center is a teaching hospital, CVPH in Plattsburgh is launching a residency program next month.

The four residents will also be spending time at Alice Hyde, learning from primary physicians throughout the network.

With the addition of Alice Hyde to the network, the UVM Health Network totaled more than 1.5 million patient/physician encounters in 2015 and employees 12,000 people.