Megan Barry (Photo: Submitted) Story Highlights Sharpen focus on transit by creating Office of Transportation to coordinate departments.

Create ‘complete streets’ to make roads safer for bikers, pedestrians, bus riders and drivers.

Enact technology upgrades and expanded bus routes and make approach regional.

Transportation is an urgent concern for many Nashvillians. We are growing — the Nashville metropolitan area is expected to add more than a half million new residents in the next 20 years, bringing more cars and more traffic.

Planning for this requires a bold approach — not just to manage traffic congestion, but to maintain the quality of life of our neighborhoods and to keep Nashville’s economy percolating.

Addressing our transportation issues to keep us moving and ensure a better quality of life won’t be easy. It requires both local and regional approaches on a complex set of issues involving many stakeholders.

The next mayor will need to lead the charge.

Locally, we can start with improvements to our MTA system: technology upgrades, such as real-time tracking of buses and an electronic fare system, to expanded routes that help riders move around the county without having to first go downtown.

We have to cut costs and reduce transit times for working families who rely most heavily on public transportation.

Another major opportunity lies within and around our major pikes and corridors. My goal is to reimagine our pikes as “complete streets,” which means improving roads while also making them safer for pedestrians, cyclists, bus users and even drivers.

To see the concept of a “complete street,” imagine, for example, Nolensville Pike, but with the power lines buried below new sidewalks, which are placed next to protected bike lanes, and with dedicated high-capacity transit lanes with optimized traffic signals that reduce congestion. That’s a complete street.

Developing complete streets creates good-paying jobs for local residents during construction.

Once in place, studies show, they encourage small business growth and mixed-use residential development in the areas best equipped to handle density.

An obstacle to building more complete streets is the silo orientation of Metro departments that currently deal with pieces of transit.

Though effective at their individual missions, departments don’t talk to each other enough. Lines of communication get crossed and the actions of one department sometimes counteract the needs of another.

As mayor, I will sharpen our focus on transit by creating an Office of Transportation responsible for coordinating the city departments that deal with transit and for working with local, regional, state and federal agencies to streamline the processes for investing in all modes of transportation.

By doing a better job coordinating these departments and functions, we can more efficiently address Nashville’s current transit problems and develop competitive funding proposals for future projects.

Nashville’s transportation challenges are not confined to Davidson County and cannot be solved as if they were.

Half of Middle Tennesseans work in a county other than the one in which they live. It is therefore crucial that we work to develop a forward-thinking regional transportation strategy.

Initiatives such as NashvilleNext and MTA’s strategic plan “nMotion” are opening doors to the development of a thriving transit system for both city and region.

As mayor, I will be enthusiastic about seeing these important efforts through.

I also look forward to working with leaders across Middle Tennessee through the Mayors’ Caucus to plan the area’s transportation future and to secure state and federal resources to work toward that future.

My approach to transportation is rooted in my firm belief that a city that thrives has to be a city that moves.

To keep Nashville moving, this means everything from roads to sidewalks to buses to bike lanes to rail — it’s all on the table.

A world-class transportation system is essential to a vibrant city.

The investments we make in transit will bring enduring returns for our health, our economy and our quality of life.

Megan Barry is an at-large member of the Metro Council and a candidate for mayor.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1HwCY6D