Centene (CNC) looks like the mirror image of UnitedHealth (UNH) when it comes to the ObamaCare exchange business, but the truth is more complicated.

A week ago, UnitedHealth said it was bowing out of most of the 34 state exchanges where it competes, as financial losses pile up.

On Tuesday, Centene said its exchange profit margins are coming in “at the higher end of our targeted range.”

Centene’s low-premium, narrow-network, low-deductible plans are on the opposite end of the spectrum for UnitedHealth’s generally broader-network, lower-deductible coverage.

One might say that Centene, with roots as a Medicaid managed care provider, is winning because it has brought Medicaid-type networks to the individual exchange market. Unfortunately for UnitedHealth, there aren’t as many ObamaCare customers who are willing to pay up for broad provider networks, and those who are tend to be high-cost patients.

Investors greeted Centene’s earnings news by bidding up shares 6.1% to 66.71, the highest since Jan. 5. Likewise, shares of Molina Healthcare (MOH), another low-cost insurer with Medicaid roots, got a 3.4% lift to a six-month high ahead of its earnings report on Thursday.

While UnitedHealth had amassed 795,000 exchange customers in its 34 states at the end of the first quarter, Centene said it had 683,000 customers in 15 states where it participates, up roughly 55% from a year earlier, according to ACASignups.net. The total includes exchange customers of Health Net, which Centene snapped up in a $6 billion merger that recently landed the company on the S&P 500.

The generally accepted view is that Centene has simply outsmarted UnitedHealth, but there’s more to the story than that. There’s growing recognition among industry experts and even the Obama administration that the deck has been stacked against insurers like UnitedHealth and nonprofit Blue Cross Blue Shield, with plans which have attracted sicker customers.

Customer risk was supposed to be balanced among all insurers through ObamaCare’s permanent risk-adjustment program that transfers funds from carriers which attract low-cost customers to those that are a magnet for the sick. But risk-adjustment isn’t working as intended for a variety of reasons, including the failure to consider customer use of prescription drugs in weighing an insurer’s risk.

To the extent the rules shift, the changes may take some of the wind out of the sails of Centene.

One potential red flag comes from New Hampshire, where Minuteman Health said it plans to hike 2017 ObamaCare premiums by 45% — if it faces a $3,000-per-customer risk-adjustment charge, as it expects. HHS will report risk-adjustment results for 2015 on June 30. That may also be a big day for Centene.

Another part of the Centene story is more complicated than it appears. The company, through its Ambetter plans, is the lowest-cost insurer in places like Seattle, Miami, Atlanta and Jackson, Miss. But its pricing decisions don’t always seem to be in the best interest of customers.

While the cheapest annual bronze-plan premium (before subsidies) rose about $250 in Mississippi for a $25,000-earner this year, the subsidy fell $300, yielding a $550 increase. That came about because the subsidies are tied to the cost of the second-cheapest silver plan, and Centene cornered the market on low-cost plans in a number of states this year by attaching bronze-like deductibles ($5,500 and $6,500) to silver plans.