Syracuse's Brandon Reddish intercepts a pass intended for Clemson's Mike Williams during the first half of Saturday night's game in Clemson. (AP Photo/Richard Shiro)

Left tackle Isaiah Battle suited up but did not play against Syracuse during Clemson's 16-6 victory Saturday night, due to disciplinary actions, the school announced in the press box shortly after kickoff. The reason was not disclosed during the game.

Kalon Davis moved into Battle's spot from right tackle, which was filled by usual right guard Reid Webster, whose spot was filled by Eric Mac Lain, making his first career start in his 34th career game.

Mac Lain rotated in with freshman Tyrone Crowder, logging his first action outside of previous games against S.C. State and N.C. State.

As for Battle, the best pro prospect among Clemson's offensive line, this is his second missed start due to off-field issues. He sat out the Tigers' first drive at Florida State for showing up late to a team meeting.

Last year, Battle was suspended for a full game for punching a North Carolina State player.

Too close to call

On a second-and-goal play in the third quarter, quarterback Cole Stoudt delivered a swing pass to Adam Humphries, who tried to tiptoe the sideline on his way past the pylon.

The side judge ruled Humphries foot touched the sideline at the 2-yard-line, and when the play was reviewed, only two replay angles showed no conclusive evidence of whether he stayed in bounds. The ruling on the field stood, but was not confirmed, and Clemson settled for an 18-yard Ammon Lakip field goal, tying the game at 6.

Losing their grip

Entering the game with just six turnovers on the year - tied for ninth-lowest in the nation - Clemson coughed it up four times Saturday.

The most painful was on a well-called misdirection play, when Stoudt pitched to C.J. Davidson on what appeared to be an easy touchdown run - except Davidson mishandled the grab inside the Orange 15-yard-line, and was unable to recover or push the ball out of bounds before Syracuse jumped on the football.

With 1:12 before halftime, Stoudt was stripped by linebacker DyShawn Davis on the Clemson 25-yard-line, leading to an unexpected 50-yard field goal before the half by Orange freshman kicker Cole Murphy.

Another pickoff

Senior safety Robert Smith made his fourth career interception, and second of the year, when he dove to pick off A.J. Long in the second quarter and gave Clemson excellent field position on the Syracuse 33-yard-line. However, the Tigers didn't cash in when Davidson fumbled.

Just punt to start

Eight opposing opening drives, eight three-and-outs administered for the Clemson defense. The yardage on those brief starting drives: minus-4, minus-16, minus-4, minus-4, 0, 2, minus-9 and 0 yards.

That's a cumulative total of minus-35 yards on 24 plays.

Generous gift

Clemson announced Saturday evening a donation of $2.5 million toward its ongoing facility upgrades, courtesy of Clemson graduate and trustee Leon J. "Bill" Hendrix, Jr. and his family.

Hendrix served as student body president in 1963, received a Clemson Medallion in 2009, and was chairman of the board of trustees for three terms from 2003-09. He has served on the board since 1995.

His family includes wife Pam and their children Jill, Joy, Holly and Jim, all Clemson graduates. Clemson is working on projects involving Memorial Stadium suites, Doug Kingsmore Stadium additions and a Littlejohn Coliseum rebuild.

"Trustee Hendrix, his wife and children continue to step up in leadership and love for Clemson, setting a benevolent example for others," university president Jim Clements said in a statement. "It is with deep gratitude that we accept this gift that will improve Clemson forever."