Top pair: Anthony Darmanin steers The Cleaner to victory in the Travis Harrison Cup. Photo: Getty Images

Longford trainer Mick Burles is aiming high after The Cleaner returned to his best form to win the Travis Harrison Cup (1600 metres) at Moonee Valley on Saturday.

The star Tasmanian galloper is a noted leader and didn't have things his own way early before finding the lead. But from then on he had the race under control.

"I was in a bit of a pickle early and then had to give him a snag back to go around them," jockey Anthony Darmanin said.

"I gave him one at the 600 metres and he really quickened, and I thought from there, they'd have to be pretty good to get me."

Advertisement

The Cleaner ($3.20) gave nothing else a chance in the straight, going to the line strongly to beat Sadaqa ($21) by three lengths, with Fulgur ($5) 2¾ lengths away in third placing.

Burles said the immediate aim for The Cleaner was the $150,000 Winter Championship Final at Flemington on July 12, before looking to the spring.

"I'll look at a few of the early weight-for-age races [over the spring] like the Makybe Diva for him," Burles said.

"I'd like to get a group race next to his name because for a horse like him, I think he deserves one, and long range I'd like to have a go at the Emirates Stakes on the last day [of the spring carnival] at Flemington."

Stephen Brown's Melbourne and Darwin stable set-up continued its impressive recent run, when Kievann showed plenty of grit to win the Essendon Nissan Handicap (1200 metres).

Brown has now won a race in Melbourne on three successive Saturday's and last weekend added a double at Fanny Bay to the win of The Thief at Flemington.

Brown said he had been a little concerned that Kievann ($8.50), which had won at Moonee Valley two weeks ago, would have to race on the speed from a wide gate, but after racing outside the leader Hard Stride ($4.60), he fought the race out strongly, to win by a half head.

"Because he drew out a little bit, he had to go forward, but I was worried he might be too close. But at Moonee Valley it's alright I suppose," Brown said.

Brown only took over the horse in the middle of his previous preparation and had been unsure what level he might measure up to. But after Kievann's past two wins, Brown might even consider a spring campaign.

"I might possibly put him away for the spring; he might have a nice race in him, particularly if we can find one at Moonee Valley, which he seems to like."

After failing to win in her first seven starts, the addition of blinkers has turned around the career of Street Allure and the filly, which had been entered for next week's Inglis Great Southern Sale, made it three wins in a row after narrowly taking out the Eurozone Handicap (1200 metres).

Street Allure ($4.80 favourite) and Longchamp Belle ($6.50) had a great battle up the straight with only a nose separating them on the line.

"Without blinkers on she probably would have given up, but with them on it's really helped her," said Jeremy Rogers, racing manager for Street Allure's trainer Darren Weir.

Street Allure's rider Michele Payne said she thought she had won, but was relieved to see Street Allure's number go up as the win meant more than usual as her brother Stephen, who works for Weir, is the filly's strapper.

"It's great to get these opportunities from Darren on nice horses and to win in town with Steve is a special great feeling," Payne said.

Much-travelled New Zealander Corey Parish gave himself an early 25th birthday, riding Warwarick ($31) to victory in the Advanced Mailing Handicap (1600 metres), giving him his first metropolitan success in Melbourne.

Parish who has ridden successfully over jumps in New Zealand, rode eight winners in Queensland as an apprentice and a winner in England before settling in Australia last year.

"I was always going to move over and kept putting it off, but it's been a great success. I'm here to stay now," said Parish, who is based at Seymour.