Alan Drake and Dave McAllister accept from Florence Chamber of Commerce Vice President Bruce Jensen the honor of Business of the Year. ( DC Spencer / Daily Record )

Jake Jacobsen and Fran Black named jointly as Florence Chamber of Commerce Person of the Year. (DC Spencer / Daily Record)

The title of the Florence Chamber of Commerce's "Night of Stars" aptly predicted the evening's recognition ceremony Friday at the Sumo Golf Club with 160 people present for the event.

The chamber, the City of Florence, the Florence Police Department, the Florence-Penrose School District and other local establishments highlighted several luminaries in their respective services.

The chamber honored both Fran Black and Jake Jacobson as Person of the Year, noting each one's numerous talents, willingness and creativity on behalf of Florence. Black summarized the remarks of several when accepting the award.

"Collaboration," Black said of the Florence community. "That's what makes it a great place to live for me."

Kwik Stop owners Dave McAllister and Alan Drake accepted the chamber's award for Business of the Year. Chamber Vice President Bruce Jensen said the designation is voted upon by all the chamber members, calling the Kwik Stop "a cornerstone on the eastern end of town."

"We appreciate this a lot," McAllister said. "We're really proud to be part of the community."

John and Carol Fox were the first recipients of the chamber's new Legacy Award presented by Bob Wood. The couple was honored for the contributions they made through the years to Florence as gatherers of history, supporters of drama and creative events, the Florence swimming pool, the Pioneer Museum, and countless other causes.

Advertisement

The Foxes were unable to attend the event, but their daughter, Peg Piltingsrud, accepted the honor on their behalf, adding that the legacy of their 52 years in the community would be, "Veni, vidi, vici," Latin for "I came, I saw, I conquered."

Fremont School District's Steven Clayton named Glenette Esquibel Employee of the Year for her 27 years as a paraprofessional for elementary special education.

"It's nice to know that my colleagues think that much of me," Esquibel said. "I'm retiring in May so this is a great honor."

Educator of the Year Glenette Esquibel accepts the honor from Florence Chamber of Commerce President Allen Knisley and Florence-Penrose School District's Steven Clayton. (DC Spencer / Daily Record)

Named as Employee of the Year for the Florence Police Department were Administrative Assistant Nancy Barth and Lt. Mike Ingles, both of whom, said Chief Michael DeLaurentis, were key to the operation of the police department.

"I couldn't do my job without either one of them," DeLaurentis said. Barth and Ingles each have 24 years on the FPD.

Senior Center President Darlene Luckett acknowledged Edwin Hill for his many hours and talents shared with the Center.

Dick Upton, president of the Pioneer Museum, recognized Marty Lamm for her volunteer efforts at the museum, categorizing, organizing, displaying and teaching.

Also recognized in the Accounting for Community Excellence (ACE) program were high school students Makayla Knapp and Devon Crank. Both were congratulated on their volunteerism, leadership and problem-solving skills.

Florence City Manager Mike Patterson presented the award for the City Employee of the year.

"This is the first year the award was done like this," Patterson said. The chamber did not make the selection, but asked Patterson to do so.

Patterson said he thought of "people who don't get a lot of attention, but just get griped at" when water lines break or roads need to be plowed. Receiving the award in recognition of their leadership were Public Works Department Director Sam Elston and Martin Lancaster.

Master of Ceremonies and Florence Mayor Pro-tem Mel Edwards commended the award recipients and others in attendance Friday evening.

"What's the common denominator among all these people?" he asked. "They're all volunteers." Each one had a mission and end goal in mind, and succeeded with support from their friends and family, their own hard work and their volunteering hearts.

"We're celebrating enthusiasm, commitment and sheer, hard work," Edwards said.

Guest speakers Vanessa Martinez with Pueblo Marketing and Urban Development, and Wade Broadhead, Florence City Planner also touched on the community connection.

"Chambers of Commerce are essential to success of urban renewal projects," Martinez said. "As these developments take place, your businesses will benefit." She encouraged the evening's attendees to stay strong, stay connected and to continue working for the good of the community.

Broadhead, who moved to Florence from Pueblo last August, commended the community.

"In the whole region of Southern Colorado, you are the up-and-coming town," he said. "You guys are known now regionally as the antique capital of Colorado."

Event director Susan Frushour said she was pleased with the turn-out for this year's new approach to their annual awards.

"The whole idea was to keep it low-key," Frushour said. Rather than offering a formal dinner, organizers asked area businesses to donate food for the all-you-can-eat buffet. Goodie bags for every attendee contained a variety of coupons for such things as discounts on meals, oil changes and window washing.

This year was also the first time the event was at the Sumo Golf Club south of Florence. In addition, 11 tables showcased businesses, six of which were designated 501c3, Frushour said, noting that "volunteering is the heart of the community."