Investors may expect hedge-fund-like “alternative” mutual funds to produce decent returns that aren’t tied to the fate of stocks or bonds, but some of these funds have failed to do so over the past five years, reports WSJ.com’s Wealth Adviser. Since the financial crisis, these funds have become much more popular, but investors should weigh their mixed record. Long/short equity funds, for example, gained 6.3% annually over the past five years, but they typically move in the same direction as the stock market. Managed-futures funds showed low correlation to the S&P 500′s monthly direction, but over the past five years, they gained only 1% a year on average. “Too many advisers have started to get the idea that the alternative investments are ways to magically remove risk from a portfolio or to get them very low correlations with stock and bond returns,” says Liam Hurley, chief investment officer of Summit Financial Strategies.

MANAGING THE MONEY:

In the search for yield, remain skeptical. So-called direct-lending opportunities, such as private pools of real-estate debt and hedge funds that have loans to small businesses, might dazzle investors with annual income of 8%, but investors should be skeptical, writes Wall Street Journal columnist Jason Zweig. For many of these funds, liquidity is an issue. PriLend Funding Group, an unregistered fund run by an affiliate of accounting firm Rizzo, DiGiacco, Hern & Baniewicz, for example, doesn’t allow investors to make withdrawals for two years. To get their money out, they need to either wait for the loans to be paid off or for money from new investors to cover their withdrawals. There are alternatives however for income-hungry investors. “You could also simply wait; once rates begin to rise, the income on conventional bonds will go up too,” Mr. Zweig writes.

Goldman to offer low-cost ETFs. Goldman Sachs Group Inc. plans to cap at low levels the fees associated with a new line of exchange-traded funds as it seeks to capture some of the growing popularity around those products, Bloomberg writes. In a regulatory filing cited by Bloomberg, Goldman says it will waive some of its management fee and limit expenses for at least the first year of the large-cap version of its ActiveBeta ETFs, making the expense ratio 0.09%. It is also covering expenses on five other ETFs it is launching. The firm plans to start issuing the funds this year.

Some target-date funds add ‘alt’ mutual funds. In an effort to steady performance, some sponsors of target-date retirement funds have added hedge-fund-like “alternative” mutual funds to their portfolios, reports WSJ.com’s Wealth Adviser. So far, this is appearing mostly at small firms, such as Manning & Napier Inc., Principal Financial Group and AllianceBernstein LP, as they look to “differentiate themselves and find a place in a market that is dominated by just a few players,” says Lori Lucas, defined-contribution practice leader at investment consulting firm Callan Associates Inc. Bigger players like Fidelity Investments and Vanguard Group haven’t followed suit.

THE BUSINESS:

Betterment readies robo retirement plans. Betterment LLC plans to start offering businesses an online-only 401(k) plan featuring 13 low-cost stock and bond exchange-traded funds from companies such as Vanguard Group and BlackRock Inc., reports Wealth Adviser at WSJ.com. Participants in the company retirement plans will receive the same customized advice Betterment provides to investors who use its Web-based services for their individual retirement accounts and brokerage accounts. Betterment Chief Executive Jon Stein said it decided to start offering these plans to take advantage of “a huge market” even though industry analysts describe 401(k) record keeping as a low-margin business.

Broker-dealer Next Financial on the sale block. Next Financial Group Inc., an independent broker-dealer with 739 affiliated registered representatives and advisers, is for sale, InvestmentNews reports, citing brokerage executives with knowledge of the matter. Potential suitors had been circling the firm over the summer, the publication said. “Any offer that was deemed appropriate by the board would be presented to the shareholders,” Next Financial President Barry Knight Mr. Knight was quoted as saying. “At this time, no such offer has been presented to us.”

Cetera cuts head of wealth management. Cetera Financial Group quietly parted ways with Steve Dunlap, the head of its wealth management division, two months ago, Financial Planning says. Mr. Dunlap, who joined the firm two years ago from Bank of New York Mellon, told the publication he was cut due to Cetera’s reorganization under its parent company, RCS Capital Corp., which acquired Cetera last year. “Cetera explained at the time that this action was taken that it was simply reorganization and an elimination of wealth management at the firm,” Mr. Dunlap said. “My view is, ‘I don’t understand that move.’ “Cetera declined to discuss the details of Mr. Dunlap’s dismissal.

Follow Wealth Adviser at WSJ.com on Twitter: @dowjonesadviser

The Wealth Adviser briefing covers topics of special interest to wealth managers, financial planners and other advisers. It’s delivered to subscribers by email each workday morning. If you haven’t done so already, you can sign up for it here: http://on.wsj.com/WealthAdviserSignup.

Please send tips, suggestions or other comments to Michael Wursthorn at michael.wursthorn@wsj.com or Wealth editor Karen Damato at karen.damato@wsj.com.