CLEVELAND, Ohio -- Punch Bowl Social swung its doors open on Saturday. A game of billiards immediately followed.

Well, actually a lot of other things also ensued -- NBA Jam, bowling, ping pong, shuffleboard, ski ball and, of course, Ms. Pacman. They were accompanied by a wide-ranging drink and food menu.

You see, Punch Bowl Social is part restaurant, part bar, part bowling alley and part barcade. In other words, there are a lot of parts to this two-level complex, which boasts four bars, a restaurant, eight lanes of bowling, video, foosball and other games.

The 27,000-square-foot "eatertainment" concept joined a growing list of bars and restaurants that have sprung up in the $750 million Flats East Bank development along the east bank of the Cuyahoga River.

The Denver-based Punch Bowl, which is aiming for millennials, features a pastiche of unlikely styles – one that owner Robert Thompson calls 'dirty modern.' In other words, PBS shoehorns mid-century modern, industrial, Victorian and mountain lodge styles into one room.

The circular bar, for instance, looks like some mid-century modern hang out you might see in an old airport. Except for that chandelier hanging over the bar that looks like it was assembled out of antlers – in other words, the whole 'mountain lodge' thing.

The mid-century touches are reflected in the overstated booths and diner-themed décor and menu of PBS, which rolls out new twists on old standards, from sandwiches to chicken & waffles to soups and salads. (PBS will also serve breakfast items until 3 a.m. some nights, along with a Happy Hour that runs 3-6 p.m. Monday-Friday.)

The drink lists rolls out a wide range of elixirs, from alcoholic milkshakes to juices to punches and classic cocktails and new mixes. Many of the drinks will be served in jars.

"The jars thing is a nod to my southern roots," says Thompson, a Mississippi native. "It's also a different twist that should appeal to our crowd, which is looking for more than just another bar or restaurant."

Punch Bowl will open its rooftop patio in the spring.

The opening of its neighbor across the street is more in doubt: The spot slated to open as a Toby Keith bar-restaurant continues to sit empty amid a suspension of construction.

Punch Bowl is the fifth operator to open in the second phase in the area. It follows Alley Cat Oyster House, Big Bang, FWD and the Crop entertainment complex, which features three connected venues.