Frustrated by their inability to repeal the Affordable Care Act and unable to produce a conservative alternative to replace it, House Republicans are moving two bills to repeal small but important provisions of the law — a tax on medical device manufacturers and an independent board to clamp down on out-of-control Medicare spending. The two bills would harm the federal budget and do nothing to help consumers, but were approved by the House Ways and Means Committee and are expected to pass the House on Thursday.

The Affordable Care Act imposes a modest 2.3 percent tax on revenues from sale of medical devices in this country, to be paid by the manufacturers or importers. The tax applies to big-ticket devices like M.R.I. scanners, X-ray machines, artificial joints and pacemakers, but not to consumer items like eyeglasses, contact lenses or hearing aids. Repealing the tax would reduce revenues, and thus increase federal deficits, by an estimated $24.4 billion over the next 10 years. The bill provides no way to replace the lost revenue.

Photo

Industry spokesmen claim the tax, which took effect in 2013, is thwarting innovation by absorbing funds that could pay for research. And they say it will drive some companies to move production facilities abroad. But independent analysts have shown such claims to be wildly exaggerated. The device industry appears to be thriving from increased business generated by the reform law and, like other industries benefiting from the law (insurers and drug makers), it ought to pay to help support it.

With almost two-thirds of the House co-sponsoring the bill to repeal the tax, it is virtually certain to pass and be sent to the Senate, where four-fifths of the members expressed support for repealing the tax in 2013. President Obama ought to veto this handout to an industry that deserves no special privileges.

The bill to repeal the Independent Payment Advisory Board, co-sponsored by more than half of the House’s members, is also expected to pass. The board, to be composed of nongovernmental experts, is meant to act as a brake on excessive spending in the Medicare program. If per capita spending in Medicare exceeds specified targets, the board, whose members have not yet been appointed by the president, must recommend changes (most likely cuts in payments to health care providers) that will become law unless Congress finds alternative, equal savings.

The board has been vilified by conservative critics with outlandish charges that it will ration care, tell patients what treatments they can receive and disrupt doctor-patient relationships. In reality, the board is prohibited by law from making any recommendations to ration care, restrict benefits, limit eligibility, or increase premiums or cost-sharing. Its primary role is to stiffen Congress’s spine by insulating it from powerful health care lobbies and forcing it to act when Medicare spending runs off the rails. If a bill to get rid of the board reaches his desk, Mr. Obama should veto it as well.