Former state’s attorney Glenn Ivey, center, speaking at the 4th Congressional District candidates forum at Bowie State University on Tuesday night. Seated to Ivey's left is former Maryland lieutenant governor Anthony Brown (D). To Ivey’s right is Republican Robert Broadus. (Mark Gail/For The Washington Post)

The Democratic candidates for Maryland’s 4th Congressional District race are almost indistinguishable in the policies they support and the issues they champion.

Expanding the Affordable Care Act is crucial. Students need more career options beyond attending a four-year institution. Voters are tired of Washington gridlock. And struggling middle-class families need more help from their representatives on Capitol Hill.

At a candidate forum Tuesday night at Bowie State University, voters got a glimpse of how the field of seasoned veterans and political newcomers will try to differentiate themselves in the battle to succeed Rep. Donna F. Edwards (D), who is running for the U.S. Senate.

From the unemployed statistician to Maryland’s former lieutenant governor, each congressional hopeful sprinkled his or her platform with passionate personal narratives in an effort to draw in some of the approximately 75 attendees.

“In 2014, I lost when I ran for governor,” said former lieutenant governor and state delegate Anthony G. Brown (D), 54, who is billed as the primary front-runner in some candidate polls.

Del. Joseline Peña-Melnyk (D), right, and former Maryland lieutenant governor Anthony Brown, center, talked with voters after the 4th Congressional District candidates forum held at Bowie State University on Tuesday night. (Mark Gail/For The Washington Post)

“People said, ‘Why are you running for Congress?’ And I thought about the lesson my father taught me. . . . Sometimes you’re going to get knocked down, but if you believe in what you do, you pick yourself up, you dust yourself off, and you stay in it.”

[Congressional candidates split support among Pr. George’s officials]

Brown brought the polish of a practiced campaigner who spent more than a year at the head of a statewide campaign, responding to voter questions with crisp answers. If elected, he said, he would “build on the achievements of President Obama,” and he asserted that he is the candidate who is most qualified for the position. However, he did not go into great detail about his record.

Although most of the candidates have been in the military, worked in the legislature, have had executive-branch experience in government or worked in the private sector, Brown said, “I believe I am the only one who has done all four of those.”

Glenn F. Ivey (D) — the current fundraising leader — harked back to his time as state’s attorney in Prince George’s County, when he oversaw reductions in crime, championed reform measures that put cameras in police interrogation rooms and prosecuted officers accused of excessive force.

He, too, aligned his politics with those of Obama, who is wildly popular among the district’s majority black voters, and he reminded the crowd of how congressional Republicans consistently sought to undermine the president’s authority.

“I’ll fight against that,” said Ivey, who turns 55 on Saturday.

Democrat Matthew Fogg, right, speaks at the 4th Congressional District candidates forum held at Bowie State University on Tuesday night. (Mark Gail/For The Washington Post)

[Ivey finishes 2015 with strong fundraising lead in primary race]

Del. Joseline A. Peña-Melnyk (D-Prince George’s), 49, who is relatively unknown outside the portion of the congressional district that includes her state legislative district, said her experience as an immigrant who struggled through poverty uniquely qualifies her to advocate for working families.

“I bring a perspective that no one up here brings,” she said. “I am a woman. I am a mother. I am a wife, a sister, a daughter, an Afro-Latina that represents this community.”

Drawing parallels to Edwards, Peña-Melnyk said she is independent and unafraid to oppose party leaders. She was one of a handful of lawmakers in Annapolis who voted in 2012 against expanding gaming into Prince George’s.

“You want someone who is going to rock the boat but knows when not to flip it. That is me,” Peña-Melnyk said. “I don’t compromise if it’s going to harm you.”

Military veterans Warren Christopher, 48, and Terence Strait, 34, both Democrats, cast themselves as anti-establishment candidates who bring fresh vision in a field of career politicians.

Christopher, a retired Army lieutenant colonel, touted his leadership abilities and military experience.

“This is about making sure that we have a proven and tested leader,” Christopher said, raising his voice. “I have taken troops into combat more than seven different times, and under my leadership, I brought every troop home alive.”

In some of the most pointed remarks of the night, Christopher asked the crowd whether life had improved as a result of the elected service of some of the current and former officials sitting alongside him: “Are you better off? There are a lot of folks on this dais that have had opportunities to deliver. Look at the results.”

Strait, a statistician, said he has a vision, even if there is not much on his résumé to offer voters. The youngest candidate of the group and a supporter of Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders, he said he would fight for a $15 minimum wage, for a single-payer health-care system and for investments in infrastructure to stimulate job growth.

Democrat Matthew Fogg, 64, a latecomer to the primary race, is a retired U.S. marshal and community activist who ran for a state delegate seat in 2014 and, after losing, became a write-in candidate for state Senate.

Two Republican candidates, Robert Broadus, 43, and George McDermott, 70, also joined the forum. Broadus, a Navy veteran, urged black voters like him to vote for a party that fights “against violations of the Constitution.”

McDermott, a native Prince George’s resident, bemoaned the change in society’s values from those of his childhood and denounced voter apathy that led to the Democrats’ state “monopoly.”

“The monopoly will take advantage of you,” he said.

Both parties will nominate candidates during the state’s April 26 primary. In the heavily Democratic 4th District, the Democratic winner will be overwhelmingly favored to triumph in November’s general election.

The next forum will be held at noon Saturday at Harmony Hall Regional Center in Fort Washington.