A new bill passed by the Senate Health Policy Committee would allow an estimated 800,000 uninsured, low-income Floridians who don’t qualify for Medicaid and fall beneath the Obamacare threshold to apply for coverage through a new “Florida Health Insurance Affordability Exchange Program,” aka FHIX.

Under SB 7044, the state-based insurance exchange would be positioned to FHIX something else: It could become the rescue plan to guarantee another 1 million Floridians coverage if the U.S. Supreme Court this summer sides against the administration in the King v. Burwell case. If King wins, Floridians’ Obamacare health insurance premium tax credits would cease unless the subsidies could be routed through a state exchange. At risk is $3.8 billion now helping Floridians pay their premiums.

But wait, there’s more to like about SB 7044: The FHIX bill would protect the health of safety-net hospitals which are about to lose up to $1.9 billion in federal funds for something called the Low Income Pool, a program that helps pay for emergency care to uninsured patients. That’s critically important to Palm Beach County’s St. Mary’s and Lakeside medical centers.

The Affordable Care Act sunsets the LIP program, but Gov. Rick Scott’s administration has been lobbying for it to be extended just for Florida. The Obama administration is saying that money’s gone. But Scott is in such denial that he has spent the fictional money in his proposed budget. That could not only create a crisis for hospitals that serve the poor, it could crater Scott’s hopes for big business tax cuts this year.

If the Obama administration accepts Florida’s Medicaid FHIX, it would bring in far more than the lost LIP money. It would bring in an estimated $5 billion a year in federal Medicaid support.

Barely a month ago, Florida’s legislative leaders were insisting they had no plans to consider Medicaid expansion this session. So what changed? Key business groups, especially Associated Industries of Florida (AIF), rose up and demanded action.

“This bill is important to business and it is acceptable to business because it is a free-market, private-sector, consumer choice-based private insurance plan that will help Florida residents who are not eligible or cannot afford coverage in our state’s existing market structure,” AIF said in a video statement praising Senate leaders.