Workers for the Civilian Conservation Corps at Chapman Drive. ( Carnegie Branch Library for Local History / Courtesy Photo )

If you go What: Summer Colorado History Series: The Feds in Colorado When: Noon-1:15 p.m.Friday, Aug. 7 Where: Museum of Boulder, 2205 Broadway, Boulder Tickets: $5 general admission; free for Boulder History Museum members Info: 303-449-3464 or boulderhistory.org

A turning point occurred when the National Bureau of Standards chose Boulder for its Radio Propagation Laboratory in 1949.

The demographics of Boulder changed dramatically in the following decade. But federal influence on Boulder County began much earlier in our history.

The Homestead Act of 1862 made 160 acres of land available for anyone willing to live on the parcel and cultivate it for five years. Many Boulder County homesteaders prospered from the federal program and still are here today, such as the Oliver Wise family, who settled in Canfield, near Erie. Waneka and Ewing are two other homesteader names that remain in Boulder County.

Mining operations were influenced by the U. S. Bland Allison Act of 1878, which set a guaranteed price for silver. Silver miners at Caribou benefited from this federal legislation and the Sherman Silver Purchase Act, which followed in 1890.

Colorado historian Tom Thomas, the featured speaker in the Boulder History Museum's Summer Colorado History Series, recognizes federal influence in everything from water and mining to transportation and scientific research.

"The West was far more dependent on federal assistance than other parts of the country," he says.

Rocky Mountain National Park, partially in Boulder County, was created in 1915 and helped fuel tourism. National forests preserved scenic beauty and encouraged sightseeing.

Like the rest of the country, Boulder suffered during the Great Depression. But programs from President Franklin D. Roosevelt's administration helped Coloradans get back on their feet.

"The West benefited proportionately more than other parts of the country from all of the New Deal programs," Thomas says.

One such program was the Civilian Conservation Corps, and Boulder welcomed two CCC camps in 1933. The CCC helped ease the suffering of the Depression by putting able-bodied young men to work. The majority of each worker's $30-a-month paycheck was deducted and sent home to their needy families.

The first camp was located at Sixth and Water (now Canyon Boulevard) streets. A second camp was at Sixth and Baseline.

The CCC built the Flagstaff Amphitheater, Green Mountain Lodge, portions of Flagstaff Road and Chapman Drive, among other projects.

In a formal ceremony, the amphitheater was presented as a gift to the city in 1934.

Works Progress Administration programs followed the CCC in Boulder with projects that included the construction of Boulder High School, the installation of the Central Park bandshell and the creation of Beach Park on University Hill, according to local historians.

"The growth of CU also depended on federal research dollars, " Thomas says. In his book on the history of Ball Aerospace, former Camera science reporter Todd Neff wrote that, in 1948, the University of Colorado-Boulder received $69,000 from the Air Force, the largest scientific grant in their history. The funds supported researching a pointing control device and other scientific information to be used in rockets, foreshadowing the physics powerhouse CU would become.

A "top secret" Atomic Energy Commission project was announced in 1951 and later would be known as the Rocky Flats Nuclear Weapons Plant. Located in neighboring Jefferson County, Boulder residents rejoiced at these well-paying government jobs and were appreciative that many young men wouldn't be forced to leave town to gain employment.

U.S. Highway 36 was partially funded with federal dollars and opened in 1952. Broomfield would not have developed in the way that followed if not for the Boulder-Denver Turnpike project, Thomas explains.

After the National Bureau of Standards was dedicated by President Eisenhower in 1954, other federal labs followed, including the National Center for Atmospheric Research and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. The Martin Acres subdivision provided housing for many of these new government workers.

Both Ball and IBM grew with money from federal research contracts.

Federal legislation, federal land, federally funded programs and government dollars helped to shape Boulder and remain an influence on the city today.

Carol Taylor and Silvia Pettem write about history for the Daily Camera. Email Carol at boulderhistorylibrarian@gmail.com, Silvia at pettem@earthlink.net or write to the Daily Camera, 5450 Western Ave., Boulder 80301.