'There's no other one like it'

When McDonald's opened a hamburger stand off 28th Street in Boulder more than 50 years ago, the burgeoning fast-food chain inadvertently set the stage for decades of operational and philanthropic innovation.

The 109th location for McDonald's, which in 1973 was rebuilt at 1800 28th St., played a critical role in the development of the Happy Meal, the double drive-through, advertisements on tray liners, breakfast, scholarship programs and the nonprofit Ronald McDonald House. Bob Charles, the franchise owner at the heart of those efforts, sold the Boulder location to Aaron Holland in 1996.

McDonald's store No. 109 recently underwent another physical change — the razing of the 40-year-old restaurant and subsequent redevelopment — but the innovative roots run deep in the resulting eatery, the location's owner said.

"There's no other one like it," said franchise owner Aaron Holland, who also runs the McDonald's restaurant on Baseline Road in Boulder and a location in Broomfield.

The McDonald's on 28th Street, which recently opened, is one of several hundred of the fast-food chain's restaurants to receive a "re-imaging" this year.

The interior environment is more cafe than cafeteria with wooden tables, partition walls that create seating nooks, modern chairs, LED menu boards and a couple TVs.

Instead, the eatery boasts tones of red, grey and black.

Gone is the gold that was splashed throughout the restaurant. Rather, the color is an accent via the Golden Arches on signs and branding.

The kitchen and drive through are designed to increase efficiency — no longer do employees have to haul ingredients to and from the basement.

The exterior design is unique, in part because of the city's guidelines. The construction materials used and the south-facing positioning of the double-glazed windows encourage passive solar use and energy savings, which was a welcome sign to longtime Boulder resident Chuck Towler.

Diana Hernandez hands a to-go order to a customer in the double drive-thru at the newly renovated McDonald's on 28th Street in Boulder on Friday. (Jeremy Papasso / Daily Camera)

"It's impressive," said Towler, who has more than 30 years in energy and solar consulting. "Aaron took on this passive solar concept by himself and designed without even knowing (some additional benefits). You wish more people in Boulder would do that."

The restaurant also has three drive-through windows in addition to parking spots that serve as a holding area. Those with larger orders can pull forward to the third window or briefly into the holding area, which would allow for other, smaller orders to not be held up in the process, he said.

"People's time is so precious," Holland said.

The restaurant that served as the birthplace to the double drive-through now has two lanes that merge into one.

The aim for efficiency, however, has long been in that location's roots.

When franchisee Charles ran the location, he would stand on the roof of the restaurant and watch the cars flow through the drive-through. Charles aimed to time the drive-through treks based on the stoplight cycles to the north and the south, Holland said.

The goal was to have the cars in line get their orders and leave before the cycle changed again, said Holland, who later made similar perches atop the old restaurant to gauge the flow of customers.

Old habits die hard.

"I couldn't wait to climb up there and look down off that roof again," said Holland of the new restaurant.

Based on the restaurant's first few weeks in business, Holland said he's already in discussions with McDonald's corporate officials and the city of Boulder about giving a similar overhaul to the Baseline location.

"It's so efficient," he said, adding that the new restaurant gained Charles' seal of approval. "It's just the right thing to do."

Contact Camera Business Writer Alicia Wallace at 303-473-1332 or wallacea@dailycamera.com