Cookies, too, to make clients welcome

Recording engineer Jeffrey Tanner plays back a track by the Hip-Hop artist Mystical while waiting for another artist to arrive for a recording session at KMG Studios on Friday. ( Matthew Jonas / Staff Photographer )

If you go What: The KMG Industry Party When: 7-10 p.m.Tuesday Where: 3063 Sterling Circle #5, Boulder More info: facebook.com/kmglifeinc

Boulder's latest recording studio is ready to strike a chord by serving as a one-stop-shop for musicians and artists.

Recognizing the bustling music scene in the Boulder-Denver area, KMG Studios, or Kimble Media Group, is putting down roots in east Boulder after moving from south Denver, hoping to serve both aspiring and well-established artists.

The family-oriented media group, owned and operated by musicians, is having a grand opening event, "The KMG Industry Party," on Tuesday. The party, located at 3063 Sterling Circle #5 off Valmont Road, will feature live music accompanied by visual and graphic art, refreshments, and networking opportunities for artists. The event is free and open to all ages.

A recording studio at heart, KMG is reaching out to artists in many other ways. It's offering services like mixing, mastering, production, artist development, videography and photography, event booking and hosting, as well as social media promotion. The studio's parent company is called "KMGLife," reflecting a philosophy of looking at music as a way of life, not simply as an art form.

Advertisement

The studio even offers to bake cookies for its clients.

"It's basically a second home for artists," said Cayla Kimble, KMG vice president. "We want them to be comfortable, a place they can use for refuge and have fun, be creative, enhance their artistry, and really build their individual brand as an artist in one place."

'A duty to be overly respectful'

As artists themselves, members of KMG understand the time consuming process of traveling between different media specialists to develop as musicians. They became determined that all aspects essential to launching a successful music career could be accomplished under one roof.

Often referring to its team as family, KMG ultimately sees itself as a lifestyle brand driven by a passion for music, helping cultivate success in artists of all sizes.

KMG began in late 2010 as three small recording studios primarily catering to vocalists.

The company was started by vocalist, entrepreneur and sound engineer Greg Kimble, who found himself dissatisfied with the recording industry after studying at the Conservatory of Recording Arts & Sciences in Gilbert, Ariz. After a number of less than ideal internships, Kimble drove to Denver with nothing but a few hundred dollars and a full tank of gas, living out of his car.

Fueled not only by a passion for music, Kimble developed a strong desire to treat artists with the respect he feels they deserve, regardless of their success or popularity. Instead of seeing artists as yet another business client, KMG wants to build lasting relationships with clients. Communication and maintaining a relationship are key to understanding what clients want, Kimble said.

"We have a duty to be overly respectful to anyone who trusts us enough with their music, because they have a choice of what studio to go to," Kimble said. "I want to make sure that everyone who comes to the table has a fair shake, and knows what's going on — transparency is huge."

"I want a relationship-based business, not a transaction-based business," Kimble added.

Claiming the former office of Immersive Records, the massively increased space it's now in allowed KMG to build bigger studio rooms than when it was located in Denver, complete with the latest mixing equipment. Its former multi-tenant office location, sharing walls with businesses including a call center, posed problems for a studio constantly making noise.

KMG has expanded its client list to work with genres including pop, hip-hop, rock, funk, r&b, soul and more. The company has recorded with notable artists like members of Korn and Slipknot, rapper Yelawolf, and Grammy-nominated funk band Blind Dog Smoking. No artist is too big or small too handle, Cayla Kimble said.

Studio comes replete with session artists

Reflecting the passion of music incorporated into its business practices, members of KMG comprise a house band known as Last Minute, a fusion of funk, soul, pop and R&B. The house band is signed to KMG Records, its own record label, in which members of the band can offer to fill in as a "session" artists for other groups recording at KMG, such as if an artist recording at KMG needs a guest bassist to fill in.

Studio Manager Ashley Kisner discussed the idea of session files, in which an artist recording at KMG can save their files, including audio and instrument tracks, and resume working on their music at any given time. Starting next year, KMG's goal is to create a personal login for KMG clients that will allow them to access information like their preferred microphone, client profile, preferred engineer, and other recording items that can be accessed remotely, Kisner said.

"That's the future of the recording industry, believe it or not," Kisner said. "Nobody else has caught up to that train yet."

Denver-based hip-hop group Byzantine, or BYZ, found that their experiences at KMG surpass other studios they've used in Denver. Excited about KMG's move to Boulder, BYZ sees the move as an upgrade. The group recorded in Studio C, a studio with walls that change color, creating a relaxed and comfortable environment to produce music in, according to Slobodan Jerkic, BYZ manager.

"Every time we're there, we feel welcome," Jerkic said. "Compared to other studios, it's more of a friendly environment. It's not a business environment where you pay for a session, you record, and you leave. KMG wants you back."