EagleVail’s Mikaela Shiffrin is a teen phenom no more, but she’s still the best slalom skier in the world.

Eight days after her 20th birthday, Shiffrin claimed her third consecutive World Cup slalom title Saturday at the World Cup finals in Meribel, France, then did her best to share her crystal globe with the support system that helped make it possible.

“I don’t really feel like it’s my globe,” Shiffrin said. “I’m the one who goes home with it and keeps it in my room. But there are a lot of people who worked toward that. … I don’t feel it’s mine to own, it’s just mine to have right now.”

Over the past three seasons she has done it all in slalom — three season titles, two world championships gold medals and an Olympic gold medal. She came from behind to win Saturday’s race, her sixth World Cup slalom victory this season and 15th of her career.

Shiffrin had a 90-point margin over Sweden’s Frida Hansdotter going into Saturday’s race. Hansdotter could not overtake Shiffrin in the standings unless Hansdotter won and Shiffrin finished out of the top 15.

“There definitely was a little bit of extra stress,” Shiffrin said. “Having a 90-point lead, I was a little more nervous than I might have been if I had less of a lead. At 90 points, you start to feel comfortable, you take your foot off the gas and Frida could easily beat me. If I hadn’t won, she was going to win. I was very happy with the performance with that added pressure.”

Going into Sunday’s giant slalom that will conclude the World Cup season, Shiffrin is in third place in the GS standings. She can’t win the GS title but wants to finish her GS campaign on a good note.

“I feel like I came up short a little bit in GS (this season), even though it was quite a bit improvement from last year and the year before that,” Shiffrin said. “Once again this summer, I’m going to be really thinking hard about what I can do in my GS to get faster.”

Shiffrin hopes to start doing some super-G races next season, not only to begin the transition into a four-event skier but also to improve her GS.

“A huge part of it is that I need to learn how to take some risks,” Shiffrin said. “A lot of these girls who are great GS skiers are also really great speed (downhill and super-G) skiers. In speed, you have to be able to put it down the hill and be comfortable on the edge. And also be sure enough about your technique that you’re still safe. I tend to try to control what’s happening in the GS course a little too much.”

Shiffrin returns to the U.S. on Monday and will race the slalom at the U.S. Alpine Championships next Saturday in Sugarloaf, Maine, then spend a week with her grandmother in western Massachusetts.

“That’s going to be really relaxing,” Shiffrin said. “My Nana always spoils me when I go visit her, baking cookies and pies. She has the best breakfasts I’ve ever had. I’m really excited to see her. I think that might be the only vacation I get, but a week with my Nana is good enough for me.”

Results 15C

John Meyer: jmeyer@denverpost.com or twitter.com/johnmeyer