Sen. Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.) speaks during a news conference last month in Washington. (Andrew Harrer/Bloomberg News)

With his usual aplomb, President Obama tells supporters that the “crazies” — presumably American critics, including two of the most respected Democratic foreign policy voices in the Senate — stand in the way of his Iran deal. The president’s resort to name-calling, yet again, suggests that the only appeal he has left is to blind party loyalty. Perhaps that will be enough to uphold a veto (although a surprisingly long list of Democrats are remaining silent, no doubt to postpone as long as possible the White House’s wrath), but it is becoming evident he and his partisans are isolated.

Domestically, polls show American voters oppose the deal, in some cases by a 2 to 1 margin. Obama’s crass advisers liked to say Iran was the Obamacare of his second term. To the extent it is a rallying cry for opponents and a disaster electorally for his own party, he might be right. Already, Sen. Rob Portman (R-Ohio) is attacking his likely Democratic opponent, former Ohio governor Ted Strickland, for supporting the deal. If Obamacare helped produce a GOP majority in the House in 2010 and Senate in 2014, it may be that the Iran deal keeps those majorities and gives the GOP the White House in 2016. In that event, the voters’ voices will be reflected when a GOP president starts the Iran relationship anew.

Internationally, the deal has already done huge damage to our relationship with Israel and the Sunni states. Now we learn France may not be keen on the deal either. Our other European allies seem unconcerned about congressional repudiation of the deal. John Vinocur writes in the Wall Street Journal:

Neither German Chancellor Angela Merkel nor U.K. Prime Minister David Cameron have made an explicit link between Congress’s possible September vote against the agreement and anything resembling the Obama administration’s notions of instant cataclysm. After initially nodding “yes” to the deal, the French have partially reverted to form reflecting their traditional hard-nosed antinuclear proliferation position. It’s OK in Paris to acknowledge that the accord is an oversold mediocrity, and its character nonhistoric. Mr. Obama’s notions of co-opting a suddenly tranquilized Iran to embrace the Forces of Good in the Middle East can get characterized as naive. American sanctions experts say big French banks have informed them they are in no rush to return to Iran.

In short, the president’s two remaining arguments — congressional rejection means war and isolation from our allies — simply are not true. Not only does this mean that Congress should not fear international alarm if it nixes the deal, but that the next president can pull the plug without greatly upsetting our allies. It has always been the case that while Europe may grumble, it is never so relieved as when there is strong American leadership that offers it protection against foes.

Democrats in Congress would not be crazy to reject the deal. To the contrary, it makes perfect sense in terms of their own political survival, in terms of our relationships with allies in the Middle East and in terms of our European allies. Opponents of the deal have avoided the ad hominem attacks on those following the president’s lead, preferring to keep the discussion on the merits. Giving Iran $100 billion or more to use on terrorism, a green light on missile and conventional weapons, and a ludicrous self-inspection deal that endangers all future arms-control efforts — as well as providing Iran with a glide path to the bomb — strikes us, however, as reckless and irresponsible.