Most people have fallen prey to the notorious “overdraft fee.” It is pretty pathetic when a bank charges a customer $35.00 for an overdraft of $1.00.

One major problem, though there are many, with the overdraft fees is that sometimes, the customer did not authorize the transaction. You can explain this to a bank until you are blue in the face and most banks will not reverse the fee even though you provide proof that you did not authorize the draft of the funds.

Another major problem, though, again, there are many, is that banks will charge you upwards of $35.00 to pay an item that cost them nothing to pay out. What this means is that a transaction on your account may have caused your account to go negative by $.30. Some banks, however, will not charge an overdraft fee if the amount of the overdraft is less than $5.00. But beware, most banks do not care if it was a nickel that caused the account to go negative. Best believe you will have to fight tooth and nail to get the $35.00 fee reversed.

Overdrafts are not a problem for everyone. There are things that you can do to protect yourself. Most people do not know it, but when you initially sign up for a checking account, the account is automatically set up to pay out whatever comes through. You have to block that perk. Though it is nice to have, it will cost you in the end. A bank is not going to tell you this when you open the account because banks make their money off of fees and investments. If the bank tells every customer that you have to set the account up to decline anything that will overdraw the account, how will it continue to charge the absurd overdraft fees?

At the tender age of 18 I opened my first checking account. I then moved about three hours away from the bank. I left $100.00 in the account. I came back thinking I had some money in the bank. Sadly, I had fallen prey to the fee schedule that banks charge when there is no activity on the account. Yes, you can also be charged for no banking activity. The account was in the negative by $13.00. The bank had charged fees every month until the account was overdrawn. Do not fall prey to things of this nature. Always do your homework on a bank before banking with it. Also, google the bank to see how many times it has been sued for charging excessive fees.

Source: https://www.lawyersandsettlements.com/lawsuit/excessive-bank-overdraft-fees.html#.VmN9p4REehg

Twitter: https://twitter.com/legalisticgirl

Join the Discussion