As an emergency room physician, Mark Fourre, M.D., treats a wide variety of medical issues.

But there’s one scenario that pops up every time he goes to work.

More information THESE NATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS have online databases that you can search to find primary care doctors near you who are board-certified in their specialties. • Find a pediatrician; American Academy of Pediatrics. healthychildren.org • Find a family doctor; American Board of Family Medicine. abfm.org • Find an internist; American Board of Internal Medicine. abim.org • Find an osteopathic physician; American Osteopathic Association. doctorsthatdo.org HAVE MORE QUESTIONS? These organizations can help answer questions and offer additional help navigating the system. • Maine Consumers for Affordable Health Care can help you find coverage, understand your coverage, enroll in Medicaid, and find help with health care and prescription costs. You can also call the group’s helpline, 1-800-965-7476. Mainecahc.org • Find out if you’re eligible for MaineCare, Maine’s Medicaid program, by contacting the Maine’s Department of Health and Human Services. You can also call 855-797-4357. Maine.gov/dhhs • The Maine Health Care Management Coalition has a searchable online database that allows consumers to compare doctors, practices and hospitals, based on metrics like safety, patient experience, and management of conditions like asthma, hypertension and diabetes. You can also call (207) 844-8106. Getbettermaine.org • Maine Quality Counts offers guidance on how to assess the costs and risks of medical treatments and tests, and how to talk with your doctor to make sure you’re getting the treatment you need. Mainequalitycounts.org • The Maine Board of Licensure in Medicine has a searchable online database (go to “Licensee Search”) that allows you to find out if there have been any problems with your doctor. Maine.gov/md • The Maine Board of Osteopathic Licensure also has a searchable online database (go to “Licensee Search”) that allows you to find out if there have been any problems. Maine.gov/osteo • The Maine Academy of Family Physicians has a patient resources section on its website with useful information. Maineafp.org • The Maine Osteopathic Association has a searchable database that allows you to find a doctor near you. Check out the “Patient Resources” section to find basic information about medical conditions. Mainedo.org • The American Academy of Family Physicians has a plethora of information about medical conditions and tips on managing your health care needs. Familydoctor.org • The U.S. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality has more tips on finding a doctor. ahrq.gov/patients-consumers

“On pretty much every shift, I take care of people who don’t have primary care,” said Fourre, chief health affairs officer at MaineHealth. “It’s absolutely a problem.”

There are myriad reasons why it’s such a problem, and why it’s so important to establish a relationship with a doctor before you need one.

A primary care doctor – such as a family physician, internist, pediatrician or osteopathic physician – can make sure you stay up to date on immunizations and manage chronic health issues like diabetes. What’s more, a primary care doctor can help monitor conditions like high blood pressure that may not necessarily cause symptoms, but raise your risk of stroke and heart attack, said Fourre.

And if you see a doctor over a period of years, that doctor is better equipped to detect abnormalities in things like thyroid nodules, moles and heart murmurs that could be warning signs of larger issues, said Intermed family doctor Allyson Howe, M.D., who is also a specialist in sports medicine. “When I get to know someone over time, I can recognize changes in them.”

That means you can manage your health issues before they become emergencies, and avoid the emergency room altogether.

And when you do have a medical emergency, having a primary care doctor can help ensure that you get the highest-possible quality of care, Fourre added. Without one, it might take longer for the ER docs to take your medical history and track down records from the patchwork of providers you have seen in the past. As a result, expensive medical tests may have to be unnecessarily repeated, he said.

Also, having a doctor who knows you can reduce the stress you’ll have when you do have an emergency.

“The primary care doctor is going to be there before an emergent issue, so you’re not going to be trying to navigate the insurance company website while you’re also dealing with a health issue,” said Emily Brostek, executive director for Maine Consumers for Affordable Health Care, a nonprofit health advocacy group.

That said, the process of finding a doctor can be daunting. These tips can make the process easier.

TALK TO YOUR INSURER

Contact your insurer to find out which providers are in the network under your policy, says Brostek. Under most policies, you can see a doctor who is outside your network, but you will pay more out of pocket. And you may be less likely to go on a regular basis, if you know it’s going to cost more, says Howe. If you’re confused about your network, call your insurer. You can also contact the free helpline managed by Maine Consumers for Affordable Health Care at 1-800-965-7476.

GET COVERAGE

Not insured? Don’t know if you qualify for Medicaid? Reach out to the Maine Department of Health and Human Services, which administers MaineCare, Maine’s Medicare program. Call 855-797-4357 or go to www.maine.gov/dhhs.

You can also contact Consumers for Affordable Health Care for assistance enrolling in MaineCare, or finding programs to help with health care and prescription costs. Call the group’s hotline or check out its guide to Maine health care at www.mainecahc.org.

ASK AROUND

Ask people you trust for recommendations, such as friends and other doctors, Fourre suggests. If a friend raves about a doctor’s good bedside manner, that’s important information. “Having a doctor that listens and communicates well isn’t just nice, it’s critical to successful care,” he says. “There are a vast amount of errors around communication.”

Related Read more from Healthy Maine Magazine

LOOK FOR BOARD CERTIFICATION

Find out if the doctor is board certified in his or her specialty. While certification is voluntary, “board certification requires stringent testing to make sure each physician meets the standards of the specialty,” said Fourre.

KNOW YOUR OPTIONS

There are a variety of primary care doctors to meet your needs. Family doctors provide care for children and adults. Pediatricians treat children, but not adults. Internists treat adults, but not children. Osteopathic physicians treat children and adults. (Osteopaths are doctors who have all the same training and qualifications as medical doctors, but take a holistic approach to treatment.)

CONSIDER YOUR OWN PRIORITIES

Do you want to see the same provider each time? A smaller practice might be the best fit. Pick a larger practice if it’s more important to ensure that you have a large-enough team of doctors for you to get a same-day sick visit for your child. Convenience should be a priority, said Howe. “If you’re driving 60 miles to see a doctor, you’re less likely to come in and build that relationship.”

GO FOR AN INTERVIEW

Before you commit to a primary care doctor, set up an appointment to meet and find out if it’s a good fit, said Angela Cole Westhoff, executive director Maine Osteopathic Association.

MAKE THE MOST OF YOUR TIME WITH THE DOCTOR

Write down your questions ahead of time, and give that list to the doctor at the outset of the appointment, so that you can be sure to address everything on it, suggested Howe. Be sure to bring along any medical records and test results you have, as well as any medications and supplements that you’re taking. Before you go, make note of your medical history, any symptoms you might be having and any major stressors that might be affecting your health.

TRUST YOUR GUT

Above all, “pay attention to your own experience,” said Fourre. Put a premium on communication, and a feeling that you have been heard, as it’s imperative to the quality of care. Personal comfort level matters a lot, said Westhoff. “If you have something that’s not clearing up or getting better, the patient needs to be comfortable saying that.” Fit is one of the biggest issues, so take it seriously, said Lisa Letourneau, M.D., executive director of Maine Quality Counts, a nonprofit that advocates for patients. “It’s OK to be honest with your primary care provider about your needs, and how they can best support you in making decisions about your health,” she said. If the fit doesn’t feel right “it’s OK to be honest about that and find someone who better meets your needs.”