Waukegan- January 28, 2015 - Erie HealthReach Waukegan Health Center is hosting an ObamaCare Enrollment Fair on February 7th for the Waukegan community and the surrounding areas. The Fair aims to educate and enroll individuals so that they can have access to care and avoid penalties as the deadline nears. This fair will provide relevant information and assistance in Spanish and in English. Individuals will be able to immediately apply for health care coverage with the help of several, certified Navigators.

"The first year of ObamaCare resulted in nearly 8 million people nationally choosing health plans from the MarketPlace. Those results are great, but there are millions of individuals and their families who are still uninsured. Our ObamaCare Enrollment Fair will provide the information needed to help people get covered for the upcoming year--before the penalty increase. This Fair will provide much-needed outreach to the Waukegan community to help enroll and educate individuals before the deadline in two weeks," said Iliana A. Mora, Chief Operating Officer of Erie Family Health Center. Last year Erie signed up over 7,000 people under Obamacare.

WHAT: Erie HealthReach Waukegan Health Center to host an ObamaCare Enrollment Fair to educate individuals from the most vulnerable and language-challenged communities regarding their health care insurance options. The Fair will provide information regarding ObamaCare, access to benefits, eligibility, health insurance exchange options. The concept of medical home, preventive care and follow-up care will also be covered.

WHY: It has been shown that without health insurance people delay their care, leading to poor health outcomes. Enroll individuals before the February 15th deadline so that they have access to affordable, quality care.

WHO: Erie HealthReach Waukegan Health Center certified Navigators, community members, individuals interested in learning--in both English and Spanish--about ObamaCare options and enrolling before the deadline on February 15th.

Media Ops: Ability to interview: individuals enrolling, certified Navigators (regarding the process, the types of questions, challenges faced), Erie personnel, etc.

WHEN & WHERE:

Saturday, February 7, 2015, 8am-1pm

Erie HealthReach Waukegan Health Center

2323 Grand Avenue

Waukegan, IL 60085

Anyone wanting to meet with a Navigator can call 847-666-3494 and then dial 6 or just attend the Fairs. Attendees need not be patients of Erie. All are welcomed.

###

ABOUT ERIE FAMILY HEALTH CENTER

Founded on Erie Street in Chicago in 1957, Erie Family Health Center is a community health resource that provides high-quality, compassionate health care services. Serving more than 60,000 medical patients and 9,500 dental patients through 250,000 annual visits at 13 centers in Chicago, Evanston and Waukegan, Erie delivers comprehensive primary medical, dental and behavioral health care that responds to the needs of each community. Erie's highly skilled providers, innovative partnerships and forward-thinking approach make it a national leader for the provision of community-based health care.