8 a.m.; I change into scrubs and sit with Dr. Bock, a vascular surgeon, in the cramped office he shares with three other doctors. Emergencies the night before have upended the schedule so we wait while calls are made and patients are prepped.

This would be the last time I would sit as I spend the next 12 hours at Mission Hospital embedded with doctors and nurses learning how our community’s hospital works.

Once the schedule is fixed we see our first patient, a man in his early 70s complaining of tremendous pain in his leg. A quick procedure verified the problem and the unfortunate solution is an above the knee amputation of his leg. Listening to the doctor tell the family their husband/father/brother will be losing his leg was one of the most heart wrenching moments of my life. They take it about as well as anyone could, possibly better, because years earlier the same doctor warned the man that the combination of smoking and diabetes would result in losing his leg.

After doing some patient rounds it is back to the operating room. As I watch the heart-lung machine kick in, the surgeon explains how the patient, a woman in her 50s, got here. He says the woman on the table couldn’t afford her medication, Plavix (cash price at CVS of generic is $149.99/month), so instead she is getting emergency heart surgery that will cost more than $150,000, or the equivalent of 83 years’ worth of the medication. If she survives surgery, she will probably look forward to many years of medical bills that she can’t pay.

As day turns to night, we head to the emergency department where a woman having difficulty breathing is brought in by Skyland Fire & Rescue. She deteriorates quickly, no breathing, no pulse. Everyone is doing their jobs, airway established, CPR has begun, and the ER doctor is calmly and confidently giving instructions. The team does not have the luxury of getting bloodwork done, X-rays, or a detailed medical history. They learn two things before she loses consciousness, she is on birth control and smokes. The perfect recipe for a pulmonary embolism. Does she have insurance? Can she pay for her treatment? No one asks, no one cares, the goal is to save a life and they succeed.

8 p.m.: exhausted emotionally and physically I head for home.

What did I learn and what do I want to share?

First: WNC is in good hands. Mission provides state-of-the-art care to people regardless of ability to pay, without passing judgment on the behaviors that brought them in the door, and in spite of the regulatory and compliance burdens placed on them by the state and federal government.

Second: The health care debate is going to be here a while. While votes to repeal the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (Obamacare) have stopped, U.S. House Speaker Paul Ryan is not a fan of the law. As we are enter an election year, we will hear more spin from all sides about the impact of Obamacare. In North Carolina the debate will be different; it will focus on Medicaid reform, a term loosely used to describe any policy change as an improvement regardless of the actual outcomes, and Medicaid expansion, something that North Carolina rejected leaving about 500,000 people uninsured. I expect we will see new debate on Medicaid in North Carolina as the new payments system is implemented and managed care organizations and accountable care organizations or provider-led entities replace the successful Community Care of North Carolina model.

The final item I want to share is this: We must remember the human side of medicine. The health care industry is big business. Fortune.com estimates its size at $2.9 trillion and that covers everything from gauze pads to gene therapy. While everyone argues over who is paying and who is getting paid, we can’t lose sight that at the end of the day medicine is more than actuarial models and pharmaceutical company market caps. We need to be reminded there are people behind the numbers. Reminded that every patient is someone who is hurt or sick, someone who is hoping to get better, and someone with friends and family praying for the same. We need to be reminded that every doctor and nurse is someone who is trying to answer those prayers and heal that person, and we need to remember that someday that person will be us.

Rep. Brian Turner, D-Buncombe, represents District 116 in the N.C. House.

Read or Share this story: http://avlne.ws/1iZ4Xqa