House Majority Whip Steve Scalise, R-Jefferson, visited with seniors in western St. Tammany Thursday (Aug. 7), using the discussion to link cuts to the popular Medicare Advantage program to the Affordable Care Act. About a dozen seniors participated in the discussion and stated their opposition to reductions in the program.

The private Medicare Advantage plans serve as alternatives to the traditional, public program. They usually assign seniors to a network of doctors and health providers, with bonuses such as gym memberships included. About 26 percent of the state's Medicare recipients are enrolled in Medicare Advantage, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation.

"The proposed cuts to Medicare Advantage threaten the more than 200,000 Louisiana seniors who have paid into and rely on this program to provide them high quality, affordable health care," Scalise said.

Republicans have been objecting to anticipated cuts to Medicare Advantage, blaming the Obama Administration and the ACA in the process. Scalise, who assumed the No. 3 House leadership position on July 31, hammered on that theme during the roundtable discussion at the STAR Fitness Center near Covington. The event was sponsored by the Coalition for Medicare Choices.

"It's always good to get first-hand accounts of how the laws in Washington are affecting real people," Scalise said. "Today, we've seen some of the devastating impacts of the president's health care law on people who enjoy Medicare Advantage."

Scalise said he supports the Medicare Advantage program, which he said is a being scaled back in part because of the Affordable Care Act.

"This is on example of how this law (ACA) is failing so many people and why we need to not only repeal it, but replace it with reforms that will lower costs and put patients back in charge," Scalise said, predicting that health care will be one of the biggest issues in the 2016 presidential election.

The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, a government agency, has said it is proposing a rate structure that would mean a 1.9-percent reduction for the Medicare Advantage program in 2015. However, Republicans and insurers say the cuts could be significantly higher because of new fees and other changes.

The impact that the cuts will have on seniors and their Medicare Advantage coverage will come into focus in October, ahead of the open enrollment period, according to America's Health Insurance Plans, which represents the health insurance industry.

Several of the seniors told Scalise it was important that the program remain in place as is.

Abita Springs resident Leo Sanchez said his participation in Medicare Advantage allows for him and his wife, Dianne, to have a gym membership, which in turn helps keep them healthy. They exercise at the STAR fitness center three or four times a week.

"The program is working really well for me," said Leo Sanchez, 78. "People tell me I don't look 78, and I love that."