Buy Photo Iowa Insurance Commissioner Nick Gerhart (Photo: Register file photo)Buy Photo

Three Florida men accused of peddling phony “Obamacare” health-insurance policies to Iowans have agreed to pay $52,500 to settle the allegations.

The Iowa Insurance Division said last year that the men and three companies they were associated with ran misleading radio and TV ads encouraging Iowans to call a toll-free number right away to find out about health insurance.

The ads promised to help people obtain health insurance, “even if you have current health issues or if you have pre-existing conditions,” the division said. The ads didn’t mention that the Affordable Care Act bars insurers from denying coverage based on pre-existing health problems.

Callers were falsely told the policies were comprehensive insurance plans that complied with Obamacare rules, the division said. In fact, they were limited indemnity policies that would only pay up to $50 toward the cost of some medical services.

“While limited benefit plans have a place in the market, the plans are usually designed to supplement health coverage,” Commissioner Nick Gerhart said in a prepared statement. “We will not tolerate any insurance sales which misrepresent the benefits, advantages, conditions and limitations of the insurance plans being offered.”

Donald Pinansky, Marc Sporn and his son, Dylan Sporn, agreed to settle the administrative charges filed against them by the Insurance Division. The division said Pinansky and Marc Sporn had previously been convicted of federal fraud charges and sentenced to prison. Their subsequent participation in the insurance business was illegal, the division said.

Dylan Sporn had his state insurance license revoked, and the other two men were ordered not to transact any insurance business in Iowa.

Marc Sporn’s daughter, Bryana Sporn, has not settled a case filed against her, but she has been barred from transacting any insurance business in Iowa, Gerhart’s office said.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1FmLw5f