Update: Hickenlooper’s spokesman Eric Brown says originally 27 homeless individuals were scheduled to arrive at the Fort Lyon reopening Tuesday, but some needed addition medical assistance and others wanted to delay their arrival to the facility.

The rural Fort Lyon prison facility, shuttered by Democratic Gov. John Hickenlooper amid budget cuts in 2011, reopened Tuesday as a repurposed facility intended to aid the state’s homeless population.

After intense back-and-forths and political wrangling at the state Capitol this year, lawmakers passed a measure that appropriated funds to bus the state’s homeless to the rural facility to receive substance-abuse support services, medical care and job training.

A news release from Hickenlooper’s office said the facility opened Tuesday to serve 14 homeless individuals, while a news release by House Democrats placed the total at 27.

Confusion did not stop there.

When asked for confirmation, Hickenlooper’s spokesman, Eric Brown, confirmed the total at 14, though in a tweet Monday Roxane White, Hickenlooper’s chief of staff, said 27.

Fort Lyon opening tomorrow with our first 27 folks. Helping Vets and people who are homeless. Visit during #PedalthePlains — Roxane White (@RoxPWhite) September 2, 2013

“This project will give homeless veterans and others new opportunities,” Hickenlooper said in a statement. “The men and women who go to Fort Lyon will learn the skills they need to get back on their feet.”

The program is not limited to homeless veterans, and Fort Lyon’s repurposing is part of Pathways Home Colorado’s effort to become more strategic in preventing and ending homelessness, according to a news release.

Facing a budget shortfall two years ago of more than $1 billion, Hickenlooper closed the prison to save the state cash — a move that killed about 200 jobs in Bent County, where poverty rates were hovering near 35 percent.

Late last year, Hickenlooper’s office asked the Joint Budget Committee to reserve about $6 million over the next two years to repurpose the sprawling campus to serve the homeless. But after committee members toured the facility Jan. 21, they rebuffed Hickenlooper’s request and later voted unanimously against allotting funds in the state budget to the facility.

Hickenlooper’s staff worked closely with lawmakers to pass the plan that will cost taxpayer’s about $3.9 million next year with increasing costs in the years to come.

According to a news release from Hickenlooper’s office, after at least one-year of residency at Fort Lyon, clients will be eligible to receive a Section 8 housing voucher from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development to return to permanent housing in another community.

The facility is slated to hold 200 residents by next July.

“I’m pleased we were able to get the new Fort Lyon up and running in only three months,” said Rep. Leroy Garcia, D-Pueblo, who was a leading lawmaker of the initiative. “My thanks to everyone in the Lower Arkansas Valley who worked so hard to make this happen.”

Follow Kurtis on Twitter: @kurtisalee