Protesters rally against acting Brazilian president Temer in Sao Paulo

Several hundred Brazilians protested against Interim President Michel Temer in Sao Paulo, Brazil's largest city and home turf for the former vice president to Dilma Rousseff, who was suspended from office after the Senate decided to impeach her.

Downtown Paulista Ave., the traditional bastion for what until now was the opposition to the Rousseff administration, was the scene of the protests, which began late in the afternoon after being called by unions and social movements.

The protesters said that they will not recognize the "legitimacy" of Temer's government, adding that they will take to the streets again in the coming days, not to defend Rousseff but to protect "democracy and social rights."

---

U.S. federal judge rules in favor of Republicans against "Obamacare"

A federal judge ruled in favor of Republican lawmakers in their lawsuit against the health care reform known as Obamacare, saying that the U.S. government is unconstitutionally using public funds to make access to health services less costly.

Judge Rosemary Collyer, who was appointed to the bench by Republican President George W. Bush, said that the federal government has no authority to spend public funds without the specific approval of Congress.

The decision will remain on hold, however, and Obamacare will remain in place since the government will file an appeal.

Collyer ruled that the administration may not spend billions of dollars in federal funds to pay insurance companies to reimburse them for cuts that the law requires them to make to customers' out-of-pocket medical payments.

---

WHO, PAHO ask pregnant women not to travel to Rio during 2016 Olympics

The World Health Organization and the Pan American Health Organization asked pregnant women not to travel to Rio de Janeiro or to other parts of Brazil where the Zika virus is present as part of their recommendations for the Olympic Games in August.

In a joint communique, the two affiliated organizations acknowledged that athletes and the personnel working at the Games need more information about the risks posed by Zika - which has been linked to microcephaly in newborns - and the ways to prevent infection.

---

U.S. announces regulations to contain methane emissions

The U.S. government announced new rules to prevent the emission of 11 million metric tons of methane into the atmosphere by 2025, a program it intends to expand upon over time.

The Environment Protection Agency announced a set of regulations that will affect only new oil and gas wells, the aim of which is to slash methane emissions by 45 percent below 2012 levels over the next 10 years.

Drillers will be required to monitor and reduce the methane that is emitted at the wells, as well as methane that is emitted when it is transmitted through pipelines, and additional inspections of equipment will also be required under the new rules.

---

Clooney: Trump won't be president because fear won't drive U.S.

George Clooney was the center of attention at the Cannes Film Festival, promoting his new movie, "Money Monster," and sharing his views on Donald Trump.

"There's not going to be a President Donald Trump," Clooney said in response to a question from reporters.

"Fear is not going to drive our country. We're not afraid of Muslims or immigrants or women. We're not going to be afraid of anything," the actor and filmmaker said.

Clooney spoke during a press conference along with Julia Roberts and the rest of the cast of the Jodie Foster-directed "Money Monster," which is being presented out of competition at Cannes.

His rejection of the possibility of a Trump presidency was greeted with applause.

---

9 Parties represented in Brazilian acting president's Cabinet, but no women

Brazilian acting President Michel Temer chose leading figures from nine centrist and conservative parties for his Cabinet, which for the first time in decades has no female ministers.

Temer, who had been vice president, replaced Dilma Rousseff of the center-left Workers Party, or PT, Brazil's first woman head of state, who was suspended from office after the Senate voted 55-22 early Thursday to subject her to an impeachment trial.

While the heads of the Mines and Energy and National Integration portfolios still remain to be filled, the Cabinet could have no female representation for the first time since the 1970s, when Brazil was under a military dictatorship.

EFE