Healthcare Solutions Team While open enrollment is now closed until November 15th, there are still several options for individuals and families to be able to insure themselves.

March 31st may have marked the end of open enrollment for acquiring a qualified health insurance plan on government-run marketplaces or exchanges; however, individuals still can purchase affordable health insurance from private agents such as those at Healthcare Solutions Team.

A national health insurance brokerage agency, Healthcare Solutions Team employs more than 500 licensed and accredited agents across the country who can offer consumers a variety of health insurance plans. Last year, the company provided personalized solutions and optimized plans for approximately 100,000 customers, working with each individual to find the coverage best suited for his or her budget and needs.

“While open enrollment is now closed until November 15th, there are still several options for individuals and families to be able to insure themselves,” said Grant Born, partner with Healthcare Solutions Team. He explained that the Affordable Care Act now requires people to pay a government fee or tax if they do not have minimum health coverage in 2014.

According to Born, one of the most popular health insurance options his company offers is a fixed benefit plan that pays for medical services up to a set amount with no deductible or copays. Fixed benefit plans are similar to major medical plans, but tend to be more affordable because they are not forced to comply with the Affordable Care Act conditions of unlimited lifetime benefits, maternity coverage, pediatric dental benefits, newborn care, and more.

“Fixed benefit plans typically offer between $1 and $3 million of overall coverage, which is generally enough to ‘bridge’ a client until the next open enrollment should a medical event occur,” he said.

“Another popular health insurance choice is short term medical, which works like the traditional health insurance people are accustomed to with a deductible and an 80/20 copay,” said Joe Eichman, principal at Healthcare Solutions Team. “These plans offer major medical coverage—typically between $1 and $2 million—without a long-term commitment.”

Short term medical provides coverage for a few weeks, several months, or anything in between. Eichman said it is ideal for those who are waiting for the next enrollment period in November as well as anyone in-between jobs or experiencing a situation that leaves him or her uninsured for a limited period of time.

According to Born and Eichman, other affordable options for today’s consumers are accident and critical illness insurance. These can be offered as supplements to help pay expenses not paid by major medical or as a stand alone to bridge a client to the next open enrollment.

Accident insurance offers coverage for deductibles, uncovered medical expenses and even non-medical costs such as transportation expenses, living expenses, domestic assistance, and loss of income for injuries resulting in a personal accident.

Critical illness medical insurance policies provide income during a catastrophic event, for example if someone is diagnosed with cancer or heart disease. Policy holders are paid a lump sum to cover expenses and the money can be used to pay bills directly, hire a specialist medical caregiver, or explore alternative therapies for the diagnosed condition that are not typically covered by insurance.

In addition to providing a variety of health insurance plans, Healthcare Solutions Team offers a further array of coverages including dental, supplemental and life insurance; simple Health Savings Accounts (HSA); high-deductible plans; small business, self-employed and group health care; and major medical plans for individuals and families.

As one of the country’s premier health insurance agencies, Healthcare Solutions Team has been recognized as America’s #1 Managing General Agency by Assurant Health for three years in a row and listed in 2012 and 2013’s “Inc. 500|5000” as well as named America’s #1 Career Health Insurance Agency.

To learn more about available health insurance plans, contact Healthcare Solutions Team at (630) 261-3000 or visit http://www.APlanForEveryone.com. To compare coverage, log onto http://www.ReformSimple.com.