Multiple fire departments battled a large grass fire in eastern Rice County Sunday afternoon.

Sterling Fire Chief Greg Klein tells KAKE News that as of 9:00 p.m. Sunday night, some spots were still burning, but a vast majority of the fire was knocked out.

Rice County emergency managers say crews began responding to the blaze at about 2 p.m. Dispatchers tell KAKE News that the fire began near Avenue V between 26th and 28th roads about 11 miles east of Sterling. Smoke filled the air as the fire quickly spread across 6 miles.

Some residents were urged to evacuate their homes, others did voluntarily after seeing it creep closer.

"I'm concerned about my friends and family and everyone that's my neighbors," said Ron Foster.

Several travelers also felt stuck with no where to go.

"Well you can't hardly see," said Jack Love of Great Bend. "It looks like it's coming from all directions."

Sterling's volunteer fire department first responded to just a few fires and soon realized it spread to much more than they could handle alone. More than 60 firefighters from Geneseo, Little River, Lyons, Sterling and Rice County rural fire departments were called out to tackle grass and tree fires.

Klein says an unfriendly mixture of conditions created challenges.

"The wind and the dry fuel and the fuel being the grass and the trees," he said.

After knocking out most of the flames, investigators went to the site of origin to try to find the cause.

"We have no idea at this time," said Klein.

Despite miles worth of burnt grass and some trees, Kline says thankfully no one was hurt including animals. The only property damage was a few lost sheds.

"We want people to be safe and stay safe and of course we don't allow any burning while it's windy," said Klein.

KAKE News on your side to keep your family and property safe. Rural homeowners can protect their property with some simple yard upkeeps, even during winter. The Kansas Forest Service suggests you set your home up in three maintenance zones.

1. The first extends 30 feet from your home.

It should be the most maintained and if possible, have the grass greened up.

2. The second zone extends 105 feet from your home, this area needs to have the grass mowed short.

3. The third zone is all the other land on your property, it should be cleared at least once a year with a mower, and dead brush should be removed.

You should also have a 100-foot-long garden hose ready to go along with a shovel and rake. And always call firefighters if a fire gets out of control,

Previous story:

Multiple fire departments battled a large grass fire in eastern Rice County Sunday afternoon..

Rice County Dispatch said crews began responding to the blaze at about 2 p.m. Dispatchers tell KAKE News that the fire began near Avenue V between 26th and 28th roads about 11 miles east of Sterling. It then spread north about two miles towards Avenue T.

Dispatch said crews from the Geneseo, Little River, Lyons, Sterling and Rice County Rural fire departments have responded to the fire. Multiple Sheriff's deputies are also on scene.

There have been no reports of injuries or structures being damaged.

A Red Flag Warning is in effect for several central Kansas counties, including Rice County.