It’s a recurring problem for conservatives: If you propose a tax plan, and it cuts taxes on somebody, it has to raise taxes on somebody else, or raise the deficit. Since conservatives have long been focused on cutting the top marginal tax rate on income without raising the deficit, their tax plans usually involve cutting taxes on the rich — and therefore raising taxes on some nonrich group.

This was a problem for Mitt Romney in 2012. He ran on a tax plan that gave high earners at least $86 billion in annual tax cuts, according to the Tax Policy Center. Yet Mr. Romney insisted that his plan would be revenue neutral, meaning it would not raise or lower the deficit. This implied that he would raise taxes on somebody else, which became a significant political problem.

Subsequent conservative tax proposals, including one released Thursday, have recognized and sought to avoid this trap — and failed.

Last fall, Senator Mike Lee, Republican of Utah, released a tax plan that reflected a message from conservative reformers: Conservatives should abandon the quest for a top income tax rate below 30 percent, so they can focus their tax-cutting energy on the middle class. Senator Lee’s tax plan would drastically increase the per-child tax credit from $1,000 to $3,500, giving a big tax cut to middle-income families with children. He’d still cut tax rates at the top, but only to 35 percent.

When you also include the Medicare tax (but not the Obamacare Medicare surcharge, which Mr. Lee wants to repeal), the Lee plan would mean a top effective tax rate of 37.9 percent, compared with 43.4 percent today. Like Mr. Romney, Senator Lee tries to get more revenue out of high-income taxpayers by broadening the tax base. And like Mr. Romney, he ends up giving them a net tax cut anyway, because his base broadening doesn’t raise as much revenue as his top rate cut costs, again according to the tax center’s analysis.

Photo

If high earners get a tax cut under the Lee plan, and middle-income families with children pay less, who’s paying more? The tax center says “nobody”: All income groups get a tax cut under the Lee plan, which is a $2.4 trillion net tax cut over 10 years. The largest cut as a share of income goes to high earners.

The economist Robert Stein recognizes that a deficit increase of this size doesn’t work, and in “Room to Grow,” a collection of conservative reform proposals released Thursday by the YG Network, he proposes some tweaks to the Lee plan so that it’s truly revenue neutral. The release of “Room to Grow” is a moderately big deal in conservative circles: Eric Cantor, the House majority leader, and Mitch McConnell, the Senate minority leader, attended an event celebrating its release.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Stein’s first idea is to apply Senator Lee’s 35 percent tax rate to all taxable income above $36,250 for single filers, or $72,500 for married couples. Indeed, that would raise a lot of revenue; income in that band is currently taxed at 25 percent. It would also mean, when you add on the 15.3 percent payroll tax for Social Security and Medicare shared by employers and employees, that most people with moderate incomes would in effect be paying about 50 cents of every additional dollar they earn to the federal government.

In addition to probably being an unpopular idea, such a high marginal tax rate would be a significant work disincentive for middle-income people, particularly for the spouse who earns less in a two-income household. It’s a surprising proposal, since much of the rest of “Room to Grow” focuses on finding ways to encourage people to work.

Recognizing that a 35 percent income tax rate on people making less than $40,000 a year isn’t likely to fly, Mr. Stein offers two other revenue-raising ideas: limiting the mortgage interest deduction more sharply, or reducing the tax preference for municipal bonds. These won’t work, either. The entire cost of the mortgage deduction (which Senator Lee already proposes to partly eliminate) is $72 billion in 2014; the municipal bond tax preference costs $27 billion. But according to the tax center, Senator Lee’s tax plan would cost $138 billion this year relative to current policy, so Mr. Stein’s proposals aren’t enough to fully offset that.

Though the federal government’s fiscal picture has improved in the last few years, a long-run fiscal gap remains. The bad memory of the deficits caused by the Bush tax cuts in 2001 and 2003 lingers. There is no room, politically or fiscally, for net tax cuts. But conservatives find it hard to talk about taxes through any framework other than how to cut them.

Reformists are urging conservatives to trade one kind of tax cut message for another. But they have yet to find a way to pay for the tax cuts they propose.