If you go What: Poetry open mic When: 7 p.m. Tuesdays Where: Innisfree Poetry Bookstore & Cafe, 1203 13th St., Suite A, Boulder Tickets: Free Info: innisfreepoetry.com

Good reads Want to try a new poetry book? Co-owner Brian Buckley recommends: • A local book: "Wastoid," by Mathias Svalina of Denver. "He took the themes Shakespeare sonnets and rewrote them in our time and place," Buckley says. "They're heartbreaking and beautiful, joyous language pieces to read." • For the new year: "Geography III," by Elizabeth Bishop. "Poems in here are full of questions that could be good for the beginning of a new year," Buckley says. He says the book poses questions about travel, your place in the world and whether you are doing the things your soul needs you to be doing. "It's a beautiful, small book," Buckley says.

This place is different. It aims to be an island.

The front door proclaims to those on busy University Hill, "Poetry and fair trade matter."

Here, thoughts and emotions join words that find their rhythm, both silently on the shelves and sometimes loudly on stage. The space is small and, therefore, carefully curated. The coffee is fair trade, organic and local, and the books for sale offer exclusively poetry.

In fact, Innisfree is one of four poetry-only bookstores in the nation.

It was inspired by the nearly 90-year-old Grolier Poetry Book Shop in Harvard Square in Cambridge, Mass. Seattle is home to another poetry bookstore, and the fourth and newest, in Brooklyn, is temporarily closed because of a new baby.

Boulder's Innisfree, named after a William Butler Yeats poem, "The Lake Isle of Innisfree," is celebrating its fifth year.

Justin Medford reads from his book of poems as Gary Erb looks on during the weekly poetry open mic at the Innisfree Poetry Bookstore & Cafe. ( Paul Aiken / Staff Photographer )

When husband-and-wife cofounders Brian Buckley and Kate Hunter decided to open a niche bookstore so close to campus, they faced a range of responses, Buckley says.

"Some said, 'We're rooting for you,' " he says. "Some smirked and said, 'Good luck,' especially on The Hill, where things come and go."

Poetry book sales in regular bookstores are minuscule, says Buckley. And the National Endowment for the Arts recently reported only 6.7 percent of American adults read poetry last year, down from 12 percent in 2002 — marking the most significant drop-off of any genre.

But Boulder's not a typical city, he says.

Some residents go out of their way to support a small business, even though Starbucks is walking distance away, he says. English and creative writing teachers at the University of Colorado, Naropa University and area high schools often conduct classes at Innisfree, he says.

The Boulder Writing Dates Meetup Group gathers at Innisfree on Saturday mornings once a month. They talk about their writing projects and then write for several hours.

Organizer Norah Charles, of Boulder, says she prefers Innisfree because it's quiet, supportive of literature and inspirational.

"It's a place to work and feel inspired," Charles says. "You can go back and forth between the books and your work, and that's pretty cool."

She says that, unlike other Boulder bookstore-coffee shops, Innisfree is calm, intimate and not too loud.

"Innisfree is a serious gem," she says, adding it might not be the best place to hang out and talk, considering other patrons often are silently reading and writing.

The next Writing Dates get-together, free and open to the public, is 9 a.m.-noon on Valentine's Day. Although the group has more than 100 members, about a dozen attend the monthly events.

Poetry in Boulder

In the evenings, local poets flock to Innisfree. They share their words during the weekly Tuesday open mics or listen to a new featured poet or musical guest on Thursdays.

Kate Heidelbach and Dave Essig show their appreciation for a reader during Innisfree s poetry open mic. ( Paul Aiken / Staff Photographer )

The shop also plays host to special events, such as the Literature and Arts Festival, at 3 p.m. Feb. 11, organized by the Literary Buffs of CU's English department.

Boulder already has earned a name for itself in the poetry world, as home to Naropa University's Jack Kerouac School of Disembodied Poetics, founded by poets Anne Waldman and Allen Ginsberg. Naropa's annual, internationally known Summer Writing Program brings in more than 60 guest faculty members, and the poetics school itself holds weekly readings, performances and discussions.

Nearby CU is home to assistant professor Noah Eli Gordan and associate professor Julie Carr, both authors of multiple poetry books and recipients of big-name awards. Ruth Allen Kocher, professor and associate chair of the creative writing program, is also an award-winning, published poet.

Clubs such as the Boulder Poetry Tribe boldly proclaim that Boulder's poetry scene is "dynamic and thriving." One will find poetry readings at coffee shops, such as The Laughing Goat, and poetry clubs at other bookstores, including the Living Poets Society at the Boulder Book Store.

"For a small town, it's amazing what goes on in the poetry realm," Buckley says. "There were amazing things going on anyway, and we'd like to think we added another little ripple supporting the art of poetry."

But even so, Buckley says, he doesn't believe he could keep the store open without the coffee component.

He and his wife met in a poetry class at college in Boston, he says, and began dreaming about a poetry-exclusive bookstore then. After 20 years of teaching, Buckley says he decided to finally pursue the idea.

"The store is an attempt to honor the art of poetry, the muse, the teachers and parents who delivered poetry so wisely, and the way in which Kate and I met," he says.

Buckley says poetry has always been a part of his life.

"Growing up a child in Boston," he says, "poetry was prevalent in our Irish neighborhood. There was pride in it, especially where many Irish people in Boston had crossed the ocean and felt like it was a bridge back to Ireland."

To Buckley, poetry is so important because it speaks to our inner voices.

"When you're reading it, you feel that someone took incredible care with word choice, placement, deciding the beats, for the words to appear on the page in this form, this shape," he says. "It's a writer-reader exchange that's quiet, intimate, that flushes through the heart, soul and mind as you read it."

Aimee Heckel: 303-473-1359, heckela@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/aimeemay