GARNER, N.C. (WNCN) – A Garner woman is taking it upon herself to find answers for thousands of people struggling with health insurance. Her mission started just this week, but has already gained millions of supporters.

Tessa Stanton’s concerns started when her mother was unable to get a much-needed prescription refilled. Stanton soon realized it wasn’t a problem unique to them, but thousands of people across the country.

“These are people, human beings that are dealing with this that are sick. Our nation is sick. And my mom is sick and I can’t get her the help she needs,” said Stanton.

Stanton’s mother, who recently changed insurance to an Affordable Care Act plan, is in the process of moving from Alabama. She’s also battling health issues, so when she started running low on medication, she quickly started looking for a new doctor.

“She called numerous, numerous offices and they would not take the insurance and they would not tell her why they wouldn’t take it. That’s what was very frustrating,” said Stanton.

Wondering if it was a state issue, Stanton called the Alabama Department of Insurance, the state where the plan was purchased.

Stanton said, “I called their office to find out you know, what it is that she needs to do with this insurance. And the woman I spoke to was very frustrated. She said she had numerous calls about the same thing. She didn’t have the answers. And the best answer she could give me was to call Obama.”

Stanton did call the White House, but wasn’t able to leave a message for Mr. Obama.

After that, Stanton had enough. She took to social media, and not only has her video gotten more than 8.5 million views as of Saturday, she’s gotten similar stories from people all over the country. She says it has moved her to do as much as she can to shed some light on health insurance issues.

Stanton’s mother was able to find a doctor that would take her insurance, but can’t get in to see them until October. Until then she might just have to go without the medication she needs. In the meantime Stanton is trying to find a different insurance plan for her mother.

“Something more stable and maybe I can get answers for her,” she said.

WNCN reached out to the provider of the insurance police and the Alabama Department of Insurance, but have not heard back from either organization.