A memorial will be held Tuesday for former state Sen. Stephanie Takis, an Aurora Democrat known for her mischievous twinkle, great laugh and mentorship to several Adams County politicians.

Takis, who was 69, died Aug. 5 at home. She was born in Salt Lake City and had worked as a financial analyst for the federal government and as a congressional liaison. Takis served on the Aurora City Council from 1989 to 1993 and in the legislature from 1997 to 2008.

Her memorial service is scheduled for 5 p.m. Tuesday at Moorhead Park, 2390 Havana St.

“Stephanie Takis knew who she was, what she believed and delivered it with her one-of-a-kind voice,” said Senate President Morgan Carroll, D-Aurora. “I loved being around her. She was grounded, no drama, warm, but behind that smile everyone knew — don’t mess with Adams County women!”

Here’s what some friends, lawmakers and lobbyists had to say about Takis:

Friend Carolyn Boller:

When something struck Steph as funny she could let out the biggest laugh and her whole being went into the laugh. I can still hear it.

Former House Majority Leader Alice Madden, D-Boulder:

Stephanie Takis knew exactly why she went into public service and she never for one moment forgot that she wanted to represent those who would otherwise not have a voice. She had a core moral center from which she never swayed. A public servant must know themselves and Stephanie knew herself and her constituents; that is a rare quality in today’s “where does the wind blow me” political positions. I admired her greatly and I truly hope she is not a vanishing breed. Go with God my friend.

Lobbyist Greg Romberg:

Stephanie had the remarkable ability to take every aspect of her work very seriously while at the same time being able to be completely irreverent about what was going on. You knew you were in for a treat whenever you saw that mischievous look on her face that preceded an insight that was always both spot on and completely hilarious.

Friend Lois Claggett

Stephanie and I met while working as management analysts at Fitzsimons Medical Center about 30 years ago. We became immediate friends and the wonderful ride began. Shortly after I met her she introduced me to her family: her sister, Andrea, her brother-in-law, Jerry, and her nephew, Andrew. We started to spend holidays together, especially Greek Easter where I acquired my love for Greek food.

My husband said to us one time that he was surprised that we worked together as we never talked shop. Stephanie and I looked at each other and said, “Why?”

One morning I took a break at work and went into Stephanie’s office to chat. She was reading the paper and we started to talk. All of a sudden she said that we needed to become more active in the community. That was not on my radar but she was reading the Aurora newspaper and there was a listing of vacancies for several of the commissions. I told her that I didn’t think I knew much about any of them and she said probably no one else did either. So we both applied for two and within a few months we both were accepted. She went on the Budget Advisory commission and I went on the Aurora Historic Preservation Commission. The rest is history now — and all from a morning break chat.

Former Rep. Judy Solano, D-Brighton:

Stephanie was a “numbers person.” When I was a new legislator, I could count on Sen. Takis to give me the details about the state budget. She was also an expert on transportation issues and I respected her advice. Sen. Takis was an exemplary public servant, serving in a humble, yet strong manner. Her wisdom and presence will be missed.

Sen. Lois Tochtrop, D-Westminster:

Stephanie was my mentor when I was first elected to the House in 1999. She taught me a lot, especially the three things I followed during my service as a legislator. 1. Remember who brought you to the dance. 2. Vote your district and 3. Your word is everything, never lie.

Stephanie was a great legislator and one of the Adams County women who embodied the saying, “Don’t mess with the Adams

County women.” She will be missed by the Adams County Democrats and many others whose lives she touched.

Former Rep. Edward Casso, D-Commerce City

Stephanie would share a happening and when I laughed, she would say, “You liked that, did you?” And then she would laugh her special “Stephanie laugh.”

She and I served together in 2007 and 2008. Whenever a major vote was taken in the House or a major debate had occurred, she would call for me in the House. She would send a Senate sargent to have me go to the Senate floor.

If she didn’t approve of my action, she gave me an earful — which happened once or twice. But if she did approve, she didn’t congratulate me or discuss the event. She would simply just give me an approving wink of the eye through those big glasses. I think that captures who she was, and how sweet and endearing she was too.

Laura Huerta, Adams County Democrat

Stephanie would share a happening and when I laughed, she would say, “You liked that, did you?” And then she would laugh her special “Stephanie laugh.”

Here’s what the Aurora Sentinel had to say when she ran for reelection: “Takis is a consistent advocate for elderly, poor and middle-class residents who have big needs and few paid lobbyists under the gold dome. In a district that has some of the most gritty urban and quiet rural parts of the state, Takis has been able to strike a fair balance in the message she conveys to fellow lawmakers at the Capitol.”