A proposed budget for fiscal year 2015-16 shows Solano County in a better position than the past few years.

Although slow, Solano is emerging from the local housing market collapse and the effects of the recession, according to the budget posted online at www.solanocounty.com.

County Administrator Birgitta Corsello released the recommended budget of $892,269,052 for fiscal year 2015-16, an increase of $22,051,524 or 2.5 percent from the budget for 2014-15 fiscal year. The recommended budget does rely on increases in revenues, the use of various fund balances and a limited draw from reserves.

Still, Corsello reiterates, “The county budget for fiscal year 2015-16 is balanced.”

“While we continue to have a structural gap between revenues and expenditures in the general fund, the gap has narrowed through the efforts of everyone,” she wrote in the budget report and added that the county is relying on the use of one time fund balances from various funding sources and draws from committed reserves to fill the gap. “Departments must continue efforts to maximize revenues and cost recovery opportunities to provide services while reducing ongoing cost of services.”

Meanwhile, there are no provisions in the operating budget for the coming fiscal year for salary increases.

The budget, Corsello explained, successfully manages to address the board’s strategic priorities and remains consistent with the county’s fiscally prudent management policies.

The budget also reflects a workforce of 2,926.45 full-time employee positions, excluding extra help positions, a net increase of 110.70 full-time employees from the previous fiscal year. The “modest” increase of 3.9 percent, according to Corsello, addresses new mandates and associated services related to the Public Safety Realignment, Proposition 47, Affordable Care Act, Stanton Correctional Facility, cost avoidance measures and change in operational needs driven by workload.

Additionally, the financial report noted that the budget includes implementation of new technology to provide staff the tools necessary to perform and succeed at their jobs. The budget also includes a continuing investment in the maintenance and improvements of county facilities, as well as funding for employee training and development programs, allowing the county to meet the changing needs of those who live, work and visit Solano County, Corsello said.

The Solano County Board of Supervisors will likely schedule budget hearings on the plan to begin at 9 a.m., on June 22, in the Board Chamber of the County Government Center, 675 Texas St., Fairfield. During the hearings, the board will be requested to increase and/or fund additional revenue to offset positions, investments in technology and county facilities, contributions to non-agencies, reserve levels for unfunded liabilities and the use of one-time funds received in Fiscal Year 2014-15.