Re: “Importance of funding Planned Parenthood” [Opinion, Aug. 13]: For someone who is dean of a prestigious law school, Erwin Chemerinsky’s intellectual dishonesty is nothing short of amazing. For starters, the Washington Post fact-checked the 3 percent statistic regarding how many visits to Planned Parenthood are for abortions and called the figure “misleading” and derived using “meaningless and incomplete comparisons.”

Secondly, we can all log on to YouTube and view the incriminating videos in their entirety. “Intact hearts, lungs and livers” are the words used. Planned Parenthood can call it fetal tissue, they can say they make no profit, they can say it is legal. The fact remains that these folks are manipulating human babies in utero to harvest their organs, an abhorrent practice. People like Chemerinsky must use intellectual dishonesty to help themselves avoid this reality, because if they did not, they would have to fully confront the fact that what they are supporting is reprehensible.

Also important to remember is that there are thousands of publicly funded clinics across the country that provide women’s health services such as those Chemerinsky bemoans will be lost if my tax dollars stop funding this macabre organization. Besides, Obamacare was supposed to have solved such health care issues. Women are supposed to have access to all the mammograms, pap smears and contraception they need. If, despite the promises of the Affordable Care Act, women, like me, still can’t afford them, perhaps Chemerinsky should address that issue.

G. Moffitt

Irvine

• • •

First of all, I am an ardent supporter of women’s health services. While saying this, I’m furious that my hard-earned tax dollars are being used for late-term abortions and selling the fetus body parts to a profit-making company. Mr. Chemerinsky should be forced to watch a late-term abortion as the fetus’ head is being crushed, then cut up for the body parts. I’m wondering if this would change his opinion of Planned Parenthood. This barbaric practice has nothing to do with women’s health.

Pat Elliott

Orange

Defending the indefensible

If primitive people eat the dead hearts of their enemies, it is identified as cannibalism.

Dean Chemerinsky contrarily might write about the nutritional value of cardiac organs and suggest not condemning the practice in the name of improving the nutritional status of primitive tribes. If a beating heart were torn out of a living person, then civilized people would identify it as unspeakable murder. Chemerinsky contrarily might call it justifiable because the cardiac patient might do something even worse, if that is possible, in order get a needed living heart.

Killing a baby in the womb is infanticide and murder enough. Justifying the practice of stealing its organs stretches the definition of unimaginable horror. Pity the students studying law under a professor that finds cannibalism not only legal but worthy of public funding.

Joseph Mastropaolo

Huntington Beach

• • •

I cannot believe a person who is a dean at UCI School of Law could be so hoodwinked by these abortion pirates. Holly O’Donnell, a former “blood and tissue procurement technician,” worked with Planned Parenthood clinics to obtain fetal tissue and organs from babies. She stated clearly in the video that Planned Parenthood often did this without the consent of the mother. This is clearly a violation of the law.

She stated: “Imagine you were an abortion patient and someone was just stealing your baby’s parts. It’s just terrible.” Furthermore, much better results for, as Mr. Chemerinsky stated, “use of fetal tissue in medical research offers hope for curing many diseases,” can be obtained from umbilical cord cells and adult stem cells. There is just no cause to take a baby’s life for this. Medical ethics does not condone performing an evil (taking a life) for a good (medical research).

Bob Stone

Irvine