As a founding member of art-rock tricksters Devo, Gerald Casale is no stranger to opportunistic stunts.

His pioneering new-wave band has built a four-decade career on the mangled remains of punk and pop music’s collision, always prancing one step ahead of critics with outlandish imagery and ideas that are simultaneously comedic and academic, colorful and soulless.

But when it came to Devo’s latest tour, Casale — who sings and plays bass and keyboards — wasn’t simply trying to craft a wily, sarcastic statement or pander to his cult fan base.

“The original idea for this tour was, of course, an artistic conceit like Devo often does,” Casale said over the phone from California. “We were going to play only these ‘Hardcore’ songs that existed before anybody knew about us and we were in our experimental, insular period of proto-Devo. And we thought, ‘It’ll be so bizarre for us and the crowd, so let’s do it!’ But then it became like a memorial tour and a way to raise money for his family.”

The “his family” in question is that of Robert Casale, a.k.a. Bob 2, Gerald’s brother and longtime Devo guitarist/keyboardist who died of heart failure in February at age 61.

“Bob’s family was destitute because he didn’t have insurance and there’s all these catastrophic care bills because he was trying to get Obamacare right when it happened,” Casale said. “So we started a donation site that Pearl Jam and Shepard Fairey put on their sites. But that wasn’t enough to help with (Bob’s) family not losing their house.”

Casale had already pitched the idea for a “Hardcore Devo” tour, as the band’s 1974-1977 period has come to be known, which would consist exclusively of songs originally recorded on four-track tape machines in the basements of Akron, Ohio, where Devo formed.

But with the renewed emphasis on fundraising for Casale’s late brother’s family — and the prospect of reviving twitchy art-punk masterpieces like “Jocko Homo,” “Mongoloid” and “Midget” — lead singer Mark Mothersbaugh and the rest of Devo decided it was high time for a “Hardcore” return.

“It’ll even be more raw and more primitive because we’re doing it as a four-piece,” Casale said of the tour, which plays Denver’s Summit Music Hall on June 23. “We couldn’t possibly short-term think of putting somebody else on stage to play Bob’s parts. But we started as a raw, experimental art band and we were kind of like the White Stripes or the Black Keys when they were still in diapers, so we think we can pull this off. It’ll be intense, and it won’t be slick, but it’ll be catchy and mind-blowing.”

Casale’s confidence is well-deserved. He’s directed most of Devo’s music videos (including the bondage-themed, MTV-era classic “Whip It”) and collaborated on almost every other aspect of Devo’s famously nerdy, creepy visual aesthetic.

But even without the band’s usual theatrics, Casale thinks the “Hardcore”-era songs will stand on their own and act as a fitting tribute to the inspiration behind the tour.

“Devo was always about being somewhat intentionally infantile and transgressive and disrespectful and politically incorrect,” Casale, 65, said. “We’re older now, but luckily most of the songs are so whacked-out and conceptual that it’s not like we’re touring as a group who made our fortune doing ‘Jessie’s Girl.’ Devo songs were never really of-their-time. You don’t listen to ‘She didn’t know I was a midget’ and go, ‘Oh yeah, that’s 1975 right there!’ “

John Wenzel: 303-954-1642, jwenzel@denverpost.com or twitter.com/johnwenzel

DEVO PERFORMS “HARDCORE DEVO: SONGS FROM ’74-’77.” Proto-punk art-rock classics. 8 p.m. June 23 at Summit Music Hall, 1902 Blake St. $45-$50 GA; $100 VIP. 303-487-0111 or sodajerkpresents.com.