COLUMBUS, Ohio -- Patients in a pilot program at MetroHealth Medical Center that set an example for the expansion of Medicaid in Ohio are about to join the state’s newly expanded health program.

Patients receiving care through MetroHealth program known as MetroHealth Care Plus will be moved into the state’s expanded Medicaid pool this weekend in anticipation of their coverage program expiring at the end of the month.

MetroHealth Care Plus is a Medicaid waiver program that was launched in February 2013 as a demonstration project. MetroHealth tapped $36 million that it gets each year from county taxpayers to qualify for $64 million in federal Medicaid matching funds to pay for the program.

Before Ohio expanded its Medicaid coverage limits, as allowed under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, the program was the only one of its kind in the state. It was designed to enroll up to 30,000 Cuyahoga County adults who did not have health care coverage for free care.

But the expanded Medicaid coverage limits also cover participants in MetroHealth Care Plus. Greg Moody, executive director of Ohio’s Office of Health Transformation, said the hope is that the roughly 28,000 participants won’t notice much change.

“There may be some slight changes,” he said. “I think the MetroHealth benefit was not as generous as the Medicaid benefit, so when the conversion happens some people might see an increase (in their health care coverage).”

MetroHealth, in a letter to the program participants, said once the patients get their new Medicaid cards they will receive instructions on how to select a managed care program. There will not be any lapse in coverage.

Patients in the program with questions can contact MetroHealth Care Plus at 1-800-362-4934. The patients will be added to a quickly growing group of Ohioans covered because of Medicaid's newly expanded income guidelines.

Medicaid signups in Ohio surged at the end of March. The number of newly eligible clients -- those who were able to sign up because of the expanded income limits -- is now above 100,000.

Nearly 75,000 more people who already were eligible for Medicaid coverage under the old income levels but had not signed up also have been added to the system.

Ultimately, state actuaries estimate, there are more than 563,000 Ohioans newly eligible for coverage as a result of the expanded income limits, and by June 2015 as many as 366,000 are expected to be enrolled.