Chemo isn’t the only toxic game in CancerLand - financial toxicity can be a huge threat, too.

Financial toxicity is a term coined to cover both the real financial burden and the related emotional distress that routinely hit patients and their families facing large treatment bills.

Stories are common about patients who are thrown into bankruptcy, refuse care because they don’t think they can afford it, or are faced with big expenses after unknowingly choosing the wrong coverage option.

Dan Sherman hears more such stories than most.

As a clinical financial consultant for Mercy Health Saint Mary’s, the Lacks Cancer Center, he’s been tackling those issues differently than most since 2009. The results he describes in the September/October “Oncology Issues,” the journal of the Association of Community Cancer Centers, are simply jaw dropping:

-- Year two of the program: 218 patients received navigation services, reducing out-of-pocket responsibility for patients by more than $2.6 million and saving the hospital system more than $1 million in reduced charity and bad debt;

-- Year three: 168 patients received navigation; patients’ out-of-pocket responsibility reduced by more than $4 million; hospital system savings: $2.5 million.

-- Year four: 211 patients served; out-of-pocket responsibilities reduced by more than $5 million; hospital system savings: $3.7 million.

Key to effective financial navigation, he writes, is “presenting patients with all the available choices in the context of their medical condition.”

Beginning with a patient’s diagnosis and treatment plan, he evaluates insurance coverage needed to pay for it. What the patient doesn’t have, Sherman goes to work finding and recommending to the patient.

As a true Bureaucracy Buster, he even fills out those incomprehensible forms for patients to sign.

He credits the rollout of the federally funded Pre-Existing Condition Insurance Plan during year two of the Saint Mary’s program, for “significantly increased savings to both our patients and our cancer program.”

Read his entire article on Oncology Financial Navigators.

“Most often I see patients who are confused about the high out-of-pocket responsibilities that come with the Medicare plan they have enrolled in,” he writes, citing some 30 to 60 different Medicare coverage options.

For example: Most Medicare Advantage plans have a cost-sharing responsibility of 20 percent for infusion services with out-of-pocket costs ranging from $3,400 to $6,700 a year. In many cases, if the patient has supplemental Medigap coverage, that policy, not the patient, would pay the out-of-pocket charges.

No surprise: His yearly seminars on Medicare plans offered in October through Saint Mary’s and the Cancer and Hematology Centers of Western Michigan, fill fast.

Sherman’s bottom line advice: Don’t assume you can’t afford care and don’t make medical decisions based on financials.

“There may be avenues to lower your costs.”

True, there may not, but you won’t know if you don’t ask.

Next: The Affordable Care Act and more

Sue Schroder, former features editor for The Grand Rapids Press, was diagnosed with non-Hodgkin lymphoma in late 2009. Email her at livenow.ss@gmail.com. For an index of her columns on MLive.com/grand-rapids, visit http://bit.ly/sueschroder.