The people who established this nation intended for a continual rotation of citizens for elective positions, not career politicians like Collin Peterson. Let’s value private enterprise and personal responsibility. Let’s spend within our means and not create more debt for our children and grandchildren.

Is Collin Peterson responsible for that? Yes, because the first thing he did when he was elected to that Congress was to vote for Nancy Pelosi. He put her in charge of the machinery of Congress for that result to occur. That’s how Congress works. He knows that much of what occurs there is procedural and through committees, so the leader wields incredible power. She has a say as to who serves on which committee, and how, and if, bills move through the House. Furthermore, he knows that Congress works essentially through a two party system, and they tend to vote in groups, so what the leader pushes to a large measure determines what the result will be.

So, it doesn’t matter that he voted “no,” on the bill, because he voted “yes” when he voted for Nancy Pelosi to lead the Democrats in Congress, and that is the vote that mattered. Yes, Collin Peterson does vote conservatively on a number of issues important to the people of the Seventh District. Only he knows whether that is a matter of conviction or tactics to get re-elected. However, has his vote against a Democratic bill ever meant the difference of whether the Democratic bill passes? I don’t think so, and so it is always a safe, meaningless vote — except for his re-electability. Furthermore, what is telling here is that Mr. Peterson says he won’t vote to repeal Obamacare. That speaks volumes as to what his real position was on Obamacare.

What has been the first thing Collin Peterson has done when he returns to Washington after being elected? He votes for Nancy Pelosi. So, regardless of how Collin Peterson otherwise may vote, a vote for Collin Peterson is a vote for Nancy Pelosi and gun control; A vote for Collin Peterson is a vote for the Nancy Pelosi and Obamacare and poorer medical care; A vote for Collin Peterson is a vote for Nancy Pelosi and “transgender” men in women’s bathrooms; A vote for Collin Peterson is a vote for Nancy Pelosi and Islam and Muslims sweeping across the nation; A vote for Collin Peterson is a vote for the Nancy Pelosi and more and more in-your-face control by the United Nations over our lives; A vote for Collin Peterson is a vote for Nancy Pelosi and extreme environmentalism. A vote for Collin Peterson is a vote for Nancy Pelosi and Planned Parenthood and the butchering of babies and the sale of baby parts; A vote for Collin Peterson is a vote for Nancy Pelosi and mega corporate farming and disenfranchising our children from remaining on the land and continuing farming which is the most common form of free enterprise; A vote for Collin Peterson is a vote for Nancy Pelosi and more and more welfare that the nation can’t support and that isn’t good for the welfare recipient or the taxpayer, and a complete collapse of our economy due to run-away debt; A vote for Collin Peterson is a vote for Nancy Pelosi and this massive tax and spend program that is wrapped around this lie called global warming.