WASHINGTON, DC — AARP today commends the Ways and Means Committee for introducing and passing the bipartisan Protecting Integrity in Medicare Act (PIMA) that targets waste, fraud, and abuse in Medicare. PIMA, introduced by Reps. Kevin Brady (R-TX) and Jim McDermott (D-WA), would help strengthen and preserve Medicare for future generations by helping to prevent valuable resources from being stolen or misused. PIMA removes Social Security numbers from Medicare cards, fights prescription drug abuse, and includes portions of the Preventing and Reducing Improper Medicare and Medicaid Expenditures (PRIME) Act, authored by Reps. Peter Roskam (R-IL) and John Carney (D-DE), that AARP has also endorsed.

“On behalf of AARP’s nearly 38 million members and the many millions of Americans with Medicare, we applaud the advancement of PIMA,” said AARP Senior Vice President Joyce Rogers. “AARP is committed to improving the efficiency and cost-effectiveness of our nation’s health care system. This bipartisan legislation will help older Americans by rooting out and preventing waste, fraud, and abuse in the Medicare program.”

AARP has been working hard for many years to fight health care fraud, including educating its members about how to protect themselves from fraud and encouraging them to report fraudulent activity when it occurs. Waste, fraud, and abuse increase the cost of health care for both individuals and the health care system.

# # #



About AARP

AARP is a nonprofit, nonpartisan organization, with a membership of nearly 38 million, that helps people turn their goals and dreams into real possibilities, strengthens communities and fights for the issues that matter most to families such as healthcare, employment and income security, retirement planning, affordable utilities and protection from financial abuse. We advocate for individuals in the marketplace by selecting products and services of high quality and value to carry the AARP name as well as help our members obtain discounts on a wide range of products, travel, and services. A trusted source for lifestyle tips, news and educational information, AARP produces AARP The Magazine, the world's largest circulation magazine; AARP Bulletin; www.aarp.org; AARP TV & Radio; AARP Books; and AARP en Español, a Spanish-language website addressing the interests and needs of Hispanics. AARP does not endorse candidates for public office or make contributions to political campaigns or candidates. The AARP Foundation is an affiliated charity that provides security, protection, and empowerment to older persons in need with support from thousands of volunteers, donors, and sponsors. AARP has staffed offices in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands. Learn more at www.aarp.org.