Both the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) recently announced funding opportunities for HIV services that may be of interest to readers of the AIDS.gov blog.

CDC Funding for High Impact HIV Prevention Programs for CBOs: Deadline November 14

CDC announced the availability of fiscal year 2015 funds for a cooperative agreement program for community-based organizations (CBOs) to develop and implement High-Impact HIV Prevention Programs in the following two categories:

Category A: HIV prevention services for members of racial/ethnic minority communities. These services must focus on members at greatest risk of acquiring and transmitting HIV infection. Examples of these minority communities include, but are not limited to, Black/African Americans, Hispanics/Latinos, American Indians/Alaskan Natives, Asian, and Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islanders.

HIV prevention services for members of racial/ethnic minority communities. These services must focus on members at greatest risk of acquiring and transmitting HIV infection. Examples of these minority communities include, but are not limited to, Black/African Americans, Hispanics/Latinos, American Indians/Alaskan Natives, Asian, and Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islanders. Category B: HIV prevention services for members of groups at greatest risk for acquiring and transmitting HIV infection, regardless of race/ethnicity. Examples include, but are not limited to, HIV-positive persons, men who have sex with men, injection drug users, and transgender persons.

Applicants are required to provide HIV prevention services for both HIV-positive persons and high-risk HIV-negative persons, regardless of the category for which funding is being requested.

This opportunity is limited to non-profit organizations (e.g., community, faith-based, and tribal organizations) that must be located and provide services in the 50 specified Metropolitan Statistical Areas [PDF 284KB], selected based upon having the highest unadjusted number of diagnoses of HIV infection in 2011.

Pre-application technical assistance is available to prospective applicants via workshops and webinar conference calls. Read more about the TA opportunities.

Up to $210 million is available to support up to 100 awards for a five-year period of performance. Applications are due November 14, 2014.

Read more information about Funding Opportunity Announcement: PS15-1502: Comprehensive High-Impact HIV Prevention Projects for Community-Based Organizations.

HRSA Announces Availability of $25 Million to Support HIV Early Intervention Services (HRSA-15-027)

HRSA’s HIV/AIDS Bureau is accepting applications for the fiscal year 2015 (FY15), Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program (RWHAP) Part C, HIV Early Intervention Services (EIS) Program. The purpose of this grant program is to provide HIV primary care in the outpatient setting targeted to low-income, vulnerable, medically underserved persons living with HIV (PLWH). Applicants must propose to provide a comprehensive continuum of outpatient HIV primary care services in the service area including: 1) targeted HIV counseling, testing, and referral; 2) medical evaluation and clinical care; 3) other primary care services; and 4) referrals to other health services.

This competition is open to existing and new organizations proposing to provide RWHAP Part C funded services in the service areas as listed in the funding announcement.

Approximately $26.4 million is expected to be available annually to fund up to 54 awardees. The actual amount available will not be determined until enactment of the FY’15 Federal budget.

Applications are due November 14, 2014, with an anticipated project start date of May 1, 2015, for two-year projects. HRSA requires applicants for this funding opportunity announcement to apply electronically through Grants.gov.

Read more about the funding opportunity, including details on eligible applicants, the application submission process, and application requirements at http://www.hrsa.gov/grants/index.html.