Recruited by the Rev. Jackie Jackson, right, Dominique Brown, 25, a student at Cincinnati State University, fills out a card to make an appointment to get help enrolling in health insurance. Jackson, working for the nonprofit Enroll America, goes to the university on Thursdays to offer information about the Affordable Care Act. (Photo: Anne Saker, The Cincinnati Enquirer)

CINCINNATI — A voice called out to Andrea Roth, 20, as she swung through the foot traffic of changing classes in the Advanced Technology and Learning Center at Cincinnati State University.

"Young lady by the elevator! Do you have health insurance?"

Roth stopped and turned to find a man at a folding table smiling at her. She replied, "No, I don't." The man said, "Come on over here, let's talk about that." Roth approached the Rev. Jackie Jackson for counseling about the Affordable Care Act.

Roth is among those age 18-35 whose participation is deemed critical for the long-term success of the federal law that extends health insurance coverage to millions of Americans. Across the region, recruiting is under way to help young adults sign up as enrollment for 2015 coverage starts Saturday.

U.S. officials have estimated that the Affordable Care Act needs about 40 percent of the "millennial" generation to enroll in health insurance to offset the higher costs of insuring older people.

Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell underscored the importance of enrolling millennials Thursday in a campaign swing through Cincinnati ahead of open enrollment.

She said the healthcare.gov website has been retooled to better appeal to millennials and increase the potential for sign-ups.

"The penetration in mobile is tremendous with this age group," Burwell said. "That was another important step to take in making sure the ability to apply through mobile became easier."

About a quarter of Ohio and Kentucky enrollees this year — the first year of health reform coverage — are millennials. That's slightly less than national percentages, which officials say needs to be higher.

In March, President Barack Obama made a direct appeal to millennials to sign up by appearing on the Internet comedy show Between Two Ferns. The government later found that millennials' enrollment surged in the last month of the sign-up period.

“We’ve got to go where they are. We know they’re busy – a lot of them are going to school and holding down a job. It’s important to be where they can see us.” The Rev. Jackie Jackson, on getting millennials to enroll in ACA

Knowing that, nonprofit groups that are helping Americans sign up, such as Enroll America, are starting this enrollment season by focusing more closely on younger adults.

"That's why I'm here," said Jackson. "We've got to go where they are. We know they're busy – a lot of them are going to school and holding down a job. It's important to be where they can see us.

"Hey there, young man in the Reds cap! Do you have health insurance?"

In prodding millennials, Trey Daly, Ohio executive director for Enroll America, said his organization will also remind them that going without health insurance will mean a much stiffer penalty in 2015. This year, the "individual mandate" means a tax penalty of $95 or 1 percent of modified adjusted gross income for the person who doesn't buy health insurance.

Next year, the penalty increases to $325 or 2 percent of modified adjusted gross income.

"Last year, we emphasized the purely positive message with the Affordable Care Act, especially that there was financial assistance available," Daly said. "But one of the things we found later was that for many, the existence of the mandate and the fine if you don't have coverage was a significant motivating factor."

At Cincinnati State, Jackson said the fishing was good last year, with many students realizing they needed coverage.

"This year, it's harder," he said as dozens of students walked past the table. "Last year, we enrolled a lot of students because it was the first time for the marketplaces and for Medicaid. This year, we have to dig deeper."

Contributing: James Pilcher of The Enquirer

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1uyDHl5