Potential conflict for insurance agents on state exchange

Photo: Max Whittaker, Getty Images Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 Peter Lee of Covered California, which refers consumers to insurance agents who are paid by commission. Peter Lee of Covered California, which refers consumers to insurance agents who are paid by commission. Photo: Max Whittaker, Getty Images Potential conflict for insurance agents on state exchange 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

Here's something consumers should know when they buy an individual health insurance policy through an independent agent advertised on Covered California: These agents get a commission when they sell a policy, and they might get a bigger commission if they sell one policy over another.

For example, Kaiser Permanente pays agents $100 per member the first year and $50 for renewals, according to Howard Golden, vice president with Brock Financial & Insurance Services in San Francisco.

Blue Shield pays 4 percent of the premium each year. That's $240 a year for a policy that costs $500 a month (before tax subsidies).

It's not unusual for insurance agents to represent multiple insurance companies and earn different commissions based on what product they sell, but salespeople don't usually get referrals from a government entity, like they do from Covered California.

The state-run insurance exchange advertises agents who sell health policies eligible for a federal tax subsidy on its website. To spur enrollment, last week it started sending agents the names of people who started an application on Covered California but did not finish it.

Agents who sell these policies must undergo training and are supposed to provide unbiased advice. Their contract requires them "not to steer Consumers towards or against any of the (qualified health plans) sold by the Exchange solely on the basis of payment schedules or other consideration made to the agent."

Even so, "there is a potential conflict of interest," says Julie Silas, senior attorney with Consumers Union's West Coast office.

Covered California does not disclose that agents get commissions on its website, saying it's unnecessary. "It's obvious, if you buy through an agent, that's how they make their money," spokesman Roy Kennedy says.

An agent is only one way people can buy policies through Covered California. They can also sign up with a certified enrollment counselor, county human services agency, an insurance company directly or Covered California itself.

Certified enrollment counselors, who also have gone through training and agree to provide unbiased advice, get $58 for each completed application and $25 a year for renewals starting in 2015. They often work for nonprofit organizations.

Covered California would not disclose how much agents get paid, saying that's between agents and the companies.

I got information about commissions for this story by calling independent agents. In some cases they were confirmed by the companies.

Most companies I spoke to said they are paying the same commissions for policies sold on and off Covered California.

Agents say they are not getting rich off Covered California policies; in some cases their commissions have been cut dramatically.

Before 2014, Blue Shield paid 12 percent of premiums the first year and 5 percent upon renewal, compared with the new 4 percent/4 percent schedule.

"Agents are blaming the Affordable Care Act" for commission cuts, says Susan Shargel, president of Shargel & Co. Insurance Services in San Francisco. Under the act, "80 percent of the premium collected has to be spent on health care-related costs. All those huge administrative costs are eating up that 20 percent. We come out of that."

Some companies, such as Anthem Blue Cross, will let agents keep their old, higher commission structure when they place customers with an expiring policy into a new ACA-compliant policy with the same company.

"Our agents will get paid on the commission scale at the time of the original sale," says Darrel Ng, a spokesman for Anthem Blue Cross.

Ng says Anthem has reduced commissions on new policies. "Because we expect agents to see much more volume, with more people in the individual market, commissions are lower than they used to be."

Agents point out that unlike enrollment counselors, they are licensed and regulated by the California Department of Insurance.

Unlike the individual market, when agents sell small group policies through Covered California, they will earn a flat 6.5 percent of the premium the first year, decreasing gradually to 5 percent in year six and thereafter.

Doug Heller, an independent consultant for consumer groups, says a flat-fee commission would be better for individuals too because ones based on a percentage of premiums gives agents an incentive to sell higher-priced policies.

The existing commission structure "is a real blind spot for Covered California," he says. "When consumers buy mandatory health insurance policies, the agent who sells it should have no incentive other than to get them into the policy that is most suited to the consumer. A flat-fee for the agents is a cleaner way to insure that."

Silas, of Consumers Union, hopes Covered California will monitor the sale of policies "to make sure there is no steering" of customers into policies based on commission or the health risk of consumers.

"I know the exchange takes seriously its responsibility to make sure everyone is treated fairly," she says.

Kennedy says that at Covered California, "we monitor complaints. If our office suspects something inappropriate, we alert the proper authority." In the case of agent sales practices, that would be the Department of Insurance.