At the center of the controversy surrounding leaked Vatican documents is a pair of books due out later this week. CBS news obtained a copy Tuesday of the more explosive of the two, in which author Gianluigi Nuzzi lays out what he calls "a true battle between good and evil."

The Republican presidential candidate is running a slow and steady campaign, and his poll numbers are rising. Rubio's uncompromising ambition and impatience are not recent developments; those key traits were evident even in his twenties, and could be seen in his approach to legislating as speaker of the Florida house.

A survey is giving new insight into our kids use of electronic devices. The report by Common Sense Media shows two-thirds of teens carry their own smartphones. We get an inside look at the research into how American kids spend their time online, and the results may surprise you.

When you use one of those handy "Sign in with Facebook or Google" shortcuts on an app or website, what personal information are you revealing in the process? Find out how to control the data you share as you roam different sites and services on your computer or smartphone.

In this epidemic of shootings the country is looking for solutions, and CBS News is listening to a variety of ideas to end the bloodshed. Kai Kloepfer was just 15 when 12 people were killed at a midnight movie screening in Aurora, Colorado. He tells CBS News about the "smart gun" technology he's working on to make guns that nobody can shoot but their rightful owners.

New numbers from the Pew Research Center show millennials are losing the faith. Less than half say religion is very important to them, and just half say they believe in God with absolute certainty, compared with nearly 70 percent of baby boomers. That attitude shift is changing the way Americans tie the knot.

Crowdsourcing isn't only for raising money via a Kickstarter campaign. Now, people are using the Internet to crowdsource funding to buy a house, pay for a wedding and even finance an operation. But there are caveats, and some potential pitfalls.

More top news:

U.S.

Keystone XL pipeline company asks U.S. to suspend review

Several booted from flight in L.A. claim discrimination

Protesters rappel from balcony at Colts-Panthers game

AP: Broken system lets problem officers jump from job to job

World

Prosecutor tries again for Pistorius murder conviction

Satellite detected heat flash as Russian jetliner went down

93-year-old ex-Auschwitz guard declared fit for trial

Politics

O'Malley to promise executive action to curb gun violence

Obama: U.S. troops won't fight ISIS on front lines in Syria

What's on the ballots for Election Day 2015?

Clinton meets families of gun violence victims

Business

7 financial pitfalls to avoid this fall

FCC fines companies for blocking Wi-Fi signals

Big Sugar vs. Big Corn goes to court

Science and Tech

Supreme Court justices spy over online search engines

Skype founders develop robot to deliver your groceries

Health

What women need to know about dense breast tissue

For some, Obamacare doesn't seem so affordable

Entertainment

Police backlash puts pressure on Tarantino's new movie

More "Hunger Games" attractions coming to U.S.