Letter writers endorse their preferred candidates and discuss election issues.

Buy Photo (Photo: Argus Leader )Buy Photo

Mike Rounds is the candidate to represent South Dakota

Rick Weiland appears on the South Dakota political scene again. This is his third attempt to obtain a position to represent our state in Washington. No, not that he hasn’t been a part of politics. In 1985, Weiland moved to the Washington, D.C., area to serve as Tom Daschle’s national finance director and senior advisor. Remember the senator who somehow forgot to file his income correctly? Daschle: “I made a $128,203 innocent mistake” (good advice by Weiland). In 1995, Weiland returned to South Dakota. After the 1996 election, Weiland was appointed by President Clinton to serve as the Region VII director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. He and the family moved to Evergreen, Colo. In 2001, Weiland returned to South Dakota, where he ran again for Congress in 2002, losing in the Democratic primary to Stephanie Herseth.

Weiland became the state director of AARP in 2002. He resigned that position too and joined the International Code Council (a nonprofit government organization) as the chief operating officer. Later, he became the CEO of the International Code Council (2006-2012). His total compensation ranged from $421,126 to $538,936 each year. Despite the group’s $4.6 million deficit in 2012, Weiland remarked in a debate that private insurers should pay their CEOs less and operate more efficiently. Weiland’s Sioux Falls restaurant business reported a profit of $5,000 to $15,000.

Larry Pressler is a supporter of the Obama administration. We have experienced what has happened to our great country in the past five years. His residence is located in D.C.

The EB-5 federal progam began in 1990. Now, 14 years later, it has became a political issue just before an election. Where has Tim Johnson and many others been before? At the present time, there have been many attempts to involve Mike Rounds in a scandal.

Mike Rounds is our only choice to elect a person who has spent his life raising his family in South Dakota to be our next U.S. senator.

Ernest Kroeger

Hartford

Investment in education vital to a ‘vibrant economy’

The South Dakota Republican Party campaigns on a platform of low taxation and a pro-business climate, but what best serves the people of the state? Taxes are not automatically evil, nor government bad. Education, infrastructure such as roads, bridges and services that ensure safety and health and the environment, or protect the more vulnerable among us, are all worthy of our tax dollars. It is vital that tax money is carefully spent and benefits society as a whole, rather than a few individuals. Access to affordable health care is a necessity, not a luxury for the few.

As a retired educator, I am concerned with the failure of the Republican-dominated state government to adequately fund education. For decades, teacher salaries in South Dakota have ranked at the bottom, in spite of recent governors’ claims to be “education” governors. The teachers and school staff I have worked with are extremely dedicated to students. Medium-size and small schools face incredible challenges to meet student needs. Every year, superintendents go to Pierre attempting to convince state legislators and the governor of the need to increase funding. Add in costs of providing up-to-date technology for students, and you have a perfect storm.

Republicans claim to care about education, but they balance their budgets on the backs of educators and our children, ignoring the fact that a well-educated work force is important for attracting business. Likewise, with less state support for higher education, college students face much higher tuition and debt. Good education and the resulting good jobs are what eventually make a vibrant economy and a healthy society. Minimum wage jobs today are not enough to support a family.

South Dakota needs a governor and legislators who are willing to invest in the education of our children. This has not been the current Republican Party.

Ruth Sarar

Garretson

Larry Zikmund maintains focus on what’s good for all

When I think of the characteristics that I appreciate in a manager, they are their fairness, willingness to listen, experience, informed on the issues that pertain to work, forward thinking, act with integrity, and someone who cares about people. These characteristics say a lot about who the person is and what they value. That is why I am writing in support of Larry Zikmund, who is running for the House of Representatives in District 14.

I worked for Zikmund earlier in my career, and I think he embodies the qualities mentioned earlier. We need people who have Larry’s experience and willingness to serve in Pierre. When I worked for him, he was an effective chief executive because he focused on what was good for the Associated General Contractors and good for South Dakota. He also worked with leaders throughout the state, which is what he would do if elected. I highly recommend Larry to help serve us in the Legislature and hope the voters in District 14 will affirm that message in November.

Jean McKinnon

Shreveport, La.

Vote to change South Dakota leadership

With just days remaining until the election, I want to toss in my 2 cents about South Dakota’s government and elected officials.

For four decades, this state has been ruled by corrupt people who are self-serving and couldn’t care less about who they serve. Earlier this year, South Dakota was named as a top five state in the nation for corrupt politics. We have been controlled by Republicans to the point of making me want to not even vote. It seems that wherever I go, I hear people complaining about the rubbish in Pierre, but it is those same people who keep voting the same way every time. If you want change, then say so with your vote. If not, quit your griping.

Mike Rounds refuses to debate. That tells me the guy is afraid of what will come out. Gov. Dennis Daugaard won’t release documents. What is he afraid of? Why won’t the South Dakota Board Of Regents release those EB-5 documents? Do they contain information that will hurt Rounds? Sounds like it to me.

If you are tired of South Dakota politics, do something about it. I voted absentee and did not vote for any incumbents. Not one.

Clarence Mardian

Sioux Falls

S.D. doesn’t need another Democrat

If Larry Pressler hadn’t done such a poor job as senator the first time around, Sen. Tim Johnson never would have been elected. Without Johnson’s vote for Obamacare, Obamacare would not have passed. So, in a round about way, you can blame Pressler for Obamacare. That is probably why he is in favor of it.

Remember that a vote for Pressler is a vote for Rick Weiland. We do not need another rubber stamp Democrat from South Dakota. Look at the mess that the Democrats have put the USA in — doubled the national debt in six years, Benghazi, ISIS, IRS scandal, out-of-control Environmental Protection Agency, Common Core, open borders, redefining marriage, Obamacare, fewest number of workers in more than 40 years, 50 million on food stamps, lies and the list goes on.

William Hartman

Sioux Falls

Who will represent South Dakota’s citizens?

When Mike Rounds was governor, he represented himself, his family and his cronies. Now he wants to go to Washington, D.C., to do the same. I want somebody to go to Washington to represent the people, all the people of South Dakota.

Rick Weiland, it appears, will be representing the Democratic party. He says that he wants to take Washington away from the big money, but it appears that the big money is the Democratic party.

Gordon Geick

Sioux Falls

Rounds’ proven leadership needed in Washington

My name is Bob Berry, a South Dakota native who grew up in McLaughlin, graduated from the University of South Dakota and its law school. I practiced law in Lemmon for a time before my career on Capitol Hill in Washington. I was a House employee, where I interacted with staff and members of Congress from both parties and worked behind the scenes at the time Larry Pressler was elected to the House in 1974.

When Pressler announced his candidacy for Congress that year, I sought out Frank Denholm, the incumbent Democratic congressman, for his reaction. Denholm said he was surprised Pressler was running as a Republican because as a state department employee, Pressler had asked Denholm for a job not long before.

Pressler was later elected to the Senate, and his reputation in the corridors of the capitol was that he was an empty suit, unprepared for the daily tasks at hand and that he was detached. When Ted Muenster ran against him for re-election, one of Muenster’s campaign lines was, “A Senate seat is a terrible thing to waste.”

Today, the Senate is in gridlock because the majority leader, Harry Reid, Democrat of Nevada, runs that body like a fiefdom, allowing only House bills he or the White House approves and only certain Republican amendments, quite a departure from legislative procedures in Democratic and Republican congresses of the past. Pressler’s election as an Independent would only compound the problem.

What South Dakota needs in Washington is Mike Rounds, with his proven, firm and resolute leadership, and the state should not reach back more than 15 years for a former senator who has promised to serve only one term and endorsed Barack Obama and his failed policies not once, but twice.

Bob Berry

Alexandria, Va.

Take the mid-term elections seriously; vote

The mid-term elections are approaching, and it’s important that everyone eligible to vote takes that responsibility seriously. I hope that South Dakotans have been paying close attention to the senatorial and House of Representatives race. The importance of who we send to Washington to represent our state cannot be overstated.

Please take the time to think about all the ads you have seen ... the endless and oft-repeated TV ads, in particular. Ask yourselves as you watch them, who is paying to influence you and other voters? Where is the money coming from? Most importantly, ask yourself whether the person they are promoting is really interested in the people of the state, or are they interested in protecting the status quo?

Be completely honest with yourself and vote for what is best for our state and our country ... not what will benefit only a favored few. Prove to yourselves and the rest of the country that South Dakota voters cannot be bought by the highest bidder.

Elizabeth Rahn

Beresford

Mike Rounds offers just one choice

No to Mike Rounds. Yes to Rick Weiland.

I believe Rounds is up to his eyeballs in the EB-5 tsunami. New revelations daily. Stonewalling in Pierre. Anemic and amended responses to the questionnaire. Facts that won’t come out until after the election. Skipping debates. No response to MSNBC. Rounds is hiding.

Two-thirds of voters don’t want him. He is bringing embarrassment to the state — national news stories and MSNBC coverage. Eighth most corrupt state in the union. Larry Pressler’s statement about senators being vetted in their first year is purely “outer space.” We are interested in justice and truth now.

If the former governor cared about South Dakotans, he would pull out of the race. But the kingdom, power and glory tend to blur common sense. How much more ridicule to us before the election — and after? What kind of confidence can people have in him with this scandal? The other two-thirds of D.C. reps are dedicated to gridlock and anti-Obamaizing, and he proposes more of the same. Groan. South Dakota can do better.

My support is for Rick Weiland: A. He touches so many of us — he even shook my hand twice in the Wagner parade; B. He has common sense; C. A vote for Pressler is a vote for Rounds; D. He is for 100 percent of us, not 2 percenters; E. He wants health care, good wages and fair shakes for people; and F. The other two bring baggage, Weiland does not.

Rick Weiland. Finally a breath of fresh air for all of us.

The Rev. Dan Brandt

Avon

Is Rep. Kristi Noem out of touch with constituency?

Despite Jon Ellis’ assertion that Corinna Robinson made “rookie mistakes” in a recent debate, I find those reported “mistakes” less egregious for a U.S. representative than my experiences with Rep. Kristi Noem.

In 2012, I asked questions about an agriculture bill. It took a lot of time and effort to get a response. I didn’t keep records of the frequent requests for response because I thought maybe this was a freak mishap of some kind.

In May 2013, I asked a series of questions regarding the Working Families Flexibility Act. I received a timely response, but only to my first question. I sent the follow-up questions by email, that were not answered until Oct. 22, 2013, but only after several contacts by email, visits to her Sioux Falls office and a phone call to her Washington office. I finally received a phone call.

On Feb. 11, I received an email update from Noem’s office stating that the House had reversed a provision slowing cost-of-living allowances for certain military persons. The email said this was done in a budget-neutral way. In an email I sent the next day, I asked how this was done.

I sent another email March 12 and again March 21, indicating I hadn’t received a response. I received a phone message March 28 answering the question. I received a follow-up letter April 4, stating the same information in the phone message.

Suffice it to say that Noem would not secure my vote for director of animal control, and I definitely won’t be voting for her to continue as my representative.

Gerry Ambroson

Sioux Falls

Mike Rounds remembers sacrifice of veterans

If you are old enough, you will recall how shamefully America received our veterans as they returned from Vietnam. While governor, Mike Rounds took action to rectify that disgraceful treatment by hosting a “Welcome Home” event, giving the honor long due to our heroes.

Attended by 32,000 veterans and their families, the two-day event included concerts, speeches, Huey helicopters, displays, fighter jets, a B-1 Bomber fly-in, fireworks, a remembrance of the fallen soldiers and many more events and displays.

In the dedication of the Vietnam War Memorial sculpture, Mike Rounds stated, “It is about you, our veterans of the Vietnam War, your honor, your service and your sacrifices. South Dakota has not forgotten you. America has not forgotten you.”

Loren Leitzke

Ipswich

Vote Democrat to create ‘balance of power’

American government is based on a two-party system. South Dakota is about as close as we can get to a one-party form of government. Good government should be based on a balance of power; otherwise, we have a dictatorship. A two-party system is necessary to ensure checks and balances. We have not had a Democrat governor since Richard Kneip. I think most of us will agree that Sen. Tim Johnson did an excellent job.

In order to maintain a fair and equitable form of government, we need to elect Rick Weiland for Senate and Susan Wismer for governor, as well as other Democrat candidates.

Lyle S. Coonradt

Sioux Falls

The ‘fair market’should decide wages

After reading a recent article by a local college professor on raising South Dakota’s minimum wage, it is obvious to me why we have so many low-information voters.

If the minimum wage is increased, who pays for this increase? The employer? Wrong. If the employer can, he will raise the price of his product or service that he sells, which means we pay for that increase. If he can’t raise the price, he will have to lay off some of his employees.

Then we probably will pay, again, through food stamps, unemployment, welfare, etc.

The big winners, if the minimum goes up, are union members. Most union contracts have a clause that states if the minimum wage goes up, then their wages go up, too. We pay again.

The government has no right to be involved in the minimum wage debate; let the fair market take its course. People should be paid what they are worth, not what the Democrats want to give them to buy their vote. I do not want to pay more for everything that I buy and to see entry-level employees lose their jobs.

Steve Elkjer

Sioux Falls

Does Rounds’ oversight of EB-5 show leadership?

The Oct. 17 Argus Leader reported that Joop Bollen, in deposed sworn testimony presented as a part of the EB-5 California civil case brought against South Dakota, admitted that he operated the EB-5 program free of supervision from the Regents and the governor’s office. Yet, Gov. Mike Rounds claims the recent dismissal of the suit vindicated him of any wrongdoing. In fact, the lawsuit is just one indicator of the lack of oversight and poor management of one of Rounds’ pet programs.

There are other questions regarding EB-5 under the Rounds administration that South Dakotans should be asking.

1. Why did the state agency, largely funded by the Governor’s Office of Economic Development during the Rounds administration, decide to outsource the EB-5 program when it had been run out of a state agency from 2004-2009? South Dakota could have made millions from fees charged annually to the foreign investors.

2. When the EB-5 program was contracted out to Bollen’s SDRC company in 2009, why was his contract for $49,000, thus making it a no-bid contrac,t when $50,000 would have required bids?

3. In 2010, when Bollen requested immunity from prosecution related to the California lawsuit, why did this not result in an investigation by the Rounds administration?

4. Why has the state never pursued reimbursement from Bollen for the state salary he was paid in 2008 and 2009 while he also was receiving payments via his SDRC state contract?

5. Why did Rounds change his written testimony regarding the California lawsuit after the Rapid City Journal presented information that contradicted his original written testimony?

What other aspects of the EB-5 program have not been revealed to the citizens of South Dakota? Is this the type of person we want as our next U.S. senator?

Joyce Scott

Brookings

Read or Share this story: http://argusne.ws/1u9koRc