The bird was once the most populous in the world, now lost to us.

Buy Photo A preserved passenger pigeon, which is believed to be the last one shot in Wisconsin, is mounted in front of a new mural at the University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point. (Photo: Sari Lesk/Gannett Central Wisconsin Media )Buy Photo

It is hard to conceive of 5 billion of anything, and it is hard to quite picture a flock of birds so massive and tight-packed that it could block out the sun.

But that was the passenger pigeon, a bird with a population so massive that it must have seemed, to those living here in the 1800s, like its sky-darkening flocks would be a permanent feature of life — in central Wisconsin, especially, where the species had its main North American nesting ground.

And today, they are just ... gone. The decline and eventual extinction of the passenger pigeon is an incredible story, and there have been a number of eulogies written recently to Martha, the last of the species, a bird that died this month 100 years ago in a Cincinnati zoo. It's the contrast between the absolute ubiquity of the animal in the 19th century and its destruction, completed in the 20th century, that makes the story so powerful.

In Wausau, this year's Birds in Art exhibit at the Woodson Art Museum includes "Legacy Lost & Saved: Extinct and Endangered Birds of North America," which ties the passenger pigeon's story to those of other birds that have been lost or nearly lost. In October, the museum will host author and documentarian Joel Greenberg in October for public programs and screenings of his film, "From Billions to None." Visit www.lywam.org for details.

In Stevens Point, a new mural at the Museum of Natural History at the University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point was unveiled this summer along with a preserved pigeon believed to be the last one shot in Wisconsin.

It was hunting, as well as habitat destruction, that killed the passenger pigeon. There was no Endangered Species Act in the 19th century, and no regard for what might happen if hunting continued unchecked. And anyway, who would think to worry? Passenger pigeons were everywhere.

Anne Gillespie, York, Pa., left, and Susan Gillespie, Virginia, Minnesota, right, read an excert from Audubon's Ornithological Biography describing a flock of Passenger Pigeons in Kentucky in 1813 at The Art of John James Audubon exhibit at Hawk Mountain Sanctuary in Kempton, Pa., Monday, Sept. 1, 2014. The exhibit is on display until December 31. (AP Photo/The Republican-Herald, Jacqueline Dormer) (Photo: JACQUELINE DORMER, AP)

Story: Mural honors passenger pigeons, extinct for 100 years

Column:Seize 'Birds in Art' season at Woodson Art Museum

And that's what make the passenger pigeon's story so compelling. It was not some minor species or evolutionary cul-de-sac. It was an absolutely dominant species, brought to its end 100 years ago.

We hope and believe that today, we have a different relationship to wildlife, and are more inclined and better equipped to protect species from such a dramatic fall.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1tEXKLu