In Washington, this is a winter not of discontent so much as cognitive dissonance. Nothing captures that more succinctly than the following phrase, which appeared in Politico on Friday: “In a big win for House Republicans and President Obama …” The night before, the vast majority of House Democrats had broken with the White House over a bill to keep the government running, while most Republicans hailed that same $1.1 trillion spending bill as a triumph. This followed last week’s announcement by the Bureau of Labor Statistics that the U.S. economy, in November, created three hundred and twenty-one thousand jobs—on top of an October count of two hundred and forty-three thousand and a September increase of two hundred and seventy-one thousand—a report in which conservatives somehow saw evidence of the failure of Obamanomics.

For all the dismal predictability of our politics, the landscape is in the process of being at least partially reordered, and not only because of the Republican victory in the midterm election. The impressive rate of job creation, too, is unsettling old dynamics. Monthly employment reports used to provide an occasion for John Boehner’s catchphrase: “Where are the jobs, Mr. President?” (Sort of a “Where’s the beef?” for a new century.) Now that the answer is “Right here, Mr. Speaker,” Republican leaders are out of sorts, fumbling for the right rejoinder. Reince Priebus, the Party chairman, while “glad” about all those new jobs, is nonetheless aggrieved that “Obama-Clinton Democrats” have “pushed job-killing policies when we needed job-creating policies.” (Look for more of this two-headed hydra in the coming months; in a speech on Wednesday, Senator Ted Cruz went after the “Obama-Clinton foreign policy.”) The House Republican Conference, acknowledging through gritted teeth that the unemployment rate has fallen to 5.8 per cent, would have us focus instead on the labor-force participation rate, which is at “Carter-era levels”—not a compliment, unless we’re measuring funk.

This sullenness notwithstanding, it would be wrong to conclude that conservatives are losing the argument over the direction of the economy. As a new poll by the Times reveals, the brightening picture has diminished but still not erased the Republican advantage on economic questions. The public remains receptive to the notion that “overregulation” is a drag on growth; in the Times poll, this rates as a greater concern than economic inequality. Neither the recent job gains nor the rise in average hourly earnings have restored confidence that the government can do much to improve the lives of working-class and middle-class people. When “prime-age” men and women would sooner remain unemployed than take a low-wage job—because, as a new series in the Times explains, these jobs pay too poorly to support a family—we are seeing a dangerous decoupling of the state of the economy from the fate of individual Americans, as they themselves see it.

The implications will, of course, be felt in 2016. (By the agreement of both parties and all major media outlets, everything, including rainfall averages and fantasy-football player rankings, must now be assessed in terms of their implications for the 2016 election.) Writing in The New Republic (before the purge), Danny Vinik sees only “good news” for Hillary Clinton, she of the “Obama-Clinton” axis: “The more the economy improves over the next 24 months,” Vinik contends, “the better Clinton’s changes are of winning the presidency.” This might be right, and the idea that credit accrues to the outgoing President’s party has a certain intuitive appeal.

It is, however, at odds with recent experience. The economic expansion of the nineteen-eighties gave a boost to the campaign of Vice-President George H. W. Bush in 1988, but Vice-President Al Gore did not get the lift he needed from an even stronger economy in 2000. His opponent, George W. Bush, conceded the strength of the economy, but successfully cast doubt on Gore’s role in it. “Our economy is strong today not because of Al Gore,” Bush said that October. “Our economy is strong today because we’re a land of dreamers and doers.” The budget surplus also lent force to Bush’s argument for a massive tax cut. “That money is not the government’s money,” he said again and again. “That money is the people’s money.” The seemingly limitless boom of the nineteen-nineties created, in still another way, a disadvantage for Gore. During the summer of 2000, President Clinton told a group of us that if growth could now be taken for granted—“if people think this economy’s so strong you couldn’t wreck it with a sledgehammer”—it would be much harder to convince them that Bush was a risky choice.

The nation’s main economic challenge, it appeared at the time, was to “extend the promise of prosperity to every forgotten corner of this country,” as Bush put it in his acceptance speech at the Republican convention that August. And if the current recovery continues to gain momentum, that could again become the focus of a Presidential election. Hillary Clinton, who established a strong connection with working-class and middle-class voters during her 2008 primary campaign, might have an advantage in a contest like that, but it will not be automatic; it will have to be earned, or at least reasserted.

The middle class might well be up for grabs. Republicans are aware of this; the way you can tell is that none of them—not even Mitt Romney—is talking about “takers” this time around. Instead they toss around terms like “wage stagnation,” and not only to blame it on President Obama. But when Senator Rand Paul says he has a plan to address stagnant middle-class incomes, it sounds more like the Republican plan to address just about anything: cut spending, repeal Obamacare, end “the President’s war on fossil fuels.” Jeb Bush, too, outlines a boilerplate conservative agenda—deregulation; an “all-in” energy policy; simplification of the tax code; entitlement reform—as a strategy to “see a rising income for the middle class again,” which is how he put it at this month’s meeting of the Wall Street Journal CEO Council, a group that knows a few things about rising incomes.

Among the contenders, only Senator Marco Rubio has given real attention to the problems facing middle-class families. In January, he’ll publish a book on the theme, called “American Dreams.” The cover features the senator, hands on hips, in a classically heroic pose. Posturing aside, when Rubio talks about the “insecurity” that “has coiled itself” around the lives of hard-pressed people, he actually sounds like he understands it. Rubio’s proposal to create a “wage-enhancement credit” for low-wage workers suggests a seriousness of purpose. At the same time, Rubio’s idea of an innovative anti-poverty program is to roll all federal spending on the poor into a “Flex Fund” for the states—in other words, a block grant, not unlike the ones that Newt Gingrich was proposing twenty years ago. “Turning federal programs into block grants is a shopworn idea with a long history of disappointment,” Peter Edelman, the Georgetown Law professor and former aide to Senator Robert F. Kennedy, wrote earlier this year, when Rubio released, with fanfare, his proposal.

The trouble for Rubio—indeed, for all the Republican hopefuls—is that the ideological rigidity of the right, its reflexive hostility to government solutions and its exaltation of the market, constrains their creativity and prevents them from developing a genuinely effective response to income stagnation. That is, an effective policy response. Their political response is well-practiced. Republican candidates are going to keep doing what they have done for a long time, with frequent success: stoking middle-class frustration and directing it at Democrats. What struggling workers and non-workers actually need from politicians is exactly what the G.O.P. works so hard to obstruct: “bold, persistent experimentation,” as Franklin Roosevelt put it in 1932. Unless someone grabs the mantle of reform, a winter of discontent is coming, and it’s going to be a long one.