Tulane University doctors launched a health clinic at Covenant House in New Orleans within days of Hurricane Katrina and the levee breaches in 2005. At the beginning, they were greeting patients at a card table in the courtyard of the agency that serves homeless teens. Within a year, the clinic had four exam rooms and had seen 8,000 patients.

By 2010, fueled by a $100 million federal grant, dozens of similar clinics were offering preventive health care in Orleans, Jefferson, St. Bernard and Plaquemines parishes for low-income residents.

The network of 41 clinic sites operating today is one of our region's greatest post-Katrina success stories. Roughly 57,000 uninsured patients are getting primary care and mental health services. That sort of access to preventive care generally keeps people healthier and reduces the likelihood they will end up in an emergency room.

Kristy Nichols, Gov. Bobby Jindal's top administrator, acknowledged the clinics' benefits when she presented the administration's proposed budget to legislators Friday. "I know these clinics provide valuable services," she said.

Even so, the Jindal administration zeroed out the clinics in its version of next year's budget. Legislators ought to find a way to put the money back.

The loss of the $7.7 million in state money would put severe stress on the clinics. That pressure would be magnified because the state allocation is needed to ensure another $12.6 million in federal matching money.

With the state facing a $1.6 billion budget deficit for the next fiscal year, some cuts are bound to be painful. Gov. Jindal's administration is recommending a $235 million drop in health care spending in the new budget.

But the primary care clinics here do a great deal of good with the relatively small amount of money the state has been providing. It would be a shame to jeopardize the health of patients and the financial stability of the clinics. Pushing uninsured patients to ERs also would be costly for hospitals.

The primary care clinics have income from other patients, and some have ongoing fund-raising campaigns. But this kind of cut would drive every clinic to cut staff and services, said Susan Todd, executive director of the 504HealthNet coalition. "You're going to see a drastic reduction in mental health services and primary care services available to the community," she said.

Ms. Nichols told legislators Friday that the administration thinks local communities should pick up the state's share. But the clinic program is operated through a federal waiver to the state's Medicaid program allowing people who wouldn't normally qualify to be covered.

Ironically, the federal Medicaid expansion that is part of the federal Affordable Care Act would cover these patients and tens of thousands of other low-income Louisiana residents. But Gov. Jindal has refused to accept that money.

It is particularly cold-hearted for the state to refuse the expansion and then tell the clinics to find funding from city and parish governments or private donors.

For the first three years of the new Medicaid program, 2014 through 2016, the federal government is paying 100 percent of the cost of covering people whose income is 133 percent of the poverty level. That would have provided a financial bridge for the state.

The New Orleans Musicians' Clinic, which has been providing care for performers since 1998, posted a plea for assistance on its Facebook page after Ms. Nichols' presentation. "Help community clinics like ours fight. (The Medicaid waiver program) helps keep our services alive and our patients out of the emergency room! Please pick up the phone and call your state representatives. We rely on this funding stream to care for the patients who fall through the cracks!!!"

Too many people in Louisiana fall through the cracks. Gov. Jindal and legislators should ensure that these patients don't join them.