WASHINGTON -- Provider payments under health plans sold through the Affordable Care Act's health insurance marketplaces may be "significantly" lower than reimbursements from commercial plans, initial indications suggest.

National physician groups are concerned the rates are so low that their members won't sign on to participate in ACA marketplace plans, and there will be no doctors to treat those newly covered patients.

A representative of one primary care provider organization, speaking to MedPage Today on background, said some rates were 70% lower than traditional preferred provider network plans, adding that plans were trying to make provider rates as low as possible to keep premiums equally low.

"Initial hearsay information is that payment rates being offered by [marketplace] plans are quite low in at least some of the states," a federal affairs representative for a second primary care provider group said. "What that means is that fewer providers will sign up."

Health insurers are approaching community providers, hospitals, and clinics with Medicaid rates and starting negotiations with providers at that level, Lon Sprecher, chief executive of Dean Health Plan in Madison, Wis., told MedPage Today. Dean Health Plan and its owner SSM Health Care in St. Louis operate health plans, clinics, and hospitals in Missouri, Illinois, Oklahoma, and Wisconsin.

"The theory that they use is, 'Well, you're seeing these patients already. They're probably Medicaid or uninsured, so Medicaid reimbursement-plus would either be status quo or better than what the provider is receiving,' " Sprecher said.

Meanwhile, health insurers would receive commercial-level premiums while paying Medicaid-level reimbursement rates. "A lot of the providers that we deal with are just saying we're not interested in Medicaid or Medicaid-plus for a commercial [marketplace] product," Sprecher said.

He added it will depend on the provider group, payer in the marketplace, and individual market forces as to what patients' options will be in their ACA-marketplace plans. But he knows of several instances where providers have chosen not to participate with a marketplace plan because of reimbursement rates based on Medicaid payments.

"I think in certain instances, certain geographies, and for certain provider groups, the answer is yes, they will choose not to participate [in a marketplace] under those reimbursement parameters," Sprecher said. "My guess is ... there are going to be some areas that have a fairly spotty provider network."

However, other medical groups were less certain about what marketplace products would look like.

The Medical Group Management Association said they didn't have specific or concrete information to share.

"Our information is anecdotal only," Pam Udall, spokeswoman for the Texas Medical Association, told MedPage Today. "We have heard from some physicians the offers are lower but we can't quantify what that means. Lower for that practice? Lower for the market?"

Richard Gough, MD, of Frederick Primary Care Associates said his 25-physician practice in Frederick, Md., hasn't heard from commercial plans in the market on what the rates will be.

"Nobody is expecting them to be great," Gough said of the payments. "For Maryland, we're probably not expecting any more than what you would get with public assistance or basic Medicare rates."

His group isn't looking to bring on a bunch of new patients, he said. Instead, they want to sign on with one marketplace plan in Maryland and then direct their existing self-pay patients to that one. That's difficult when they don't know what the payments or terms of participation will look like.

"It's aggravating not knowing what's coming down," Gough said. "Patients are going to start being able to sign up and not even know what our reimbursements are or what our options are, frankly."

He wasn't sure how it would blend with existing programs like CareFirst's patient-centered medical home project.

A spokeswoman for the trade group America's Health Insurance Plans said provider payment rates are contract decisions between individual plans and providers, and she couldn't comment.

However, a final rule released earlier this year by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services on marketplace plans attempts to address the provider access issue.

"The final rule requires a [qualified health plan] issuer to maintain a network that is sufficient in number and types of providers, including providers that specialize in mental health and substance use disorder services, to assure that all services will be accessible without unreasonable delay," the rule states.

CMS said that for 2014, it will mostly rely on states' assessments of network adequacy.