A debate Saturday between the rivals in the north suburban 10th Congressional District – Rep. Brad Schneider, the first-term Democrat, and GOP challenger Bob Dold – grew tense on the topic of Medicare.

Dold assailed Schneider as a partisan leader who’s done little good for 10th District voters.

“You said you wouldn’t cut a single penny from Medicare. You have gutted the program by over $700 billion,” Dold said to Schneider. “After you’ve misled the voters this many times, how can they expect to trust anything that you say?”

What followed was chippy back-and-forth over the intersection of the Affordable Care Act , Medicare and past budgets proposed by Rep. Paul Ryan, R-Wis., that Dold supported when he was in Congress. In the exchange, both politicians slung partisan Medicare talking points that have been largely debunked by fact-checking organizations in recent years.

The debate was sponsored by the League of Women Voters of Illinois and ABC 7 and will be televised on that channel at 1 p.m. Sunday.

For most of the debate, the candidates stuck to their campaign messaging. Dold stressed his willingness to break from party lines and represent the district in a bipartisan fashion; Schneider said Dold’s past record was dependably right-wing.

“Only one of us has voted to cut Medicare and that’s you,” Schneider said. “You voted for a Ryan plan, and you voted for it twice, and the Ryan plan ends the Medicare guarantee.”

In his rebuttal, Dold pointed out that the claim – ";Republicans voted to end Medicare"; – was PolitiFact’s “Lie of the Year” in 2011. PolitiFact is a nonpartisan fact-checking website associated with the Tampa Bay Times.

“What’s interesting is he’s running a campaign and he’s trying to spout off things because he has no record to run on, and therefore wants to poke holes at me,” Dold said.

Dold reiterate the claim that Schneider, by voting in support of the Affordable Care Act, voted to cut $700 billion from Medicare.

That claim has also been repeatedly targeted by fact-checking groups that have made the distinction that $716 billion will be reduced in future Medicare spending over a period of 10 years – a reduction of the spending growth rate, not a cut in current spending, according to FactCheck.org, a website run by the Annenberg Public Policy Center of the University of Pennsylvania.

Schneider unseated former Rep. Dold in 2012, winning by slightly more than one percentage point. This rematch has been closely watched and is considered a tossup by many observers.

Vice President Joe Biden is coming to the Chicago area Wednesday for a political rally in Vernon Hills in support of Schneider, U.S. Sen. Dick Durbin and Paul Vallas, the Democratic candidate for Illinois lieutenant governor.