Two months into his first year as superintendent of Roseville City School District, 42-year-old Derk Garcia of Eldorado Hills wants to have a conversation – about the district, about Roseville, about feedback and the state of education.

It’s a conversation he’s been having with school staff and community members for weeks now, getting acquainted with Roseville City’s 18 elementary schools and their stakeholders in hopes of devising a three-year plan for the district as it enters a new era with Common Core State Standards.

Born and raised in Sacramento, Garcia is new to Roseville City but more than a little familiar with the region. He finished his bachelor’s degree in history at UC Davis and his master’s in educational policy and leadership from Sac State. He landed his first job in the field of education in 1996 as a teacher at La Entrada Continuation High School. He has worked as a teacher, after school coordinator, vice principal and principal in Elk Grove Unified School District.

After returning for a while to San Juan’s district office, where he worked as interim chief academic officer and oversaw all of that district’s academic programs from preschool through adult education, he has moved to the helm of Roseville’s largest elementary school district. His three-year contract, which started July 1, offers a $160,490 starting salary.

Garcia joined the Press Tribune for a Q&A last week to discuss his thoughts and impressions of Roseville’s elementary schools so far.

How did Roseville City School District come on your radar? What attracted you to the district?

Roseville City has a stellar reputation throughout the Sacramento area. It’s kind of known as a lighthouse district. It’s one of the few districts that is growing and at the same time offers a lot of stability … As I did my research when the position came open, those strong relationships and bonds between the school district and staff, parents, community, were overwhelming, so it made the choice very easy.

What are your impressions of the district so far? How would you characterize it compared to San Juan and other school districts you’ve worked for?

It’s worthy of its reputation. It really has a supportive board that is focused on students. It has a really talented staff top to bottom. I’ve been in every school already thus far, and you can just see how engaged students are. The parents are here, and they’re supportive of the school district as well. I guess the thing that’s most impressive to me, beyond the human side, is the relationships the district has forged with the city, the chamber, the businesses, and when you put that all together, that’s why you get such a great district.

This is a district of just under 10,000 students, 18 schools, and it’s a district that’s growing, so I think there is the opportunity here to continue the success they’ve experienced over the last several decades. Whereas I’ve always worked in the larger districts – Elk Grove is 60,000 students, and San Juan is just under 40,000 – this just feels like a much better-sized district to be a part of and work together toward student success.

Coming to the district with a clean slate and fresh eyes, is there anything you particularly want to achieve in the role of superintendent? What do you want to bring to Roseville City School District?

I’ve probably met, individually, with over 100 people so far, and I’ve been asking them the same three questions: What’s great about Roseville City, what deserves a second look and how can I support you in your current role? (I’m) listening for themes throughout the community, because those questions aren’t just being asked of teachers and principals and instructional aides; it’s parents, it’s community members, it’s board members. I’m trying to get a feel for why others value the district and what they see. We’re doing a cabinet retreat (on Sept. 8) to talk about some of those things and we’ll bring that information to the board at the next board meeting (on Sept. 18).

What has been the focus of your first two months on the job so far?

My focus has been to engage the community in a conversation about the district and what makes it so good, and what are other opportunities to look at something for a second or third time to make sure it’s benefitting our students? From there, the board will engage in a discussion and set some goals related to their priorities, and we’ll work on that over the next several years.

What I’m hoping for is to get the board to settle on three-year goals that really focus the district and focus our work on students.

Obviously Common Core is a hot topic around the country right now, and has been for a couple years. What is your take on it?

I have two boys, ages 5 and 7 in kindergarten and second grade, so I think it offers great opportunity for our children in terms of what it’s asking them to do – especially around the reading, the writing, the algebraic or conceptual thinking around math, and just the overall thinking skills. When you’re asking students to create arguments based on text starting in fifth grade, you’re really getting to those higher-order thinking skills and a depth of knowledge that the previous standards never attained. We’ve moved beyond the “right” answer, meaning the bubble answer on a Scantron or a California Standards Test question, and we’re moving towards the thinking and justification of our answers.

For me, it’s an exciting time. It’s a lot of work though. It’s going to take a lot of time, energy and resources. I don’t want to give people the misperception that Common Core is like a light switch. You don’t “click,” and all of a sudden everything changes on the first day of school this year. This is going to take several years for teachers to think through the new standards and the new curriculum adoptions that are coming, and the assessments. I know it’s going to be a little bit uncomfortable for folks, and I’m OK with that uncomfortable-ness so long as on the other side, we’re learning together and our students are actually growing their skills and thinking ability.

Are there any challenges on the horizon for the district, anything that either concerns you or that you’re preparing for?

On the academic side of the house, we’re really looking at Common Core being this year’s baseline, and the infusion of technology in terms of the testing itself. My understanding is, when they did the practice run last year, it went really well. But we go live this year, and any time you’re doing something new there’s a little bit of hesitancy, and I want to make sure we’re well-prepared for when the assessments come.

On the business side, we are going to be a growing district and building new schools in the future, so for me it’s balancing both the academic and the business side and making sure they’re both successful.

What are you most looking forward to this year?

For me it’s a year of firsts. You hit those little milestones – it’s your first day at work, it’s your first board meeting, it’s the first day of school for me here in the district. What I’m most excited about is the student learning, so I most enjoy being out in schools, walking classrooms, observing great teaching and seeing students engaged in learning.