The Bureau of Labor Statistics weekly unemployment figures out on Friday reflect a remarkable happenstance.

Be it women, minorities or the young, hence, the very base of the Democratic Party, each of these categories is experiencing record unemployment numbers under President Barack Obama.

And this comes after 5 years of an economy controlled by the Obama administration, an economy that reflects the beliefs of the man these demographics revere.

Thank you to our vets; BPR remembers your sacrifice

Not only can US Marines fight, they can dance too

According to a series of CNS News reports, data released by the Bureau of Labor Statistics shows:

American women participating in the nation’s labor force hit a new low at a rate of 56.9 percent in October. Additionally, the number of women holding jobs declined by 357,000 from September to October.

While the national unemployment rate is 7.3 percent, the unemployment rate for young workers, ages 16-19, is more than three times that rate at 22.2 percent.

The black youth unemployment rate for ages 16-19 is 393 percent higher than the national unemployment rate.

Again, this is the base of the Democratic Party.

Saturday Night Live did a recent parody of black Americans professing support for Obama regardless of his actions. But in reality, it’s not just black Americans that should be mocked.

The Associated Press reported in 2012 that the job market left half of young college graduates either jobless or underemployed in positions that don’t fully use their skills and knowledge, and the unemployment rate for young workers, the millennial generation, has not fallen below 22 percent since Obama has been in office.

Yet, Obama’s job approval ratings have held relatively steady until the recent Obamacare rollout fiasco.

With 13.6 percent of U.S. households receiving food stamp relief last year, up from 8.6 percent in 2008, one must wonder if the base of the Democratic Party has been satiated with entitlement pay outs.

[poll id=”135″]