Rep. Steve Stockman (R-Texas), attempting to portray his Senate opponent as too liberal, has put up a new website arguing that Sen. John Cornyn (R-Texas) loves Obamacare. The site even features a damning photo of Cornyn looking friendly with the president.

The image, however, isn't real. It's been photoshopped.

The odd-looking image was first noticed Tuesday by Politico reporter Burgess Everett:

This Stockman website photo looks like Cornyn's face was photoshopped onto Biden's head pic.twitter.com/x03FmbDIYM — Burgess Everett (@burgessev) January 21, 2014

As the Wire later noted, the image was originally a picture from a February 2009 event where Charlie Crist, then the Republican governor of Florida, stumped for Obama's economic stimulus plan (AP Photo/Charles Dharapak):

Crist's appearance with Obama and his support for the stimulus bill damaged his reputation with Republicans. He is now running for his old seat as a Democrat against Florida Gov. Rick Scott (R).

The photoshopped image was removed from Stockman's site as of Tuesday afternoon. Stockman's spokesman did not return a request for comment.

Stockman launched his long-shot bid to unseat Sen. John Cornyn (R-Texas) in December, saying he was upset Cornyn did not stand with Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas) during the government shutdown fight.

Stockman has attacked Cornyn -- labeled one of the most conservative members of Congress by National Journal in 2011 -- for "voting to fund Obamacare" and said Cornyn "wakes up every morning and works to make the Senate a more liberal place."

Stockman caught attention this month for claiming on his website that he had received endorsements from a number of groups that supported him in his run for Congress but hadn't endorsed his Senate bid. Last week, the chairman of one such group -- the Government Is Not God-PAC -- announced the committee would back Cornyn over Stockman and called the congressman "an impediment to conservatives gaining control of the Senate in the upcoming election."

Also on HuffPost: Senate Seats Up For Grabs In 2014 Senate Seats Up For Grabs In 2014

1 of 33 Sen. Jeff Sessions (R-Ala.) Status: Running for re-election Sen. Jeff Sessions (R-AL) speaks during the DC March for Jobs in Upper Senate Park near Capitol Hill, on July 15, 2013 in Washington, DC. (Photo by Drew Angerer/Getty Images) Share this slide:

Getty Images