Topics: 2015 Emmy Awards, Cookie Lyon, Editor's Picks, Emmy Awards, emmys, empire, taraji p. henson, TV, Entertainment News

When I was a kid, my mother broke one of the many rules of Good Parenting, and told me that she did not believe I could be anything that I wanted to be. For example, she explained, I could never be president of the United States. She’d experienced the civil rights movement, fought against apartheid and was a professor of black history and women’s history. She believed that no black person would ever become POTUS in our lifetime—and certainly not a woman. So I always wonder what she would have said if she’d lived to see 2008.

Few things aside from the election of Barack Obama have shocked me over the years, but I did receive one unforgettable surprise a few months back, during the season finale of “Empire.” When I heard Taraji P. Henson, as Cookie Lyon, utter the words “Run them pearls, ho,” on national television, on a popular show that I knew people from all backgrounds were watching, I couldn’t believe how much things seemed to have actually changed over time. And while it’s in no way comparable to the election of America’s first black president, it felt like a hugely significant cultural moment.

“Run them pearls, ho” is the exact line you would write for a TV show with a predominantly black cast if you had no interest in respectability politics, only in presenting an authentic character whose language was perfectly aligned with her back story and current context. The scene—which culminated in a smack-down between Cookie and Anika Calhoun—was like one of those classic skits from late ‘90s rap albums, made popular by the Ruff Ryders and rappers signed to Def Jam. Hearing Henson utter the phrase made me feel like DMX, Lil’ Kim or Beanie Sigel had been invited into the “Empire” writer’s room; all rules of popular TV had been broken and—like other big moments in the season—it seemed that we had entered a new Golden Age of TV where soapy dramas were suddenly going to be allowed at the big kids’ table with shows like “Mad Men” and “The Good Wife” (or else create their own table entirely).

In the same way that I sometimes can’t believe America elected a black president, I can’t believe “Empire” got away with Cookie Lyon. A character like hers will open up the door for a wider array of diverse women of color on TV who will be written with more concern for authenticity than respectability. The fact that the Emmys are taking notice of this important character with a lead actress nomination is exciting and, hopefully, a sign of better things to come.

But that doesn’t mean that Henson deserves to win.

The truth is that season one of “Empire” was full of highs and lows. Many viewers struggled to get through the first couple of episodes, when the soapiness of it all weighed down the show’s positive attributes. And while it was always clear (from that first broomstick butt-whooping) that Taraji P. Henson was going to steal the show, her role was not always written in a way that gave her character the depth it needs to compete with the other great talents nominated this year. Critics and fans agree that, for what she was given, Henson truly delivered. But this is not the season for her Emmy win.

Cookie is beloved by so many because she both embraces and subverts certain tropes. Her flashbacks show a young girl from the ‘hood who rocked that classic Salt-N-Pepa hairstyle, served time in prison and then comes out kicking ass, taking names and wearing a lot of leopard print and fur. She’s no Olivia Pope and she’s no Alicia Florrick. As an intelligent woman without a college degree, who knows how to work the system (and can run the show better than the men around her, all while rocking 6-inch heels), she’s more like Christina Hendricks’ Joan Harris on “Mad Men.” And like Joan Harris, it’s going to take time before we get to see what this character is really made of, and what Henson can bring to the role.