Speaking in a reference committee hearing in support of a resolution on telehealth, women's delegate Lauralee Yalden, M.D., of New York City, says the resolution was not intended to replace primary care or face-to-face medicine. "But we do seek to supplement health care to the population as a whole," she added.

For the 25th straight year, AAFP members gathered for a three-day conference -- newly renamed for 2015 as the National Conference of Constituency Leaders (NCCL) -- to discuss issues of importance to family physicians, their practices and their patients.

A number of physicians lined up to testify about the pros and cons of telemedicine services.

The Reference Committee on Practice Enhancement considered a variety of issues, from telehealth to hepatitis C infection, but the underlying theme repeatedly heard was one of helping family physicians take better care of their patients.

From April 30 to May 2, members representing five constituency groups -- women; minorities; new physicians; international medical graduates (IMGs); and gay, lesbian, bisexual or transgender (GLBT) physicians or physicians who support GLBT issues -- as well as some members representing themselves, wrote and debated resolutions during reference committee hearings.

Benjamin Simmons, M.D., a GLBT delegate from Concord, N.C., testified on his own behalf against the resolution, which sought to promote access to telemedicine services, along with adequate payment. "Each state medical board has different policy regarding the appropriateness of telemedicine and physical exam and diagnosis," said Simmons. He wondered if the resolution violated individual state medical requirements for telemedicine.

Bruce Echols, M.D., a GLBT delegate from Dallas, also spoke against the resolution and pointed out that most physicians practicing across state lines are not giving physical exams. "In Texas, there has to be some physician contact at some point."

But Shayla Toombs-Withers, D.O., a minority delegate from Omaha, Neb., said telemedicine is considered an "adjunct service," in her part of the country. "We recognize there are rural and underserved areas where health care is limited and where patients can't easily get to a health care provider," she said.

Samuela Manages, M.D., a new physician delegate from Van Buren, Maine, testified that as a rural practice physician, she depends on telemedicine in some situations. For instance, she said, "We incorporate face-to-face visits with telemedicine" in consults with rheumatologists whereby the first patient visit is face-to-face "and subsequent visits are by telemedicine."

Ultimately, delegates referred the resolution to the Board of Directors for further discussion.

Family physicians also were eager to express their opinions -- both pro and con -- on dissemination of additional patient education resources detailing how family physician training differs from that of nurse practitioners (NPs).

Resolution co-author Michelle Sell, M.D., a women's constituency member from Central City, Neb., explained in the hearing that her resolution asked the AAFP to review resources already available from the Nebraska Medical Association or create its own resources and make them available to members, "So we can have intelligent discussions with our patients and make recommendations to them."

Ann Messer, M.D., of Austin, Texas, registered with the women's constituency but speaking on her own behalf, testified that it was important for the general public -- as well as legislators crafting state laws -- to understand how different medical professionals carry out their work. As an example, Messer said she had recently discovered that some Texas state legislators "didn't know that chiropractors don't use a stethoscope" when conducting a well-child exam, a detail that would preclude discovery of, for instance, a heart murmur.

Christopher Gaynor, M.D., of Seattle, speaking as a general registrant, opposed the resolution and said his state has had independently practicing NPs for years; psychiatric NPs, in particular, had alleviated a shortage in that field. "My sense is that we need everyone at the table caring for all these people newly insured under the ACA (Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act), he said.

Julie Anderson, M.D., from St. Cloud, Minn., a general registrant, said she had testified recently before the Minnesota legislature about NP scope-of-practice issues. Although some legislation favoring NPs did pass, "We were able to make some strides in terms of nurse practitioners not being able to use the term "doctor" and needing extra hours in training," said Anderson. "This can help us even if we can't stop all the laws."

Ultimately, the delegates adopted a substitute resolution that asked the AAFP to research and/or develop patient education materials on the topic and make them readily available to members and patients.