Estes Park residents Bill and Judy Howell pose for a photo Jan. 16, holding photos of them in their various volunteer work. They volunteer at the Cheyenne Veterans Affairs Medical Center. They gave away mugs stuffed with goodies, welcome home vets and help with Operation New Dawn that assists vets with PTSD. They also are hospice volunteers, bell ringers for the Salvation Army and train with the American Red Cross. ( Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Estes Park couple Bill and Judy Howell's plans to retire and relax after lengthy careers in big-city law enforcement got ruined by a few mugs.

"We just wanted to decompress because of everything we did as cops," said Bill, a Vietnam War veteran of the U.S. Air Force who retired after 32 years working for the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department in homicide and gangs.

Judy, who along with Bill retired 12 years ago, worked 25 years for the Alhambra Police Department in the areas of narcotics and vice.

Right away, they moved to Estes Park not at all interested in volunteering, just wanting to relax, sleep, fish, hike and watch the elk in their yard.

That changed when Judy and other members of the Larimer County Republican Women started filling mugs with toiletries to give to veterans at the Cheyenne Veterans Affairs Medical Center after a female veteran visited the group. She'd said the veterans staying in the hospital didn't have their own personal toiletries and encouraged the members to start collecting travel-size items.

The members collected enough items to fill 50 mugs the first month they made a delivery in June 2013, followed by 100 and 125 the next two deliveries, the numbers remaining steady since then. They make the deliveries every month or two depending on the need.

From Mugs to Clothes

Advertisement

Judy and Bill, who came along for the deliveries, learned two things: The veterans needed warm clothing for life on the streets and the hospital needed volunteers for its new No Veteran Dies Alone program.

The couple started collecting coats, boots, scarves and gloves from material and monetary donations given by individuals, businesses and organizations in the community; they got monetary donations for rides when the veterans needed transportation for medical care in other facilities; and they collected household items for veterans moving from homelessness into transitional housing. They distribute the donations through voluntary services.

"It's amazing how many people want to do something, especially for vets, but they don't know how," Judy said.

Judy and Bill began volunteering for No Veteran Dies Alone, a hospice program that pairs trained volunteers with veterans to be beside them through the dying process to make sure they're never alone. The volunteers go through seven weeks of training to participate in the program.

Bill was particularly interested in being a hospice volunteer, he said.

"Because of my background in homicide, I thought it was something I could deal with," he said. "Working in law enforcement, you have a good opportunity to be around folks that recently passed because of natural causes or violence. You don't look at death as a normal citizen."

It helps that both Bill and Judy have family members in the military.

"For us, it's kind of personal, " Judy said.

As hospice volunteers, the two let the patients and their families know they're there to help anyway they can and are there to listen to them and be beside them. Toward the end, the two will sit vigil with the patients, even if they're not conscious.

"It's amazing how many relatives need somebody to talk to," Judy said, adding that in talking with the veterans, "You get a chance to get to know them, their histories and how much they sacrificed."

Other Volunteer Work

Bill and Judy volunteer with the hospice program at least once a week. They expanded their work by visiting veterans in other parts of the hospital to also spend time with them and by helping out with an ice cream social the first Sunday of the month, delivering the items by cart to the veterans.

They also help with the hospital's Operation New Dawn program that assists veterans with mental health issues and Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder.

And they serve as bell ringers for the Salvation Army, volunteer with the American Red Cross and are members of the Estes Valley Sunrise Rotary Club.

The couple wanted to give back for the help the law enforcement agencies they worked for received from their local Salvation Army and Red Cross.

"We decided we wanted to help people rather than be helped," Bill said.

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm