By the time President Obama won reelection in 2012, however, the country was thoroughly sick of threatened defaults and fiscal cliffs, and Congress passed a six-month extension to fund the government until September. The idea was to give Murray and Ryan's budget process some time (and to allow Congress to turn to issues such as gun control and immigration). The first step for Murray and Ryan was to get their respective chambers to pass budgets—documents that they could then work with to reach a compromise.

Her job was harder than his at this stage. The Democrat-controlled Senate feared that Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell would amend the budget either to strip funding from Obamacare or to force votes on issues that would be tough on Democrats up for reelection. So to win her party's support, Murray had to convince Majority Leader Reid that she could protect both the Affordable Care Act and vulnerable Democrats. "I don't think [Ryan] ever believed that I was going to get a budget," she says. "He knew that I was going to try."

Most Popular

Murray and many female senators legislate using what former Arkansas senator and longtime Murray friend Blanche Lincoln dubs "the PTA strategy." Put simply, they split up the work and delegate—a "high-effort, consensus-building" tactic that helps women tackle large, divisive issues more effectively than men, at least according to one Vanderbilt University study. For Murray, that meant instead of hoarding power as committee chair, she deputized her committee members such as Stabenow and freshman Tammy Baldwin, a Wisconsin Democrat, to track the hundreds of pending amendments, especially those that the Republicans were churning out.

The PTA strategy worked. After considering hundreds of amendments, and voting on 70, Murray won passage of her budget by a vote of 50–49 on March 23, 2013. Earlier that same week, Ryan got his budget through the Republican-controlled House. They'd each won round one, but the leaders of both parties now had to designate conferees to help iron out differences between the two versions. Democrats named their negotiators, but after four years of clamoring for a budget, the Republicans suddenly grew leery. Texas Senator Ted Cruz charged that the budget-conference process was a ploy by Democrats to raise taxes. Ryan was stuck, and over the next six months, Murray went to the Senate floor 21 times to demand that Republicans name conferees and begin negotiating.

It was during this time that the women of the Senate got down to business. Barbara Boxer saw through a $12.5 billion water resources bill and $54 billion transportation legislation; Stabenow got a gigantic $955 billion farm bill passed; Mikulski shepherded through more than a dozen appropriations bills; and all 20 women came together to ensure reauthorization of the Violence Against Women Act. But at the end of September, everything ground to a halt. Bomb-thrower Cruz, already eyeing a 2016 presidential bid, had been encouraging House conservatives to shut down the government by refusing to give Ryan and the other Republican leaders enough votes to pass a budget bill unless Democrats defunded Obamacare. The Tea Partyers, eager for a fight, agreed. The government closed on October 1.

For the next week, senators paraded across the floor talking angrily past one another, and communication between the parties completely dried up—among the men, that is. A week into the shutdown, the female senators had one of their dinners in New Hampshire Democrat Jeanne Shaheen's offices and, over pizza and wine, half-joked that if the men weren't finding any solutions, maybe they could do better.

The next day, Republican Susan Collins went to the floor to propose a compromise that would become the basis of the talks to end the shutdown. "I ask my Democratic and Republican colleagues to come together," Collins said. "We can do it. We can legislate responsibly and in good faith."

Appropriations Chair Mikulski picked up a microphone: "Let's get to it. Let's get the job done. I am willing to negotiate. I am willing to compromise." Ten minutes later, a third woman rose. "I am pleased to stand with my friend from Maine, Senator Collins, as she has described a plan which I think is pretty reasonable," said Alaska Republican Lisa Murkowski. "I think it is pretty sensible."

A bipartisan gang of 14 senators formed, including six women, to negotiate an end to the impasse. It ended eight days later. The headlines read: "Senate Women Lead in Effort to Find Accord"; "Men Got Us Into the Shutdown—Women Got Us Out."

The shutdown came with a silver lining: Republicans dropped their objections to the budget talks and named conferees. But due to several factors, not least of which was their mutual respect and commitment to the task, Murray and Ryan decided to negotiate one-on-one. Because they trusted each other not to leak information to the press, Ryan says, they could speak fully and honestly. "[Patty's] not emotional, and she's not lying. Some of these folks walk out of the room, and they huff and they huff. She's not like that."

Murray herself likes to recount how, after she first arrived in DC in 1993, her seventh-grade daughter wrote an op-ed in her school newspaper criticizing her mother's support of a controversial trade bill. Her kids are harder to sell than anyone in Congress, she says, not unaware of the fact that when she plays up her soccer-mom persona, people tend to underestimate her.

Right off the bat, Ryan ruled out raising taxes and wanted to keep entitlement cuts. Murray's bottom line was that no defense spending would be restored without equal increases in domestic spending. "She was a very tough negotiator. She stood her ground on a number of things. As did I," Ryan says. "Basically, we laid over three budgets [including President Obama's] on top of each other and found the common ground. It was just a smart, methodical process."

Murray adds, "I knew that he had to have a win. I knew him enough to know how we could make a story for his win, and how we could make a story for my win, so that we could reach an agreement." After Congress broke for Halloween, they conducted their negotiations over the phone—stepping away from family to chat or text ideas, lending privacy and intimacy to the talks.

Meanwhile, the Senate was lurching toward its next partisan showdown. Just before Thanksgiving, Reid, sick of the legislative logjam, moved to limit Republican filibusters, something considered so antithetical to the Senate that it was labeled "the nuclear option." The Upper Chamber is an institution designed to work on agreement. Even without the filibuster, mutual agreement is required on everything—the daily prayer, the schedule, whether bills can be debated—and when consensus is lost, time-consuming votes are required to achieve the simplest bits of business. This is what happened when Reid went nuclear. Boom. Both sides stopped talking once again.

One thing did emerge from the Senate's nuclear winter, however. Murray and Ryan's budget deal passed on December 18, well ahead of the January 1 deadline. It was a two-year pact that ended—or at least suspended—the fiscal cliffs. The House followed suit, and the president signed the bill into law the day after Christmas. The two ideological opposites had achieved what (former) Speaker Boehner, President Obama, Senate Majority Leader Reid, Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, and Vice President Joe Biden had all failed to do.

To commemorate all the grief she'd given Ryan over Seahawks star quarterback Russell Wilson (Wilson went to college in Wisconsin), Murray got the player to sign a jersey for him. She presented it to him as a gift when their agreement passed Congress; it's now framed, hanging on a wall in Ryan's home in Janesville.

The night of the November 2014 elections, Murray and Ryan exchanged congratulatory texts and vowed to begin work on a joint bill to create a 15-person commission to study "evidence-based policy making," using data to assess the efficacy of certain spending programs and tax credits. As Ryan had teased Murray at their Super Bowl celebration earlier in the year, "Patty, I think this is the beginning of a beautiful friendship."

This article originally appears in the December 2015 issue of ELLE.

Purchase Broad Influence: How Women Are Changing the Way America Works, forthcoming in January .

This piece has been updated.