John Wood Jr.

In a political era characterized by partisanship and polarization, John Wood Jr. is hoping to revive some once-respected values: reconciliation, consensus and humility.

“Everyone’s going to have different perspectives and it’s OK to have different opinions,” the 27-year-old writer, jazz musician and digital marketing sales representative said. “We need to be open to other ideas.”

But with little money or name recognition — not to mention his Republican Party label in an overwhelmingly Democratic district — Wood’s quixotic challenge to unseat entrenched incumbent Rep. Maxine Waters in the 43rd Congressional District is a long shot, to say the least.

The two will go head to head on the Nov. 4 ballot.

Waters, 76, has been a fixture in Los Angeles and California politics for nearly four decades. She has served in Congress since 1991 and is a member and past chairwoman of the Congressional Black Caucus. Before that, she served in the California Assembly, first elected in 1976.

The congresswoman could not be reached for an interview. As in the past when facing only token opposition at the ballot box, Waters has not engaged in much of an election campaign, preferring to focus on her legislative duties.

Waters has won handily, often with 70 percent of the vote or more, in the South Los Angeles district she’s represented for 24 years. The redrawn 43rd now also takes in parts of Gardena, Hawthorne, Lennox, Westchester, Inglewood, Lawndale, Lomita and Torrance.

Waters, who kicked off a United Small Business Alliance event on Oct. 16, was nicknamed “Kerosene Maxine” by some of her detractors for her inflammatory remarks aimed at large financial institutions, the Tea Party and others. She once referred to former Los Angeles Mayor Richard Riordan as a “plantation owner” and called former President George W. Bush a racist.

In 2010, the congresswoman was investigated for arranging a meeting with Treasury Department officials to help OneUnited Bank, in which her husband, Sidney Williams, had a financial interest. She was cleared of wrongdoing by the House Ethics Committee in 2012.

She is critical of Republican spending plans aimed at cutting the nation’s expanding deficit.

“No one disagrees about the need to reduce the deficit,” she said in 2011. “However, Democrats must continue to draw sharp distinctions for their constituents about how each party would go about it: end war, make the wealthy pay their fair share, and uphold the nation’s safety net? Or end Medicare and Medicaid, allow defense spending to balloon, and repeal health care reform for millions of Americans?”

Advertisement

That same year, she spoke out in an MSNBC interview in support of increasing income taxes on those in the top 1 percent tax bracket.

“They have been getting away with not paying their fair share. ... I think Republicans are going to have to not do what they’ve been doing in the past and protecting the richest 1 percent in our country. They’re going to have to come on board on this.”

She voted against the 2002 Iraq War Resolution; Wood, her opponent, also participated in a demonstration against the war at that time.

Waters was born in Missouri, moving with her family in 1961 to Los Angeles, where she worked in a garment factory and as a telephone operator.

She was hired as an assistant teacher in the Head Start program in Watts in 1966 and later attended what is now Cal State Los Angeles, graduating with a sociology degree in 1970.

Her political career began when she became chief deputy to Los Angeles City Councilman David Cunningham Jr.

Waters has sponsored legislation designed to help homeowners avoid foreclosure and supported the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare.

Wood, who began his political volunteerism working on behalf of President Barack Obama’s 2008 political campaign, said he’s become more fiscally conservative through the years but stressed that government still plays an important role in providing a safety net for families.

But he’s also sympathetic to the libertarian wing of the GOP that promotes small business and lower taxes.

In a district where only about 15 percent of the registered voters are Republican, it’s been a tough sell, he acknowledges. But Wood said he brings an important voice to the Republican Party and would provide a needed voice on the other side of the aisle for struggling low-income citizens and minorities.

“My purpose in running is to try to uplift the condition of folks, particularly for the folks who need it most,” he said.

He’d like to see the GOP return to its roots as the “party of Lincoln,” saying there are a range of issues on which agreement and common ground needs to be sought between the two parties.

While saying that Waters has served the community well in many ways, he said she also tends to be among the more polarizing figures in Washington and that voters are looking for a change of guard.

“I consider myself to be fairly middle of the road,” he said. “The thing that really inspired me about President Obama’s candidacy in ’08 was that he was really pursuing cultural change in the way we approach our politics. I don’t think it’s healthy for us to just judge each other right off the bat.”

According to the candidate’s online biography, Wood is the grandson of the late record industry pioneer Randy Wood, who founded Dot Records in the 1950s and the nationally broadcast radio show and mail order record store “Randy’s Record Shop.” His father, John Wood Sr., is a noted jazz pianist and his mother, Deonda Theus, an R&B vocalist.

His grandparents were delegates to the 1960 Democratic convention that nominated John F. Kennedy.

His Facebook page quotes the Beatles (“The love you take is equal to the love you make”), identifies his political views as “center-right” and lists both Culver City and William Howard Taft high schools as his alma maters.

Wood, who is biracial, said he came to value political diversity as a healthy part of the American system.

Wood’s father was white and hailed originally from Tennessee, a middle-of-the-road Kennedy Democrat who became more conservative later in life. Wood’s mother was born in Los Angeles to a black family and was more liberal than her husband. His parents didn’t always agree when it came to voting for the same candidates.

“I always look at Democrats and Republicans as ‘mom and dad,’ ” Wood said.

“The center of American politics needs to be strengthened. I think I’d have more leverage as a black Republican representing a minority district than a politician on the other (Democratic) side of the aisle.”

Bread-and-butter economic, education and quality-of-life issues are the most important in the 43rd Congressional District, he said.

“The economic and education problems that have plagued the inner city haven’t improved over the last 30 or 40 years in some of these areas,” he said.

Wood was born in Inglewood and grew up in Culver City. His wife is from Watts and the couple now live in Los Angeles.

“I’m pro-life, but I don’t think overturning Roe v. Wade is as important as having a broader conversation about the health of the American family,” he said.