ASPEN — Using the rail section at the top of the slopestyle course, riders Mark McMorris and Silje Norendal won gold Sunday in the Winter X Games finals.

Norendal defended her 2014 gold with a final run that snuck past four-time gold medalist Jamie Anderson.

Watch: Silje Norendal wins gold in women’s snowboard slopestyle

Norendal, 21, spun technical performance on the rails at the top of the course — riding on the wall and grinding rotations off the rails — fueled a 93.66 score that pushed her past Anderson’s second-run 91.33.

A few minutes later, the judges again rewarded the most technical rail riding, delivering McMorris, the contest’s top qualifier, his fifth X Games gold. McMorris, who won big air Friday night, has twice won two golds in a single X Games.

Spinning a creative line through the rail section, McMorris was able to pass Norwegian rider Stale Sandbech, even though Sandbech’s flipping tricks off the jumps were more technical.

Both riders hit switch backside 1260s off the first hit. Sandbech threw a 1440 double-cork off the middle air, compared to McMorris’ 1080-degree rotation in the same double-flipping trick. Both riders stomped huge triple-cork 1440s on the final jump. That mute-grabbed triple-cork 1440 has served McMorris well in slopestyle, delivering him two golds and a silver in the last three X Games slopestyle contests.

McMorris said the new switch 12 and his rail work contributed to his 96-point second run.

“I wanted to something different and I’m glad I took the time and brought that switch 12 into the run because I think it played huge on my score,” he said. “I think the rails definitely set me apart too.”

Sandbech earned his first X Games silver on Sunday, adding to his trio of bronze medals. Swedish rider Sven Thorgren collected his first X Games with bronze.

Anderson, the California yoga-lover who won gold in her sport’s Olympic debut last year in Russia, was the only American in the finals. Her airs were large, some of the largest of the competition, but her rail section work paled to Norendal’s.

Watch: Mark McMorris wins fifth X Games gold

Anderson won her first X Games slopestyle medal with a bronze in 2006 and has medaled every year since, except for 2009. She earned her third X silver Sunday.

Canada’s Spencer O’Brien threw the first-ever backside 900 in women’s slopestyle competition but missed the podium, revealing the trajectory of progression in women’s riding. New Zealand’s Christy Prior, an X Games rookie who won bronze in last month’s Dew Tour, snuck past O’Brien on her final run of the best-of-three competition to win bronze.

Podium run complete. Garrett Goodwin completed his methodical climb up the podium Sunday by winning gold in the adaptive snocross finals.

The 22-year-old Goodwin, who won bronze as an adaptive rookie in 2013 and claimed silver last year, held off a couple of charges by Doug Henry, who finished with his second X Games silver.

Goodwin became paralyzed from the waistdown during a 2011 motorcross training accident and is one of the first to race with a rollcage protecting him.

Four-time defending adaptive snocross champion Mike Schultz did not race Sunday after shattering his heel Friday in the adaptive snowboarder semifinals.

His to lose. Tucker Hibbert continued his dominance in the snocross, winning for the eighth consecutive X Games. The 30-year-old has nine total golds to go along with three silvers and a bronze.