Here’s a slightly startling pair of statistics, courtesy of Encore contributor Glenn Ruffenach: In a recent Gallup survey of currently employed workers, the average age at which people said they expected to retire was 66. But in a simultaneous survey of retirees, the average actual age at which people had retired was 61.

Shutterstock.com Early retirement: Less fun when accidental.

For many boomers, of course, that five-year time gap would mean a major financial disruption, a one-two punch that combines fewer years of earning and saving with more years of post-work life to pay for. With those issues in mind, an article this week by Christine Benz, director of personal finance at research firm Morningstar, feels particularly pertinent. A premature retirement brings a host of financial challenges with it, of course, but Benz suggests that those who find themselves leaving the workforce early focus their energies on three main concerns:

Social Security: Delay it, if you can. Given the average retirement age, it’s not surprising that between 35% and 40% of retirees begin claiming Social Security benefits at 62, the earliest possible age. (Those percentages ticked higher during the last recession, after a decade-long decline.) The problem, of course, is that claiming early almost always means your month-to-month Social Security income will be lower than it would be if you waited – a haircut of up to 30% from what you’d receive if you waited until the “full retirement age” of 66 or 67, and a cut of 43% compared with what you’d get if you held out until age 70.

Benz’s message: Unless their assets are at a depressed level (as they were in 2008 and 2009), people who have independent retirement savings should tap those before they turn to Social Security. For broader advice about strategies for maximizing Social Security benefits, see the tools highlighted in this recent article by Encore’s Anne Tergesen.

Tap your savings strategically. Cash “emergency fund” savings, long-term taxable investments and Roth IRAs are the first places early retirees should turn for money for living expenses, Benz says, because withdrawals from those sources won’t be taxed as income. Those options are preferable to traditional 401(k)s and IRAs, since withdrawals from those accounts are taxable (and might be subjected to additional penalties if the saver is younger than 59 ½). Being able to estimate your taxable income may be crucial, because if you’re too young to qualify for Medicare, you’ll need to…

Do your Obamacare homework. If it works the way it’s supposed to (and of course, so far, not so good on that front) the Affordable Care Act could make health insurance more affordable for 50- and 60-somethings who previously faced sky-high premiums. But as Benz points out, for many people, affordability will depend on subsidies based on the insured person’s gross income. Draw too much taxable income from your savings, she notes, and your annual premiums could be much higher. For some folks, that may mean relying on a combination of taxable and non-taxable withdrawals for a few years to keep the taxable share lower. Mike Piper, a CPA and author of the Oblivious Investor blog, covers the issue in more detail in this recent post.