Detroit mental health organization to create integrated care center in Midtown

Detroit Central City Community Mental Health Inc. has received $793,000 in federal funding to create Southeast Michigan's sixth federally qualified health center.

But Detroit Central City's Midtown health center at 10 Peterboro St. will be quite different than the other five centers. It will provide integrated primary medical, dental and mental health services along with housing and support services to clients, said Irva Faber-Bermudez, DCC's CEO.

"This is what we wanted. We are the first community mental health center to be able to do this on our own," Faber-Bermudez said. "Almost half the people who come to DCC are homeless. It is difficult to coordinate care for them because of transportation problems and other challenges."

Faber-Bermudez said DCC has 120 days to begin operations as a health center and expects to treat about 3,500 people its first year. She said DCC plans to continue its mission of providing assistance to about 4,400 homeless and public housing residents.

"We will use $150,000 of the grant to renovate" and build out Detroit Central City's Midtown clinic to provide space for the health center, Faber-Bermudez said. Another $1.2 million in funding is expected to be available to DCC over the next two years if certain patient care outcome and volume goals are met, she said.

About 15 to 20 people will be hired to supplement DCC's 150-employee workforce, she said. DCC also will collaborate with University of Detroit Mercy's McAuley Center to provide primary health care to the Detroit community.

Earlier this year, DCC hired Jane Damren as director of integrated health initiatives, Faber-Bermudez said.

"Our board had already decided we needed to move in the integrated health care direction," she said.

Under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services awarded $150 million to 236 new health center sites, including Detroit Central Community, to expand access to care.

The funds will support an additional 1.25 million patients and help accommodate Medicaid and private health insurance expansion through health reform.

In Michigan, HHS issued $6.25 million to nine organizations. Besides DCC, they include Covenant Community Care in Detroit, MyCare Health Center in Mount Clemens and Western Wayne Family Health Center in Inkster.

The other five federally qualified health centers in Southeast Michigan are Detroit Community Health Connection Inc., Community Health and Social Services Center, Western Wayne Family Health Centers, Covenant Community Care and Advantage Health Centers.

There are also three "look-alike" health centers that provide similar services. They are the Wellness Plan Medical Centers, Health Centers Detroit Medical Group and Oakland Integrated Healthcare Network.

DCC is partially funded by Detroit Wayne County Community Mental Health Agency and Gateway Community Health.

Jay Greene: (313) 446-0325, jgreene@crain.com. Twitter: @jaybgreene