A couple of pre-game thoughts:

— OK, so neither the zoom-in on my iPhone nor the operator was capable of producing a sharp picture here.

But with the NHL trading deadline approaching, when two NHL general managers spend a morning skate sitting together at the top of the Pepsi Center’s lower bowl, as Joe Sakic and the Coyotes’ Don Malone did Monday — it’s going to draw some attention.

And perhaps raise some eyebrows.

Coyotes’ defenseman Keith Yandle, 28, especially a force on the power play, has a year remaining on his five-year, $26.5-million contract, and if Arizona’s housecleaning and rebuilding goes into high gear, he could go — despite the fact this is not some 34-year-old D-man heading into his final seasons. Mike Chambers summarizes Yandle as a player in our advance box this morning:

Spotlight on Keith Yandle: The defenseman leads the Coyotes in scoring but has a team-worst minus-27 rating, which is tied for 817th among 822 NHL players. Yandle has produced a league-high 26 power-play points (which do not factor in on plus-minus) and is tied for fourth among the league’s defensemen in overall points (40). His upside outweighs his downside, given that he averages 24 minutes per game. That ranks 20th among NHL blue- liners and second for the Coyotes.

Mentioning Yandle here in conjunction with that Sakic-Maloney chat is not a claim to know anything or to have picked up some chatter with a parabolic microphone, but it makes sense that as the Avalanche checks around in exploring if it can acquire a quality defenseman, Yandle would be a possibility.

However, a playoff-bound team thinking more short-term might be more prone to offer the Coyotes a compelling package, and one of the Avalanche’s problems is a dearth of prospects in its pipeline to include as part of any deal.

— I almost felt self-conscious the other day asking who would start in the Colorado net. The answer was, of course, Semyon Varlamov.

Here’s another way the Avalanche has painted itself into a corner with Reto Berra as the backup, and with its obvious lack of faith in him.

If Colorado plays him now, it would be widely viewed as tossing in the towel.

As I touched on in my Monday column, I personally believe trying to determine if Berra is indeed a disaster, or if given another chance, he could fool us, is worth it at this point and preferable to playing Varlamov into the ground — yes even before the Avalanche’s playoff hopes completely disappear.

Even if the upside is that the Avalanche somehow gets back in that playoff hunt — bear with me for the sake of illustration — Varlamov can’t play every game in a shocking closing run, and the other option would be to recall Calvin Pickard for the stretch run.

So if the answer soon to the “And in net…?” question is Berra, I won’t rip it. The Avalanche at this point needs to get some answers.

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or twitter.com/TFrei