A Colorado group has gathered plenty of signatures to put a proposal for a universal, single-payer health care system in the state to voters, but it will come with a $25 billion price tag if it passes next year.

Voters will get to decide whether to approve a new state entity with its own board of trustees that would pay for health care for Colorado residents funded by a 10 percent payroll tax. Self employed would pay the whole tax while workers for businesses would pay about a third with the employer kicking in the rest.

Proponents say the single-payer system would save administrative costs, be a wash with money that residents already spend on health insurance, cover everyone who has lived in the state for a year or more and cut out profits for large health insurance companies.

“I think most people would love to have health insurance, but they can’t afford it,” said state Sen. Irene Aguilar, a Denver Democrat and physician who is helping organize support for the ballot issue. “By spreading the costs based on ability to pay, we could make sure everyone gets the care they need.”

But Linda Gorman, who studies health care for the free-market Independence Institute, called it a “very, very bad idea.”

“The people supporting it are ill-informed,” she said. “They would benefit from some serious reading in the economics of public choice, and from (studying) how the kind of thing they are proposing actually operates when run by real people in the real world.”

Gorman said the premium tax increase would give Colorado the highest state income tax rate in the country and allow unlimited tax increases as the measure says it is not subject to Taxpayer Bill of Rights restrictions on raising revenue.

She also notes the initiative doesn’t define residency requirements so people could claim benefits by registering at homeless shelters or other non-permanent locations. And a board of trustees would decide what procedures are covered so people might still have to pay to get certain treatment.

IN OTHER NEWS: Vermont removes critic of single payer system

“It would be hard to think of a worse choice for a high-income, industrialized economy except, perhaps, the Soviet or North Korean models,” she said.

Aguilar said people would have to establish one year of residency to receive benefits and all people who establish residency and pay into the system would get a chance to vote on any premium increases. She said Colorado residents would be covered for the essentials established under the Affordable Care Act as well as preventive care.

The secretary of state certified last month the group had enough signatures to get on the November ballot, but recent proposals for large tax increases in Colorado have failed even for popular issues like education.

Colorado voters easily rejected a nearly $1 billion tax increase for school funding in 2013, and even Denver voters, known to support many tax hikes, killed a proposal last month to fund college tuition through a sales tax increase.

Politically, Aguilar concedes single-payer is not a popular term in the United States and the health insurance companies will likely outspend them to urge voters to reject the issue. A spokeswoman for the health insurance association didn’t return a call seeking comment.

ColoradoCaresYes campaign will be funded mostly with small, grassroots contributions, she said.

But Aguilar said it will be popular in rural places that have high insurance premiums.

“This is an issue that makes sense for everybody spending a lot of money that benefits a corporation that might not be that interested in their personal well-being,” she said.