— An attorney for a woman and four minors who have accused a Brandon pastor of molestation has filed civil lawsuits against the property owners who rented the worship space to the pastor and his church.

“They should have known that these activities were going on there,” said attorney Lou Pendas, whose law firm is representing the woman and four girls. “They should have taken action to prevent it.”

The lawsuits filed this month name MTV Enterprises & Rosenthal and MSR Management Corp., according to court records filed in Hillsborough County Circuit Court. The property owners rented the space at at 117 W. Windhorst Road to pastor Francisco Rios and his church, Casa de Amor.

The lawsuit says the property owners failed to “provide a safe environment,” failed to “maintain its premises in a reasonably safe condition,” failed to warn the plaintiffs and allowed “Rios and Casa de Amor (Church) to remain on its premises.”

They screened their tenant poorly and didn’t follow up properly when the molestation allegations arose, Pendas said.

Neither organization named in the lawsuit could be reached for comment.

Rios is not named in the lawsuit but faces Hillsborough County criminal charges in the case. He could not be reached for comment; a woman who answered the phone at the church Friday said he remains the pastor of the church.

Rios was arrested in April on charges that he molested three females, who at the time were 12, 17 and 43. The three contacted the sheriff’s office the previous August after talking to each other and learning each had been touched by Rios at the church, according to the sheriff’s office. Since then, the sheriff’s office is investigating another complaint from a minor girl that she was molested by Rios; Pendas said another potential victim has emerged, as well.

The sheriff’s office said the 17-year-old told investigators she was touched inappropriately on about 15 occasions beginning in 2011. Rios had told her he was touching her because “he loved her as a pastor and she was not to tell anyone because he could get in trouble,” according to the sheriff’s office.

The 12-year-old girl told the sheriff’s office she was molested by Rios about twice a week over a year’s time beginning in 2013.

The 43-year-old woman told investigators Rios had touched her inappropriately in April 2013 after he “convinced her it was a way to cure (her from) a medical condition,” the sheriff’s office said.

Cristal Bermudez Nuñez, a sheriff’s office spokeswoman, said charges related to the 43-year-old woman’s accusations have been dropped but didn’t know the specifics of why. She said Rios still faces lewd and lascivious charges related to the accusations of the three girls.

Rios has been released from a Hillsborough County jail after posting bail, according to sheriff’s office records.

Pendas said his law office will pursue the civil case against the property owners regardless of the status of the criminal charges against Rios.

“It doesn’t have any impact on civil cases,” Pendas said. “They are different burden of proofs.”

jpatino@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7659

Twitter: @jpatinoTBO