SANTAQUIN, Utah (ABC 4 Utah) – Seven snow-covered deer lie dead in secluded corners of an orchard, and they all have one thing in common.



"They have their butts chewed out the same way..." said Brett Farley, who owns the property.



But two of the neighbors' pets have lost their lives too. A woman and her boyfriend shot and killed them Monday morning.



"We don't know why,” said Brandon Naccarato, the deceased dogs' owner.



So, how did all this happen? Farley has an idea. He says he starting spotting the desecrated deer about two months ago.



"We couldn't figure out why the deer were dying, and then people witnessed it. We saw that the dogs just chased them until they got stuck, and the dogs would just chew them..." Farley explained.



Farley claims his employee and her boyfriend could not stand to watch the attacks any longer.

He says they tried shooing the dogs away and when that failed, they pulled out a handgun.



"There was nothing wrong with what was done. It was all legal,” Farley resolved.



According to Utah Code 18-1-3, 'Any person may injure or kill a dog while the dog is attacking, chasing, or worrying... any species of hoofed protected wildlife.” Legally, the couple is justified, but owner of the deceased dogs says that does not make it right.



"If the dogs need to be, you know, taken care of, they need to be taken care of, but I was never addressed,” Naccarto said.



Naccarato claims no one warned him his canines were causing problems. He says the couple should have had The Division of Wildlife Services notify him before taking matters into their own hands.



"...and we've wanted to see proof of our dogs on a sheep or on a deer, and we've not seen that,” Naccarto explained.



Naccarato's relative recently posted the story on social media. The shooting has hundreds of irate dog-lovers making threats toward the couple responsible. The subjects of those threats say the comments have become so aggressive, they have had to leave town.



"I've been called the B-word, a piece of crap, and that I should go into hiding—I couldn't run fast enough from them, so I left. I honestly almost brought my dogs because I'm worried they're going to do something to my dogs,” said Jaquel Christensen, the woman who shot Naccarto's dogs.



According to a DWR lieutenant, this type of dog attack scenario is an issue the agency deals with often. He says he wants to make it clear that DWR does not make the rules but simply enforces them.



Copyright 2016 Nexstar Broadcasting, Inc. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.