Most Popular

1 The Media Must Decide Whether to Follow Donald Trump Down the Sewer

2 The Democratic Platform Committee Now Has a Progressive Majority. Thanks, Bernie Sanders.

3 On the Shameful and Skewed ‘Redskins’ Poll

4 Clinton Needs Sanders Supporters to Win, But Sanders Needs Clinton Supporters to Change the System

5 Benjamin Netanyahu Just Formed the Most Right-Wing Government in Israeli History

Last year, home care aides were among the many low-wage workers who joined fast food workers at Fight for 15 rallies in at least 19 cities. The Fight for 15 movement, spearheaded by fast-food workers and backed by SEIU, was a natural ally for home care workers, says Massachusetts home care worker Kindalay Cummings-Akers: “We figured, there’s a lot of low-wage workers out that can’t survive off of $8, $9, $10 an hour, so we all might as well just go out there together, make it a national fight.” Now that her union has won $15 an hour, she adds, “the fight’s not over.… this shows that if we can do it, other people can do it too.”

In Massachusetts, while the new wage agreement is a step forward—and is coupled with other benefits like job training—the low-wage home care workforce still faces socioeconomic challenges. Reflecting national trends, surveyed personal care workers cited low compensation as a major problem that factored into some workers’ desire to leave the job: Roughly two-thirds expressed frustration about not being paid according to their time spent in the job. Other common complaints included a lack of paid sick leave and not being paid fairly according to skill level.

Living wages help stabilize the workforce and improve the overall level of care. Research on San Francisco home care workers found that each added dollar on the base wage boosted workforce retention by 17 points, and retention rates jumped 39 percent to 74 percent “following significant wage and benefit increases.” Other research points to unionization itself as a boost to job and workforce quality.

But the Massachusetts victory only underscores the plight of many other home care workers across the country, who remain exempt even from the federal base wage (dependent instead on state wage standards or just the whim of employers). The Obama administration recently moved to amend federal regulations to extend wage protections to home care workers, but the rule has been thwarted by litigation brought by the industry.

In addition to supporting the ongoing expansion of public healthcare under the Affordable Care Act, the recent Supreme Court ruling affects home care workers more directly. While the consumer base grows for community-based services, many home care workers themselves may gain access to coverage, since a large portion of them earn poverty wages and are themselves uninsured.

As workers campaign to extend the $15 wage floor to other sectors, it’s also spreading a vision of a care economy that treats both providers and consumers with dignity.

Cummings-Akers, who plans to keep organizing for fairer wages for all workers and expansion of state-sponsored Medicare programs, wishes more politicians saw what she deals with at her client’s home, where she often volunteers extra time to ensure that he and his partner are fed well and comfortable. Won’t policymakers want the same when they get older? “That’s a question they should ask themselves: Do I want someone [caring for me, who is] being paid well…and is happy and not miserable?… When you’re not happy at your job, you don’t really give your best.”

In her everyday work, she says, “I love my job, I love what I do, and I’m going to give my best. But I’m going to fight for what I deserve.”