Getty Images

“Whatever” is returning to town, maybe even your town.

Bud Light plans to take over a U.S. town the last weekend in May in the latest edition of its “Whatever, USA” marketing program. The brand introduced the concept last year in Crested Butte, Colo., where it built a beach, hosted free concerts and flew in 1,000 consumers for a weekend party.

Anheuser-Busch InBev SA Chief Executive Carlos Brito called last year’s promotion “a major success” and said it reached nearly 90% of 21- to 27-year olds in the U.S., which is Bud Light’s target demographic. There were 200,000 applications from Millennials interested in being one of the 1,000 people selected to party at Whatever, USA.

“These are just amazing figures,” Mr. Brito said during an earnings call last October.

The goal this year is to get 500,000 submissions. The brand will be rolling out an extensive marketing effort at bars, events and retail outlets over the next two months. It will visit more than 2,000 bars and offer free Bud Light samples to Millennials who submit video applications for Whatever, USA.

Bud Light will set up displays at major events like the NCAA Final Four in Indianapolis, Stagecoach Music Festival and four spring break cities, including Cancun and Panama City. It also has partnered with 7-Eleven and Walmart to build Whatever, USA displays in stores so consumers can apply to attend the party.

“The key question is: How can we make the program better in 2015?” said

Bud Light Vice President Alexander Lambrecht. “We want to take our recruitment platform to every single consumer touch point: traditional media, events and digital and social media.”

Just as it did last year, Bud Light aims to keep the selection of the host city for the event a secret. Mr. Lambrecht said the company picked Crested Butte from a list of nearly 20 cities about 60 days before the event took place. News of Crested Butte’s selection didn’t leak until shortly before it became Whatever, USA.

Some of the city’s 1,500 residents complained that Bud Light was taking over the town. Bud Light paid $500,000 to the town and painted several town blocks in the brand’s signature blue.

Mr. Lambrecht said he doesn’t anticipate similar criticism from local residents this year. The Crested Butte event generated an estimated $1 million in revenue for the town and added 500 temporary jobs, according to the local chamber of commerce.

“Last year, there was a level of uncertainty because we hadn’t done it before and the town had not done it,” said Mr. Lambrecht. “We have the proof point we can leave a positive legacy for the town and that will help the search for a town (this year).”

Bud Light also ran into issues with guests who traveled to the event on chartered planes. Guests faced three-hour delays departing because of security screening problems before they arrived at the airport. The company plans to space out flights more than last year to avoid delays in 2015.

Mr. Lambrecht said Bud Light commercials on Whatever, USA will roll out in mid-March and air across multiple TV channels through the end of May. The company also plans to have extensive advertising on Facebook and Instagram.

Bud Light plans to visit 10 to 20 cities in March and narrow its list of candidate cities to five finalists in April. The host city will be identified right before the event, May 29-31.