A chaplain comforts a woman who cried out Friday morning as an ambulance carried away a man suspected of shooting his girlfriend before he was found wounded and unresponsive at a home on West Montague Avenue in the North Charleston area. (ANDREW KNAPP/STAFF)

A man who engaged in a three-hour standoff Friday with Charleston County sheriff’s deputies, reportedly after shooting his girlfriend, died early Saturday from a gunshot wound, authorities said.

The Charleston County Coroner’s Office identified the man as Cordell Bennett, 25, of North Charleston. The condition of Bennett’s 24-year-old girlfriend was not clear Saturday.

The death stemmed from a reported domestic dispute shortly before 9 a.m. Friday at Mundy’s Mobile Home Park, 4059 W. Montague Ave., according to an incident report released by the Sheriff’s Office.

Deputies and officers from the North Charleston Police Department rushed to the woman’s mobile home after receiving a 911 call about reported shots fired.

The victim had called or sent a text message to her brother earlier in the morning, saying her boyfriend had shot her, Sheriff’s Maj. Eric Watson said.

A deputy who responded to the scene reported seeing the woman staggering in the road and walking in his direction, according to the report. Blood was visible on the woman’s shirt and pants, the deputy reported, and she had what appeared to be gunshot wounds to her left shoulder and right hip.

She told the deputy her boyfriend, Bennett, was responsible for her wounds, the report said.

Paramedics transported her to the Medical University Hospital where she underwent surgery Friday.

First responders heard at least one gunshot while tending to the woman. A standoff ensued between the man, sheriff’s deputies, police and SWAT teams.

Investigators maneuvered a robot into the home around 11:25 a.m. and came across the man lying on a bedroom floor.

They entered the home to take the man into custody and found him breathing, but unresponsive.

Deputies reported seeing a visible injury to the man’s head, according to the incident report. A handgun was also found lying on the floor, deputies said.

Paramedics transported the man to Medical University Hospital for treatment of a gunshot wound. Bennett died at the hospital 3:46 a.m. Saturday, Deputy Coroner Kimberly Rhoton said. Whether or not the wound was self inflicted remains under investigation.

Reach Christina Elmore at 937-5908 or at Twitter.com/celmorePC.