Tusayan Mayor Greg Bryan. File photo

Loretta Yerian

Reporter



TUSAYAN, Ariz. - Tusayan Mayor Greg Bryan and other representatives will meet with Arizona's congressional delegates in Washington D.C. April 13 - 16 to address key issues facing the Tusayan community.



Bryan, also vice president and chief operating officer for the Best Western Premier Grand Canyon Squire Inn in Tusayan, will also be one of six Arizona delegates representing the American Hotel and Lodging Association asking for specific hospitality reforms.



Reforms in the hospitality industry include a rise in online hotel reservation scams, reestablishing a 40-hour work week for full-time employment status, relationships between franchise companies and franchisees and clarification for the H2B visa program, which allows foreign workers to work in the U.S. for 10 to 11 months before returning home.



"We are trying to get them (congressional delegates) to reform the overall H2B program and to consider lifting the cap of 66,000 (workers)," Bryan said.



Bryan said the lodging industry has also been hit recently with online reservation fraud - something they want to change.



"People are being frauded and the hotels are getting black eyes because it looks like they are making a reservation with the hotel," Bryan said. "We are trying to get some legislation to block that."



Hotel representatives would also like to have a 40-hour workweek reestablished for fulltime employment status.



Currently, under the Affordable Care Act, 30-hours is considered fulltime and health care benefits are difficult to address.



"Before, the industry as a whole, was providing voluntary health care coverage and now with the 30-hour work week, you can't afford to do it in that case," Bryan said. "We have a hard enough time getting employees."



Bryan will also be representing the town of Tusayan and speaking to members of Congress about the impacts of the possible designation of the Grand Canyon Watershed as a National Monument and future development in the town.



"I am going to be there for both the hotel industry and the town on issues like the monument and the development and our opportunities to have some things considered," Bryan said.



Recently, over 30 people attended a stakeholder meeting, hosted by the Arizona Department of Game and Fish (AZGF), in Tusayan to discuss the impacts if the area of the monument gets national monument status.



"There was a strong number of ranchers as well as wildlife organizations and over flight folks," Bryan said. "There were quite a few different entities represented. What our concerns are is what could happen. Nobody know for sure what the impacts would be if (it is) named as a monument, because it varies."



Stakeholder are concerned about the impacts to grazing rights, hunting restrictions, loss of recreational usage areas and overall forest health.



According to Bryan, in the past, other areas with national monument designation have initially been put forth with no restrictions on hunting, ranching and forestry and within several years restrictions were put in all those areas.



Additionally, the monument's designation could have serious economic impact for the area.



"We do consider hunting a pretty strong economic industry up here," Bryan said. "Two zones up here are world class mule deer hunting. They sold a particular hunt in Salt Lake City (Utah) for $300,000."



According to Bryan, money garnered from hunting is used for improvements to water stock tanks and other wildlife resources.



During his time in D.C., Bryan hopes to learn the intent of Arizona's representatives and what future legislation could look like.



"The impacts (of the watershed), whether they be intended or unintended, could be detrimental to our community and our forest in the area," Bryan said. "While we understand the desire to stop any additional uranium mining and we have worked hard at doing that, we (the town) think this is an overreach and has far more consequences and impacts than just uranium mining. It's kind of like trying to take a sliver out with a chainsaw."



Bryan will also be speaking to the delegates about future development in Tusayan.



"(I want) to dispel the rumor that we are just rolling over for a development company and we do not care," he said. "That's the message I really want to get across: We are being diligent and we are holding Stilo to their commitments."



Bryan will make a report during the April 22 town council meeting.







Related Stories: • Letter to the editor: Grand Canyon Watershed is already protected • Arizona lawmaker says designation of Grand Canyon Watershed unlawful • Town of Tusayan opposes creation of Grand Canyon Watershed National Monument • Tusayan Town Council questions possible Grand Canyon Watershed • Group 'auctions' Grand Canyon to illustrate threat to public lands