410 to 1

The House on Tuesday easily cleared three bills aimed at reducing opioid addiction, the first of more than a dozen bipartisan bills up for consideration this week.

Just one House lawmaker – Rep. Jose Serrano (D-N.Y.) – opposed the legislation.

ADVERTISEMENT

The relatively minor legislation – which includes two bills calling for more government study into existing policies – are among 18 bills slated for votes this week. All are expected to pass with broad bipartisan support, Speaker(R-Wis.)'s office said Tuesday.

At the same time of the vote, the House Rules Committee weeded through dozens of amendments on the remaining opioid bills. Among the most controversial of those bills is one from Rep. Susan Brooks Susan BrooksOvernight Healthcare: Republicans to get Thursday briefing on ObamaCare replacement plan House approves bill to launch opioids task force Overnight Healthcare: House takes first step on opioids bills MORE (R-Ind.), which calls for a review of prescriber practices – something that is opposed by some doctors groups.

House GOP leaders plan to merge their opioids bills into a final package next week. That legislation will then be combined with the Senate's opioids legislation, known as the Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery Act (CARA), to be ultimately sent to the president's desk sometime this summer.

Watch live: Tune in Wednesday, May 11 at 8:45 am for Targeted Cures: A Policy Discussion on Treating Patients with Rare Diseases. Featuring:

-Energy & Committee Chairman Fred Upton (R-Mich.)

-Senator Bob Casey Bob CaseyLawmakers blast poultry, meat industries over worker injuries GOP chairman sees funding deal soon on medical cures bill Overnight Healthcare: House takes first step on opioids bills MORE (D-Pa.)

-Biogen CEO Dr. George A. Scangos

-PhRMA President & CEO Stephen J. Ubl

Topics of discussion include: the cutting-edge science & medicine driving rare disease advances, public-private partnerships for developing and delivering treatments, and the path to making care accessible to the patients who need it most.

Click here.

Feds poised to defy doctors groups with new action on painkillers

The federal government is beginning to take on a powerful coalition of doctors groups, led by the American Medical Association, in a new push to require training for anyone who prescribes painkillers.

A group of 30 advisers to the FDA voiced near-unanimous support for mandatory doctor training last week, creating new pressure for the agency at the center of the national opioid epidemic. Advisory panels have made similar recommendations twice before, but both times the FDA has rejected them.

This time, advocates are armed with new evidence that the current voluntary guidelines don't work: A checkup of the FDA's voluntary prescribing training program this year found that only 37,517 doctors finished those programs in two years, far short of its goal of 80,000 prescribers during that time. Read more here: http://bit.ly/24IF9lg

Clinton proposes expanding Medicare

Hillary Clinton is stepping to the left on healthcare, expressing support for allowing people younger than 65 to buy into Medicare.

"I'm also in favor of what's called the public option, so that people can buy into Medicare at a certain age," Clinton said at a campaign event in Virginia on Monday, in comments first reported by Bloomberg News.

While Medicare recipients currently need to be at least 65, Clinton proposed lowering that age to "55 or 50," for people who buy into the program.

The comments come as Clinton and her Democratic primary opponent, Bernie Sanders, fiercely debate the idea of single-payer healthcare. Read more here. http://bit.ly/1rS1LkX

GOP accuses ObamaCare chief of misleading Congress

Republicans released a report Tuesday arguing that Andy Slavitt, the acting administrator of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), misled lawmakers when he said "over $200 million" of funds for setting up state-run ObamaCare marketplaces had been returned from states to the federal government.

The House Energy and Commerce Committee report states that, in fact, only $21.5 million has been returned.

But Slavitt and the administration are standing by his statement.

The administration said Slavitt was referring to funds returned from all states, including the 34 states that returned funds because they never set up their own ObamaCare marketplaces to begin with. Read more here. http://bit.ly/21TWdD9

ON TAP TOMORROW

The Hill hosts an event on rare diseases featuring remarks from Chairman Fred Upton (R-Mich.) and Sen. Bob Casey (D-Pa.). http://bit.ly/1WZkln0

The House Energy and Commerce health subcommittee holds a hearing on alternatives to ObamaCare.

The House Ways and Means Committee holds a hearing on implementation of the doc fix law.

WHAT WE'RE READING

Federal health officials updated guidelines for Zika virus testing after data showed the virus stays in urine longer than blood (Reuters)

Researchers in labs across the country are rushing to understand the still largely unknown Zika virus (New York Times)

Under growing pressure from nutritional advocates, the Food and Drug Administration is looking to redefine how the word "healthy" is used on food labels (Washington Post)

IN THE STATES

State lawmakers are cracking down on "sober homes," many of which receive government funding to help recovering addicts (STAT News)

Ohio legislators will take a historic vote on whether to legalize medical marijuana on Tuesday (WKYC News)

Doctors are unsure how to comply with a new fetal pain law in Utah (Associated Press)

ICYMI FROM THE HILL:

HIV and AIDS advocates say Sen. Bernie Sanders Bernie SandersWhy superdelegates shouldn't support Sanders Young Turks host offers M for Trump, Sanders debate Puerto Rico debt relief faces serious challenges in Senate MORE (I-Vt.)'s campaign cancelled their meeting http://bit.ly/1QXtxk

Send tips and comments to Sarah Ferris, sferris@thehill.com, and Peter Sullivan, psullivan@thehill.com. Follow us on Twitter: @thehill, @sarahnferris, @PeterSullivan4