WASHINGTON — A giant spending bill needed to fund the U.S. government past Thursday also could suspend rules governing when truckers can be behind the wheel, an effort drawing from opposition from U.S. Sen. Cory Booker (D-N.J.) and others.

The legislation would provide $1 trillion to fund most of the government through Sept. 30, the end of the current fiscal year, and avoid a shutdown similar to one that occurred a year ago when House Republicans refused to pass a spending bill unless it cut off support for the Affordable Care Act. Lawmakers are trying to pass the measure and go home at the end of the week.

The provision in question is being championed by U.S. Sen. Susan Collins (R-Maine). It would require the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration to study the impact of regulations that limit when truckers can take an extended break between trips, and in the interim would suspend the rules until the review was completed. It is one of several measures that could be added to the spending bill that Congress must pass before its members go home for the year.

The dispute pits the trucking industry against the Teamsters Union. which represents drivers, and safety groups. Both sides are generous contributors to federal lawmakers. Employees of trucking companies contributed $7.2 million for the 2014 elections, while the Teamsters gave $1.8 million.

Opponents say that suspending the provisions would enable truckers to work as much as 80 hours each week. The American Trucking Associations, the trade group for the trucking industry, said drivers averaged 52 hours under the old rules.

Under federal law, truck drivers can be behind the wheel 11 hours a day, up to a maximum of 60 hours in a seven-day period. But if a trucker takes a 34-hour rest period, that seven-day calendar starts all over and the driver can be behind the wheel another 60 hour during the subsequent seven days.

The government said in 2013 that the 34 hours off can only be taken once a week and must include two 1 a.m. to 5 p.m. periods.

Booker joined U.S. Sen. Richard Blumenthal (D-Conn.) in urging Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.) to keep it out of the final spending measure.

"The suspension of the rules could force tired truckers to stay on the road for longer periods of time, impairing the safety and well-being of the public," the senators wrote in a letter released today. "This provision should not move forward without further study and debate."

Comedian Tracy Morgan was seriously injured in June on the New Jersey Turnpike when a tractor-trailer smashed into the limo he was riding in. Morgan's friend and mentor, James "Jimmy Mack" McNair, was killed. Four other vehicles were involved in the crash. The driver of the truck, Kevin Roper, has been charged with vehicular homicide and four counts of assault by auto.

Former National Highway Traffic Safety Administration head Joan Claybrook, cited the Morgan crash at a press conference called yesterday to oppose the Collins provision.

"Right now, truck drivers and families are needlessly dying because of truck driver fatigue," said Claybrook, chairwoman of the advocacy group Citizens for Reliable and Safe Highways. "Drastically increasing truck driver working hours and reducing rest time are not sensible, serious or desired."

A spokesman for Collins, Kevin Kelley, said the accident occurred under current rules.

Kelley said that the Collins provision does not change most of the regulations, including the number of hours a trucker can drive and the amount of rest required,

The trucking trade group contends that the new rules actually could hurt safety, since drivers will get going at 5 a.m. rather than earlier, thus putting more vehicles on the road during the morning rush.

"Safety will likely be enhanced by suspending these rules," spokesman Sean McNally said.

Booker, a member of the Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Committee, is backed by the Teamsters Union and the U.S. Department of Transportation.

"The provision at issue as a central element of a comprehensive rule that ensures that truck drivers have adequate rest when operating on our highway," Transportation Secretary Anthony Foxx wrote to House Appropriations Chairman Hal Rogers (R-Ky.) last week. "I am seriously concerned that this suspension will put lives at risk."

And Fred P. McLuckie, Teamsters director of federal legislation and regulation, said the spending bill should not be used as "a testing ground for policies that denigrate highway safety and put all the traveling public at greater risk.”

Jonathan D. Salant may be reached at jsalant@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @JDSalant. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.