Harrod died after heart attack; had wanted to be circuit court clerk in Clark County (Ind.)

Kelly Harrod (Photo: Courtesy photo)

A man who'd been involved in a battle to become circuit court clerk in Clark County (Ind.) has died, but his attorney plans to push forward with an appeal.

Kelly Harrod, 63, suffered a heart attack shortly before Christmas and never fully recovered, said his attorney Larry Wilder.

Harrod's daughter, Dana Harrod-Fieldhouse, also confirmed her father's passing Thursday.

"He had a massive heart attack," she said. "He held on for two weeks."

Harrod, a Republican and Vietnam veteran, had been involved in an election controversy in the county.

He appeared to have defeated Democratic challenger Susan Popp on Election Night. But the Democratic Party filed for a recount, and last month a bipartisan Recount Commission certified its findings in Popp's favor.

Wilder said he will take the case to the Indiana Court of Appeals to honor a commitment that he made to Harrod in one of their last conversations. "His passing doesn't relieve me of my personal obligation and assurance that we would go forward and that's what we're going to do."

Harrod-Fieldhouse said the family supports the appeal because it was "extremely important" to her father and because of discrepancies related to the election.

"We would have taken this all the way to (the) Supreme Court, and we still intend to," she said. Remaining issues "need to be ironed out and answered."

Harrod, a retired Jeffersonville police officer, had a failed run for sheriff about 20 years ago that stuck with him, Wilder said.

Part of his legacy is being "the standard-bearer for making sure the county has correct and operational voting equipment and making sure the processes are followed," the attorney said.

Harrod, the father of six biological children and four adopted ones, also will be remembered as a proud family man and former investigator who found ways to be kind to others. Harrod-Fieldhouse recalled the time her dad gave one of their air conditioners to a family in need.

"If we had two, he would take it and give it to somebody else," she said. "That's what kind of man he was."

Courier-Journal reporter Darla Carter can be reached at (502) 582-7068 or on Twitter @PrimeDarla.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1B9PtVQ