President Truman addressing Congress in 1952. The New York Times

Challenged in Court

In 1952, when the Supreme Court overturned an executive order issued by Harry S. Truman, an oft-used precedent was set. It says that presidents have the most authority when their actions are in line with laws already enacted by Congress. The courts have considered several actions of Mr. Obama and presidents before him.

Barack Obama, 2013 Delayed the requirement under the Affordable Care Act that larger employers provide health insurance to their employees by issuing new Treasury Department rules. Justification The Treasury has said the delay is a form of "transition relief" that it is allowed to grant under its rule-making power without a change in law. Current status Republicans in Congress filed a lawsuit in late 2014, arguing that by amending the law, the administration violated the section of the Constitution that gives Congress “all legislative powers.”

Barack Obama, 2012 The president made recess appointments to the National Labor Relations Board in between short “pro forma” sessions of Congress. Justification Jay Carney, then the White House press secretary, said that the president had the authority to make nominations “when pro forma sessions are simply used as an attempt to stop the president from making an appointment.” Outcome In 2014, the Supreme Court upheld the right of a president to make recess appointments but ruled that Mr. Obama had violated the Constitution because his recess appointments were made during breaks that were too short.

Barack Obama, 2011 Announced a rule requiring that health insurance plans provide contraception and other preventive services free of charge to women. Justification After objections from religious organizations, the administration made a series of changes to the rule that it said would guarantee coverage of birth control “while respecting religious concerns.” Outcome The Supreme Court decided in 2014 that the rule violated a federal law protecting religious freedom. The Obama administration has since devised an accommodation for religious nonprofit groups that would offer women free contraception through insurance companies.

Barack Obama, 2011 The administration announced that it would stop defending the Defense of Marriage Act in court. Justification The administration said that Section 3 of the act, which denies federal recognition of same-sex marriages, violated the right to equal protection under the Constitution. Outcome The Supreme Court, siding with the administration, struck down the Defense of Marriage Act in 2013, writing that it "singles out a class of persons deemed by a State entitled to recognition and protection to enhance their own liberty."

Bill Clinton, 1995 Prevented the government from contracting with companies that hire permanent replacement workers during strikes. Justification The executive order was issued to "ensure the economical and efficient administration and completion of federal government contracts" and cited the president's authority to set procurement policy. Outcome A year later, the order was voided by a federal appeals court, which said the president's right to set procurement policy did not allow him to undermine a 1935 law that courts have held allows employers to permanently replace strikers.

Harry S. Truman, 1952 Ordered the government to take control of steel mills to continue production during a workers’ strike during the Korean War. Justification The executive order stated that "steel is an indispensable component" of weapons and materials for the war effort and that a "work stoppage would immediately jeopardize and imperil our national defense." Outcome The Supreme Court declared the order to be unconstitutional because it did not "stem either from an act of Congress or from the Constitution itself." This decision has been used as a framework for assessing actions in several cases since then.

President Obama speaking on immigration in 2014. Mike Blake/Reuters

Challenged by Congress

Because the president’s authority is restricted to actions that are in line with the law, Congress has the power to pass new legislation in anticipation of presidential action, or vote to nullify an action directly. Because Congress is hampered by the president’s veto power, it must have either a veto-proof majority or enough political will to prevent the president from acting.

Barack Obama, 2014 Announced programs that would grant work permits and protection from deportation to more than four million unauthorized immigrants. Similar protections were announced in 2012 for roughly 800,000 young people. Justification The administration has cited its power to exercise "prosecutorial discretion" in setting priorities within existing law, given limited resources. Current status The House voted this month to undo the policies, but Mr. Obama has said he would veto such legislation. Republicans have said they will also use a deadline for funding the Department of Homeland Security to try to dismantle the actions.

Barack Obama, 2014 The Environmental Protection Agency issued a draft rule to cut carbon pollution, primarily from coal-fired power plants. Justification The agency has authority under the 1970 Clean Air Act to regulate any substance deemed a pollutant, a designation recently given to carbon dioxide. Current status Republicans in Congress have vowed to fight the administration's climate rule through bills to block, delay or defund it. State attorneys general are also turning to federal courts to stop the policies.

Barack Obama, 2011 Authorized airstrikes on Libyan government forces and air defenses as part of an effort sanctioned by the United Nations Security Council. Justification The administration said the limited nature of the strikes did not amount to full-blown “hostilities” and did not require congressional authorization under the 1973 War Powers Resolution. Outcome Lawmakers from both parties argued that the president had violated the Constitution by not seeking permission to intervene in Libya. In a symbolic vote, the House failed to authorize the president's actions, but it also defeated a bill that would have cut financing for the mission.

Barack Obama, 2009 Ordered the detention camp at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, to close within a year. Justification The administration said the prison had become a “damaging symbol to the world” and harmful to national security. The order stated that it should be “implemented consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.” Current status The prison remains open, in part because Congress has prevented the Obama administration from transferring the remaining higher-level detainees to prisons on domestic soil. But the administration has also been slow to approve deals to repatriate remaining lower-level detainees.

George W. Bush, 2006 When Congress passed a law prohibiting torture or the degrading treatment of prisoners, Mr. Bush attached a “signing statement” saying the law did not need to be obeyed as written. Justification Mr. Bush, who employed this practice often during his presidency, expressed concerns about the limits placed on his power as commander in chief. Presidents since the 19th century (including Mr. Obama) have used signing statements to assert that a statute conflicts with the Constitution. Outcome Senators John McCain and John W. Warner said in a statement that they intended to “monitor the administration's implementation of the new law.” Oversight by Congress and the courts is more difficult in the classified realm of national security.

George Bush, 1992 When establishing a human fetal tissue bank, Mr. Bush continued a ban on using tissue from induced abortions for federally supported research. Justification The head of the Public Health Service said the administration was not convinced that using tissue from abortions would not encourage more abortions. Outcome Congress passed a bill that would have lifted the ban on using tissue from abortions, but it was not able to overcome a veto by Mr. Bush. The next year, President Clinton lifted the ban, and Congress passed a law nullifying Mr. Bush's executive order.

President George W. Bush speaking on stem cell research in 2006. Shawn Thew/EPA

Changed by the Next President

While presidents are able to act alone when in line with the Constitution and current law, their actions can be easily undone by the next president. Upon taking office, President Obama signed several orders overturning those of George W. Bush.

George W. Bush, 2008 Opened up the sale of oil and gas drilling leases on more than 100,000 acres in eastern Utah. Justification The Bureau of Land Management is responsible for the development of oil and gas resources on federal land and authorized to sell leases under decades-old laws. Outcome Weeks after Mr. Obama came into office, Interior Secretary Ken Salazar voided the drilling leases, saying the sales had been rushed and not given enough review.

George W. Bush, 2001 Announced a policy to allow federal funds to be used for human embryonic stem cell research, restricted to cells that had already been extracted. Justification The president said his policy allowed for research "without crossing a fundamental moral line by providing taxpayer funding that would sanction or encourage further destruction of human embryos that have at least the potential for life." Outcome Mr. Obama signed an executive order soon after taking office that loosened the restrictions. His order has survived challenges in court, but it could be easily reversed by the next president.