Buy Photo Darin Gordon, director of TennCare. (Photo: Larry McCormack / File / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

Nursing home applications got so backed up when TennCare changed its processing system that administrators reported more than half of their patients did not get timely eligibility determinations.

Jesse Samples, executive director of Tennessee Health Care Association, which represents nursing homes, told TennCare Director Darin Gordon in an email that the problem was causing serious cash flow issues for its members and stressful circumstances for patients.

Gordon responded that the agency's internal statistics showed better performance but admitted its "more limited approach" in communicating applications was causing frustrations.

The emails obtained by The Tennessean through an open records request reveal that TennCare cannot place all the blame for its backlogged Medicaid applications on the federal government. After a class action lawsuit was filed on behalf of people seeking coverage, the state agency argued in court papers that healthcare.gov, the federal insurance exchange, had caused the issues. But nursing home applications were not filed through that website.

Nursing home applications got backlogged because TennCare stopped having state employees with the Department of Human Services process them and outsourced that work to a private contractor. The applications got sent to a new service center operated by Cognosante LLC, which was awarded a four-year, $31 million contract.

The responsibilities of the new service center, the Tennessee Health Connection, included answering calls from people seeking Medicaid coverage who had applied on healthcare.gov as well as processing the paper documents sent by nursing homes. But the call center failed to adequately perform its duties.

The state wound up taking punitive actions, levying a fine of almost $1 million, said Sarah Tanksley, a TennCare spokesperson.

"TennCare's new service center, Tennessee Health Connection, experienced an unexpectedly high volume of applications in the first quarter of 2014 while also experiencing some technical difficulties associated with the startup of this new call center," Tanksley said. "As a result, the state took significant actions to address the problems and levied significant fines against the vendor."

Cognasante and TennCare then worked for several weeks to improve the service, she said, and resolved the application problems early last year.

Samples said while there has been a significant decline, the system still doesn't work as well as it did when the Department of Human Services processed applications.

The association's projections on backlogged applications are still higher than they were before Jan. 1, 2014, when the state made the change.

"The outstanding balance decreased from 1,200 to 600 over the last six months of 2014," Samples said. "This positive trend is a result of TennCare working collaboratively with providers to try and resolve the issues surrounding the new financial eligibility process — which was an average of around 230 individuals — it is still encouraging."

Besides the problems with the call center, TennCare faced more trouble with a new computer system that was supposed to have processed Medicaid income guidelines that changed because of the Affordable Care Act. Although these changes did not affect nursing home patients, they did apply to other Medicaid enrollees.

TennCare had expected the new computer system to be working when making the decision to stop having Department of Human Services employees process applications.

The $35.7 million computer system was so far behind schedule that TennCare had to give up control of its Medicaid enrollment duties. TennCare made most Medicaid applicants seek coverage through healthcare.gov.

Last month, TennCare ended its contract with Northrop Grumman and must find another vendor to build the computer system. The system was supposed to be ready to roll by Oct. 1, 2013.

Northrop Grumman received $6.2 million toward its contract — and most of that was federal dollars. The state's share was $628,000.

TennCare on trial

The Tennessee Justice Center, the Southern Poverty Law Center and the National Health Law Program filed a federal lawsuit in July asking U.S. District Judge Todd Campbell to force the state to correct barriers to people applying for Medicaid.

The action came after Cindy Mann, the federal director of Medicaid programs, put Tennessee on notice in June that it was in violation of U.S. laws in regard to processing applications in a timely fashion. She also directed TennCare to set up a presumptive eligibility program for newborns.

In September Campbell issued an injunction ordering TennCare to set up appeal hearings for people who filed for Medicaid and have waited for months for eligibility determinations. Tennessee challenged the order and is asking the U.S. Court of Appeals in Cincinnati to set it aside. However, it is scheduling hearings for people who can prove they applied for coverage.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1EoKsZf