Earth has lost a third of arable land in the past 40 years, according to the University of Sheffield’s Grantham Centre for Sustainable Futures.

The continual plowing of fields, combined with heavy use of fertilizers, has degraded soils across the world, the research found, with erosion occurring at a pace of up to 100 times greater than the rate of soil formation. An inch of topsoil takes a century to accumulate. But, soil conditions can be improved in a much shorter time, using good management, including increasing organic matter content, which sustains the myriad life forms found in healthy soils.

Increasing world population underscores the importance of soil improvement education for billions of farmers and home gardeners.

Fear Mongering

When Faux News’ Chris Wallace tackled the national presidential “issue” of transgendered people using the bathroom which they feel appropriate for them, and reaction to the spate of recent laws “protecting” women from predatory men in womens’ restrooms, he researched the “problem” and found a political red herring. Quoting Politico and right and left wing groups, which found no instances of men using transgendered “cover” to assault women in restrooms, Chris conceded that the legislation was a solution in search of a problem. Politico concluded, “We haven’t found any instances of criminals convicted of using transgender protections as cover in the United States.”

Conservatives are disappointed that this latest wedge issue, of demonizing any sexuality that isn’t their 100% straight (man on top) celestially sanctioned version of sexual expression, hasn’t energized their base.

Except, of course for Ted Cruz, who continues to frame the issue as protecting his daughters from non-existent men posing as women, who would sexually assault unwitting females in public restrooms.

Chalk up another example of GOP fear mongering to add to: voter fraud, womens’ reproductive health “safety” TRAP laws, women serving in combat and on submarines, gays serving openly in the military, undocumented Latinos (“...and some, I assume, are good people”), burdening future generations with government debt, “judicial activism,” a liberal “war” on Christianity, Obamacare, Black Lives Matter, the government plot to take away your guns, socialism, the Iraq war — “But we don’t want the smoking gun to be a mushroom cloud?” (Condolizza Rice), and the biggest fabrication yet, that 1.6 trillion Muslims are out to get us.

“Be afwaid, be vewry afwaid.”

War’s Death Toll

Since the US lead “War on Terror” began on 9/11, 1.3 million people have died as a result of the conflicts. According to a study by Physicians for Social Responsibility, Physicians for Global Survival, and the Nobel Prize-winning International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War, the death toll in just three countries, Iraq, Afghanistan and Pakistan may be as high as 2 million dead.

Millions dead from 15 years of conflict, but where is the main stream media? Bragging about how good the Donald has been for their bottom line?

Advertisement

The forward to the study remarks, “[A]t a time when we’re contemplating at this point cutting off our removal of troops from Afghanistan and contemplating new military authorization for increasing our operations in Syria and Iraq, this insulation from the real impacts serves our government in being able to continue to conduct these wars in the name of the war on terror, with not only horrendous cost to the people in the region, but we in the United States suffer from what the budgetary costs of unending war are.”

After the departure of Robert Gates and Chuck Hagel, president Obama tapped veteran Pentagon insider Ash Carter to be Secretary of Defense. After leaving office, both Gates and Hagel criticized the White House micromanagement of the middle east conflicts, and lack of access to the president.

Carter’s job is to implement a shift in war strategy, which will increasingly rely “heavily on a dizzying patchwork of local ground forces — often with competing agendas — moving in large formations to isolate and ultimately invade the two major ISIS strongholds: Mosul in Iraq and Raqqa in Syria,” according to Military Times. This more conventional military approach will require troops on the ground, possibly for years to come. But, ignores ISIS strongholds in Syria, which is one of many factions fighting to overthrow Assad.

We look to support Syrian “moderates” to effect regime change there. Problem is, there are no Syrian “moderates.” Another fiction invented 1. to avert public backlash from direct US military intervention in Syria, 2. as an excuse to dump costly military arms in the region, insuring the continued profit “gravy train” of the arms industry.

Syrian civilian deaths have increased since looser rules of engagement were implemented last fall. In 2015, the US sold arms totaling $1.475 billion ($1,475, 000,000) to Egypt. Last November, the State Department announced more arms sales to the Saudis of $1.29 Billion ($1,290,000,000).

Bottom line, more people will die in the region, for years to come. In fact, whenever America’s “interests” are cited as justification for military intervention, people die. Lots of them.

Fifteen years from now, after 30 years of failed policy (did we learn nothing from Viet Nam? And LBJ huddling with his advisors in the White House, to decide which parts of Viet Nam to bomb back to the stone age? And the war crimes of Nixon and Kissinger?), will a future president implement another “strategic shift,” which will further the continued profits of the terrorism industrial complex? What will the middle east death toll be then?

Jeff Konicek is a retired educator and bonsai expert, living in Laytonville.