Recently, I went to the ballpark for fun with my kids, Ayanna and Andrew. The Nationals and the Phillies were playing!

Then I was off to Yale University, my alma mater of long ago, to speak to four business school classes. Whenever I visit, I have the same insecurities as way back when.

But I’ve found my voice and my self-confidence in the years since. As I said on Facebook, it was game on.

The reality is that my life is pretty much amazing from one day to the next, sometimes doing things that I never imagined in my younger years. This year alone I’ve spoken at gatherings for Melanie Campbell’s Black Women’s Roundtable, Al Sharpton’s National Action Network and a women’s empowerment conference where Bishop T.D. Jakes spoke. I also attended the NAACP Image Awards and participated in an AARP Life Reimagined event at a Women of Faith conference in Houston, just to name a few.

I have to say that although most of this is work, it’s been a balance of these kinds of fun-filled and challenging experiences that have pushed me beyond my comfort level, causing me to grow in my confidence and outlook on life. Often as adults, we get to a point where we plateau and assume that either we’ve done it all or are simply too busy or set in our ways to try new and exciting things.

I would be remiss if I did not also mention that on Jan. 15 this year, our beloved mother and grandmother, Hattie Kane, passed away. Pressing through the grief was difficult and we’re still taking it one day at a time. But there’s much ahead and I’m reinvigorated.

>> Visit AARP Black Community

Author, civil rights leader and theologian Howard Thurman once said, “Don’t ask what the world needs. Ask what makes you come alive, and go do it. Because what the world needs is people who have come alive.”

Based on Thurman’s sound advice and my experiences, I challenge you to challenge yourself. It’s spring. Whether it’s for personal recreation, family fun or work, create some new beginnings. Refresh and reimagine life — your life. Do something exciting. Game on!

AARP helps people turn their goals and dreams into real possibilities, strengthens communities and fights for and equips Americans 50 and older to live their best lives. Discover all the ways AARP can help you, your family and your community at AARP Black Community, and connect with us on Facebook and Twitter.

Photos: Courtesy of Edna Kane-Williams

Also of Interest

See the AARP home page for deals, savings tips, trivia and more