Topics: 1 percent, Editor's Picks, fitbits, iPhones, new years resolutions, William Davies, Life News

Somewhere between December 25 and January 2, tradition states that we should perform an existential U-turn. The season of goodwill, giving and family morphs rapidly into that of neurotic self-improvement and fitness plans. January is the month when we strive to confront some of our most disquieting questions: Who do I want to be? What do I wish to look like? Which of my habits do I hope to cast aside?

Marketers have always sought to ensure that our full range of ethical needs can be satisfied through spending money. Both altruism and egoism are fertile territory for selling more products and services. It goes without saying that Christmas represents a commercial nirvana. But there is also a particular affinity between consumer culture and that January dream of self-transformation.

Ever since advertising agencies first studied how to prompt specific emotions during the 1920s, anxieties about self-improvement have been deliberately cultivated by capitalism. The ‘new year, new me’ mindset of January is a rich opportunity for those wishing to sell us stuff. Our dietary pledges and lifestyle goals leave us vulnerable to the most idealistic advertising messages regarding who we might become over the next year.

Yet there are certain features of today’s marketplace and culture that add an extra bite to the business end of self-transformation, which have only emerged in the last few years.

Firstly, things have become a lot more technological and scientific. In the past, New Years’ resolutions were fundamentally ethical pledges regarding the life one would like to live. They were like marriage vows made to one-self. “I promise to be a person who doesn’t smoke.” “I commit to drinking more water.” In the absence of any other party to be faithful to, such vows tend to dissolve relatively quickly.

Today, however, we live in the age of smart and wearable technologies, whose purpose is to convert self-transformation from an ethical project into a scientific one. In the process, we outsource much of the mental strain of self-control to machines. Technologies such as the ‘smart cup’ Vessyl, which “automatically knows and tracks everything you drink,” provide data on what we’ve been putting in our bodies.

The ‘quantified self movement,’ which began as an experimental project of digitally tracking anything from one’s nutrition to one’s sex-life, has become big business, now that Fitbits, Jawbones and smart watches collect data on bodily behavior and movement. The chief innovations of the iPhone 6, released in September, were apps which monitor physical activity and health behaviors.

If Silicon Valley venture capitalists are even half right, the next five years will see a flood of new gadgets, wearable technologies and apps aimed at monitoring and reporting how we (principally our bodies, brains and credit cards) are behaving, from one minute to the next. In that respect, early-January neurosis — am I being the person I’d like to be? — is now becoming the normal condition of the digital technology user, throughout the year. Extensive new technological infrastructures are being built simply to nurture and answer that one lonely question, only now with quantitative data. Our anxiety is their revenue opportunity.