Looking for a unique handbag? You might consider a Bucketbocks, which is made completely out of metal. ( Bucketbocks / Courtesy photo )

I drink out of teapots.

Not like I fill teapots with tea and then pour the appropriately steeped product into a designated cup. As in, I put any variation of liquid inside a teapot — wine, beer, gin and tonic, rich chocolatey Ovaltine — and I drink out of the spout.

I have good reason, folks. First, it's quite a delight and turns the simple process of swallowing liquid into a conversation and adventure. Second, it's fancy as hell. Just pop that pinky and you'd be surprised by how much more exquisite that Peeber tastes. Finally, and most important, it cuts back on doing dishes and the need to replace the wine glasses I've broken, which is all of them.

The Bucketbocks' Three Handles aluminum purse retails for, $125. (Bucketbocks / Courtesy photo)

I'm an advocate for misusing (or repurposing, if you want to use hipster verbiage) objects of all kinds. I use a bird cage to hold napkins, a bathrobe as a blanket (take that, Snuggie!), margarita glasses as elevated bowls, a record cabinet as a DVD station, a mailbox as a filing cabinet and a ladder as a bookshelf.

Krista Mann, of Broomfield, gets it. About 10 years ago, she says she was shopping in a kitchen store when a metal ice bucket caught her eye.

"Oh, cool," she says. "I could use that as my purse."

So she did. The self-proclaimed introvert says she was amazed by how many people stopped her to start a conversation about her ice bucket.

"It was just the fact that it was different," Mann says. "It still functioned like a purse. It had a handle. ... I said, 'Maybe there's something here.' "

But, really, why do most purses look the same? Why are they floppy, fabric or leather, square-ish and hard to clean out when your child slips her open juice box inside? Mann set out to reinvent the purse, inspired by her ice-bucket handbag — it's totally not an ice bucket, so don't get confused.

Mann, who has a background in renewable energy, only a few weeks ago launched Bucketbocks (bucketbocks.com), a metal fashion accessories business.

"Many people carry attractive, well-made handbags," Mann says. "The problem is that almost none of them are even slightly interesting."

Here's what a Bucketbocks is:

• Handcrafted, sculpted, polished, artisan, metal handbags of different sizes.

• Made in the USA.

• Metal, wearable art.

Here's what a Bucketbocks is not:

• Super heavy. They're made out of aluminum, so they weigh about a half-pound to to 1 ½ pounds.

• Cell phone dead zones. Your texting machine still gets service inside its metal compartment.

The Curly-Q purse, made by Bucketbocks, retails for $105. (Bucketbocks / Courtesy photo)

• Ice buckets.

• Stovetop cookware, even though they sort of have an "Iron Chef" thing going on.

Bucketbocks products feature three different kinds of handles and come in various sizes, including one with an external "coin pocket" inside a separate orb, to "add to the structural uniqueness," Mann says.

The lids affix via magnets, rather than a zipper or latch. And on those rare Colorado days where it rains 24/7 for more than an entire month and a tornado goes through your hometown in the foothills — which is totally not a sign of the apocalypse — these metal purses protect your goodies better, Mann says. Rain can't get in.

These unusual purses are environmentally friendly, too. About a third of the aluminum contains recycled content, and the straps come from a recycling facility in town. When shipped, your purse will arrive in shredded junk mail and newspaper as packing material.

The natural finish line runs $65-$95; polished products are $105-$130. Find Bucketbocks products at the Meow Meow Boutique, 1118 13th St. in Boulder, and online. As Meow Meow writes about Bucketbocks on Facebook, "Why be average when you can be shiny and fabulous?"

I'm seeing myself carrying a Bocketbocks drinking my morning green smoothie out of a teapot spout like whuuut. And I like what I'm seeing. So does Judy Jetson.

Aimee Heckel: 303-473-1359, heckela@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/aimeemay