Former U.S. Rep. Marilyn Musgrave has plenty to say about abortion and pro-choice candidates, but little to say about the personhood stance of Rep. Cory Gardner, the Republican who now holds her seat in Congress.

Musgrave attended the Western Conservative Summit gathering in Denver over the weekend, where she was surrounded by plenty of fellow Republicans who share her views on abortion. Musgrave is vice president of government affairs for the Susan B. Anthony list, which works to elect pro-life candidates.

“The key states where we are focusing on the Senate races are Arkansas, Louisiana and North Carolina, where the incumbent senators are out of touch on life issues,” she said.

Now wait a minute! What about Colorado, home to one of the most closely watched Senate races in the country as Gardner tries to unseat U.S. Sen. Mark Udall, a Democrat who supports choice?

What does Musgrave think of Gardner saying he was wrong to have supported personhood measures that, in essence, outlawed abortion? Gardner has upset some members of his own party.

“Cory has to make his own decisions on that,” Musgrave said.

Gardner also has said he would not support a measure on the ballot this year, Amendment 67, which would change wording in the Colorado Criminal Code and Wrongful Death Act to include unborn human beings.

“Cory Gardner is pro-life,” Musgrave said.

Musgrave said Colorado’s Senate race is competitive for a pro-life candidate.

“I hope that Cory Gardner will fight back on this phony war against women. The very first ad that Mark Udall did was attacking Cory Gardner on that issue,” Musgrave said. “I think it’s very incumbent for the swing voters in Colorado to know where Mark Udall stands on the life issue. Mark Udall would place no restrictions on abortion whatsoever, late-term abortions, sex-selection abortions.

“So who’s really extreme on this issue?”

Musgrave, of Fort Morgan, served in the state legislature where she was known as a hard-right social conservative who was easy to get along with. She was elected to Congress in 2002, soon came under fire for stance against gay marriage and other issues and subsequently faced tough re-election bids in what is a Republican stronghold. Betsy Markey defeated Musgrave in the Democratic sweep of 2008, and Gardner defeated Markey in 2010.

These days, Musgrave’s on the road backing pro-life candidates or at home playing with the grandkids.

“Life is good, very good,” she said.