Buy Photo Jeffersonville city engineer Andy Crouch inspected the Big Four ramp for graffiti or other damage two days after it opened. Below the ramp, workers move one of four houses left in the new park area. May 22, 2014 (Photo: Charlie White/The Courier-Journal )Buy Photo Story Highlights Jeffersonville officials say the ramp seems to be giving the town the boost they had hoped

City engineer Andy Crouch returned Thursday to look for graffiti and any other damage, finding none

Big Four Station is expected to cost between $4 million and $5 million once its completed in October

The citymay look into adding electronic counters like the Louisville side

Days after folks on both sides of the Ohio River flocked to the newley opened Big Four pedestrian and cycling bridge, Jeffersonville officials say the ramp into its historic downtown seems to be giving it the boost they had hoped.

Jeffersonville city engineer Andy Crouch returned Thursday to look for graffiti and any other damage, finding none.

"It's been filled with biker, joggers and walkers," Crouch said. "It's great to see."

RELATED: Indiana side of Big Four Bridge completed

City redevelopment and economic director Rob Waiz said Friday that new visitors so far seem to "have been really good" about using the ramp.

"As we continue to finish getting our park done and adding other amenities, it's just going to add to the experience," Waiz said.

Waiz said the new park, dubbed Big Four Station, is expected to cost between $4 million and $5 million once its completed in October ahead of the revived Steamboat Days Festival, which is being held in conjunction with the Belle of Louisville's 100th anniversary celebration.

The park will feature a 52-foot light shard made of steel and glass near the foot of the ramp that will be internally lit with LED lights. A change in color in the glass panels will mark the water level of the 1937 flood.

A stepped waterfall that's 40 feet at its widest point will narrow as water descends 155 feet into a reflection pool at the base of the light shard. It was redesigned to pay homage to the nearby Falls of the Ohio.

The waterfall, like the shard, will have LEDs that can be changed into a variety of colors, Waiz said.

Playground equipment is on site, but not ready to be used. Workers need to pour concrete and install rubberized matting, which likely will happen next week. Sod will also be added on the north side of park next month once electrical work is done to allow the sod to be irrigated, Waiz said.

Anticipation of the new pathway spurred several new businesses, such as Pearl Street Treats near the foot of the ramp; Big Four Burgers in the former Third Base Tavern on Spring Street; Red Yeti Brewing Co. in a former furniture store on Spring; and Olive Leaf Bistro in part of the Sprigler building on Riverside Drive.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Jeffersonville fire and safety officials discuss changes after the opening of the Big Four ramp. Charlie White

Indianapolis-based Flat 12 Bierwerks announced earlier this year it plans to open its first satellite taproom and brewery in the other part of the Sprigler building by early summer.

Waiz said Red Yeti owners told him during a ribbon-cutting ceremony Thursday that business has been picking up.

He also said the city may look into adding electronic counters like the Louisville side uses to help determine exactly how many people use the bridge. Between last June when they were installed and February, more than 500,000 pedestrians and 75,000 cyclists used the ramp in Waterfront Park.

Three of the four houses remaining in Jeffersonville's new park were moved to Pearl Street and the other will be moved soon, Waiz said.

The city still hasn't decided whether the houses will be sold, leased or kept. Regardless, Waiz said they add to the historical Rose Hill neighborhood people see coming to the park from Court Avenue.

Reporter Charlie White can be reached at (812) 949-4026 and on Twitter @c_write.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1k5heSS