Feeding feral cats hurts

Regarding Deborah Hall’s Wednesday letter concerning feeding feral cats: With her using words like hope and trust regarding ferals, it’s obvious Hall is looking for validation and affirmation as a doer of good deeds.

But tossing food at ferals is the least people can do to enact positive changes for wildlife. It creates far more problems for these animals. It’s amazing how the feral-cat crowd admits that "it’s easier said than done to trap them all." Leaving just a few unaltered cats results in geometric birth rates for them, thus worsening the problem.

If hawks, bears and coyotes are preying on feral cats, as Hall notes, this is one of nature’s built-in check-and-balance mechanisms at work. Having lived next to a feral-cat colony that was registered in Brevard County (64 cats were "notched") for years, I can attest to the stench of marking and defecation, 4 a.m. mating/screeching, and fighting. During this time, I observed do-gooders driving up, dumping bags of cat food and then driving off. These people persist in perpetuating injured animals that are doomed to a short, violent life.

Laine Mcmillan, Titusville

Elect a Congress that will work for you

Our legislative branch, or Congress, is the most powerful branch within the U.S. government. It possesses the most abilities expressed in the Constitution, and though presidential power can ebb and flow, Congress can consistently trump the executive’s actions. So the question on voters’ minds this Election Day is, "What has Congress done for me?" The answer is "very little."

With approval ratings at 14 percent, our Congress is not only the most powerful, but also the least popular. Lawmakers have failed to fix immigration problems, bureaucratic operations, voters-rights issues and debt-increasing spending. So why re-elect the same incumbents, causing this gridlock to persist another two years? On Election Day, send in a breath of fresh air to the halls of the Capitol and start making Congress the problem-solving machine it is meant to be.

Much of this year’s election focuses on unpopular presidential policy. However, Obamacare (or more suitably, "Congresscare") is a piece of legislation that passed the House and the Senate. Immigration problems in the Southwestern states can be easily remedied with instructions from the Legislature, not the executive branch. Federal spending, surprisingly, is determined through a budget drafted and passed by Congress.

Throughout history, we have seen Congress take its rightful place. President Lincoln would not have reconstructed the Union, and Roosevelt would not have victoriously led us through World War II, without the aid and leadership of Congress. This year, elect a Congress that will work for you, not incumbents who will continue to forget you.

Tyler Branz, Orlando



Killing not fun

While watching the local news on television recently, I found one item to be disturbing.

The reporter was interviewing a couple who participates in the annual alligator hunt. When asked why she does it, the woman replied, "Because it’s fun."

Fun? I’ve never thought of the taking of an animal’s life as "fun." Parties are fun, celebrations are fun — but killing? Fun?

It makes me uncomfortable that some people feel that way.

Christi Gray, Orlando



Conserving land: What’s not to like?

Amendment 1 is like "motherhood and apple pie." Who wouldn’t want clean water and open land for future generations, all with no new taxes?

Nearly 1 million Floridians signed the petition to get it on the Nov. 4 ballot.

Documentary-stamp taxes on real-estate transactions have been in place since the 1930s, and a portion has been used for conservation land purchases since 1968. Development that was responsible for the loss of open space became the source of funds for conserving open space. Homes near the state’s conservation lands are worth more to future buyers because the adjacent land is protected. There is always that buffer from traffic, air pollution, water-supply problems and a serenity impossible to guarantee otherwise.

Florida’s ecotourism hosts more than 31 million visitors annually, who generate more than $2.7 billion in direct economic impact and support more than 31,300 jobs.

In addition to cleansing our water and air, state conservation lands preserve our historical and archaeological heritage, protect fisheries worth an estimated $7.5 billion annually and Florida’s unique wildlife, including more than 500 endangered and threatened species. Wildlife viewing alone is estimated to add $5.6 billion to our state and local economies.

A new focus is acquiring easements, allowing foresters, ranchers and farmers to continue agricultural activities, while conserving resources. Amendment 1 will also provide management funding so that water quality can be restored and adequate, and appropriate public access can be provided.

There is no downside to Amendment 1. Vote yes.

Greg Brock, retired chief, Office of Environmental Services, Florida Division of State Lands