With less than a week left to buy medical insurance, a major enrollment drive is underway.

That’s because most uninsured people who decide not to sign up for coverage this year under the federal Affordable Care Act will be fined $695, or 2.5 percent of their annual income, whichever is greater, emphasized Enroll America, the nation’s leading health care enrollment coalition.

“There is still plenty of time to fill out the application and select the best plan for your families,” said Mimi Garcia, Enroll America’s Texas state director. She said there is no need to risk the fine or remain uninsured.

“Eighty-two percent of the Texans who have enrolled have received financial help to help pay for their premiums,” she said.

The 2016 open enrollment period under the ACA — better known as Obamacare — began Nov. 1 and will end Sunday. The deadline is unlikely to be extended this year.

Locally, Panhandle Community Services of Amarillo has been helping residents navigate their way through purchasing insurance on the federal marketplace.

“I don’t have insurance, but I need it for a body problem. I’m an old man,” said Sirous Salmanivadeghani, 47, an Iranian refugee who has been working in Amarillo for several years.

Salmanivadeghani’s employer does not offer insurance, so he went to PCS to get advice and help on insurance plans.

PCS Director Mary Twitty said there has been a change in perceptions of the insurance mandate over the last year.

Previously, outreach to enroll patients was met with resistance. One worker was even spat on.

“There was a change in the people we talked to this year,” Twitty said. “Last year, people asked, ‘Why are you doing this?’ and one lady said she’d die before she signed up. This year, people were asking about what to do and how. It’s a great mind change for us.”

Twitty said most people have been motivated by the increase in the penalty for the uninsured. With the 2016 fines for remaining uninsured going up to $695 for adults and $347.50 per child, a family of four could potentially see $2,085 in fines.

“Many of the people who come to see us are those who wouldn’t be eligible for subsidies, but would have been available for Medicaid if (Texas) expanded it,” Twitty said. “They make too little for subsidies and too much for Medicaid. ... I remember talking to a person who was laid off from a job and wasn’t qualified for the marketplace because she didn’t have an income.”

PCS has 10 service sites and has seen 446 people since Nov. 15, taking 157 of them through the process of signing up.

Half of the people seen were referred to other areas, like Medicaid, Children’s Health Insurance Program and free clinics.

According to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, 13,848 have signed up for insurance in Amarillo since enrollment began in November.

From 2013 to 2015, Potter County has seen its uninsured rate decrease from 28 percent to 21 percent, and Randall County’s rate has dropped from 15 to 11 percent, according to Enroll America.

“The emphasis is on insurance, but the benefits on the other side is that we’ll be able to bring down these numbers of chronic illnesses,” Twitty said.

“There are many preventive measures that people can get through the marketplace, so we are telling people to not just leave the insurance on the shelf, but to use it.”

Texas Hospital Association CEO Ted Shaw also stressed the importance of signing up for medical coverage.

“Reducing the rate of uninsured in Texas is a win-win for the hospitals, for the taxpayers, but most important, for the patients,” Shaw said.

Although Texas continues to lead the nation in the percentage of people without health insurance, enrollment figures show that the state’s uninsured rate has gradually fallen from 25 percent to less than 20 percent since January 2014, when marketplaces created by the Affordable Care Act began offering coverage.

Sofia Moreno Castillo, an applications counselors manager at CentroMed health care system in San Antonio, recommended that people shop around before deciding which policy is best suited for them and their families.

It should not be a plan just based on price, Castillo advised. It should be a plan that helps the entire family.

In addition, organizations like hers are ready to help people in need of assistance when trying to enroll, she said.

“There are still a lot of people that we see every day with questions,” Castillo said.

Those applicants include people needing one-to-one assistance.

Garcia said that, despite 1.1 million people in Texas signing up for coverage during the current enrollment period, there has been little enrollment progress in rural areas.

The uninsured rate in Texas and across the country remains high, Garcia acknowledged.

According to the Texas Organization of Rural and Community Hospitals, most of the insured patients those facilities care for are either on Medicaid or Medicare.

Medicaid is the joint federal and state program that helps qualifying low-income people pay for long-term medical and custodial care, while Medicare is the federal insurance program for people 65 and older and with certain chronic medical conditions.

The Affordable Care Act and the high percentage of uninsured Texans are expected to be top issues when the Republican-

dominated Texas Legislature is back in session in January 2017.

Since Texas is among the 19 states that have declined the federal government’s offer to expand Medicaid, state Rep. John Smithee is expected to file a bill that would allow the state to opt out of the Affordable Care Act.

“We have an exception under the Affordable Care Act where Texas can opt out of requiring employers to provide mandatory abortion coverage, which we can do and make it voluntary, but we haven’t been able to get that bill through yet,” said Smithee, R-Amarillo. “I really want to get that bill through.”

However, some Democratic legislators also are expected to file bills that would allow the state to expand Medicaid.

Sources: Panhandle Community Services, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services