SAYRE — Blaming "continual financial strain," Sayre Memorial Hospital abruptly closed its doors on Monday.

In a statement, Sayre Memorial Hospital said it had been hit hard by declining Medicare reimbursements as well as Oklahoma's decision not to expand Medicaid after the passage of the the Affordable Care Act.

"The closure is due to the continual financial strain that the hospital has felt. After the 2008-2009 recessions, Sayre was hit with the Federal Sequestration, which cut Medicare payments by 2 percent," the statement said. "Then in 2012, CMS (Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services) reduced reimbursements by 30 percent to 35 percent to Sayre for Medicare patients who can't cover their out-of-pocket expenses. In addition to these strains, the State of Oklahoma not expanding Medicaid has been detrimental to the hospital's operations.”

The statement also blamed the stress on the local economy for the closure, including the shuttering of the privately run North Fork Correctional Facility in Sayre in November.

“Locally, the economy has recently taken a hit due to the unfortunate closure of the prison and the decline in oil and gas which also accelerated the hospitals struggles,” the statement said.

The 31-bed, nonprofit community hospital ceased all operations at 3:30 p.m. Monday. Sayre, in western Oklahoma about halfway between Oklahoma City and Amarillo, Texas, has a population of about 4,400.

Sayre Memorial staff who answered the phone on Monday afternoon said they had been instructed by hospital staff not to talk to the media.

In 2006, voters in Sayre approved a 1-cent sales tax increase to help replace the then 46-year-old Sayre Memorial Hospital building. The $14 million capital bond issue was underwritten by Stern Brothers & Co. of St. Louis.

In a statement posted on its Facebook page, the Sayre Chamber of Commerce said the hospital was a victim of the downturn in the local economy and that the hospital bond holders forced the closure due to an inability to lower payment amounts.

No money left

The loss of oil and gas revenue in Sayre, combined with the closing of the North Fork Correctional Facility, a major employer, created a $64,000 monthly deficit in the city's budget, the Sayre Chamber of Commerce said.

“The city had been making payments and keeping the hospital open by funding payroll,” the Sayre chamber said. “With the huge loss of city revenue, there is no money left to give.”

Sayre City Manager Guy Hylton declined to comment on the closure.

Craig W. Jones, president of the Oklahoma Hospital Association, said in a statement that the hospital closure is a “tremendous loss for the community”

“Hospitals across the state, as they are across the nation, are struggling due to cuts in reimbursements, such as Medicare and Medicaid, difficulties recruiting physicians, the rising cost of care and technology, as well as facility improvement challenges,” Jones said. “We urge Oklahoma lawmakers to accept all available funding for health care in our state to allow communities like Sayre to transition their health care services.”