George Zander (1944-2015) (Photo: David A. Lee / Special to Desert Outlook)

I remember years ago being introduced to the phrase “too cool for words,” when trying to describe something or someone whose greatness was so cool that even the words to describe it had yet to be invented. And, it was apparent that even after the words were invented, they still wouldn’t be enough. That is how I, and many others, feel about George Zander, my friend and mentor.

George died Dec. 10, six weeks after he and his husband, Chris Zander, were attacked during a hate crime incident in downtown Palm Springs that shocked many in the Coachella Valley’s LGBT community. He was 71. A public celebration of George's life is planned for March 21 at the Pavilion in Palm Springs. An investigation is underway, but it has not been determined if the attack and George’s death are linked.

George was someone who made such a positive impact in all he met, from his hometown of Seattle to the San Francisco Bay Area, to Washington, D.C., and all the way down here to the Coachella Valley. He was someone who inspired a “Wow” after you were introduced to him.

I met George back in 2005 as a youth attending Gay Associated Youth. It was a brief connection that left me amazed. We reconnected on Facebook in 2010, but it wasn’t until early 2014 that we saw each other again. He became my mentor. George was always willing to take under his wing anyone who wanted to learn how to be an organizer and activist. He surrounded himself with other activists and organizers, which is probably why he was so great at activism. Even at a young age, he seemed destined to make a difference.

As a student at Ballard High School in Seattle, George was a part of the student government cabinet. After graduating in 1962, he enrolled at the University of Washington. Four years later, he joined the Peace Corps in Micronesia, a smattering of islands north of Australia. And he put the governmental skills he’d learned in school to work on the islands.

When he returned to Seattle, George got to work. His day job was as a travel agent for AAA, but he also got involved in local politics and coalition building. Starting in 1974, he was active in the Democratic Party, helping to advance LGBT and other issues as a part of The Dorian Group, the first lesbian and gay lobbying organization in Seattle. He worked for many political candidates and on various issues in Seattle well into the mid ’90s.

Community involvement and activism began early for George Zander, shown here circa 1960. (Photo: Submitted)

“I first met him on the 1988 Jesse Jackson campaign,” remembers Jeanne Legault. “We were in the same Democratic district and lived in the same neighborhood, and I was the Jackson coordinator for that district. George quickly became my right-hand person and soon my best friend for life. We had a deep connection that I don't know if I can explain, but we were also fellow warriors in the fight for human rights.”

George later became chairman of the King County Democrats Party, which he served until 1997. One of his last projects was coordinating Seattle’s efforts during the second election campaign of President Bill Clinton and Vice President Al Gore.

It was in 1997 that George also moved to the desert. Living in La Quinta, he continued his work for AAA. In the valley, he helped to found both the Desert Stonewall Democrats and Some Fabulous Leos. The latter organization was based on a concept George brought from Seattle, where he encouraged donations to organizations he cared about rather than getting presents on his birthday.

After retiring from AAA, he went to work as a local staffer for U.S. Sen. Barbara Boxer, D-Rancho Mirage, for two years. Contributing to many other campaigns and causes followed, including “No on Prop 8” and the November 2015 election of Geoff Kors to Palm Springs City Council. Geoff and George shared an affiliation with Equality California, the statewide LGBT advocacy organization Geoff once led as executive director. And George became Equality California’s Palm Springs field organizer in 2009, after stepping down from his chairman post with the Desert Stonewall Democrats.

“Working with George was always an invigorating experience,” Geoff says. “He was very creative politically and was always throwing out ideas to try and find something that would help us advance our goals. George brought such joy and passion to his work and that impacted everyone around him.”

Chris and George Zander (second and third from left) attend a Some Fabulous Leos event in 2012 with Evan J. Van Antwerp (left) and Peter East (far right). (Photo: Lani Garfield / Special to Desert Outlook)

With Kenny Cassady, George opened Equality California’s Palm Springs office on north Palm Canyon Drive in 2009.

“George and I worked side by side for over two years,” Kenny says. “I spent more waking time with him than any other human being in my life at the time. You get to know someone pretty well like that. I learned a lot from him about advocacy and field work, and life in general.”

Through Equality California, George worked tirelessly on many human rights causes in the desert. His projects included participating in the marriage equality decision rally in June 2015 and co-chairing the annual Harvey Milk Diversity Breakfast.

Mike Thompson, executive director of the LGBT Community Center of the Desert, met George at The Center after the Affordable Care Act was passed. “He was there signing people up for Covered California,” Mike says. “I had previous knowledge of him, but to see him in action, [I] was amazed to see how passionate he was in getting people access to health care.”

George also was a passionate advocate for transgender rights. Since 2013, he worked alongside the local group, Trans Community Project, on trans-inclusive events such as the Transgender Day of Visibility. He also had a hand in, with the Coachella Valley Transgender Community Coalition, the Transgender Day of Remembrance. Most recently, George presented an event in partnership with both The Center and Chill Bar called An Evening of Equality for Transgender Awareness. And, George and I were planning the 2016 Transgender Day of Visibility at the time of his death.

Kenny Cassady is behind the steering wheel as George Zander participates in a parade. (Photo: Submitted)

Though his activist work and leadership were admirable, let us also not forget that George also was a loving husband. He met the love of his life, musician and freestyle vocalist Chris Freitas, in 2011. They were married May 18, 2014, at their Palm Springs home. The love and respect these two had for one another were evident when you saw them together

When George died last month, I was deeply saddened by the unexpected loss. In the trans community, of which I’m a part, we tend to pick as our surrogate family those who will be there for us, love us unconditionally, and lift us up during the dark hours. George was family. As our friend Shelli Orion puts it, he “was our gay daddy, and was really there for us and loved us.”

We’re not alone. Many fondly remember his impact on the community:

“George Zander represented the best part of our humanity.” - Mike Thompson

“George devoted his life to helping others and making a difference — and he succeeded. George made a tremendous difference.” - Geoff Kors

“George was a role model and a hero, not only to me but everyone he met. I miss his smiling face and positive energy. His presence was a gift.” - Kenny Cassady

George’s impact was evident during recent efforts to honor his life and work on the Palm Springs Walk of Stars. Ray Chance, a close friend of the Zanders, started a Go Fund Me campaign to raise funds to pay for George’s star. Less than a week after the campaign launch, the $11,160 fundraising goal was reached. While there will be a star to immortalize George, he also lives on through those he touched as a mentor, activist, leader and friend.

Rest in power, George.

IF YOU GO

What: Celebration of George William Zander's life

When: 5-8 p.m. March 21

Where: Palm Springs Pavilion, 401 S. Pavilion Way, Palm Springs

Info & Donations: www.somefabulousleos.com

Read or Share this story: http://desert.sn/1STQnzS