Bond International Software, the global recruitment, HR and Payroll specialists, announce the release of Bond AdaptSuite recruiting and staffing software Version 3.0. This new release addresses the evolving challenges of the staffing and recruiting industry with five strategic improvements designed specifically to benefit the performance of front line staff and business operations.

1. Candidate Sourcing: Improving recruiter efficiency is of paramount importance in any fast-paced staffing and recruiting agency. Bond International Software, Inc. has partnered with Broadbean Search, a CareerBuilder company, to integrate Broadbean Search into AdaptSuite. This enables recruiters to quickly source candidates across multiple job boards, social sites, professional networks, and their AdaptSuite database, from a single page.

2. Email Notification Management: When staffing and recruiting sales reps are on the road, how do they stay in touch with the office? While reps could use the AdaptSuite Mobile solution or make a phone call, sales reps can now get real-time email notifications of events that are relevant to them. For example, when a sales rep is going into a client meeting, and a job order has just come in from another department, the sales person will automatically get an email of the activity and be able to proactively review the job order with their client contact.

3. Affordable Care Act Management: The Affordable Care Act has introduced complex regulations that create difficulties in tracking the eligibility requirements for a staffing company’s contingent workforce. Bond has developed a comprehensive tracking solution within AdaptSuite to ease this burden and reduce the administrative costs of ACA management compliance.

4. Configuration Capabilities: Every staffing company has different ways of running their business operations. AdaptSuite offers extensive configuration capabilities to meet the unique business operational requirements of every staffing and recruiting company. This new AdaptSuite release offers more flexibility in tailoring the system while maintaining the ability to easily upgrade the base software. This reduces operational expenses that might otherwise be incurred to re-configure the software following an upgrade.

5. VMS Integrations: Usage of Vendor Management Systems (VMS) is a fact of life for many staffing and recruiting companies. In fact, a typical staffing company may have to work with 20 or more different systems. To help staffing firms deal with the challenge of entry, tracking, and visibility of jobs across systems, Bond has integrated VMS Access with AdaptSuite to normalize VMS requisitions into a single format to reduce the amount of data entry to create or update job orders as they occur.

Steve Taylor, Bond International Software Inc. president and CEO stated that “While these major enhancements in this new release of AdaptSuite are important, they are supported by many other improvements across the platform. We have also made significant updates in the user interface to improve usability and front line staff efficiency. Staffing and recruiting agencies will benefit greatly from the improvements in this release as they strive to grow their own business in today’s staffing and recruiting market. I’m very proud of every member of the Bond team, both here in the U.S. and in the U.K., who have worked so hard to bring this release to our customers.”

For more information on Bond AdaptSuite recruiting and staffing software or to schedule a demonstration, please visit http://www.bond-us.com or call 800-318-4983.

###

About Bond International Software PLC (UK, AIM: BDI)

London stock-market listed Bond International Software has been a global provider of Recruitment, HR and Payroll software & services for 40 years.

Bond is one of the largest, and most established, global specialists in staffing software for recruitment agencies worldwide and is a rapidly growing provider of web-based e-recruitment and talent acquisition software to the corporate market. Bond also provides established HR and payroll outsourcing services and software directly to both the public and private sectors. For more information please visit http://www.bondinternationalsoftware.com.

Bond International Software, Inc. is the U.S. operating company for Bond, with headquarters in Atlanta, Georgia. Bond U.S., with more than 100 employees, supports nearly 600 customers and 20,000 users. For more information please visit http://www.bond-us.com.

For further information, please contact:

Phil McCutchen, Marketing Manager

Bond International Software, Inc.

phil(dot)mccutchen(at)bond-us(dot)com

1-800-318-4983 x1112 or 770-246-2319