Most filings are hidden from public view as trade secrets, but records obtained by The Palm Beach Post show one Florida health insurer wants a 31.3 percent rate increase in 2016 and another 18.2 percent.

There’s a glimpse of good news for wallets too: At least two insurers are requesting decreases, 4.7 percent and 9.2 percent respectively — with the largest known drop by an affiliate of Florida Blue, the state’s largest health insurer.

Sixteen of 20 companies that filed 2016 rates for Affordable Care Act plans in Florida have requested their records be treated as trade secrets, state officials said. Courts may eventually rule on what should be secret, but for now, that means the numbers won’t be known until later in the regulatory process.

Here’s what records from the Florida Office of Insurance Regulation show:

AvMed – 4.67% average decrease

Florida Health Care Plan – 9.2% average decrease

UnitedHealthcare Life Insurance Company – 31.3% average increase

UnitedHealthcare of Florida – 18.2% average increase

Florida is regulating health rates again after a self-imposed two-year ban, but it could be late summer before the approved rates are announced.

A UnitedHealthcare spokeswoman said premiums reflect a mix of things including “utilization of health care and medical costs in a given geographic area” and other factors including additional mandated coverage required at the state or federal level, taxes, fees and plan design.

“We continue to look for ways to address the underlying cost-drivers of health care and to ensure that consumers have access to quality coverage in the state,” said Elizabeth Calzadilla-Fiallo, a UnitedHealthcare spokeswoman in Mirimar.

Florida Health Care Plan is an affiliated company of Florida Blue, the state’s largest insurer.

“FHCP is lowering its 2016 marketplace rates by more than 9 percent, due in part to the cost savings earned by the leveraging of administrative and back office functions between FHCP and Florida Blue,” spokesman Paul Kluding said. “Plus, because of its staff model HMO design, the company was able to gain greater efficiencies in managing and controlling the utilization of health services for its members.”

Florida Blue itself filed its 2016 marketplace rates as a trade secret due to competitive reasons, Kluding said.