Posted on October 20, 2013

AP's Julie Pace: Obama Will Offer "Mea Culpa" For Botched Obamacare Rollout

WALLACE: Well, Julie, which brings us to your story, which we have been talking about today. She is the one who broke the story that what -- the government says 476,000 people have applied on the various websites, they didn't say how many have enrolled. A couple of questions, first of all, one, what's the difference between applying and enrolling, and how much this one tell you about the other, secondly, as someone who've covered the White House, how worried are they about what's going on here? The president and his top people. And is Secretary Sebelius in any trouble?



JULIE PACE, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS: So, I'll take care of second question first.



(LAUGHTER)



WALLACE: (inaudible) OK.



PACE: The administration and the White House in particular is very worried about this. They have spent a lot of time, a lot of money on this program, and you can't say that this rollout has been anything short of embarrassing for the president. He's going to come out on Monday. He's going to address these problems. It's the first time we'll really have seen him do that -- I don't know how specific he's going to get, but this is sort of going to be mea culpa from the president. In terms of ...



WALLACE: Do you expect him really to say, we messed up here.



PACE: I think he's going to have to. I think if he comes out and says anything other than that, he's just going to be ripped apart, (inaudible) media, by the press, because this has really been a disastrous rollout. In terms of Secretary Sebelius, the administration says they have full confidence in her. That the president stands by her. I think they do have to think about the (inaudible) of this week, so. If she is going to be at a gala when she could be testifying before Congress, I think that just looks like they're not taking this as seriously as they should be.



WALLACE: And briefly, just question of application, who's going to enroll?



PACE: So, the applications, you have to fill out an application first when you get out to this Web site before you can actually enroll. This is where you enter your personal data, you also enter income information that helps the government figure out what kind of subsidy you could apply for -- you could be qualified for. So, it's important to know this number, but this number doesn't tell us how many people are actually going to enroll?



WALLACE: So before you actually shop, you look at plans.



PACE: Correct.



WALLACE: You have to apply.



PACE: You have to apply and know if you can qualify for any of these plans. But ...



WALLACE: So you can apply, and then set there and when you look at it -- no, I don't think so.



PACE: Absolutely. So, we don't know if all these people who have applied are going to eventually enroll. That's going to be the big number.