15 chefs compete, but only 1 can reign supreme

Buy Photo Mike Clampitt accepts his award for Top Chef of the Culinary Coast. (Photo: Staff photo by Hannah Carroll)Buy Photo

The tension was thick. An anxious hush settled over the once boisterous convention center.

All eyes in the room were fixed on the shiny trophy as Bob Yesbek, also known as the Rehoboth Foodie, paused before telling the audience what they wanted to hear.

"And the Top Chef of the Culinary Coast is ... " he said, pausing again to let momentum continue to build. "From Po' Boys Creole and Fresh Catch, Chef Mike Clampitt."

The room exploded in congratulatory praises and applause as Clampitt climbed the stage to claim his award.

"Completely unbelievable," Clampitt said on winning. "It's something I did not expect at all. I am truly honored."

Each participating chef was less than 10 votes away from winning, Yesbek said.

Clampitt and 14 other Southern Delaware chefs competed June 11 for the Top Chef title. Other award categories included Best Reinvention of a Delmarva Tradition, Food We Couldn't Live Without and Most Creative Chef.

Buy Photo Chef Tom Deptula serves pan seared scallops in a sweet corn broth with English peas, heirloom carrots and house made bacon. (Photo: Staff photo by Hannah Carroll)

In addition to Top Chef, Clampitt won Food We Couldn't Live Without.

The awards were chosen by several hundred people who sampled the evening's featured dishes and voted for their favorites. Clampitt won the crowds over with his famous chicken and andouille gumbo, served with a slice of homemade cornbread.

Denise Klemson, a new resident of Rehoboth Beach, tagged along to the event with her boss and was glad she did. She said the event turned out to be a great way to try different local restaurants, all in one place. The winning dish from Clampitt was among her favorites.

"The gumbo was fantastic," she said. "So much flavor with a hint of heat. And the cornbread melted in your mouth. Two thumbs up on the entire dish."

Lana O'Hollaren, event chairwoman, was pleased with this year's turnout.

"Everything was absolutely fabulous," she said. "We tripled ticket sales compared to last year. We had more chefs, more people and even more amazing food — all for a good cause."

Proceeds from the event benefited Meals on Wheels of Lewes-Rehoboth, a nonprofit organization that delivers nutritious meals daily to nearly 300 homebound citizens in eastern Sussex County.

Another Top Chef of the Culinary Coast for next year is already in the works, said John Wolfle, president of Meals on Wheels of Lewes-Rehoboth.

"Each chef came to win and should be proud of their entries," he said. "It was evident that the attendees, vendors and competitors enjoyed themselves last night. We will definitely be continuing with the competition next year."

AWARD WINNERS

Top Chef: Mike Clampitt, Po' Boys

Best Reinvention of a Delmarva Tradition: Matt Kern, Salt Air

Food We Couldn't Live Without: Mike Clampitt, Po' Boys

Most Creative Chef: Jason Dietterick, Blue Coast

Read or Share this story: http://www.delmarvanow.com/story/entertainment/dining/2015/06/13/top-chef-delaware/71172576/