Nacho Bermudos of Scorpion Construction mixes concrete at the Apex 5510 apartment complex on Spine Road in Gunbarrel. Boulder Housing Partners warns that ballot issues 300 and 301 could imperil the construction of new affordable housing. ( Jeremy Papasso / Daily Camera )

As the city's housing authority and its largest developer of affordable housing, we would like to share our analysis about the potential impact of ballot measures 300 and 301 on permanently affordable housing for our community.

Boulder's economy relies on 19,000 jobs that pay under $30,000 annually. Yet, as of 2012 there were only 2,397 apartments that meet those needs, by renting for less than $750 per month. Boulder has a serious affordable housing supply problem.

We share the interest of citizens to collectively impact the amount and pace of growth in Boulder. But at a time when our community needs to be doing everything possible to aggressively encourage and preserve affordable housing, we are very concerned that 300 and 301 will do just the opposite. Here's why:

No exemption for affordable housing: Affordable housing is a primary beneficiary of the "Growth Shall Pay Its Own Way" initiative, yet it is not exempt, as a category, from the provisions. While we can seek a waiver by a two-thirds vote from city council to exempt our projects, we expect that the process to get to that vote would be comparable to a concept review, which now costs an average of $100,000 to prepare for, not including our staff time. That hurdle may prove to be much too risky for a public-sector developer.

Ambiguity: It is difficult for us to confidently interpret what would be required of us in a future affordable housing project. The city attorney expects a moratorium. Today, there are 70 percent fewer homes affordable to households earning less than $30,000 annually, compared to the year 2000. We need to move quickly in our affordable housing development activities rather than slow down.

Advertisement

Increased cost of housing: Both initiatives will cause major and minor delays in the project approval process — and delays add to the cost of housing. Additionally, affordable housing projects operate according to precise grant funding cycles, and delays in the process can mean that we wait a year or more to access those funds again.

Increased Risk: BHP will not be able to risk spending public and private money to develop a project that may end up with an impact fee later in the process or a veto by the neighborhood. These two possibilities will make new construction simply too risky for a public-sector developer with limited funds.

Decreased Opportunity: BHP's portfolio of 1,102 units has come largely through new construction opportunities. We have purchased 210 affordable units (19 percent) and have built 902 new units. Proven by this ratio, it has been more difficult for us to compete with investors to purchase properties. If construction becomes even more difficult because of increased cost and risk, we are concerned that we will have no future ways to add to the city's affordable housing inventory.

Regional Planning: Boulder County has a critical need to engage in regional planning to solve its affordable housing problems. The "Neighborhoods' Right to Vote" would fundamentally change the way planning decisions will be made by providing a neighborhood veto over land-use planning. Planning-by-neighborhood is anathema to the emerging interest to do more regional housing planning.

Eroded Neighborhood Engagement: A well-designed neighborhood engagement process asks neighbors to invest dozens of hours in meetings and commit to the creative process. If neighbors know that they can opt to provide their input at the ballot instead of at meetings, we could end up with a much eroded ethic of neighborhood engagement.

An alternative: BHP's thoughts about what can and should be done to make Boulder an affordable, diverse and inclusive community can be found at www.boulderhousing.org/news/affordable-housing-solutions

Karen Klerman chairs the Boulder Housing Partners board of commissioners.