Buy Photo Mayer faces one count of third-degree failure to provide proper care by recklessly endangering an animal's life, resulting in his death. (Photo: File)Buy Photo

The township man whose pickup truck fell into the Toms River said he plans to represent himself in court on animal cruelty and criminal mischief charges.

Andrew Mayer, 27, stood at the front of the Toms River Municipal courtroom Monday afternoon, with his hands behind his back as Judge Damian G. Murray read the charges against him.

Mayer faces one count of third-degree failure to provide proper care by recklessly endangering an animal's life, resulting in his death. The New Jersey Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals served the charge Monday morning, alleging that Mayer did "doughnuts" on the ice and caused the death of his dog, Rolo.

He also faces a third-degree criminal mischief charge, as well as reckless driving and pollution.

The charges will be moved up to the Ocean County Prosecutor's Office for review, where officials will decide whether to indict or remand him.

Mayer's pickup truck was discovered in the Toms River the morning of March 1. Rolo, a 2-year-old boxer mix, was found dead inside the vehicle.

Police said Mayer, his friend and the dog were in the car after midnight that Sunday. The pickup truck was reportedly seen doing "doughnuts" on the ice before the headlights disappeared.

Buy Photo Andrew Mayer appears before Judge Damian G. Murray on Monday, March 9. (Photo: Tom Spader/Staff Photographer)

Mayer, who appeared alone, told the court he plans to represent himself

"Just so you understand, you have third-degree charges against you, which could carry substantial penalties in these matters, as well as a criminal history that could follow you for a considerable period of time," Murray replied.

Mayer said after the arraignment that he "absolutely" plans represent himself, despite the judge's offer of a public defender.

He declined to offer additional comment, stepping into the driver's seat of a yellow car and driving out of the municipal courthouse parking lot.

The Toms River man has an extensive driving history, according to Motor Vehicle Commission records. His license has 9 active points to date, 14 violations and 12 total suspensions.

His last suspension, which was for being a "persistent violator," occurred in April. His license was restored in July.

None of those suspensions was related to the incident in the river.

Mayer's car was recovered Monday morning, shortly before the arraignment. The process delayed Mayer's appearance in court by a few minutes.

The death of Rolo has outraged local animal activists. A change.org petition launched calling for animal cruelty charges against Mayer.

Friends of Mayer have come to his defense, describing him and Rolo as inseparable. They said Mayer would have done everything possible to save his dog.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1BZys1Z