The following voice message was left for Santa on our call-in line at 599-1218.

In response to: "Hello there, you have reached Santa Claus at the North Pole. My elves are hard at work making your toys for Christmas. Let us know what you would like for Christmas after the beep. Your calls will be posted online at the Reporter-Herald website. Ho ho ho, Merry Christmas!"

Editor's Note: Through the Christmas season, the Reporter-Herald will occasionally be publishing letters from local children to Santa. These were published Saturday, Dec. 6, in the News By: You section of the Reporter-Herald.

Dear Santa:

I feel that I have been pretty good this year. I've been trying to make my bed every day but I sometimes forget.

If you can, I'd like

Electric Eloo Razor Scooter (green or red)

Lego Movie Legos

More Legos

Thank you for your time.

Sincerely,

John Shier age 8

P.S. Thank you for being super awesome.

Dear Santa

Advertisement

I've been doing really well in school. I'm a yellow dot in reading.

If you can I'd like

Electric Eloo Razor Scooter (pink)

One Direction stuff

Lego Friends sets

Thank you

Elle Shier, age 6

Dear Santa,

Can I have a cowboy hat and a tiny TV and a playstation and a guitar? And a mote for the TV.

Frankie Imwa

I forgot. I also want a truck and a car. I want a house - not too big - not too small - just right. I'm a good boy! I want an oven so I can cook something!

Dear Santa,

Instad of sing you this year sents I am older I wanted to write a leter. So this year I want some American Girl doll class, Tale of Despereaux movie, a Barbie, a quilt making kit, a parss, some more American Girl doll shoe's, a scarff, a a Barbie, coloring stuff, a cristmas book, cristmas closs for my other doll, some gluffs, a Dictionary, and last a pair of goguls. Love you santa!!!!!!

Love, Tatum Sharp

Dear Santa,

Please can you come to my house. Merry Christmas

Love, Eden

Dear Santa,

I am looking forward for you to coming christmas eve night! I am amazed how you could go around the world in 24 hours! I love Christmas so much it is my second favorite holiday next to new years! I love you and mrs. claws, the raindeer, and all your elves! The toys you make are so cool! Well gotta go now! Bye! BTW. I would like an i-pod and lego friends #'s 41038 and 41036 if they fit in your sleigh that would be great! SYS! XOXO!

Love, Reina Lujan

--

Children can submit letters to Santa in several ways:

Walk-ins: Drop off letters at the Santa mailbox in the Reporter-Herald lobby.

Mail: 201 E. Fifth St., Loveland CO 80537 care of "Santa Claus."

Email: Children can write their letters and ask their parents to email them to news@reporter-herald.com with "Letter to Santa" in the subject line. Parents, don't worry about editing your children's work for spelling and grammar.

Phone: Call Santa and leave a message with Christmas wishes at 970-599-1218.

More info: Messages will be printed in the paper and posted online. The audio calls will also be posted online. A few cute calls might also make it into our Twitter Feed or Facebook. Call 635-3636 for details.