Monday’s edition of the Federal Register contains a new rule from Veterans Affairs to allow service dogs on VA property, new criteria from the Nuclear Regulatory Council for determining what is an abnormal occurrence and changes to the Department of Homeland Security’s record-keeping systems for U.S. imports.

Here’s what to look for.

Service animals: The Department of Veterans Affairs is issuing a final rule to amend its policy and allow service animals on Veteran Affairs property.

ADVERTISEMENT

The final rule expands the current VA regulation to allow service animals on VA property when individuals with disabilities — employees, veterans and visitors — accompany the animal.

The agency said the regulation does not impose any breed restrictions. The VA will deny access to or remove a service animal if it poses a risk to the healthy and safety of other people or other service animals.

The rule will take effect in 30 days.

Abnormal nuclear occurrences: The Nuclear Regulatory Council is considering changing its policy statement on reporting abnormal occurrences (AO) to Congress.

The revision would clarify the criteria for determining events that are significant from the standpoint of public health and safety and should be reported. Past AOs include medical events and radiation exposures at testing facilities and nuclear power plants.

The public has 90 days to comment on the proposed revisions.

Record systems: The Department of Homeland Security is considering folding two record-keeping systems, which collect and maintain data on all commercial goods imported into the U.S., into one system.

The agency’s Automated Commercial Environment/International Trade Data System of Records and the Automated Commercial System of Records would be consolidated and renamed the Import Information System of Records.

The systems will continue to collect records on imported goods, as well as the information pertaining to the people — carriers, brokers and importers — associated with the import transaction.

The public has 30 days to comment.