Will 2015 be a better year for you? Probably so — if you don’t work in the energy industry.

Texas has diversified its economy significantly in the last 20 years, but oil is still king. So when oil prices plunge, it has a big effect on the state’s economy. How big? Next year may answer that question.

The Texas economic engine is likely to move at a slower speed next year, even as the U.S. economy picks up steam.

Texans — and all Americans — face an unprecedented time of economic transition as interest rates are poised to rise in 2015. Consumers may see more change in their pockets, but some businesses could suffer as they face low energy prices and tax changes next year.

“Given the drop in oil prices, I would be surprised if Texas performed as well as it has this year,” Wells Fargo economist Michael Wolf said.

This year, Texas outpaced U.S. economic growth and led the nation in job growth, setting a state record with 421,900 jobs added for the 12 months through October.

In 2015, economists expect Texas’ economic and job growth to slow slightly because of lower oil prices, labor shortages in certain industries and weaker exports.

The Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas expects the Texas economy to grow 3.5 percent in 2015, down from an estimated 4.5 percent this year. It expects the state’s employment growth to be 2.5 percent to 3 percent in 2015 vs. 3.5 percent this year. More Texas companies expect to hire more people in 2015, according to various surveys.

Despite signs that many American families are struggling to make ends meet more than five years after the recession ended, the U.S. economy improved significantly in 2014. For example, the U.S. unemployment rate was 5.8 percent in November, compared with 7 percent a year ago and 9.9 percent five years ago.

Next year promises to be better for the U.S. economy, though it faces some headwinds such as more political friction amid weaker global economies.

“I have my own company, and I’ve had a good year,” said Nancy Davis of Dallas, who runs a marketing and advertising firm. “I feel optimistic about next year.”

Oil prices

Oil prices, which have plunged nearly 47 percent since June, are a big risk for the Texas economy next year.

Texas’ oil production, which has more than doubled in the last three years, drives much of the state’s economic growth — about 12 percent. And while energy accounts for less than 3 percent of Texas employment, energy employment jumped 11 percent for the 12 months through October, more than any other industry.

Lower oil prices can be a double-edged sword for the economy.

A price drop generally benefits the U.S. economy: Consumers save money on gas and home heating bills, consumer spending rises, and some businesses benefit from lower transportation and shipping costs. But capital investments could suffer, causing a trickle-down effect on other businesses.

In Texas, it’s unlikely that low oil prices will cause a crisis as they did in the late 1980s, because the state’s economy has diversified so much since then. Still, some fear that a prolonged downturn will hurt energy companies and could spread to other businesses such as real estate, restaurants and retail that have benefited from the increased energy hiring.

“I don’t think it pushes Texas into recession, and I don’t think it’s a repeat of the ’80s,” Wells Fargo’s Wolf said. “But I am somewhat concerned about just how large the ripple effect could be in Texas.”

No one agrees on a break-even price for when oil production is no longer profitable. One economist noted that it’s “more art than science.”

Mine Yücel, director of research for the Dallas Fed, thinks drilling activity will taper off if oil prices drop below $60 per barrel for a long time.

There are signs the industry is already reacting. The Texas Railroad Commission issued fewer oil drilling permits in October. Some Texas companies told the Dallas Fed this fall that they’re revising budgets and expect lower capital expenditures due to lower oil prices.

But consumers are benefiting from lower energy prices. Gas prices have fallen nearly 27 percent to an average of $2.30 a gallon in Dallas in the last year, according to GasBuddy.com.

Lisle Stilwell of Dallas saved about $6 the last time she filled her car’s gas tank. She hasn’t “been moved to spend” the savings yet, she said.

But Aichi Amemiya, a U.S. economist at Nomura, said recent data shows that consumers are spending their savings from lower gas prices on other goods and services.

Consumers could also see higher prices in 2015. The Fed wants an inflation rate closer to 2 percent rather than the 1.7 percent rate so far this year. Prices of certain items, such as beef and butter, have skyrocketed this year.

Interest rates

Interest rates, which have hovered near zero since 2008, are another risk to the economy. The Federal Reserve is widely expected to start raising rates in mid-2015.

Wells Fargo’s Wolf thinks the Fed will raise rates by 0.25 percent each quarter starting in June. That means people will see higher rates on auto, home and business loans, but the pace of increases will be “so slow it won’t have much impact,” he said.

Mortgage rates, for example, will remain low. Wolf doesn’t expect the 30-year mortgage rate to rise above 5 percent until mid-2016. It’s around 4 percent now.

Still, JPMorgan Chase chief economist Anthony Chan expects consumers and businesses to react as rates rise next year. “I have very little doubt people will be jumping and be beside themselves to buy houses to beat the rush,” he said.

On the other hand, higher rates will help consumers still struggling to rebuild wealth lost in the 2007-09 recession. Bank savings rates will go up.

It’s tricky. If the Fed moves too aggressively to raise rates, the nation could slip back into recession. Treading timidly could cause inflation to surge.

In summer 2013, the stock market went crazy after the Fed indicated it would wind down its stimulus program. Some fear the same could happen this time around.

“There are risks the Fed’s tightening could lead to financial turmoil, because it’s impossible to predict how financial markets react to higher rates,” said Amemiya, who thinks the Fed will start hiking rates in third quarter 2015.

Tax changes

Businesses will face more tax uncertainty in 2015.

Congress is working on tax reform to simplify the tax code and make the nation more competitive internationally.

Goldman Sachs analyst Alec Phillips thinks reforms would include changes to corporate investment incentives and a way to bring back some of the more than $2 trillion in U.S. corporate profits parked overseas at lower tax rates. He predicts a 30 percent chance of reforms becoming law in 2015.

Some health care taxes are set to change next year. For example, businesses with 50 or more employees will face health care regulations that were delayed a year. The Affordable Care Act requires such employers to offer full-time workers a health care plan or pay a penalty.

But the whole health care law could unravel if the U.S. Supreme Court strikes down federal tax subsidies for residents of states without their own health exchange.

“It’s a big question,” Wolf said. “Companies are confused about what they need to do long term. For consumers, what do you do? What people want is certainty.”

Follow Sheryl Jean on Twitter at @SJeanDallas.