The sharing of similar visions, to care for the poor and vulnerable, has led to a change of ownership at Conway Interfaith Clinic. The clinic is now CHI St. Vincent Interfaith Clinic. The transfer was completed July 6.

“We’re grateful to be a part of CHI St. Vincent. Their legacy is one of caring for the same people we’ve been helping since 2003 – the poor and vulnerable. We’re confident that CHI St. Vincent is just as committed as we are to providing high quality health care to our current and future patients,” said Thea Spatz, chairperson of the Conway Interfaith Clinic Board of Directors who will be serving on the CHI St. Vincent Interfaith Clinic Advisory Board going forward.

The Conway clinic has experienced a steady decline in the number of patients who need free health care.

“The Affordable Care Act now provides health insurance to the previously uninsured who once received free care at the clinic,” said David Foster, president of CHI St. Vincent Medical Group.

Services will still be available to those who now have Medicare, Medicaid, other health insurance or no health insurance.

“As health care continues to evolve, we must be willing to change as well to ensure the health of Arkansans. Adding a fifth community clinic is an exciting opportunity for us. A similar CHI St. Vincent clinic for the medically underserved opened nearly 45 years ago, and is still providing care in the original location. Four others are in Little Rock and North Little Rock. We’re committed to increasing our investment in wellness and prevention as we continue the legacy of our founding Sisters to create healthy communities,” said Patrick McCruden, vice president of Mission Integration at CHI St. Vincent.

Medicaid and Medicare patients will begin receiving care at the clinic Aug. 3 when CHI St. Vincent Conway Interfaith Clinic obtains authorization from the Centers for Medicare Medicaid Services (CMS).

The dental program accepts ARKids and Medicaid for children and adults. Current employees became CHI St. Vincent co-workers July 6.

The clinic location is 830 N. Creek Drive in Conway. For an appointment call 501-932-0559. Office hours are 7:30 a.m.–5 p.m. Monday through Thursday.