When you’re young and healthy, things happen and when they do, most kids shrug it off and continue on with their lives. When you’ve worked for 40 or 50 years and retire, most seniors look forward to extended vacations, road trips and the grandchildren. When you’re a young adult and become infected with an illness, you seek treatment and continue to live life to the fullest.

Here’s one for the book of records for a country that’s gotten away from any form of education and has adopted ‘hearsay’ as a means to keep themselves informed. The Affordable Care Act is actually, really affordable, but the beneficiary is misrepresented.

As we know, many are opting for the Medicaid program, of which, doctors are opting not to participate and as such, there will be many with a worthless plan, no doctor and a visit that will take months to actually arrive.

Here’s another one for the book of records, Obamacare is seriously simular to England’s nationalized health care system which actively targets it patients based on age and health. It’s called rationing of services in order to maintain some sense of cost effectiveness.

Abortions under Obamacare serves it’s cost saving methods well and is covered. What remains a concern is health care for youths and seniors, both of whom who will either break the bank, or fill the bank account if a tragedy occurs.

Youths and seniors, faced with serious health complications under Obamacare may not receive that treatment. This rationing services will also include those affected by serious infections, such as HIV or AIDS, and even dialysis patients.

In Texas, all three, HIV, AIDS and dialysis patients are more than likely, living under the poverty level and do not qualify for subsidies. Obamacare will affect them enormously, as their life styles will prove too costly to preserve.

Rationing under the pretense of expanding coverage in a redistributive manner will actually save the government money, but it will cost many, that which man should not have control over and that’s longevity of life. Obamacare’s death panels places the government in the position of playing God and that’s not only unconstitutional, but unethical as well.

Now that the bill has been passed, it’s time to read what you can of it America.