Advertisement - story continues below

The “unconstitutional” is being fought back by the unconventional.

In the wake of President Obama’s Executive Order on gun control Wednesday, former Ark. Gov. Mike Huckabee gave Americans a chance to take a shot — literally — at Obama’s signature policies.

The Republican presidential candidate is now advertising “Obama agenda shooting targets” at MikeHuckabee.com. Buyers can choose targets labeled “Obamacare,” “75,000-page Tax Code,” or “Common Core.”

Advertisement – story continues below

“Americans should go out and buy a new gun – and to improve your accuracy, you can take aim at Washington stupidity, blow holes in ridiculous government programs and shred our unfair tax code with a customized shooting target,” Huckabee said.

Huckabee called Obama’s executive orders on restricting firearms “unconstitutional.”

“Basically President Obama told law-abiding gun owners, ‘if you like your gun, you can keep your gun.’ We’ve heard that lie before when he promised, ‘If you like your doctor, you can keep your doctor,'” Huckabee charged.

Advertisement – story continues below

Huckabee said he will always stand for gun rights.

“I will fight until my dying breath to protect the 2nd Amendment. While the President may want to take your guns, my idea of “gun control” is hitting your target. So before you pull the trigger, aim your sights on the ObamaCare nightmare, the Common Core disaster, or our 75,000 page tax code monstrosity,” he said.

Speaking recently in Iowa, which he referred to as the “grassroots of America,” Huckabee said rage has overtaken anger due to Obama’s continued executive orders that bypass America’s elected Congress.

“I would repeal every one of Obama’s executive orders,” Huckabee vowed.

Advertisement – story continues below

Huckabee called for a return to the checks and balances the Founding Fathers designed for the three branches of government. He said it is time “we quit letting the Supreme Court act like it’s the supreme being.”

h/t: Breitbart