Buy Photo Mercy Medical Center in Des Moines. (Photo: The Register )Buy Photo

The number of hospitalized Iowans lacking health insurance dropped by nearly half in the first six months of the year, mainly because the state decided to expand its Medicaid program, hospital leaders said Wednesday.

The Iowa Hospital Association said about 4,445 patients lacking health insurance were hospitalized in Iowa from January through June of 2014. That was a 46 percent decline from the 8,181 uninsured patients hospitalized during the same period in 2013.

The association strongly supported expanding the state’s Medicaid program, using federal money provided under the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare. Most states with Republican governors declined to do so, but Iowa Gov. Terry Branstad agreed to a modified version of an expanded Medicaid program, called the Iowa Health and Wellness Plan.

“This analysis provides further evidence that Medicaid expansion is doing what it was intended to do – making health care more accessible and affordable for the 110,000 Iowans who have gained eligibility and coverage,” Hospital Association President Kirk Norris said.

Hospital leaders pushed for the Medicaid expansion, contending that when their facilities treat people who can’t pay, the cost winds up being borne by other patients. Such cost-shifting drives up premiums of privately insured people.

A study done earlier this year for the state found that only about a quarter of Iowa’s uninsured had gained coverage because of the Affordable Care Act. Norris said Wednesday that the percentage of those hospitalized who have gained coverage likely is higher because hospital staff members help uninsured patients sign up for programs. Uninsured people might not realize they qualify until they seek care.

Under the Medicaid expansion, working-age adults qualify for public coverage if they make less than about $16,200 per year. In the past, most childless adults didn’t qualify for such coverage.

A skeptic of the Affordable Care Act said Wednesday that the decline in hospitals’ charity care burden doesn’t prove expanding Medicaid is an efficient way to improve health care. “There’s no doubt that it’s happening, and that’s fine for the hospitals, but the question is, is that how you should cover this population?” said Ed Haislmaier, a health-policy researcher for the conservative Heritage Foundation.

Haislmaier said working-age, able-bodied adults should be required to have jobs in order to obtain coverage, and they should face co-pays and other measures to encourage them to use primary care clinics instead of hospitals for most health care. Iowa’s version of Medicaid expansion includes some measures to encourage proper use of the system, but Haislmaier said they’re not enough.

The hospital association report found that Iowa hospitals’ charity care costs fell 18.5 percent, or $32.5 million, in the first six months of this year. Overall hospital admissions in Iowa dropped 4.4 percent during the time period studied.

The report also found that emergency room visits increased less than 1 percent. The association said the finding should ease fears that hospital rooms would be crammed with new patients once more people had health insurance.

A national study earlier this fall estimated that the percent of uninsured patients at hospitals in Medicaid-expansion states fell by half, according to Modern Healthcare.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1qEcuZo