Neighborcare leader sees community clinics and Obamacare as remaking health care to benefit people, rather than systems.

The last time I sat down to talk with Mark Secord was the day President Obama signed the Affordable Care Act. Secord, who began his career as a health-care administrator 40 years ago at Virginia Mason, was excited then about the act’s potential for broadening access and improving health care.

Secord has experience with experiments in health care, having spent much of his career trying to improve it, especially for people traditional systems wouldn’t reach. For almost 19 years he’s been the executive director of Neighborcare Health, a community-clinic system that serves Seattle.

I heard he was planning to retire, so I met with him last week to talk about his work and health care in general. He told me he’s upbeat about the direction of health care in the country and at his organization.

Since we spoke five years ago, the act, often called Obamacare, has survived two major challenges in the U.S. Supreme Court, and Secord sees it as an important part of transforming health care in the U.S.

Secord said traditional health care has broken the links between caregivers and community “with an overreliance on technology and special language.” People are left feeling they have no power in the system, when they should be active participants in their own health.

For about a decade, he said, providers around the country have talked about three goals: better health, better care and lower costs. People are trying to make health-care systems work better for the public they serve, and Secord said community clinics are already on that path.

The ACA, he said, is not just about insurance. It’s also about changing the health-care delivery system, which is why the organization includes support for community health centers.

This month is the 50th anniversary of the creation of Medicare and Medicaid and the founding of the first two community clinics in the U.S., one in a poor neighborhood of Boston and one in rural Mississippi. Those clinics came out of the social-justice movement and were modeled on clinics created in South Africa during Apartheid to serve people who didn’t have access to care.

Social justice is one of the foundations of Neighborcare’s mission, Secord said, even internally. He said doctors, dentists and managers are paid less than they would be elsewhere, but they choose that because of the mission, while the organization tries to pay more to people in jobs that might earn low wages in other systems.

“It’s exciting for me, being part of an organization that lives by its core values,” he said. When new staff or volunteers come in, “I always ask them, ‘What drew you to Neighborcare,’ and I get to hear a slice of people’s life.” They often have stories about when they were in need, and that’s what draws them.

There are now 10,000 community clinic sites around the country, and like those run by Neighborcare, they serve people regardless of their ability to pay. Before the ACA, Secord said, 40 percent of the people served by Neighborcare were uninsured, and half that many are uninsured now. Neighborcare has signed up 22,000 people for insurance under the program and continues to sign up more.

Secord praises Washington for embracing the ACA. “It’s still incredible to me that other states can turn their backs” on people who need care.

Access is critical, but the organization is also, as its name suggests, invested in integrating care into the community. You don’t do that by waiting for people to show up at clinics, Secord said. Staff go to places where they’ll find people who may be without health care. Besides primary-care clinics and dental clinics around Seattle, it operates in 14 Seattle Public Schools and 23 supportive-housing facilities.

It’s even trying to reach people where they shop, creating a mini-clinic at a St. Vincent De Paul thrift shop on North Aurora Avenue.

Neighborcare is getting people who live in the neighborhoods it serves involved in helping their neighbors get healthy and stay healthy. They’ve started with four people in Yesler Terrace who speak languages common in the development who are leading walks and helping people navigate the health-care system.

Neighborcare saves money for the larger community. Their staff members work to prevent unwanted pregnancies by providing counseling and contraceptives to high- school students. “You know the stats for what happens when teenagers bring babies into the world without support,” Secord said. Staff members embedded in housing facilities such as the Morrison, which provides housing and services to homeless people in downtown Seattle, has reduced 911 calls there.

And its focus on preventive health care helps reduce the chronic diseases that suck up a huge portion of health-care dollars in the U.S.

Secord said community clinics like Neighborcare make up the largest primary-care system in the state when taken altogether, serving 800,000 people in Washington.

They’re still growing. Neighborcare is building a new facility across the freeway from Northgate Mall, Meridian Center for Health, that is designed to integrate multiple aspects of health care and social services. Money from the ACA made the project possible, and the facility is a partnership with Seattle-King County Public Health and Valley Cities Mental Health Treatment.

That’s a huge project for Neighborcare and reflects its growth since Secord came on board in 1992, when the system had two medical clinics, four dental clinics and one school-based center.

Secord, who’s 65, plans to stay around for Meridian’s opening this fall and will retire sometime after that. He told me he and his wife expect to be involved in social justice and health-care-related causes, but first he wants to relax. He’s an amateur stone mason and has already started working on a cabin they own.

He’ll leave knowing he’s helped lay a strong foundation for Neighborcare.