Federal officials’ healthcare fraud efforts recovered a record $4.3 billion in fiscal year 2013, up from $4.2 billion in 2012, the officials announced this week.

Attorney General Eric Holder and Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius released the annual Health Care Fraud and Abuse Control Program report Tuesday, showing that for every dollar spent on healthcare-related fraud and abuse investigations in the last three years, the government recovered $8.10, the highest three-year average return on investment in the 17-year history of the HCFAC program.

“With these extraordinary recoveries, and the record-high rate of return on investment we’ve achieved on our comprehensive healthcare fraud enforcement efforts, we’re sending a strong message to those who would take advantage of their fellow citizens, target vulnerable populations, and commit fraud on federal healthcare programs,” Holder said. “Thanks to initiatives like HEAT, our work to combat fraud has never been more cooperative or more effective. And our unprecedented commitment to holding criminals accountable, and securing remarkable results for American taxpayers, is paying dividends.”

The Justice Department and HHS have improved their coordination through HEAT and are currently operating Medicare Fraud Strike Force teams in nine areas across the country, including Dallas-Fort Worth. The strike force teams use advanced data analysis techniques to identify high-billing levels in healthcare fraud hot spots, so that interagency teams can target emerging or migrating schemes as well as chronic fraud by criminals posing as health professionals.

In FY 2013, the strike force secured records in the number of cases filed (137), individuals charged (345), guilty pleas secured (234), and jury trial convictions (46). Beyond that, the defendants who were charged and sentenced are facing significant time in prison—an average of 52 months in prison for those sentenced in FY 2013, and an average of 47 months in prison for those sentenced since 2007, officials said.

Justice Department officials opened 1,013 new criminal healthcare fraud investigations involving 1,910 potential defendants in FY 2013, and a total of 718 defendants were convicted of healthcare fraud-related crimes during the year. The department also opened 1,083 new civil healthcare fraud investigations.

“These impressive recoveries for the American taxpayer are just one aspect of the comprehensive anti-fraud strategy we have implemented since the passage of the Affordable Care Act,” said HHS Secretary Sebelius. “We’ve cracked down on tens of thousands health care providers suspected of Medicare fraud. New enrollment screening techniques are proving effective in preventing high risk providers from getting into the system, and the new computer analytics system that detects and stops fraudulent billing before money ever goes out the door is accomplishing positive results – all of which are adding to savings for the Medicare Trust Fund.”

The work of the HEAT task force and other enforcement tactics are being felt across North Texas.

A Houston man was sentenced in January to 72 months in federal prison and ordered to pay $880,000 in restitution for his involvement in the operation of Euless Healthcare Corporation and Medic Healthcare Incorporated. Godwin Umotong was one of six defendants convicted in the conspiracy, during which they submitted, or caused to be submitted, fraudulent claims to Medicare for diagnostic tests and office visits. Unlicensed doctors would work for EHC and Medic, and the conspirators would tell them that they would treat beneficiaries in the beneficiaries’ homes.

In total, more than $2.7 million was fraudulently billed, and of that amount, Medicare paid more than $1.3 million. ECH was located on West Bedford Euless Road in Hurst, and Medic, which operated from October 2009 to May 2011, was located in Houston.

And in October, two Grand Prairie men were convicted of healthcare fraud for their roles in a Medicaid scam that netted the father-son pair $1.4 million in fraudulent payments. A jury found Lawrence Dale St. John and Jeffrey Dale St. John guilty of a host of charges, including conspiracy to commit healthcare fraud. The St. Johns operated a company called A Medical House Calls, which claimed to provide services to in-home Medicare beneficiaries. Instead, the duo bilked taxpayers and the Medicaid system for more than a $1 million in bunk payments.

Because of the growing threat of healthcare fraud in the region, federal officials have blocked new home health agencies in Dallas and Houston from receiving Medicare reimbursement, CMS announced earlier this month.

The six-month moratorium—which went into effect in late January, and also includes Detroit and Fort Lauderdale, Fla.—is part of a second wave of moratoria sent in place by the feds. CMS is also extending for six months the current enrollment moratoria of home health agencies in Chicago and Miami.

“Our first use of the moratoria put fraudsters on notice that we are using all available tools, including these moratoria, to combat fraud, waste and abuse in our health care programs, while maintaining patients’ access to care,” CMS administrator Marilyn Tavenner said. “[This] announcement shows we are continuing our intense fight against fraud, waste, and abuse in these vital healthcare programs.”

The Dallas moratorium includes Collin, Dallas, Denton, Ellis, Kaufman, Rockwall, and Tarrant counties. CMS data show that the Dallas area, in 2012, had a ratio of HHAs to Medicare FFS beneficiaries that was 365 percent higher than its comparison counties.