Splitsville In 1916, voters approved the creation of Deschutes County. Even at 100 years old, though, Deschutes remains Oregon’s newest county. Birthday: On Dec. 13, 1916, Deschutes County was created from the western portion of Crook County. Size: 3,055 square miles. Deschutes’ name: Early fur traders called the river Riviere des Chutes — “River of the Falls” in French. Seat: Bend, incorporated in 1905 — which makes the county seat older than the county. (Name also derived from the river; “Farewell Bend” is what pioneers called the part where the town was eventually platted.) Population: ​The first county census​,​ taken in 1920​,​ ​counted 9,622 residents. Despite a significant downturn caused by the recession of 2008, Deschutes County has experienced the most rapid growth of any county of the state in recent decades. The latest figures place the population above 165,000. Government: ​The first meeting to organize county government was held in the O’Kane Building (the historic structure on the west corner of Oregon and Bond downtown, with the glass windows that say “BEND”). Appointments were made for the positions of district attorney, county judge, two commissioners, clerk, assessor, treasurer, surveyor, superintendent of schools, coroner, physician and sheriff. In 1971, the county court administrative system was replaced by the three-member county commission, and county judge, a position that also had juvenile jurisdiction, was abolished. Buildings: County o​ffices moved ​from the O’Kane Building ​into an office building constructed by the Deschutes County Investment ​Co. The County Court met there from 1917 to 1935. A county jail was completed in 1918. In 1935, the court decided to purchase the old brick high school to serve as the courthouse. In 1937, fire burned the courthouse and destroyed most early county records. The state fire marshal investigated for arson, but it was never proved. In 1940, a new courthouse was constructed and an addition built in 1978. In 2004, the Deschutes Services Center opened and houses a number of county offices, including the clerk, assessor and commissioners. Sources: Deschutes County, Secretary of State’s Office

Deschutes County was created a century ago at a time when economic and political power was shifting in Central Oregon.

Large lumber mills had just been established along the Deschutes River.

A few years earlier a railroad line had been constructed to connect Bend to The Dalles.

Residents in Bend and Redmond wanted their own county government. A vote in November 1916 made that possible and split Crook County in two to form Deschutes County.

This year Deschutes County will hold a series of events to commemorate the centennial, including an art contest for the cover of the county voters pamphlet, the creation of a time capsule and performances of a play depicting county history.

Deschutes County was the last to be created among Oregon’s 36 counties. The vote creating the county was briefly challenged in court by opponents of the change, but the legal effort was denied by a judge. The county was officially founded on Dec. 13, 1916.

“Deschutes County has been very successful and we’re still partners with Jefferson and Crook,” said Commissioner Tony DeBone on Thursday looking ahead at the centennial year.

In 1914, there were proposals for both Jefferson and Deschutes counties to be carved out of Crook County. The Jefferson County proposal passed, but residents in what is now Deschutes County had to wait two more years.

Bend and Redmond were created in 1905 and 1910, respectively. The city of Sisters was founded much later in 1946; followed by La Pine in 2006.

Much of the rapid population growth and economic change in the early 1900s was occurring in Redmond and Bend, leaving behind Prineville.

Crook County was formed in 1882 when it split from Wasco County to the north. Prineville was difficult to get to for residents in Bend and Redmond. The dirt roads were bumpy and arduous.

In 1911, the Oregon Trunk Line had reached Bend, allowing agricultural products and timber to be transported by train north to the Columbia River.

Shevlin-Hixon and Brooks- Scanlon built their lumber mills on the Deschutes River in 1915. The two timber companies moved their operations to Bend to harvest the large ponderosa pines in the area. The companies brought their resources from Minnesota, where they exhausted their timber supply.

“You get an influx of people coming for jobs in the mills,” said Kelly Cannon-Miller, executive director of the Deschutes County Historical Society.

But the railroad line was perhaps the first step toward Deschutes County becoming independent.

“When the railroad came down to Bend in 1911 that shifts the political power and money from Prineville,” said Cannon-Miller.

Prineville, not wanting to be left behind, later built its own railroad line in 1918 to link up with the north-south tracks.

In 1916, there was also a proposal to move the county seat of Crook County from Prineville to Bend. The initiative was withdrawn from the ballot before the November vote on the formation of Deschutes County.

Many cities in Central Oregon were vying for political power at the time, Cannon-Miller said. Each wanted to be an economic driver and to draw new residents.

The economic rise of Bend changed the city from a small village to a bustling town in the years after Deschutes County formed.

“It’s transforming from a frontier place with wooden storefronts to the brick buildings that we know and love today,” Cannon-Miller said.

The population of Deschutes County in 1916 was 5,000 and doubled by 1920.

Cannon-Miller said many of the new residents came from the Midwest and followed the timber companies. Many were already immigrants from Scandinavian countries and Eastern Europe.

Deschutes County in the early 1900s was also still a place where the federal government offered free land under the Homestead Act if the future private owners cleared and improved the land.

Ranching and farming remain a big part of Deschutes County and Central Oregon. But other parts of the economy have shifted.

“We yearn for the old timber days, but we don’t have those large diameter logs in quantities that they did,” said DeBone.

DeBone said he is pleased with the move to diversify the local economy such as with high-tech and other new opportunities that have arisen within the county.

“There’s a lot of advantages to living here,” he said.

A list of centennial events in 2016 can be viewed at www.deschutes.org/100years.

— Reporter: 541-617-7820,

tshorack@bendbulletin.com