In June 2014, Ta-Nehisi Coates wrote a lengthy piece about reparations in The Atlantic, arguing that the country needed to take a serious look at compensating African-Americans for “Two hundred fifty years of slavery. Ninety years of Jim Crow. Sixty years of separate but equal. Thirty-five years of racist housing policy.” In his article, “The Case for Reparations,” he insisted that “[u]ntil we reckon with our compounding moral debts, America will never be whole.”

He wrote: “Broach the topic of reparations today and a barrage of questions inevitably follows: Who will be paid? How much will they be paid? Who will pay? But if the practicalities, not the justice, of reparations are the true sticking point, there has for some time been the beginnings of a solution. For the past 25 years, Congressman John Conyers Jr., who represents the Detroit area, has marked every session of Congress by introducing a bill calling for a congressional study of slavery and its lingering effects as well as recommendations for ‘appropriate remedies.’ A country curious about how reparations might actually work has an easy solution in Conyers’s bill, now called HR 40, the Commission to Study Reparation Proposals for African Americans Act. We would support this bill, submit the question to study, and then assess the possible solutions. But we are not interested.”

Coates quoted Nkechi Taifa, who helped found National Coalition of Blacks for Reparations in America (N’COBRA): “People who talk about reparations are considered left lunatics. But all we are talking about is studying [reparations]. As John Conyers has said, we study everything. We study the water, the air. We can’t even study the issue? This bill does not authorize one red cent to anyone.”

Coates pointed out that HR 40 had never even made it to the House floor and insisted that resistance to studying the issue of reparations wasn’t rooted “in the impracticality of reparations but in something more existential.”

More recently, on Jan. 19, Coates took Vermont Senator and presidential candidate Bernie Sanders to task for responding thus when asked if he supported reparations: “No, I don’t think so. First of all, its likelihood of getting through Congress is nil. Second of all, I think it would be very divisive.”

Coates wrote: “Sanders is a lot of things, many of them good. But he is not the candidate of moderation and unification, so much as the candidate of partisanship and radicalism. There is neither insult nor accolade in this. John Brown was radical and divisive. So was Eric Robert Rudolph. Our current sprawling megapolis of prisons was a bipartisan achievement. Obamacare was not. Sometimes the moral course lies within the politically possible, and sometimes the moral course lies outside of the politically possible. One of the great functions of radical candidates is to war against equivocators and opportunists who conflate these two things. Radicals expand the political imagination and, hopefully, prevent incrementalism from becoming a virtue.”

The Coates critique of Sanders has taken on a life of its own, sparking heated debates on social media and in the press. This week, City Paper invited four Baltimore-based writers to weigh in on the conversation. (Karen Houppert)