It was a big deal when Imani Shannon, a 7-year old at Denver’s Polaris at Ebert Elementary School, decided to run for student council. She was the only first-grader to vie for a seat.

A classmate decisively shattered Imani’s excitement when she said she refused to vote for her because she’s black.

“It was really hard as a parent to see that happen,” said Quincy Shannon, Imani’s dad.

Shannon, from Denver’s Park Hill neighborhood, said Imani is one of a handful of black students in her school. Ever since his daughter enrolled in Denver’s school for gifted and high achieving students, he’s noticed a change in her demeanor that he attributes to the fact she has few black peers and teachers.

“I know she’s an extreme extrovert,” he said. “But at school, she’s introverted, and she isolates herself. It’s apparent when she comes to school that she’s alone.”

Shannon was one of 300 people who attended a Saturday conference that addressed the needs of black students in the classroom.

“Educating, Connecting with and Loving our Black Children” offered sessions for parents, students and educators to learn about how to connect with black students in the Denver Public School System.

“This came about because of some of the challenges black boys and girls have in schools,” said Darlene Sampson, DPS’s director of culturally responsive education.

Sampson said many teachers don’t appreciate the way black students communicate and express themselves.

“Our kids don’t check their culture at the door,” she said. “The task of educators is to embrace it.”

She also noted that personal biases and stereotypes lead some educators to make assumptions about what students can accomplish in the classroom. The result is a low standard of achievement.

“The greater costs are drop-outs, push-outs and sad and disconnected kids,” Sampson said.

Sheila Smith, who’s been an educator in Denver public schools for 14 years, said she’s seen these challenges firsthand.

“It holds them back,” Smith said. “People assume they don’t care or don’t want to learn.”

Rhonda Juett, who works to address the social and emotional needs of students, said she’s noticed disproportionate treatment of black students in the classroom, especially when it comes to discipline.

“Just look at the suspension rate of black students,” she said. “We need to work on our own mindset of how we’re working with children of color and build a respectful culture in our schools.”

Katy Canada: 303-954-1043, kcanada@denverpost.com or @KatySusanna