Chasing Gecker

Democrats jockey for liberal street cred: Who supports Obamacare the most?

By Jim McConnell STAFF WRITER

With less than a month remaining before 10th District Democrats select their nominee for November’s state Senate election, the party’s three candidates got together to share their views on an array of topics last week at Swift Creek Middle School.



The atmosphere was cordial as Dan Gecker, Emily Francis and Alex McMurtrie Jr. sat at a table in the school’s auditorium and took turns fielding questions from moderator Craig Carper, political reporter for WCVE Public Broadcasting.

Unlike traditional debates, candidate forums aren’t structured to provide opportunities for spontaneous rapid-fire exchanges among the participants, significantly decreasing the likelihood of dramatic “gotcha” moments or damaging verbal gaffes.

The closest last week’s event came to drama came during McMurtrie’s opening statement, when the 79-year-old suggested that there’s a “whisper campaign” being waged to convince voters that he’s too old to effectively represent the district in the General Assembly.



McMurtrie, who served in the House of Delegates from 1971 to 1981, later claimed that he’s the lone Democrat capable of putting together a bipartisan coalition to beat Republican nominee Glen Sturtevant and Libertarian candidate Carl Loser in the general election.



Francis, a nonprofit lobbyist and first-time political candidate, noted several times that she’s “the only progressive Democrat” in the 10th District race.

But an informal survey of audience members following the forum suggested that Gecker had provided the most thoughtful responses on a range of hot-button issues from gun control and abortion rights to immigration reform and Medicaid expansion.

“Basic health care ought to be the right of every American,” said Gecker, who sees Medicaid expansion as one step along a path to universal health care coverage. “This is obviously not a quick fix, but I believe it’s something that well-meaning people can come to agreement on.”

Regardless of which Democrat wins the 10th District’s June 9 primary, Medicaid expansion is likely to be a central issue of the general election.

Democratic Gov. Terry McAuliffe has made no secret of his desire to provide approximately 400,000 uninsured Virginians access to health care coverage under the federal Affordable Care Act.

Since taking office last January, McAuliffe has encountered fierce resistance from Republicans equally determined to keep Obamacare out of the commonwealth.

Unable to expand Medicaid without legislative approval, McAuliffe’s only hope is to gain control of the Senate and negotiate some type of agreement with the Republican-dominated House.

The first part of that equation likely hinges on the Democrats’ ability to win the 10th District seat, which has been held by moderate Republican John Watkins since 1998.

The 10th District includes parts of Chesterfield and Richmond and all of Powhatan County.

The GOP currently holds a 21-19 advantage in the Senate. Assuming the status quo holds for all other contested seats, swinging the 10th District into the Democrats’ column effectively would give them control of the chamber because Democratic Lt. Gov. Ralph Northam holds the tie-breaking vote.

All three Democrats enthusiastically supported the expansion of Medicaid during last week’s forum.

“I have built my career standing up for what is right,” Francis said. “You will never have to wonder where I stand on these priorities.”

By continuing to tout her progressive credentials, Francis is trying to woo the party’s base while subtly raising questions about her opponents’ political loyalties.

McMurtrie has close ties to former Gov. Bob McDonnell, who appointed him to the Virginia Commonwealth University board of visitors in 2010.

Political disclosure forms show that McMurtrie has given money to Virginia governors from both parties – McDonnell and Jim Gilmore on the right, McAuliffe and Mark Warner on the left.

But if people in his own party are skeptical about McMurtrie, it pales in comparison to how some Democrats feel about Gecker’s past representation of Kathleen Willey, one of the women who made allegations of improper behavior against former President Bill Clinton.

Further adding to the intrigue is that Hillary Clinton is considered an overwhelming favorite to win the Democratic nomination for president in 2016.

McAuliffe, a close friend of both Bill and Hillary Clinton, called Gecker “a progressive leader” in announcing his endorsement for the 10th District seat last Friday.

“The governor seems to be saying, ‘If I can forgive Dan, you should too,’” said one Richmondarea Democrat, who asked not to be identified.

Gecker already had been endorsed by Sen. Donald McEachin (D-Henrico), chairman of the Senate Democratic Caucus, as well as eight of the nine members of the Richmond City Council.

McEachin was one of about 150 people in attendance at last week’s forum, which lasted 75 minutes. What they heard was Gecker sounding little like the self-described “fiscal conservative” who has represented Midlothian on the Board of Supervisors for the past seven-and-a-half years.



While McMurtrie and Francis stayed on their talking points, Gecker demonstrated command of the wide-ranging topics and related his experiences as a local government official to state and national issues.

Asked by Carper to identify the first bill he’d sponsor as a member of the General Assembly, Gecker instead spoke in general terms about “disparities in opportunity” for residents of the diverse 10th District.

“I know what I want my legacy to be,” he said. “Our most significant challenge is the income divide. It’s clear today that where you live to a large extent determines the quality of the education available to your children.

“I want to be a legislator who says to people, ‘We will give you a hand up and a path forward.’ If we don’t do that, we’re going to continue to have the same problems plague our country.”