A Birmingham orthodontist, Mobile gastroenterologist, and a Montgomery spine doctor are the top three Alabama recipients of money from drug or device companies for the last five months of 2013, according to new data released by federal government.

Data from that time period is all the government is releasing now, but the data will be expanded and put in an easier to search format later this month, officials say. Meanwhile, below, AL.com has created a way you can search for your doctor.

The top recipient of drug or device company money in Alabama during the five-month time frame is Birmingham orthodontist Dr. David Sarver who made $75,139. Double that and it's about what he makes a year outside his practice, he said.

"I'm basically a rent-a-brain; I've authored four textbooks," Sarver said. "So they like to know what I think and are willing to pay for me to give advice on how to design hardware and software for orthodontists and dentists."

Drug companies have for years given money to doctors for honoraria, consulting, travel expenses, speeches, seminars and research. The companies and some doctors say the money helps further doctors' education and contributes to research breakthroughs. Critics say the money can be a thinly veiled payoff to influence prescribing habits, promote a brand drug or even control a scientific outcome in research.

In this latest data federal release, drug and device companies made 4.4 million payments totaling $3.5 billion in a five-month period at the end of 2013.

The money involved 546,000 health care professionals and 1,360 teaching hospitals.

The program, a part of the Affordable Care Act, is called Open Payments and seeks to provide more transparency in the nation's health care system - with twin goals to reduce costs and boost quality care.

In Alabama, 28 doctors received at least $10,000 in payments, according to the data.

Dr. Eric Baum, a Gadsden dermatologist is the fourth highest recipient in Alabama, receiving $47,667 during the last five months of 2013. He said he is paid by pharmaceutical companies to speak and advise and doesn't see anything wrong with it.

"If I felt it influenced me I'd be embarrassed,' Baum said. "I'm very open, a patient can tell me anything they want and I'll answer. ... I personally don't speak for products I don't like. If I like it and use it, I'm glad to do a talk about it. But I only talk about drugs that work well."

The largest portion of Baum's money came from the pharmaceutical company Ranbaxy Inc.

Sarver got the bulk of his money listed in the federal database from the dental equipment company Carestream Dental.

Sarver said an example of what he has done: advising Kodak on building a special CT scan that uses less radiation.

"I advised Kodak there's no sense for me to shoot a full head CT on 8-year-olds," Sarver said.

"I feel like I'm doing good things for the money I make."

The top 5 recipients of drug, device company money during the last five months of 2013:

David Sarver, orthodontist, Birmingham, $75,139 Jack A. Dipalma, gastroenterologist, Mobile, $54,585 Timothy A. Holt, operates spinal clinic, Montgomery, $49,656. Eric W. Baum, dermatologist, Gadsden, $47,667. James William Roy, operates sleep medicine clinic, Huntsville, $34,338

Database reporter Alex Walsh contributed to this report.

Search below. You can narrow search by doctor, city, or drug, device company.