CLEVELAND, Ohio -- The title of the report sums up the predicament of those who have been without work for six months or longer: "Left Behind: The Long-term Unemployed Struggle in an Improving Economy."

The John J. Heldrich Center for Workforce Development at Rutgers University in New Jersey released the report this week based on a national survey of 1,153 Americans, including 394 jobless workers still looking for employment. It is one of a continuing number of reports the Heldrich Center has released on the impact the Great Recession is continuing to have on the labor force. The recession officially began in December 2007, and ended in June 2009.

Here are seven takeaways from the report:

1. Twenty percent of workers laid off in the last five years still haven't found jobs.

2. Of those who were able to land work, nearly half were making less than they had in their former jobs. One in four held temporary work, though they wanted permanent assignments.

3. Three million people have been unemployed for more than six months, as of August, according to the Labor Department. More than 2 million have been out of work for more than a year. The percentage of long-term unemployed peaked in 2010 at 46 percent. About one-third of jobless workers are now among the long-term unemployed, more than double pre-recession levels.

4. About half of the long-term unemployed say it will take three to 10 years for their families to recover financially because they were without work for so long. Another one in five say it will take even longer -- or that they will never recover.

"While the worst effects of the Great Recession are over for most Americans, the brutal realities of diminished living standards endure for the 3 million American workers who remain jobless years after they were laid off," said Carl Van Horn, Heldrich Center director, in a news release. "These long-term unemployed workers have been left behind to fend for themselves as they struggle to pull their lives back together."

5. Fifty-four percent of workers who were jobless in the last five years received unemployment benefits. For half of them, benefits ran out before they found work. Congress hasn't extended jobless benefits beyond the six-months offered by most states, so that now only 38 percent of those experiencing long-term unemployment are receiving benefits.

6. Only one-third in the survey supported extending unemployment benefits, down from 46 percent who supported extending them in January 2013. More than half of the unemployed and long-term unemployed supported extending the length of jobless benefits.

7. Nearly two-thirds of those surveyed supported increasing funds for long-term education and training programs. However, only 22 percent of the long-term unemployed interviewed were enrolled in a training program to develop skills for a new job. Sixty-three percent of those surveyed supported greater spending on road and highway projects to provide work for unemployed workers.

A majority of those surveyed also supported initiatives to provide tax credits to businesses that hire new workers. Substantial majorities of employed and unemployed workers supported being able to make withdrawals from their 401(k) plans, without incurring financial penalties, to pay for education and training courses.

"Despite strong public support for government action, partisan-driven gridlock and deep ideological disagreements among political leaders about the causes and potential solutions have thwarted significant progress on initiatives to assist the long-term unemployed," said study co-author Cliff Zukin, a Rutgers professor of public policy and political science, in the release.