The political left creates its own reality.

A fellow columnist wrote about his continued interest in The Right Stuff column. Alleging he’s a former conservative, but is now a proud Llberal being enlightened by earning a master’s Degree from the University of California, Davis, that well-known bastion of balanced political philosophical thought and tolerance. He believes we, the unenlightened, are apparently ill-educated and are not well-read.

As an example the author said, “Historically, I think I know where this comes from: The South.” Yes, that bastion, indeed heart, of the Republican Party.

Excuse me? The South (the old Confederacy) was made up of the Democratic Party. The so-called copperhead element of his Democratic Party opposed Abraham Lincoln’s (a Republican) prosecution of the Civil War. Their 1864 party platform was immediate peace and returning the country to the status quo ante before the War. In other words, slavery.

I am a Southern man; I grew up with segregation and it sure wasn’t the Republican Party championing segregation. Every piece of civil rights legislation from the 13th, 14th and 15th Amendments forward was authored by or passed with Republican Party votes, including the vaunted yet flawed 1964 Civil Rights Act.

After Appomattox, Reconstruction (a program of the Republican Party to ensure voting, property rights and safety for the freed slaves) began. But the Ku Klux Klan, founded by Confederate Gen. Nathan Bedford Forest, terrorized the South. Democrats were responsible for enacting Jim Crow laws and segregation became the law in the old Confederacy.

Democratic administrations restored the civil rights of former Confederate officials and military officers. They were restored to public office up to and including the Supreme Court. We had a seminal Supreme Court ruling: Plessey v. Ferguson, 1896, where the doctrine of separate but equal was enshrined into law until 1954. How about President Woodrow Wilson (a Democrat), that great proponent of democracy and fairness (in other countries, apparently) re-segregating the federal civil service for the first time in 40 years?

Was Democrat Franklin D. Roosevelt a great champion of civil rights? He refused to oppose the so-called Solid South or discrimination by trade unions, so no relief from the grinding poverty and humiliation of segregation there. Democrat Harry Truman in 1948 apparently didn’t get the memo and desegregated the military. How? With Republican support.

Then we have Democrat Lyndon B. Johnson and the great onslaught of modern liberal thought (see “Leviathan” by Thomas Hobbes), which is as far from classical Liberalism you can get without being an avowed Socialist. (See Edmund Burke’s “Reflections on the Revolution in France,” John Stuart Mill’s “On Liberty,” or best of all, John Locke’s, “Two Treatises of Government”).

How did LBJ get his bill passed? By asking for and receiving Republican congressional votes denied him by his Democratic Party (Jim Crow) office holders. Oh yes. Let’s not forget his infamous remark admonishing Democrats to pass the Civil Rights Act or 1964 so blacks will vote for Democrats for the next 100 years or more. Well, it has been 52 years and we still have blacks tricked into voting for their historical masters and against the party that freed them from slavery in the first place. So was LBJ right?

The left obsesses about minding other people’s business, spending other people’s money and telling Americans we are not paying our fair share of taxes to expand their favorite institution: government at all levels. Well, I personally neither want nor need an expanded government, Obamacare, the Association of Bay Area Governments, the Iranian nuclear deal, new taxes or any other failed programs the Left is selling.

The columnist claims The Right Stuff writers are bereft of education and intellectual curiosity. Really?

Jim McCully is a Vacaville resident and member of The Right Stuff Committee, a committee of the Solano County Republican Party. Reach him at [email protected].