Photo

At first glance, Sarah Bowen’s research project seems pleasant: The sociologist and her team sat down to dinner with American families. But what she found may be disturbing for proponents of family dinners — the meals were often times of worry and strife. And, she argues, we can’t expect moms alone to change the way America eats.

“The vision of the family meal that today’s food experts are whipping up is alluring,” Ms. Bowen told Op-Talk in an email. “Most people would agree that it would be nice to slow down, eat healthfully, and enjoy a home-cooked meal.”

But that vision isn’t what Ms. Bowen and the other co-authors of a recent paper about the research, Sinikka Elliott and Joslyn Brenton, saw. They spent time with 12 families, and interviewed 150 other moms from different socioeconomic strata, and found that between time pressures, money worries and picky family members, parents often struggled to squeeze meaningful togetherness out of dinnertime.

And, they argue in their paper, published in the journal Contexts, expectations about family dinner still disproportionately affect moms: “The message that good parents — and in particular, good mothers — cook for their families dovetails with increasingly intensive and unrealistic standards of ‘good’ mothering.” Of one mother’s efforts to get dinner on the table, they write:

“Leanne’s 1-year-old daughter gets fussy when her mom cooks, and looks for attention. Her husband doesn’t offer much help; his contribution involves pouring barbecue sauce on the ribs, which Leanne calls ‘working his magic.’ Leanne wipes her brow and mutters to herself about the $80 she spent on ingredients. By the time she’s finished cooking, she says, ‘I don’t want to eat!’”

Leanne wasn’t the only mom who found dinner stressful and exhausting. The authors note that “contrary to the stereotype that poor families mainly eat fast food,” the parents they studied actually cooked a lot. “Poor families couldn’t afford to eat out,” Ms. Bowen told Op-Talk. However, “they lacked the resources to be able to make the foodie ideal of a home-cooked meal.”

One problem was the cost of fresh foods: “Healthy ingredients like fresh fruits and vegetables and whole grains are more expensive.” But Ms. Bowen noted: “Many of the poor mothers we met also lacked reliable transportation, and therefore typically shopped just once a month. As a result, they avoided buying fresh produce, which spoiled quickly.”

Time was an issue, too: “Poor families often had unpredictable, nonstandard schedules that changed from week to week. This made it a challenge to find and organize child care and also complicated preparing and eating family meals, because everyone might not be home at the same time.”

The middle-class moms they talked to were less hampered by time and money pressures, but they had problems, too — Ms. Bowen said they “still said they lacked the time to cook the way they felt they should” and “talked about not being able to afford the foods they wanted to be able to provide the best meals for their families.”

And everyone dealt with what Ms. Bowen called the “burden of pleasing others”: “Middle-class mothers felt that offering new foods was crucial for developing their kids’ palates — even if the process sometimes leads to food fights. But the process was time-consuming and stressful. For poor mothers, the stakes are high: They felt they couldn’t afford to waste food if their families didn’t like it. They reasoned that it was better to stick with foods (often processed) that they knew their families would eat, rather than risk wasting money and food.”

Ms. Bowen and her co-authors write that “we rarely observed a meal in which at least one family member didn’t complain about the food they were served.”

At Slate, Amanda Marcotte sees the research as evidence that just telling parents to make dinner more often won’t do families any good:

“It’s expensive and time-consuming and often done for a bunch of ingrates who would rather just be eating fast food anyway. If we want women — or gosh, men, too — to see cooking as fun, then these obstacles need to be fixed first. And whatever burden is left needs to be shared.”

At The Billfold, meanwhile, Ester Bloom offers some ideas for making family dinners less fraught — and for redistributing the work so that moms aren’t expected to do it all. She recommends that families “pick recipes together. Choose a variety of ingredients, frozen foods, and prepared foods, so that everyone’s expectations remain reasonable.” And she proposes a rule: “Limited negativity, period. Everybody’s in this together, everybody benefits, and that means everybody says ‘thank you’ and means it.”

The poet Kima Jones recently conducted her own survey of family food traditions: For an essay at Scratch, she asked 29 poets, “What did your mother teach you to always have in the house in case of hunger and no money?” The answers she got ranged from bologna to cassava bread to “Savings. You can always turn that into food.”

Many of the poets she talked to grew up poor, but her survey painted a more optimistic picture than Ms. Bowen’s research. She told Op-Talk that a lot of the stories she heard involved extended families coming together — the poets “talked about their grandmothers, their aunts, their uncles. There were always these reservoirs to tap into and this community where, we don’t have a potato, but we have some rice, some string beans, we have some stew meat, and we’re going to make a meal out of this.”

Growing up, she said, “I don’t remember ever not eating and not eating well, even though we were definitely working poor.” Now she lives far away from her mother, and eating dinner with her “is the thing I miss most.” And when she visits her mother in New York, she never eats out: “As long as my mother’s on the face of this earth, and as long as she’s making dinner, I’m eating dinner.”

She noted, though, that dinner for her family didn’t necessarily mean everyone sitting down at a table together: Her siblings all had different after-school activities, and her mother worked, so often “you just ate when you came in, but the food was always there.”

And, to her, eating well doesn’t mean everything has to be perfect. “With families nowadays,” she said, “I think there’s a lot of shame” around failing to live up to a high-end, organic standard. But “I don’t think beef has to necessarily be grass-fed for a child to eat it, especially when you’re talking about meat that’s $12.99 or $13.99 a pound.” Instead, she said, “Do the best with what you have.”

She also offered a way to help families do so: Support school lunch programs, which, she said, many low-income families budget around. “More needs to be said about providing healthy meals for kids in school and making sure those programs are available to them.”

Ms. Bowen, too, calls for broad-based change to help families eat together. If family dinner is important to us, she told Op-Talk, “let’s start talking about what needs to happen — outside of home kitchens — in order for people to be able to eat healthy meals.” This might include looking at “wages and schedules for service work (like working in fast food restaurants, which quite a few of the poor families did).” It might also include thinking “creatively about sharing the work of cooking” — developing programs around community kitchens, food trucks or co-workers having meals together.

Whatever these changes are, she argued, they can’t stop with telling moms to cook more: “Our research leads us to question why the frontline in reforming the food system has to be in someone’s kitchen.”