Direct primary care providers typically do not accept health insurance, dramatically reducing the amount of administrative tasks required to run their practices. This saves providers time and money that can be passed on to the patient. (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

A new bill proposed in the Tennessee legislature, called the Healthcare Empowerment Act, would create regulatory guidelines for an approach to primary care that is becoming increasingly popular. This approach is called “direct primary care.”

Direct primary care typically exists outside of traditional health insurance. Instead of going through an insurance carrier to find and pay a primary care doctor, patients and providers independently agree to a service contract and membership fee.

For example, a direct primary care agreement might cover all office visits and basic lab work for $75 per month. Additional services might cost extra, but those are typically outlined upfront.

This kind of care arrangement has grown in popularity as consumers are covering more and more of their own health care costs. As patients see their out-of-pocket expenses rise, many want to shop around for primary care like they would for any other purchase. The direct model is an innovative response to consumers who want more control over their primary care.

Is direct primary care right for your family? Following are some pros and cons to consider.

Pro: Less administrative work

Providers of all stripes spend a lot of time dealing with insurance companies. From haggling over reimbursement rates to obtaining insurance approval on top of filing claims for every patient who walks into the exam room, this type of administrative work takes up a lot of time.

A 2014 study published in the International Journal of Health Services found physicians spend 16.6 percent of their time on these administrative tasks, which leaves less time to see patients. Many primary care providers report a “hamster wheel” of patients and paperwork, leaving little time for thorough, personalized care.

Direct primary care providers typically do not accept health insurance, dramatically reducing the amount of administrative tasks required to run their practices. This saves providers time and money that can be passed on to the patient. Direct primary care patients often report longer and more productive visits with their providers than those who take traditional insurance.

Con: It’s not everywhere

Direct primary care is becoming more popular, but it is still not nearly as common as traditional practices. Only a small number of practices offer this service in the Nashville area, including GracePointe Healthcare in Franklin and Icon Pediatrics in West Nashville.

Pro: Transparent pricing and services

Direct primary care memberships are typically cost-transparent, with memberships paid for on a monthly or annual basis and additional prices outlined in a contract.

This means fewer surprise bills than with traditional insurance. Though insurance companies supply their members with an explanation of benefits, this is only after you see the doctor. As a result, it is all too common to get a surprise bill. For example, let’s say your plan covers an annual wellness visit at no cost. During the visit, your physician recommends and completes a blood test. That test was not fully covered under the wellness visit, so a few weeks later you receive a surprise bill. This kind of thing would not happen in a direct primary care practice that doesn’t work with insurance.

“If you called a traditional office and asked ‘How much is a visit, how much is this lab,’ they would have no idea,” said Rob Tomsett, owner of GracePointe Healthcare. “With direct primary care, I can tell you exactly how much it’s going to cost.”

Con: It’s not insurance

Direct primary care physicians are typically candid about this, which is a good thing, because it is really important to be aware that these arrangements don’t cover all types of care. They are best used in addition to traditional insurance, not as a substitute.

To be covered in the event of an emergency or major illness, as well as to avoid Affordable Care Act fines, consumers still need a traditional insurance plan. And if you have a qualified health plan, many of the services provided by direct primary care are likely already available to you with physicians that are “in-network” with your insurance company. In fact, the Healthcare Empowerment Act recommends consumers consult their insurance plan before agreeing to direct primary care agreements.

Even so, as consumers spend increasing amounts of their own money on health care, they are typically looking for better service and more “bang for their buck,” Tomsett said.

“People are becoming smarter about their health care dollars and where they spend them,” he said. “If I’m asking patients to pay me their hard-earned money, I have to earn that through exceptional service.”

Alex Tolbert is the founder of Bernard Health, a company that provides noncommissioned, expert advice on health, Medicare and COBRA insurance and medical bill consulting. To learn more about Bernard Health, visit www.bernardhealth.com.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1MQMAlz