With many local private colleges have witnessed enrollment declines over the last few years, students are searching for college programs that are relevant to finding a job. WBFO's Focus on Education Reporter Eileen Buckley visited the Trocaire College campus in South Buffalo to find out how the school is targeting the growing Healthcare Informatics industry.

WBFO's Focus on Education Reporter Eileen Buckley visited the Trocaire College campus in South Buffalo to find out how the school is targeting the growing Healthcare Informatics industry.

"I think the difference with Trocaire is that we provide a foundation for healthcare and informatics. We actually give students that foundation, so they can grow into whatever area of health care they want to grow into," said Kim Storfer, Program Director Healthcare Informatics.

This program teaches technology to improve healthcare industry. "To be able to prevent either duplicative tests or do other population health so we can help cure disease," said Storfer.

Students can earn a two or four year degree or a certificate in the program. But what kinds of jobs are students in this informatics program preparing for?

"Interface analysts, business analyst they can go into nurse informatics, if they have a side in nursing," said Storfer. "They can go into research. They can go into population health."

The informatics program is considered the technical or back side of the health care industry -- something we don't see as patients. Many of the students in the program are non-traditional students, working a day job, like Tracy DeSalvio, who's currently at Roswell. She's learning how to upgrade her skills.

"With in any hospital setting there is so much transition right now too meet with federal mandates and quality improvements in healthcare, so being part of the Healthcare Informatics program helped me see it in a more detailed way in how to get process done and understand why were doing all these changes for quality improvements in patient care," said DeSalvio.

DeSalvio tells WBFO News the program is giving her a better understanding of work she performing, especially with all the new changes driven by the Affordable Care Act.

"The Affordable Care Act has basically given an outline for what healthcare informatic and data should be used for, quality improvements and improving patient care," note DeSalvio.

Trocaire provides credit-bearing courses and non-credit pathways to careers. Mollie Ballaro is Dean of Admission and Workforce Development.

"And they get both didactic as well as hands on training in the different programs that we offer. A great example, in one of our largest workforce development program is the phlebotomy program, where students are able to go through a ten week course and come out and be able to go into entry level phlebotomy programs," said Ballaro.

Enrollment remain a challege for the college and it is an important part of its future. Jacqueline Matheny is Trocaire's Chief Enrollment Officer.

"Our enrollment hit its height in about 2012,' stated Matheny. "Right now we're down, not in all our programs, our nursing program, rad tech program our surgical tech program -- which are our three largest programs -- have remained steady and seen some growth, and then some of our smaller programs have had a decrease in enrollment.

The number of students going on to college is declining and students question the value of higher education.

"It's just very competitive. We have such a small community with so many colleges, 21 colleges in a very small geographic area and then you have all of the on-line colleges and other colleges outside of Western New York that are coming in and putting in campuses, so we are all competing for a decreasing number of students," noted Matheny.

But only a bout a third of the college's enrollment comes directly from high school. The average age of a Trocaire student is 27.

Derick Siefer is non-traditional student studying healthcare informatics.

"The main reason I am here is the approach they have to setting up the courses. I can work full-time and still go to work full-time," said Siefer. He currently works for a small, family-owned company that works on contracts for rehabilitation outcomes.

"Because I make reports at work and I send them to these hospitals and I have no idea what this report will do for this hospital and that's one of the reasons I'm here, and I'm figuring that out," Siefer said.

Trocaire's Storfer noting there will be 'huge job growth' in several health care areas -- jobs that will be available all over the country and, more importantly, right here in Buffalo.

"There's been predictions that there will be over 200,000 new jobs in the next five years just in the healthcare informatics industry," stated Storfer.