Springfield XD, M1A Rifle Armorers Courses and Springfield XD Disassembly and Reassembly DVD among Hundreds of Prizes in September Giveaway.

Napa, Calif. (Ammoland.com) –American Gunsmithing Institute (AGI), producers of the most authoritative Gunsmithing DVD courses, is celebrating the return of one of the industry’s largest gun and gear promotions by inviting fans to participate in the event.

AGI’s Springfield XD and M1A Rifle Armorers Courses, as well as the Springfield XD Disassembly and Reassembly DVD, are part of the prize packages for the Springfield Armory DUEL 3 promotion.

Springfield Armory’s DUEL 3 promotion runs all September long and will include hundreds of daily and weekly prizes, as well as one month-ending grand prize valued at more than $6,000.

All fans need to do to participate is visit http://hubs.ly/H015g620, vote on weekly head-to-head matchups – up to once an hour to increase chances of winning – and wait and see if they’ve won.

Participants can register at http://hubs.ly/H015g620 to vote in the weekly “duel,” in which two Springfield Armory firearms are pitted against each other in a side-by-side comparison. Among the prizes up for grabs are gear from dozens of sponsors and more than 125 Springfield Armory firearms.

In AGI’s Armorer Courses, individuals can learn step-by-step how these firearms are designed, how they function and how to disassemble and reassemble them, clean and lube them, as well as how to perform common repairs. The instructor also goes over how the lock-up, feeding/extraction/ejection cycle, gas and fire control systems work.

For more information on American Gunsmithing Institute, visit www.americangunsmith.com. Visit Facebook or Twitter to stay up-to-date on new products, images and promotions.

About American Gunsmithing Institute:

American Gunsmithing Institute offers complete Certified Professional Gunsmithing Courses and a variety of affordable DVD gunsmithing courses that can be viewed in the comfort of one’s home and at one’s leisure. Unlike traditional schooling, the DVD’s are 100 percent instruction and can be played over and over again for reinforcement. AGI instructors are all working Master Gunsmiths who provide our students the highest quality instruction available. Visit AGI at www.americangunsmith.com to download their free course catalog and find out more about the Professional Gunsmith Course as well as other affordable courses.