DESIGNS for more than 100 houses and their landscaping give scant regard to the importance of a historical 19th century Plymouth fort, according to English Heritage.

Persimmon Homes has submitted design proposals to Plymouth City Council detailing what phase five of the planned Seaton neighbourhood will look like, along with drawings of houses and examples of landscaping.

The development will see 111 homes built north of Forder Valley and south of William Prance Road in Derriford.

Planning permission has already been granted but access, layout, scale, appearance and landscaping still need to be considered.

English Heritage, in a letter to the council, said it was “disappointed” the developer’s designs did not take into consideration their advice issued back in January 2013 that the current landscaping plans would have a detrimental impact on Bowden Battery, a scheduled monument.

Bowden Battery is a well-preserved 19th century fort which formed part of the ring of Palmerston forts which protected the city and its naval dockyard during the second half of 1800s.

It provided interlocking defence with the neighbouring Crownhill Fort, Eggbuckland Keep and Fort Austin, with Bowden Battery particularly unusual given the survival of its entire glacis (an area kept free from visual obstructions to provide a clear field of fire for soldiers).

English Heritage said the views from the fort remain “little changed from the time the fort was operational,” something the new landscaping of the Seaton development would threaten.

“The application fails to assess the impacts of the development on the setting of the monument, and makes no real attempt to mitigate the harmful impacts of the development on this setting,” wrote Keith Miller, inspector of ancient monuments.

“The good survival of the fort and its glacis, within its original landscape setting, makes it a highly important survival in a regional and national context.”

Mr Miller advised that trees should be planted around the border of the development to help hide the view of the houses when looking out from the fort.

Persimmon has agreed, as part of its section 106 agreement, that 22 per cent of the phase five homes will be affordable housing.

It has also confirmed it will make a number of payments when 100 homes are occupied, including a car club contribution of £125,000, an investment of £25,000 in public transport infrastructure and give another £75,000 towards creating a better bus service.

A “first strategic transport contribution” of £2million will be issued along with a local highway network improvement contribution of £300,000 and air quality contribution of £4,195.

It is also due to shell out more than £700,000 within six months of the development work starting.

It will include a first residential travel pass contribution of £28,500, bus lane enforcement worth £25,000 and an education contribution of £731,561.

The Seaton neighbourhood plans will see 873 dwellings built in total.