Topics: Barack Obama, Bernie Sanders, Editor's Picks, Elections 2016, Obamacare, revolution, Sex, Slavoj Zizek, Business News, News

As academic disciplines become more specialized, the Slovenian philosopher Slavoj Žižek flirts with the line between relic and rebel. His interests are unabashedly broad — from Hegel to psychoanalysis to film and pop culture. And his topics are unapologetically grand: the future of global capitalism; the nature of ideology; the experience of reality.

Žižek has written more than 60 books, and starred in a number of documentaries. In “Trouble in Paradise” — recently released in the United States — Žižek searches out ways to “think beyond capitalism and liberal democracy as the ultimate framework of our lives.” His principal subject is the melding of capitalism with various forms of authoritarianism — and the kinds of discontent that may emerge from within that melding. In typical Žižek style, the book also includes an exegesis of “The Dark Knight Rises,” extended meditations on North Korea and dozens of jokes.

I reached Žižek by phone at his home in Ljubljana, the capital of Slovenia. Over the course of two conversations, we spoke about Bernie Sanders, televangelists and why Žižek wants to move to Alaska.

In “Trouble in Paradise,” you’re talking about revolution — about an “authentic emancipatory process.” Where is this going to come from?

Maybe it will not come. I’m very clear about this, and rather a pessimist.

Really?

I don’t see any historical guarantee that some big revolutionary event will happen. The only thing I’m certain of is that if nothing happens, we are slowly approaching — well, if not a global catastrophe, then a very sad society. Much more authoritarian, with new inner apartheids clearly divided into those who are in and those who are out.

Okay, maybe I should have asked, where would this change come from, if it were to emerge?

It’s not a specific place. I see potential spaces of tensions. For example, you have literally hundreds of thousands, maybe millions of students in Europe who are doing their studies. And they’re well aware that they don’t even have a chance of getting a job.

So this is one stratum. Then I think more and more, this problem of Europe — should there be a wall? Should those outside Europe — immigrants, refugees — be allowed to enter Europe? I’m not a utopian here. I’m not a stupid leftist liberal who is saying, “Oh, you know, horror, people are drowning in the Mediterranean from Africa, we should open our gates to them.” No, that’s stupidity. If Europe totally opens its borders, you would have in half a year a populist anti-immigrant revolution. I’m just saying this problem will grow — those who are in, those who are out.

There does seem to be a kind of upheaval underway —

— I don’t have too high hopes. Like those old, stupid, pseudo-Marxists who claim, “We see the beginning, we just have to wait. The crowds, masses will organize themselves.” No, you can’t beat global capitalism in this old-fashioned way.

You talk about this idea of “capitalism with Asian values,” which challenges the old idea that capitalism and democracy are the only possible partners.

It’s not only this, that we will get more states like China and Singapore, and so on — that is to say, authoritarian capitalism. I think that even in the West where we do have some kind of democracy — and I do acknowledge it’s a real achievement, definitely better than some dictatorial regime — it’s becoming more and more relevant.

That’s for me — I’m very naïve here — the importance of all these agreements, TiSA and so on. These are agreements which will determine the basic coordinates of our economic and social life, flux of capital money, flux of information for decades to come. And it’s done in secret; nobody controls it. You know, this is where we are moving. The big decisions are done in top secret. They are not even debated. And what are politicians doing? They’re fighting cultural wars, [while] real big economic decisions are simply made by experts in shadows, and so on and so on.

Do you think there are cases where voters have genuine options?

My ironic remark would be here that when voters really do have a choice, it’s usually perceived as a crisis of democracy.

OK.

For example, Greek voters had a kind of a choice at least, in voting for Syriza or against. That’s why everyone was in a panic.

In Europe, comments along these lines are more and more open. I think I quoted somewhere a comment in the “Financial Times” where a guy says something like, “Europe’s biggest problems are voters.” Like they don’t really understand the necessity of certain decisions, and so on. If this is true, this means that democracy, that how shall I put it? It means that we are basically returning to pre-democratic times, in the sense of majority cannot be trusted.

We live really in an era of ideology. Neoliberalism, it’s a myth. The role of state apparatuses, state interventions in economy — they are more and more important. I saw a report on the state of Mali in Central Africa. They produce excellent cotton, and the price, of course, is low. They cannot make or break through — why not? Because United States, in subsidizing their own cotton farmers producing cotton, spends more money for helping their cotton farmers than the entire state budget of Mali.

I read a wonderful interview on CNN, years ago, with Mali’s Finance Minister, who said, “Please, we don’t need any socialist help. Give the market a chance. Don’t unfairly support your farmers, and Mali is saved economically.” And it was incredible, how the United States Ambassador in Mali answered this. She said, “It’s not as simple as that, there is also corruption, Mali, blah, blah, blah.” [The ambassador] was totally bullshitting. But I think that’s the reality of global capitalism. Everyone is violating the rules.

Or everyone is talking about one set of rules, but actually following another.

You have certain rules, but you are never really expected to follow those rules, you know. There are rules which you are expected to violate. And, a situation that interests me even more — there are not only things which are prohibited, but you are expected silently to do it, nonetheless.

It’s very culturally specific up to the everyday level. For example, let’s say you’re a rich guy, and I’m a poor guy. I invite you out to dinner. In Europe at least, it’s custom that when the bill arrives, although we both know that I will pay, you have to pretend, “No, no, let me pay,” and so on. We have to go through this performance, although we absolutely both know exactly what will happen, that I will pay.

This seems like a basic premise in a lot of ethnographic research.

Let me tell you another horror story. Don’t you have, now, in the United States this madness with “yes means yes”? The idea is that when two people, if they want to have sex, it’s not enough if there is no no. There must be an affirmative “yes.” And even then, okay, a little bit ironically, they have those contract papers, or you take a photo, or whatever.

The point is not just to make fun of this, but this is exactly not how sexual seduction works. A little bit of a chauvinist example: You are seducing a lady. She would like to do it. But if you ask her openly, “Okay, can I fuck you now?” it would be too humiliating for her. Now I’m not saying this means that we can rape, or whatever. I’m just saying that things are much more subtle here.

I don’t think that’s quite what those rules and guidelines are intended to … okay, I see what you’re saying. We have this implicit back-and-forth.

No, no, no — let me be specific here. I’m extremely brutal against rape, sexual exploitation and so on. I’m just saying that flirting, seduction and all this is structured in such a way that it precisely resists this clear translation into explicit rules.

And that’s what happens in the cotton trade between Mali and the United States, yes? Instead of the United States explicitly saying, “We’re going to use protectionist trade policies and screw you over,” there’s a delicate back-and-forth through which this power relationship gets expressed.

In contrast to sex, in a market economy, we should push a little bit more towards explicit rules. If you play that game in [the] economy, it simply means you ignore certain very brutal power relations.

For the first time in decades, the United States has a competitive socialist candidate for president. Do you think Bernie Sanders is providing a genuine critique of the economic and political system?

Of course I sympathize with him. But I’m a pessimist here. Okay, he can play a positive role, blah, blah, blah. But I don’t see the beginning of something that will amount to a real, serious change. Maybe one has to begin with small things. For example, as I always emphasize also in my book, I still have some sympathy for Obama. I don’t buy that leftist stuff, you know, Obama betrayed the Left. What did they expect, that Obama will introduce communism into the United States, or what? But what I like about Obama, which for me is a good operation, you remember, universal healthcare. He touched a very important point of American ideology.

Which was what?

Obviously, because certain Republicans even wanted to bring him to the Supreme Court. What I’m saying is that this is how we should proceed. Don’t say “big revolution.” You just select some specific point which in itself may appear a very modest one. It’s nothing special. You cannot accuse Obama of communism, my god. Canada has [universal healthcare], most of Western Europe has it. But in American conditions, this means, obviously, something quite strong. And I think this is what we should be doing today. Not dream about big revolution, or whatever, but pick out the dramatic points of each system.