(TRUNEWS) President Barack Hussein Obama, also know by the name Barry Soetoro, spoke to a group of young Germans before departing back to the US on his European Tour. He stated that:

I want to begin with an observation that, given the challenges that we face in the world and the headlines we see every day, may seem improbable, but it’s true. We are fortunate to be living in the most peaceful, most prosperous, most progressive era in human history.

The next day the 2009 Nobel Peace Prize winner ordered the insertion of 250 more troops into the no-win, US-created scenario in Syria. These are the troops that weren’t supposed to be there, because the President had promised that there would be ‘no boots on the ground’, a promise he made in 2013 and again in 2014, and which the State Department tried to deny on Tuesday.

The President continued his remarks, saying we still need to be careful, and we REALLY need to watch out for the current ‘bad-guy’, Russia:

Now, that doesn’t mean that we can be complacent because today dangerous forces do threaten to pull the world backward, and our progress is not inevitable. These challenges threaten Europe and they threaten our transatlantic community. We’re not immune from the forces of change around the world. As they have elsewhere, barbaric terrorists have slaughtered innocent people in Paris and Brussels, and Istanbul and San Bernardino, California. And we see these tragedies in places central to our daily lives — an airport or café, a workplace or a theater — and it unsettles us. It makes us unsure in our day-to-day lives — fearful not just for ourselves but those that we love. Conflicts from South Sudan to Syria to Afghanistan have sent millions fleeing, seeking the relative safety of Europe’s shores, but that puts new strains on countries and local communities, and threatens to distort our politics. Russian aggression has flagrantly violated the sovereignty and territory of an independent European nation, Ukraine, and that unnerves our allies in Eastern Europe, threatening our vision of a Europe that is whole, free and at peace. And it seems to threaten the progress that’s been made since the end of the Cold War.

Russian is the cause of world instability, not remarks such as the following threatening to destroy North Korea:

The Community-Organizer-In-Chief finished up his remarks with a strong-arm sales pitch urging the continued development of a stronger European Union: