When President Bill Clinton signed it on a sun-splashed, celebratory day more than two decades ago, he dubbed it the “toughest and smartest crime bill in our history.”

The legislation included an infusion of funding for 100,000 new cops, almost $10 billion for new prisons and a “three strikes and you’re out” provision mandating that repeat violent offenders be sentenced to life behind bars. The goal of the legislation was to prevent crime, punish criminals and “restore a sense of safety and security” throughout the country.

“We together are taking a big step toward bringing the laws of our land back into line with the values of our people and beginning to restore the line between right and wrong. There must be no doubt about whose side we’re on,” Clinton said in 1994, with his wife seated behind him on an elevated podium on the White House lawn.

Now, in the wake of a rash of African-American deaths at the hands of white police officers under often questionable circumstances, Hillary Clinton – the former first lady turned two-time Democratic presidential candidate – is scrapping a hard-nosed policy her husband cited as one of the reasons he sought the office.

“We have allowed our criminal justice system to get out of balance,” she said Wednesday at Columbia University in New York, in the first major policy rollout of her two-and-a-half week old White House campaign. “We have to come to terms with some hard truths about race and justice in America."

[READ: 2016 Contenders Tread Carefully on Baltimore Riots]

After apparently doing so herself, Clinton unveiled a sweeping set of proposed criminal justice reforms that would dismantle much of what her husband did. They include making body cameras mandatory for police departments, applying alternative sentences for lower-level offenses and tweaking probation requirements and restrictions.

If Bill’s approach was dubbed tough on crime, Hillary’s change can be seen as a response to a time of renewed racial strife. Whereas Bill looked to lock up offenders and throw away the key, Hillary is seeking to “end mass incarceration.” His focus was on resources for law enforcement; hers is on transparency meant to protect suspects.

Bill promoted zero tolerance, while Hillary is inclined to lend a second chance.

“Keeping them behind bars does little to reduce crime, but it does a lot to tear apart families,” she said of children guilty of nonviolent offenses.

The turnabout says as much about the sea change in the country’s current political bloodstream as it says about the Clintons. In the 1990s, Bill Clinton felt he needed to look tough on crime to allay fears among jittery suburban white voters. Now, criminal justice reform is a bipartisan cause, one that caters to the increasingly diverse Democratic base but is also sellable to the general public. In fact, Clinton on Wednesday name-checked Sen. Rand Paul, R-Ky., a tenacious critic and Republican rival, for his own work toward justice reforms. Advancements in technology – especially the ability of passersby to capture video on a phone – has also undoubtedly altered public opinion, bringing to light law enforcement’s harshest tactics in vivid form.

Additionally, a mountain of steady research has demonstrated that a portion of Bill Clinton’s crime package backfired. Researchers have only found a slight correlation between incarceration and lower crime rates and last year, a researcher with the Brennan Center for Justice at the New York University School of Law wrote that “in hindsight, it is evident that federal crime bill funding shifted policy towards over-punishment and mass incarceration.”

On Wednesday, Hillary Clinton did not put a price tag on her proposals and left details about how she’d structure her changes for another day. But she signaled that she wants to use federal funds to bolster best practices of “smart policing” at the local level, rather than to “buy weapons of war that have no place on our streets.”

In the aftermath of the fatal shooting of 18-year-old Michael Brown in Ferguson, Missouri, authorities employed SWAT teams, assault rifles and armored vehicles to patrol the streets and corral demonstrators, which led to calls for the “demilitarization” of local cops.

In a measured but compelling tone, Clinton also spoke about placing mental health back at the top of the national conversation regarding crime.

“Our prisons and our jails are now our mental health institutions,” she lamented, without ever mentioning her husband’s policy that fomented the incarceration escalation.

[READ: Why Hillary Clinton's Campaign Rollout Worked]

These were Clinton’s first extensive remarks since violence broke out in Baltimore over the death of Freddie Gray, the 25-year-old who suffered a severe spinal injury while in police custody and died on April 19.

A lone tweet she sent on Monday night was knocked by detractors as insufficient given the gravity of the moment. Meanwhile, former Maryland Gov. Martin O’Malley, a likely 2016 Democratic opponent, jetted back early from an overseas trip to walk the looted, fiery streets with community organizers. He took heat from assorted residents for his own policing record, but nonetheless looked like a politician ready to enter the cauldron of chaos rather than pass judgment on it from the safe distance behind a podium and under the ivory tower.

In her speech, Clinton called for an end to the violence that has led to a curfew in Baltimore and recognized the police officers on the streets who were inspiring confidence and trust. But it was her willingness to redirect U.S. policy that proved both more substantive and in line with her strengths. Clinton may not be able to feel one’s pain quite like her husband, but she’s in her element prescribing a wonky solution to the ailment.

She even managed to connect criminal justice with the other issue du jour – economic inequality – unleashing a bit of her own rhetorical flourish by condemning “the inequality that stalks our streets.”

Clinton acknowledged that tackling inequities in the system is not a new challenge, just a more vivid one, given the cascade of events from Ferguson to North Charleston, South Carolina, and now to Baltimore. A Clinton campaign aide tells U.S. News while the venue for this speech was set last year, current events drove the topic. There was simply no way for her to avoid the dominant issue that's been splashed across television screens for the past three days.

Her opponents will say her moves are just par for the Clintonian course: that she’s again being carried by the political winds, and acting too slowly and too conveniently given her current aspirations.

But Republicans weren’t rushing to tear down Clinton’s reversal.

More than an hour after her speech had concluded, neither the Republican National Committee nor America Rising – the leading GOP opposition research outfit – had uttered a peep about it.

Still, a spokesman for Paul couldn’t resist needling Clinton for her reversal.