Once Congress reopened the federal government and averted an economic disaster, many Republicans were eager to get a little distance from Texas Sen. Ted Cruz.

But the Republican candidates for Texas attorney general can’t get close enough.

Just two days after the shutdown deal, candidate Ken Paxton announced that he had recruited Kaye T. Goolsby to his campaign team.

The veteran organizer was statewide grass-roots director for Cruz’s 2012 Senate campaign, a fact that the news release from Paxton, a state senator from McKinney, made sure to point out. Goolsby will be chairman of his statewide leadership team.

Cruz’s effort to get Republicans to subscribe to an ill-fated strategy of trying to defund the Affordable Care Act made him one of the most divisive political figures in the country. His approval ratings are dismal among many voter groups.

But in the Lone Star State, fellow Republicans are treating the junior senator’s name like gold.

Nowhere is that more evident than the race for attorney general. Candidates have taken most of the summer to roll out various endorsements. Supporters with connections to Cruz get all-star treatment.

“Cruz is popular in Texas, and it’s a nod to the influence of the tea party,” said Dallas County Republican Party Chairman Wade Emmert. “Whenever you look at running statewide, the rural areas come into play. And the tea party and Ted Cruz are extremely influential in the state’s rural areas.”

Lawyers and politicians associated with Cruz are sought after more than most.

Rep. Dan Branch, R-Dallas, recently developed a “constitutional leadership team” that included a list of 10 of Cruz’s former legal and campaign advisers.

Branch, one of the top Republicans in the Texas House, is trying to shore up his tea party support.

Paxton is banking his campaign on his tea party connections. The third major candidate, Railroad Commission Chairman Barry Smitherman, is trying to get to the right of anyone in the race.

The way it’s going, Texas GOP candidates may start adding Cruz’s valet, mechanic and the barista who makes his coffee to their list of supporters.

So why are GOP strongholds like Texas so enamored of Cruz, even as he plummets elsewhere? Texas Republicans dislike President Barack Obama, the Affordable Care Act, U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder and Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev.

Though his tactics are questionable, Cruz has become the anti-Obama.

“It’s two sides of the same coin,” Emmert said. “It’s the popularity of Cruz along with the unpopularity of President Obama, the Justice Department and Eric Holder.”

It’s only fitting that the attorney general’s race be flavored by Cruz.

In 2010, when Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison was expected to resign to fully focus on running for governor, triggering a host of down-ballot moves, Cruz and Branch were candidates to replace Greg Abbott as attorney general.

But Hutchison stayed put, eventually losing the race for governor. And when she decided against another term in the Senate, Cruz, a former solicitor general under Abbott, decided to run for Senate instead of waiting to see if the attorney general’s post would open.

Now it has. But Cruz is in the Senate and has become the most popular Republican in Texas.

And with the exception of his barber, everyone associated with him is in demand.

Follow Gromer Jeffers Jr. on Twitter at @gromerjeffers.