Topics: From the Wires, News

NEW YORK (AP) — They could be riding with unsuspecting New Yorkers on the subway. Or behind the wheel in a car in midtown Manhattan traffic. Or mingling with revelers at the New Year’s Eve celebration in Times Square.

They are the New York Police Department’s plainclothes officers — a legion of law enforcers with a mandate to blend into everyday life and spring into action at the earliest signs of trouble. It’s a less visible, proactive role that can run risks for police, as demonstrated by last weekend’s shooting of Officer Brian Moore.

Police officials won’t say exactly how many of the department’s roughly 20,000-officer patrol force turn out each day wearing street clothes instead of the NYPD’s dark blue uniform, though former officers and experts believe it’s well into the hundreds.

The distinction goes beyond mere apparel. Unlike regular patrol officers whose job revolves around responding to 911 calls, the plainclothes officers are expected to catch criminals in the act — or even before they act.

Part of the role is to target “the small segment of the population that commits most of the crime in New York City,” Chief of Department James O’Neill told The Associated Press. Another, he added, is “looking for people who might have guns, and that’s what happened to Brian.”

Moore, 25, and his partner were on patrol in an unmarked Ford Crown Victoria in Queens on the night of May 2 when police say they noticed Demetrius Blackwell on the street grabbing at his waistband. After the officers pulled up near the suspect and Moore identified himself as a police officer, he asked, “Do you have something in your waistband?” authorities said.

Blackwell allegedly replied, “Yeah, I got something,” pulled out a handgun and fired three times at the officers, striking Moore in the head and cheek.

The suspect, who has done prison time for robbery, was later caught and charged with murder. He has pleaded not guilty.

The killing follows the January shooting of two plainclothes officers in the Bronx while they were investigating an armed robbery at a grocery store. An intense manhunt ended in two arrests.

All three officers were part of roving anti-crime units housed in each of the city’s 77 precincts. Similar units are deployed in the subways. The department also uses plainclothes officers when policing New Year’s Eve, parades and protests such as Occupy Wall Street.

The department has also used the officers in decoy operations — pretending to be careless subway riders — in response to spikes in thefts of smartphones and other electronic devices on the subways. But that’s as close as they come to actual undercover work, which involves assuming a false identity as part of an ongoing investigation.

Those in the anti-crime units — considered a career path to getting a detective’s gold shield — are selected because they’ve displayed a greater willingness to put themselves in harm’s way and an eye for identifying suspects, said former NYPD commander Kevin Perham.