DONATING to BoHo for Women's Shelter To donate: Donations to BOHO for the Women's Shelter may be made online at www.boulderboho.org or by mail to P.O. Box 1393 Boulder 80306.

When she first became homeless, one young woman sought out help from other homeless people who seemed to know the ropes. But her trust was betrayed.

"A sexual assault occurred," said the woman, who did not want her name used.

It was hard for her to feel comfortable in the mixed-gender sleeping environment of the Boulder Outreach for Homeless Overflow. The Boulder Shelter for the Homeless, which maintains separate sleeping quarters for men and women, was still too noisy and anxiety-inducing.

For now, though, she has found a haven at the Women's Shelter program, an extension of BOHO that is providing summer shelter at a rotating set of churches and synagogues this summer just for women.

"It's nice to go to a place where a guy isn't going to pretend to help me and then try to feel me up in the middle of the night," she said. "It's just nice to only have women. The staff will talk to you and sit by you. It's nice to not worry about camping tickets."

The shelter houses between 15 and 18 women a night. Admission is by application only. That means the participants are known in the local homeless community as people who can get along with others, and it allows for a more "dignified" environment — in the words of coordinator Nancy Jordan, who was once homeless herself — one where bags don't have to be searched and program participants don't have to be patted down.

Advertisement

The small size also makes for a better night's sleep, Jordan said.

In other shelter environments, "You're dealing with people walking by, you're dealing with men who might be predatory, you're dealing with people who might be high," Jordan said.

Jordan said the idea for the women's shelter evolved over time. BOHO doesn't separate men and women, in part so that couples who are homeless can stay together, but that meant that single women, many of whom have histories of abuse and trauma, didn't always feel comfortable.

"There has been a calling for it," Jordan said.

BOHO experimented with a separate women's section and sometimes with entirely separate locations for women who wanted that.

The Women's Shelter program started as a pilot in January and become fully operation in June. The staff are all women, too, a decision that was made to ensure women would feel safe.

BOHO board member Bill Sweeney said the organization hopes to make the Women's Shelter a permanent program, but that will depend on funding and the cooperation of participating congregations once the overflow shelter starts again in the fall.

Right now, the Women's Shelter, as well as the Summer Sleep program at Har Hashem synagogue, are funded through the end of September, Sweeney said.

And BOHO will continue to maintain separate women's sections for those who want them in its regular overflow shelters, he said.

Another guest of the Women's Shelter, who, like all the women interviewed, did not want to give her name, said she slept on rooftops and balcony overhangs and in Boulder Canyon to keep herself safe.

"It's hard to know who you can trust, especially as a woman," she said. "You don't necessarily want to be next to a bunch of guys who are not your husband or your boyfriend. This was seriously needed. I have never felt rested in four and a half years. Now I feel rested, just from not having the worries. I hope they can continue it."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Erica Meltzer at 303-473-1355 or meltzere@dailycamera.com.