IRS head John Koskinen - at a big tax forum - drove home the point that under his administration, all taxpayers will be treated fairly and that qualified non-profits will get their tax exempt statuses approved within weeks, not months. But he also said this essentially to the government: you want a better agency? Give us more resources.

"Use of improper criteria to select applications for review: it was a mistake, and should never happen again. And to help ensure that, we have accepted all recommendations of the inspector general."

It was the first thing IRS Commissioner Koskinen talked about when addressing 2,000 tax professionals from around the country attending a forum in San Diego: the controversy involving the agency's alleged targeting of certain non-profits in approving their tax exempt status. Former IRS employee Lois Lerner claimed her hard drive crashed and she lost two years of e-mails. And in 2013, she pled the 5th in front of a Congressional committee conducting an investigation - setting off a legislative fire storm.

"You don't get to tell your side of the story and then not be subjected to cross examination," said Representative Trey Goudy of South Carolina. "That's not the way it works. She waived her 5th Amendment right by her opening statements; she ought to stay here and answer our questions."

Then in 2014, she did it again.

"Are you still seeking a one week delay in order to testify?" Queried Darrell Issa

"On the advice of my counsel, I invoke the 5th amendment right and decline to answer that question," replied Lerner.

Koskinen told his audience he wants to upgrade the agency's IT system to prepare for all the changes the Affordable Care Act will bring. But what about making sure hard drives don't crash and hundreds of e-mails are saved? Koskinen says the IRS needs more funding.

"We ought to have an e-mail system of record that's easily securable. We should not have to spend $18 million responding to a rage of inquires. That's what we spent."

Koskinen talked about his goals of regulating unlicensed tax preparers and making the customer call-in process easier. And how does Koskinen - with 20 years in the private sector, but just 7 months in this job - plan to improve the image of the IRS? He says by empowering people on the front lines.

"I'm spending a lot of time getting the culture to a point where people are comfortable. That bad news is good news - we don't shoot messengers, we thank them. The way we'll be transparent is if the entire organization is comfortable that that's a good thing."

Last week, as part of a federal lawsuit, two judges ordered the IRS to hand over information about those lost e-mails and Commissioner Koskinen said he complied. And he said that so far in 2014, there have been 2,000 hard drive crashes in the agency. So, the problem remains.