The recent defeat of Democratic Sen. Mary Landrieu by Republican Rep. Bill Cassidy means the Senate is losing one of its strongest supporters of education reform, and of charter schools in particular.

Soon after entering the Senate in 1997, Landrieu joined with Democratic colleagues such as Joseph Lieberman, Evan Bayh and John Breaux to reimagine the federal role in education. Their fundamental objective was granting states more freedom and flexibility in exchange for results, a concept that led to the bipartisan passage of what is now known as the No Child Left Behind Act. Landrieu also seized the mantle of public charter schools like no other senator, even before New Orleans was hit by Hurricane Katrina and jumpstarted its recovery by turning all its schools into charter schools. She pushed hard for myriad projects aimed at supporting the growth of charter schools throughout the nation.



[GALLERY: Editorial Cartoons on the 2014 Congressional Elections]

To Landrieu, the fight for charters was at the heart of the struggle to put the word “public” back into public education. She understood that the only way to catapult children out of poverty is by offering them a high-quality education – and that the only way to offer this education is by encouraging entrepreneurs to open new schools energized by new thinking and proven practices. Landrieu used her perch on the Senate Appropriations Committee to ensure that funds were reaching these innovative schools.

While Landrieu likely will continue to play a role in education reform, her exit comes at a pivotal moment for reform-minded Democrats on the national stage. The party has traditionally had an edge over Republicans in the area of education reform, yet the centrist think tank Third Way has found that, as Politico reported, “voters see Democrats as defending the status quo and they’re not happy with that status quo.” Just two years ago, Democrats held a 26-point advantage over Republicans on education, but according to Pew Research, the gap has narrowed to just 5 points.

The Senate’s Democratic caucus has other education reformers – notably New Jersey Sen. Cory Booker and Colorado Sen. Michael Bennet. It’s now up to them to take over Landrieu’s role as a reform leader, and in the process help their party regain its edge. But they have work to do.



[SEE: Political Cartoons on the Economy]