Aiming to address housing situation this year

Trae Miller, second from right, the new executive director of the Logan County Economic Development Corporation, visits with assistant director Laurie Jones, LCEDC board president Gary Nichols, left, and board member Patrick Lawson following the organization's annual meeting Thursday. ( Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate )

STERLING — A small crowd gathered in Northeastern Junior College's Tennant Art Gallery Thursday evening for Logan County Economic Development Corporation's annual meeting.

During the meeting Gary Nichols, president of the LCEDC board of directors, welcomed the organization's new executive director, Trae Miller, who officially starts his new job Monday, and thanked Laurie Jones, assistant director of LCEDC, who served as the organization's interim director for most of last year.

"I'm very excited about this new position. I'm excited about all the things that are going on in Sterling, in our community," Miller told the audience. "I look forward to continuing that momentum and seeing what else we can do here over the next year."

Nichols said he thinks Miller and Jones will make a "very dynamic team."

"We've got a young guy with a lot of ambition, a lot of good ideas and Laurie with some experience in that area and I think it's going to be a real good match for us."

Before introducing Miller, Nichols talked about what LCEDC has done over the past year, including assisting 32 prospects with site selection, economic data and trends, incentive information and other requests. They are currently working on 10 development projects.

"Primarily what we're dealing with right now is a lot of interest in oil and gas exploration and the hospitality industry," Nichols said.

LCEDC has also been involved in two USDA funded projects, a Camelina feasibility study and a seed cup marketing plan.

Advertisement

Nichols mentioned LCEDC's ongoing involvements as well, including communicating and coordinating efforts with the city and county, working with the Citizen Advisory Committee to beautify Sterling, serving on the Logan County Chamber of Commerce Board of Directors, and supporting the Small Business Development Center, which in the past year was successful in helping 55 clients with 24 jobs retained/created and created $2.061 million in capital formation.

More recently, LCEDC has also been working with a new organization, Northeast Colorado Economic Developers.

"We are working with our areas in northeastern Colorado to coordinate a strategy for broadband, transportation, housing and other regional issues," Nichols said.

Housing and lodging came up quite a bit during Nichols' presentation. He noted LCEDC is currently dealing with multiple hotel projects in the planning or due diligence stages.

"There's a real demand out there for new quality lodging rooms in our community," Nichols said, adding, "We have somewhat of housing shortage going on, the housing stock that we have is rather old, we don't have a lot of new home construction gong on or a lot of apartment complexes available for new residents."

To help fix that problem LCEDC is planning to do a housing study to recruit developers and contractors. Jones said the housing study will be posted next week and they are planning to host a roundtable to get input.

"We need to get talking about this," she said. "Even today I've had a phone call from someone wanting to purchase some apartment buildings and things that are already for sale and they're calling to say, 'is it time to do that?' And I say 'absolutely, it's time to do that.' So, we need some input on what to do to get new housing built."

"It's like a stepping stone and if we can get this thing rolling, I think we're going to start seeing a lot of other things falling into place."

LCEDC's other plans for 2015 include staying engaged with current projects and responding to and reacting to changing oil prices and gas markets. Nichols pointed out the change in oil prices recently hasn't diminished the interest LCEDC has seen from oil and gas businesses wanting to come to Sterling.

Additionally, the organization plans to involve local business, property owners, the city and county leadership to create conditions for economic growth, and continue to support the SBDC mission to help new and existing businesses.

Nichols' presentation also included a financial update, which showed LCEDC's total revenue decreased from $172,208 in 2013 to $115,523 in 2014.

"Some of that had to do with being kind of in a transition period, where we were working on recruiting a new economic development director," he said. "It looks promising that we're going to be able to improve on some the revenue streams for next year."

The organizations total expenditures decreased as well, from $164,449 in 2013 to $143,458 in 2014.

"We did have a deficit this past year, we had to dip into our reserves, but we had a pretty good response to our membership renewals going into this year," Nichols said.

The organization's fund balance was $249,296 at the beginning of 2014 and $221,361 at the end of the year.

"Economic development is on sound finances going forward, we do have the resources to kind of keep our operation going and hopefully improve on the revenue part of it," Nichols said.

He shared a few economic highlights for the area, noting the city of Sterling's retail sale tax collections were $241,639,400 in 2014, an 11.1 percent increase from 2013; Logan County's sales tax increased 8.5 percent to $3,185,594 in 2014; and hotel lodging revenues increased 49.7 percent to $6,892,187.

Additionally, Nichols noted Sterling Workforce Center currently has 160 job orders for 70 employers. In 2014, the center filled 1,100 employer orders.

He also talked about the unemployment rate, which decreased from 5.7 percent in January 2014 to 3.0 percent in 2014, and the average starting salary for this area, which is $40,000 for Sterling, $32,000 for Logan County.

Nichols mentioned population growth as well. In 2015, the county population is project at 23,730 and by 2025 it's expected to increase to 29,042. He said reaching the 30,000 population level is "rather significant, because a lot of industries and retail establishments, businesses look at the 30,000 benchmark to kind of fit within their parameters. So if we get over that I think we're going to be attractive to a lot more industries and retail type businesses."

Northeastern Colorado is projected to have a population of 111,375 by 2040.

At the end of the meeting Rashell Fritzler, treasurer; Darren Gebhart, secretary; and Terry Sanger were re-elected to the board of directors. Other board members include: Jay Lee, vice president; Dale Bedsaul; Heather Brungardt; Shanan Doherty; Patrick Lawson; Bob McCarty; Rich Robirds; Rocky Samber; Terry Sanger; Alex Wright; and ex-officio members Don Saling and Kim Sellers.

Callie Jones: 970-526-9286, cjones@journal-advocate.com