In the beginning, there was ‘if you like your plan and your doctor, you can keep them.' For five years, the President promoted this lie to the country. Now the President is promoting, ‘most people will get a better plan, for the most, for the same, or less cost.’

There’s a reality associated with this latest assessment and that reality states without challenge, that too is another promotional lie on behalf the President. Under the old health care laws of the land, the individual purchased insurance, based on his or her needs. Under the affordable care act, everybody is purchasing coverage that covers society as a whole and that’s not, in any way, shape, form or fashion, less costly.

When a man’s coverage includes birth control, contraceptives and other female related health issues, in no way is that going to be cheaper for him. This coverage, on behalf of the male segment of society, should be a legal challenge before the courts.

Hobby Lobby and several others are challenging the law based on religious beliefs, why not challenge the law on the bases of male and female genetic makeup. Certainly, there are better ways of obtaining funds to provide health care for society, other than, requiring society to take care of those, who either refuse to, or either, can’t take care of their own health care insurance.

The most important aspect of any society is contribution and this is another face of the affordable care act nobody wants to talk about. There is indeed a panel that will decide if and when a particular service is warranted and this will be solely depended upon contribution to society. This is where the IRS comes into play. Who can better determine contributions to society, other than the Internal Revenue Service?

Another face of this affordable care is the deductible scam, which are extremely high, but serves a very important service. For the young and healthy, they will never use their health care until their deductible is satisfied. For the middle aged insured, they will pay the deductible, plus premiums and still have to face the health care panel. For seniors, well, now that’s where the panel earns it’s money. Their contributions to society is over and as such, they are now recipients.

It’s called reality.