LOS ANGELES — Justin Morneau’s slim lead in the National League batting title is safe for now, which is a big part of the reason why the Rockies’ first baseman is not in the starting lineup for Saturday night’s game against the Dodgers.

Asked if he would consider sitting Morneau in Sunday’s season finale should Morneau enter that game with a lead, manager Walt Weiss answered: “We’ll see where he stands at that point. … He has worked very hard to put himself in this position.

“I mean, people talk about backing into a batting title and all of that stuff. I don’t think there is such a thing. It takes six months to win it. How do you back into something that takes six months to win? But he’s had a great, great year. It would be the icing on the cake.”

After going 1-for-3 with a two-run home run on Friday night, Morneau boosted his average to .319. Pittsburgh’s Josh Harrison went 1-for-4 in the Pirates’ 10-6 loss at Cincinnati Saturday afternoon. Harrison is hitting .318. Pirates teammate Andrew McCutchen went 1-for-3, maintaining a .314 average.

Weiss also said that sitting Morneau also was based on his desire to get call-up Kyle Parker a start before the season ends. Parker starts in right field Saturday night, while Michael Cuddyer mans first base.

“I have been looking for a chance to start Kyle and I haven’t been able to do that,” Weiss said. “I’m just trying to get some guys out there who haven’t gotten a lot of playing time down the stretch.”

LeMahieu scheduled for MRI: Second baseman DJ LeMahieu, who sprained the medial collateral ligament of his left knee in the sixth inning of Friday night’s game, will miss the final two games of the season. He will undergo and MRI on Monday to make sure there is no major damage.

“It still hurts. It hurts to walk,” LeMahieu said. “I don’t think it’s anything serious, and neither does Doogie (trainer Keith Dugger), but we need to check it out.”

Dugger said: “No, I don’t think it’s serious, but when you take a player out of the middle of the game and he’s still hurt the next day, you have to make sure you check it out. Right now, we think it’s a sprained ligament.”

Dugger added that he didn’t think LeMahiue will need surgery, but said the MRI will confirm that.

Cuddy power: During batting practice before Saturday’s game, Cuddyer hit a home run that bounced off roof above the left-field bleachers and out of the ballpark. Cuddyer got fist-bumps all around for his mammoth blow.

As Ken Gurnick, the Dodgers beat writer for MLB.com said, “That never happens!”

Press box wonks were guessing the ball traveled 470-480 feet.