More evidence for teapartiers that Boehner is enabling the Obama tyranny

More evidence for teapartiers that Boehner is enabling the Obama tyranny

Remember just a few short months ago when House Speaker John Boehner proudly announced his plan to file a lawsuit against President Obama to restore democracy and save America from the tyranny of the president's lawless dictatorship?

Well, that was then. Now, it's nearly the end of October—just two months away from the lawsuit becoming moot (since it seeks to force Obama to implement the employer mandate before January 1, 2015)—but Boehner has yet to file it and his often won't say when or why.



A spokesman for Boehner said the date for filing the litigation remains up in the air. “No decisions on timing at this point,” spokesman Kevin Smith said Friday. He declined to comment on speculation about the reasons for the delay.

I believe the president is not faithfully executing the laws of our country. [...] This is about his faithfully executing the laws of this country.

While early on Boehner said that the suit would focus on a delay Obama ordered in enforcement of the law’s employer mandate, sources say lawyers are now considering expanding the case beyond the originally announced subject because the mandate is likely to soon start to go into effect and because there might be more effective targets.

Back in June, Boehner said his lawsuit was about nothing less than saving the country from President Obama's refusal to follow the law:He did not initially say what the focus of his lawsuit would be, but when he revealed that it would focus on the president's delay of Obamacare's employer mandate, the architects of his legal theory said that if the courts refused to hear the lawsuit, impeachment would be the only option . But now the issue isn't that the courts are refusing to hear it, it's that Boehner himself is refusing to file it. And apparently he's considering changing the focus of the suit:That's a polite way of saying that with just two months left before the mandate kicks in, there's no point filing a lawsuit about it since the objective of the lawsuit would be to force the mandate to kick in before New Year's Day. To put it another way: If Boehner doesn't change the focus of the lawsuit, there won't be any lawsuit at all.Whatever happens, this much is 100 percent clear: Boehner's lawsuit was about politics all along. If he does file something, it will be because he's too scared to stand up to the lunatic demands of his base, not because he honestly thinks President Obama is a threat to the Republic. If he actually believed anything he said when coming up with the lawsuit in the first place, it would have been filed long ago.