Not everyone realizes it yet, but the apparent success of the "cromnibus" legislative vehicle to fund most of the federal government through September 30, 2015 is a major victory for the conservatives who now make up the overwhelming majority of the Republican Party in Congress.

The Consolidated and Further Continuing Appropriations Act of 2015 – the formal designation for the combined continuing resolution and omnibus funding bill – maintains the Ryan-Murray spending caps of $521 billion for defense and $492 billion for non-defense spending. It also leaves the Department of Homeland Security as the only agency not funded through the end of the fiscal year. So unless President Barack Obama is willing to go to the mattresses over his plan to give 5 million illegal aliens temporary legal status, and many people are betting he isn’t, the legislation makes a government shutdown highly unlikely.



[SEE: Cartoons on Congress]

There’s some grumbling on the right, of course, but that is to be expected. It’s not a perfect vehicle and not, one hopes, what would have been put forward if there had been a Republican president in office ready to sign legislation sent up Pennsylvania Avenue by a Republican House and Senate. Nevertheless it is a strategic victory that strengthens the hand of the GOP, even at the expense of what are arguably tactical setbacks.

It includes no new funding for Obamacare. It prohibits the transfer or release of detainees held at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba into the United States, meaning no civilian trials. It blocks funding of the risk corridors that, under the Affordable Care Act, could lead to a government bailout of the insurance companies. It maintains all the existing pro-life policy and funding provisions and adds three more while cutting the funds for the Independent Payment Advisory Board (which is the body that would be recommending any rationing of health care) by $10 million.

The bill also cuts funding for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency by $60 million, which is the fifth consecutive year the agency’s budget has been cut and may finally convince the bureaucrats who run the place they cannot go beyond what they are legally authorized to do without congressional approval. And it hits the Internal Revenue Service particularly hard, cutting its allocation of federal dollars by $345.6 million, prohibiting it from targeting organizations because of the way they chose to exercise their First Amendment rights or on an ideological basis, punishes it for its profligate abuse of taxpayer dollars on expensive, needless videos and conferences at luxury resorts, and prohibits the White House from ordering the review of any organization's tax exempt status.



[SEE: Political Cartoons on Democrats]