Some conservatives balk at Confederate flag debate

The Republican establishment has lined up swiftly behind calls to remove the Confederate battle flag from public spaces in the wake of last week’s racially charged massacre in Charleston, South Carolina.

But some on the party’s right wing have sounded alarms that the pressure to revisit the Civil War and its historical wounds could lead in dangerous directions.

Story Continued Below

Southern lawmakers in both parties have taken action to either remove or to urge the removal of Confederate symbols, like the battle flag from South Carolina’s statehouse grounds. And retailers, from Amazon to Sears, have announced that they will no longer sell Confederate-themed merchandise.

The shift has been remarkable: In Alabama, Republican Gov. Robert Bentley on Wednesday ordered four Confederate flags to come down from a Civil War memorial near the statehouse. Tennessee Democrats said earlier this week that a bust of a Confederate lieutenant general and an important figure in the founding of the Ku Klux Klan has no place inside their Capitol. Mississippi’s junior Republican senator, Roger Wicker, said the state’s current flag depicting the rebel-flag emblem belongs in a museum, urging the creation of a flag that represents all Mississippians. In Virginia, Democratic Gov. Terry McAuliffe announced this week that the state will recall all license plates with the Confederate flag at no charge to holders within the next 90 days, giving drivers with the Sons of the Confederacy plates another 30 days to get a new one without the emblem.

A few lonely voices on the right, though, are saying: Enough is enough.

Neoconservative pundit Bill Kristol, for instance, supported the battle flag’s removal but has slammed liberals for what he called their efforts to “expung[e] every trace of respect, recognition or acknowledgment of Americans who fought for the Confederacy.”

“Next, [the] Left will ban teaching of Lincoln’s Second Inaugural in schools. None of that ‘with malice toward none, with charity for all’ stuff…,” Kristol tweeted Tuesday.

“A cause can be unjust but some of its defenders honorable. Its defeat can be a very good thing but reconciliation can be worthwhile as well,” he then tweeted Wednesday, hours after an appearance on MSNBC’s “Morning Joe” in which he cautioned against the “Orwellian rewriting of history.”

Rush Limbaugh has gone further, calling the fight to have the battle flag removed an “attempt to segregate and isolate the entire South and to sort of Alinsky it.”

“You know, the Rules for Radicals,” Limbaugh said on his Tuesday show, referring to the late left-wing activist Saul Alinsky. “You seek the target, you isolate it, you attack it, humiliate it.”

And even after the flag does come down, that will not be enough, Limbaugh added: The American flag is next.

“The American flag is what? It’s the symbol of America. The left what? Doesn’t like this country very much and never has and it’s getting angrier and angrier about it seemingly every day. The American flag stands for the United States of America and, as such, everything that’s wrong with it,” he told listeners.

“The American flag has flown over a slave nation much longer than the Confederate flag did, folks. The American flag has flown over all kinds of atrocities,” he noted.

Conservative provocateur Ann Coulter, appearing on Fox Business Network, denied that the flag had any connection to the Charleston shooting or any racist connection at all, and attacked South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley for her call for its removal.

“I’m appalled by — though I’d really like to like Nikki Haley since she is a Republican,” Coulter said. “On the other hand, she is an immigrant and does not understand America’s history.” (Haley was born in the United States.)

Others argued the flag issue was diverting attention from more pressing matters.

Glenn Beck, who agreed that the flag should come down in South Carolina, said on his radio program, “If this is the biggest thing we’ve got going on in our country, we’ve got a sweet, sweet life.”

Beck ticked through national problems, ranging from Obamacare to the threat of global terrorism, before asking, “And we’re talking about the Confederate flag? Are you kidding me?”

South Carolina state Sen. Lee Bright, Republican presidential contender Ted Cruz’s campaign co-chair in the state, earlier this week likened removing the flag from the state Capitol to a “Stalinist purge.”

“It’s not just the flag,” Bright told POLITICO on Tuesday. “They want to take down the Confederate monuments, I’ve gotten emails from people who want to rename streets … anytime you want to basically remove the symbols of history from a state, that’s something that just is very bad … These are honorable men who fought for their homes, their home state, to disgrace them in the name of political correctness is just wrong. They’re not here to defend themselves.”

Fox News’ Bill O’Reilly, speaking to center-left pundit Juan Williams on Monday, laid out his view of why some conservatives are so upset about the debate over the flag.

“It represents bravery [in war]” to them, O’Reilly said.

“You know as well as I do that it represents, to some, bravery in the Civil War because the Confederates fought hard,” O’Reilly told Williams. “You’re right historically, but in their minds, that’s what it represents. And in your mind it represents hate. So, and everybody should know what the two sides are believing.”