Image (Photo: Image)

Community Health Alliance will no longer offer insurance coverage next year, forcing about 27,000 enrollees to find new health insurance plans.

The Knoxville-based health insurance cooperative, created under the Affordable Care Act, will continue to pay out existing claims but will wind down its coverage by not taking on new customers.

The decision was based on the co-op’s financial condition, according to the Tennessee Department of Commerce and Insurance, and ends months of uncertainty about its future. The alliance had stopped selling its plans on the federal exchange in January after its low-cost plans attracted more enrollees than expected, and their ability to handle the high volume came into question.

“This was not a decision that the Department took lightly, but it was the right decision,” Julie Mix McPeak, commerce and insurance commissioner, said in a statement. “With thousands of Tennesseans’ coverage hanging in the balance, CHA’s financial success could not be guaranteed. Ultimately, the risk of CHA’s potential failure in 2016 was too great and would have caused substantial detrimental effects on the market as a whole if it were to collapse.”

Policyholders will keep their insurance coverage through 2015 as long as premiums are paid. They must re-enroll in a new health care plan during the Open Enrollment period, which begins Nov. 1. To receive coverage in 2016, consumers must enroll by Dec. 15, according to the department. They will be able to choose from four remaining carriers on the federal marketplace, which they can shop for on www.Healthcare.gov.

The department said it was concerned about a new federal program aimed at helping health insurers and new information that emerged about the alliance. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, (CMS) a federal agency, sent a letter to the co-op in September, outlining concerns about its financial conditions.

The co-op, led by CEO Jeremy Burgess, gained approval for rate hikes in August that would have boosted rates to 44.7 percent, more than the 32.2 percent it requested. It was the largest rate hike for an insurance carrier.

Burgess, who could not be reached for comment, also runs a South Carolina-based co-op, Consumers' Choice Health Plan of South Carolina.

Community Health Alliance reported a net loss of $22 million at the end of 2014, and McPeak shared her concerns about the co-op's financial viability at a Congressional hearing in June.

The federally run marketplace has been an uncertain place for insurers to sell plans. Premiums are priced on claim history associated with a group of people and the risk associated with that collection. Carriers have been under pressure as policyholders have filed claims at higher volumes than expected.

BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee, which insures a large portion of the marketplace, lost $141 million on individual plans in 2014.

Community Health Alliance is among 23 co-ops established under the Affordable Care Act to bring more options into the health insurance marketplace. CoOportunity in Iowa has also been unable to support its growth and was liquidated.

CMS said that given their startup status, not all co-ops would succeed.

"CMS’ priority is to make sure that Marketplace customers have access to quality, affordable coverage through the Marketplace," CMS said in a statement. "We are working with Tennessee officials to do everything possible to make sure consumers stay covered.”

​As of June, 177,000 people in Tennessee were enrolled in coverage through the federal marketplace and about 85 percent have received a tax credit, according to CMS.

Reach Jamie McGee at 615-259-8071 and on Twitter @JamieMcGee_. Holly Fletcher also contributed to this report.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1Lu3Jyx