Medicare Advantage fight gets bigger than ever

MEDICARE ADVANTAGE FIGHT IS BIGGER THAN EVER — At least four organizations have joined the lobbying battle over Medicare Advantage, a fight with immense financial stakes - $170 billion annually, and growing each year.

The lobbying over MA payments has escalated thanks to two major factors, Pro's Nancy Cook and Paul Demko report: The Affordable Care Act called for deep MA cuts to bring program spending in alignment with traditional fee-for-service Medicare, while enrollment continues to grow faster than expected. The story for Pros: http://politico.pro/1SX0hR0

Story Continued Below

FIRST IN PULSE: PLANNED PARENTHOOD PUSHES BACK ON FLORIDA DEFUND EFFORT — Planned Parenthood is going up today with new television and digital ads pushing Florida Gov. Rick Scott to veto a sweeping new anti-abortion bill, Pro's Jennifer Haberkorn reports.

The ad campaign is Planned Parenthood’s first major pushback this year on state efforts to defund or undermine the organization, a trend that has risen dramatically since a series of sting videos was released last summer. The Florida bill would require abortion providers to have admitting privileges at a nearby hospital and only perform the procedure in ambulatory surgical centers — provisions very similar to the Texas requirements that are now before the Supreme Court. Planned Parenthood is making a six-figure ad buy, according to a spokeswoman who declined to be more specific.

— Read the story: http://politico.pro/1UloT76

— See the ad: http://bit.ly/1R39TY1

THANK GOODNESS IT's FRIDAY PULSE — where we're watching in awe as thousands of med students go through the panic of Match Day and discover their residency destinations at noon. Good news: If you're reading, you've already matched with PULSE today. Tips to ddiamond@politico.com or @ddiamond on Twitter.

With help from Jennifer Haberkorn and Sarah Karlin-Smith

WHAT DEMOCRATS ARE WATCHING: HOW MUCH WILL PhRMA COMPROMISE? — Before Stephen Ubl became PhRMA’s CEO in November, he was best known for leading the medical device lobby’s strident opposition to the ACA’s medical device tax, Pro's Sarah Karlin-Smith reports.

AdvaMed’s record — the medical device industry was the only health care sector that wouldn’t agree to pay for a part of the health care overhaul — has some on the Hill worried the drug industry may become more partisan and unwilling to compromise under Ubl’s tenure.

What Ubl says now: The PhRMA chief told POLITICO he won’t bend on certain matters of principle like government negotiation of drug prices in Medicare Part D. But he also said he wants to position the drug lobby as “a constructive participant” in the pricing discussion and will bring “pragmatic, pro-consumer solutions" to the table that address health care costs “holistically” and are embraced by Republicans and Democrats. Ubl rolled out PhRMA's drug pricing proposals last week, but the jury’s still out on how this one will play out. Sarah has more for Pros: http://politico.pro/1UEDWaT

7th CIRCUIT: HOSPITAL PLANS AREN’T CHURCH PLANS UNDER ERISA —The 7th Circuit Court of Appeals ruled that a religious-affiliated hospital is not exempt from ERISA, an issue that's divided lower courts. The 7th Circuit said that a church-affiliated hospital is not the same as a “church” health insurance plan that would be exempt from ERISA. The case was brought by several employees of Advocate Health Care Network in Illinois. The 3rd Circuit Court of Appeals issued a similar ruling recently.

The 7th Circuit ruling: http://1.usa.gov/1UjozFJ

SENATE HELP COMMITTEE TO MARKUP BILL TO IMPROVE FDA, NIH STAFFING — HELP Chair Sen. Lamar Alexander and Ranking Member Patty Murray introduced a bill on Thursday to help FDA and NIH attract and retain top scientists.

What's in the bill:

— Quadruples the number of people eligible for the Senior Biomedical Research Service from 500 to 2,000.

— Allows FDA and NIH employees in the program to receive pay higher than normal government pay scales.

— Eases FDA's ability to take advantage of the program, which is primarily used by NIH.

See the bill: http://1.usa.gov/1Z5Eyqv

What's next: The committee will markup the bill during its third and final hearing on legislation that will be compiled into a counterpart to the House’s 21st Century Cures Act.

What advocates are saying: BIO and the Friends of Cancer Research praised the proposal. "Improvements in human resources management and capability are essential if the FDA is to ensure that safe and effective new medicines, which are being developed with increasingly complex science, reach patients as efficiently and quickly as possible,” BIO CEO Jim Greenwood said in a statement.

HOUSE LEADERS SPAR OVER ZIKA FUNDING — Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy and Minority Whip Steny Hoyer on Thursday argued on the House floor over funding to counter the Zika virus outbreak in Puerto Rico during their weekly exchange over the upcoming House schedule, Pro's Colin Wilhelm reports.

Referencing the upcoming holidays — and "the need to care for one another" — Hoyer criticized a proposed Republican approach to use leftover Ebola emergency funding to address Puerto Rico’s Zika outbreak. The administration asked Congress for $1.8 billion in new Zika funds, and CDC has earmarked leftover Ebloa money for public health efforts to fight the virus in Africa.

“I know it’s for Ebola but they have leftover money,” McCarthy countered.

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): More transparency is needed into generic drug pricing and reimbursement rates set by drug plan middlemen. Bipartisan legislation (H.R. 244) would enhance oversight of federal health programs and help ensure pharmacy reimbursement for generic drugs reflects market fluctuations. Visit www.ncpanet.org/pharmacyaccess. **

CLUB FOR GROWTH HITS TRUMP IN UTAH — The anti-tax group is spending $200,000 to air a new health care-focused commercial ahead of Utah's primary on Tuesday — and like other critical ads, this one uses footage from Trump's extensive "60 Minutes" interview last year, when he extolled the virtues of providing government-sponsored health coverage. "Ask Donald Trump why he sides with Hillary Clinton, and why he wants more government health care," a narrator intones.

See the ad: http://bit.ly/1Rocxut

WHAT's NEXT FOR ENROLL AMERICA? — The advocacy organization laid out an unusual goal last month: A five-year plan to "put ourselves out of business." And Enroll America's president says that funders and supporters are energized to have an end date.

"We have always been clear that our goal was not to be a permanent organization," Enroll America's Anne Filipic told PULSE, "and the members of the enrollment coalition I’ve spoken to are excited that we are laying out a clear plan for institutionalizing the success we’ve seen by providing tools, training and resources to support the local organizations who will carry on this work for years to come."

WHY ACA MARKETPLACE NEEDS BETTER ELIGIBILITY CHECKS —Thursday's Senate Finance Committee hearing on HealthCare.gov exposed some of the weaknesses in the enrollment process, argues Judy Solomon of the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. She points out that hundreds of thousands of consumers have had challenges proving their eligibility, which has affected their coverage and subsidies.

"HHS could do more to limit inconsistencies by expanding the electronic sources of data for real-time verification and giving consumers more guidance about the documents to send to verify their income," Solomon writes in a CBPP post: http://bit.ly/1nSBeRX

THE STORY OF THE WEEK … is Sarah Kliff's story for Vox on the reality that providers often make medical errors — and the resulting shame that plagues those nurses and doctors for years to come, sometimes with devastating consequences. Sarah's story: http://bit.ly/1ptgphK

HARVARD, NFL PLAYERS TEAM UP ON NEW HEALTH APP — The app is part of the ongoing Football Players Health Study, but it's open to everyone. TeamStudy will use Apple's ResearchKit platform to track brain function, heart health, pain and mobility; researchers are hoping to establish a control group of non-athletes in addition to football players, too.

"Using ResearchKit, we will be able to quickly identify patterns that could lead to treatments for health conditions faced by former NFL players," said Harvard's Alvaro Pascual-Leone.

ON TAP TODAY — The Cato Institute holds a 12 p.m. forum to preview next Wednesday's oral arguments in Zubik v. Burwell, the Supreme Court case on how the ACA's birth control coverage rule applies to religious non-profits.

ON TAP NEXT WEEK — On Tuesday, the House Oversight Committee holds a hearing on heroin and opioid abuse. On Wednesday, ProPublica hosts its forum on patient harm — expect questions about its surgeon scorecard to resurface — while a House Appropriations subcommittee holds a hearing on the CDC budget.

WHAT WE'RE READING, by Rachana Pradhan

A ProPublica analysis finds that physicians who get more money from drug companies tend to prescribe more brand-name medications. http://bit.ly/1R5DZbb

The Washington Post profiles an expectant mother in Colombia who has been diagnosed with the Zika virus. http://wapo.st/22owxlZ

The Center for Public Integrity digs into why a tobacco giant gave $250,000 to an organization that represents more than 200 African-American newspapers. http://bit.ly/1R33iN6

The Bangor Daily News editorial board writes that limiting doctors' painkiller prescriptions is the wrong approach for solving Maine's drug abuse epidemic. http://bit.ly/22ovLW1

Valeant's CEO tells employees that the company is not going bankrupt, Bloomberg reports. http://bloom.bg/1pxsbI1

Johnson & Johnson will have to pay about $500 million to five plaintiffs injured by defective hip implants, Reuters reports. http://fxn.ws/22pOZHA

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): While approximately 80 percent of prescription drugs dispensed are generic drugs, the reimbursement system for these medications is largely unregulated and a mystery to pharmacists and patients. The lack of transparency also raises questions as to whether drug plan middlemen, pharmacy benefit manager (PBM) corporations, are overpaid by Medicare and other federal health programs. Moreover, when generic drug prices spike, PBM corporations are slow to update reimbursement rates, leaving community pharmacies with payments that don’t cover costs and unsustainable financial losses. H.R. 244 would increase transparency and facilitate timely payment updates. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacyaccess. **