By Emma Crawford

Daily Journal

TUPELO – SummerSALT, a summer reading program at The Orchard church for children in kindergarten through third grade who struggle with reading, hopes to expand its reach to other area churches this summer.

SummerSALT began four years ago and now wants to take the month-long program, which takes place in June, to area churches.

Children who attend the program work on literacy skills with teachers and assistant teachers in an effort to build a strong foundation for reading and retain those skills between school years.

With plans to expand to multiple sites, what began as just one program at The Orchard has become a non-profit organization.

Merissa Rambo, missions director at The Orchard, said the church has begun partnering with local businesses and will serve as a guide for new program sites in the area.

When she saw that there are more children who need the extra help in reading than The Orchard alone can serve, Rambo decided it was time to expand.

The program at The Orchard works primarily with Tupelo Public Schools, but Rambo said she has received calls from Lee County and Pontotoc school districts about expanding the program to serve their children, too.

The Orchard will provide training, materials and assistance to help new program sites get started.

“We want to empower other churches to do this, too,” Rambo said.

To help start the expansion, SummerSALT has received a grant from the CREATE Foundation, which Rambo said will cover some of the start-up costs at a new program site this summer.

Rambo said her hope is to be able to serve at least 60 children the first year at a new location.

The Orchard had 120 kids participate in the program this past summer.

SummerSALT aims to keep classes small, Rambo said, with no more than 12 children in each one.

“Research shows that the fastest way to advance learning is through small groups,” Rambo said. “That’s the heart of our program.”

When the program started four years ago, Rambo said she never thought she would see it become a non-profit organization.

“It’s really exciting, but I also never planned for any of this to happen,” she said. “I’m continuously amazed at the way God provides for things to happen.”

The plan is for the program to grow out of Tupelo into surrounding areas, although it could take time.

Rambo said she hopes to have a three-year commitment to the program from whichever church The Orchard partners with for a new SummerSALT site.

“My dream would be to add a new site every summer,” Rambo said.

emma.crawford@journalinc.com

Twitter: @emcatcrawford