In New West news: Albuquerque real estate is growing but still lags behind western counterparts, genetically pure bison will return to northern Colorado, Toys for Tots and marijuana dispensaries compete for warehouse space, Wyoming loses one of two Affordable Care Act insurers, and a Wyoming U.S. Representative wants more paddling in Yellowstone and Grand Teton National Parks.

The latest Urban Land Institute report has given Albuquerque, New Mexico a coveted “green dot,” which designates a healthy real estate market—comprising investment, development, and home building. The report, which drew from 1,465 surveys with real estate industry representatives, ranked Albuquerque 49th of 75 “to watch” markets. According to the Albuquerque Business Journal, this is the first time the ULI gave the city the green dot, after previously giving it red and yellow dots.

But Albuquerque isn’t out of the woods yet. In a follow-up story through the ABJ, Albuquerque’s market was compared with others in the Western region. And despite gains, Albuquerque is still markedly behind New West markets like Denver, Salt Lake City, Boise, and Phoenix. It was also among the bottom four for retail, office, multifamily, and industrial investment. However, Albuquerque beat out places like Boise and Salt Lake City for housing and showed gains in the hotel market.

Now up to Fort Collins, where a herd of 10 genetically pure bison are slated to move to nearby Soapstone Prairie Natural Area and Larimer County’s Red Mountain Open Space. The move coincides with National Bison Day (November 1) and will include a host of celebrations. Indeed, there’s a waiting list for an afternoon fieldtrip and Pateros Creek Brewing Company will host a celebration at 5:30 p.m., with proceeds of their Prairie Thunder Imperial Brown Ale going toward the project.

The move marks another step in a remarkable return for a species that once roamed much of North America. From an all time low of 325 in the 1880s, bison have returned to 500,000 head, comprising genetically pure herds (such as the ~3,500 head Yellowstone National Park herd) and bison bred with cattle. The bison who will inhabit the Fort Collins spaces were created out of genes taken from quarantined Yellowstone bison and specially screened to remove brucellosis, a disease that can inflict serious losses on cattle herds. From the Coloradoan:

The team, led by bison reproduction program director Jennifer Barfield, employed tactics such as embryo transfer and artificial insemination to create what’s now called the Laramie Foothills Conservation Herd.

It will serve as a seed herd for future species conservation efforts. A few of the bison are mature females and will give birth to calves in late spring or early summer, said Daylan Figgs, senior environmental planner with the city of Fort Collins.

The herd will be free to wander 800 acres of their species’ native shortgrass prairie, surrounded by a fence specifically constructed to keep the large animals from roaming too far. The prairie where the bison will roam is visible from Soapstone’s entrance road and the recently realigned Cheyenne Rim Trail.

And keeping with Colorado, an unexpected conflict has (indirectly) come up between Toys for Tots and Denver’s marijuana dispensary business. Reportedly, Denver’s regional Toys for Tots coordinator, along with Marine Sgt. Phillip Sena, have struggled to find a warehouse space to work out of, citing rising prices and falling vacancy rates—conditions created, in part, by the boom of the marijuana industry. From the Denver Post:

About 4 percent of industrial spaces were vacant in Denver as of June, according to a real estate market report by Cushman and Wakefield.

“That’s bonkers,” said Megan Devenport, program manager for Denver Shared Spaces, a group that works with nonprofits, businesses and the city to use real estate for social good. “If real estate prices continue to go up and vacancies continue to go down, we’re going to see these vital services moving out of the city center, and that’s not ideal.”

In Denver, warehouses are going for more than $12 a square foot, Devenport said, with a slightly lower average of $8 a square foot across the metro area.

“That’s almost double what the historic average has been,” she said.

Devenport blames this shift in part from the marijuana cultivation industry’s cash flow and desirability, since they can pay cash and pay well. The marijuana cultivation industry occupies about 3.7 million square feet of Denver’s industrial space, according to CBRE Research. CBRE Industrial Services Vice President Paul Kluck added that only encompasses 2.6 percent of Denver’s warehouse footprint. Currently, Sena and his coworkers are running the Denver Toy for Tots out of a red van (as seen in the video below) hoping to find space in time for the holidays. In 2014, the business donated toys to nearly 90,000 Denver children.

Now up to Wyoming, where WINHealth, one of Wyoming’s two Affordable Care Act providers, has dropped out, leaving Blue Cross Blue Shield to pick up the slack. WINHealth President and CEO Stephen Goldstone, cited in the Billings Gazette, states the company was expecting $5 million in federal reimbursements, but were told they would only receive $638,000 through the ACA. Currently, 7,500 Wyoming residents are signed up with WINHealth, which will pay their premiums until December 31. Meanwhile, Deputy State Insurance Commissioner Jeff Rude has spoken out, saying while Blue Cross offers several different plans, competition would still be preferable. In addition, Wyoming Governor Matt Mead is pushing for the state legislature to accept federal funding for Medicaid, a debate that has been ongoing.

And rounding out Wyoming news, U.S. Representative Cynthia Lummis is looking to open up Yellowstone and Grand Teton waterways to “hand-propelled watercraft,” according to Yellowstone Insider. “The Yellowstone and Grand Teton Paddling Act” would open up around 400 miles of stream and river, including portions of the Firehole, Gallatin, Lamar, and Snake rivers—most of them in secluded backcountry regions.

In essence, the amendment would mandate the National Park Service create regulations for these waterways and potentially oversee them as recreational channels. Further, it seeks to bypass environmental assessments, citing them as an unnecessary cost to the NPS. The move has drawn criticism from organizations like the National Parks Conservation Association, who point out those waterways are choice fish habitats. Further, the areas Lummis proposes to open were originally closed in 1950, out of overfishing concerns.

This is not the first time Lummis has tried to open portions of Yellowstone and Grand Teton to paddling. She proposed a similar amendment last year, which passed the House but not the Senate. Neither national park has commented at this time regarding the “Yellowstone and Grand Teton Paddling Act.”