Photo

PELLA, Iowa — After nonstop candidate traffic in Iowa for a full year, the gun was sounded on the final lap before the Feb. 1 caucuses, as the leading candidates in both parties crisscrossed the snowy plains and the state’s largest newspaper announced its endorsements.

The Des Moines Register backed Senator Marco Rubio of Florida for the Republicans, giving welcome news for a candidate who has been trailing Donald J. Trump and Senator Ted Cruz in Iowa polls; and Hillary Clinton for the Democrats, who is in a tight race with Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont.

And in a move that was less than an endorsement but perhaps even more significant, Iowa’s senior elected Republican, Senator Charles E. Grassley, shared a stage with Donald J. Trump here in Pella, standing behind a “Trump” sign on a podium. The appearance conferred a seal of approval by elements of the Republican establishment that once declined to take Mr. Trump seriously and is now beginning to see him as preferable to Mr. Cruz, a hard-line conservative.

“I’m happy to be here with such an enthusiastic group and this candidate,” Mr. Grassley said. Mr. Trump reciprocated later, saying, “This is a great guy, this is a great guy,” as photographers snapped pictures of the unlikely pairing. “He’s respected by everybody.”

At an rally earlier Saturday, Mr. Trump joked that he was so impervious to attacks, including charges by rivals that he was not a true conservative, that he could shoot people in the middle of Fifth Avenue without losing support.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

His remark came in for angry rebuke from Glenn Beck, the right-wing radio host, who campaigned in Iowa with Mr. Cruz on Saturday. “This kind of hubris,” Mr. Beck said gravely, referring to Mr. Trump, “is beyond imagination.”

Throughout the gathering, Mr. Cruz and Mr. Beck alluded to the left-leaning positions taken by Mr. Trump for much of his life.

“Nobody on earth ever grew a backbone after they got into 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue,” Mr. Cruz said. “Is there any chance on earth that individual would actually stand up to the cronyism and cartel in Washington?”

For his part, Mr. Trump raised doubts about Mr. Cruz’s eligibility to serve because of his Canadian birth and about an unreported loan he took from Goldman Sachs to finance a Senate race.

“You got to pick a winner, because I’m the only one who’s going to win,” he told Iowans, referring to the general election.

In endorsing Mr. Rubio, The Register sought an alternative to the two leading Republicans in the race, who each engender hostility from large parts of their party. “Republicans have the opportunity to define their party’s future in this election,” the paper wrote. “They could choose anger, pessimism and fear. Or they could take a different path,” the editors wrote.

It called Mr. Rubio his “party’s best hope” for enlarging the Republican tent and called him “whip-smart” about policy matters in meetings with editors.

Photo

The paper’s once highly anticipated backing is less meaningful in an age of reduced print circulation and the hogging of the news cycle by a candidate, Mr. Trump, whose often insulting tweets are followed by nearly 6 million people and whose rallies are covered live on cable TV.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

For Mr. Rubio, however, it may offer a bounce if establishment-leaning Republicans who dislike Mr. Trump and Mr. Cruz, and so far have been divided among several candidates, start to coalesce behind the Florida senator.

Speaking to about 250 people in Indianola, Iowa, about an hour after The Register announced its endorsement, Mr. Rubio did not revel in it. Only after a questioner congratulated him for it did he say, jokingly, “I’d rather have your endorsement.

“I’m grateful for it,” he added, “but I still want you to caucus for me.”’

He seemed to have taken some of the newspaper editorial’s advice to heart as he gave one of his more upbeat campaign speeches recently. Though it spoke glowingly of him, The Register’s article also chided the senator, known for his optimistic message of American exceptionalism and renewal, for offering a darker assessment about the country’s prospects lately. “He has pandered to rising pessimism in his party. He talks gloomily about ‘a nation in decline,’ ” the editorial said.

On Saturday evening he was lighter on the gloom. America, he said, “is the greatest country in the history of the world.” He added: “We don’t say that enough.”

Mrs. Clinton was the paper’s pick ahead of the 2008 caucuses as well, when she finished a disappointing third behind Barack Obama and John Edwards.

The paper wrote Mrs. Clinton “is not a perfect candidate,” but it noted, “The presidency is not an entry-level position.”

Although it praised Mrs. Clinton’s chief rival, Senator Bernie Sanders, for injecting the issue of income inequality into the races in both parties the paper hesitated over the near-impossibility Mr. Sanders would face in getting his sweeping programs through Congress.

Mrs. Clinton has been making the same argument, particularly about Mr. Sanders’s proposal for universal health care; she says a wiser course is to improve on President Obama’s Affordable Care Act. Recognizing the power of Mr. Sanders’s idea, though, she has taken to reminding people of her own attempts to create universal health care during her husband’s administration.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Now, before it was called Obamacare, it was called Hillarycare, as some of you might remember,” Mrs. Clinton said at a town-hall-style event in Clinton, Iowa, on Saturday, the second time in recent days she has used the line.

“We share the same goal: universal health care for every single American,” Mrs. Clinton said of her rival. “But we have a real difference about how to get there.”

Mr. Sanders, who began a weekend bus tour of eastern Iowa cities and towns on Saturday, began the day speaking to more than 150 supporters who hollered and stomped their feet in his Davenport campaign office, before heading out to canvass.

Mr. Sanders, who has begun to resemble Mr. Trump in his penchant for citing positive polls, maintained that in head-to-head matchups with Mr. Trump he outshined Mrs. Clinton.

Pointing out that former President Bill Clinton has stepped up attacking him, calling him angry, Mr. Sanders embraced the distinction. “And, you know what?” he said. “It is true. I am angry and the American people are angry.”