<p>Greg Johnson</p>

When to pull the plug? An uncomfortable conversation. An unsettling decision when dealing with a human life — a spouse, a partner, a mother, a father, a child, a sibling. Even if health has been failing, if examinations find disturbing signs of persistent problems, if specialists conclude there are multiple apparently irreversible issues, the timing is agonizing.

But what about when the patient is an entity, in this case, ironically, a health insurance company?

It is not too early to ask end-of-life questions about Community Health Alliance, the Knoxville-based Consumer Operated and Oriented Plan established by the Affordable Care Act. A July report by the Office of Inspector General for the Department of Human Services showed the critical condition of CO-OPs in general and CHA in particular.

Taxpayers provided the seed money for CHA and the other CO-OPs via federal loans, with the CO-OPs pledging to repay the loans once cash flow turned positive. In loan applications, CO-OPs, government-created companies designed to compete with traditional insurance companies and, thus, drive down costs, were required to provide actuarially supported projections of their number of enrollees.

CHA’s enrollee heartbeat is barely detectable. As of December 2014, CHA had only 2,287 enrollees. In its loan application, CHA projected it would have more than 25,000 members. CHA made only 9 percent of its projected enrollment.

In 2015, CHA’s membership grew to more than 35,000. CHA’s rapid enrollment in 2015, driven by more competitively priced policies, caused regulators to intervene. The OIG wrote in a footnote in its report, “In a January 8, 2015, letter to the Secretary of Health and Human Services, the Tennessee Department of Commerce and Insurance requested an immediate enrollment freeze for Community Health Alliance because of its tenuous financial condition.”

That last phrase — “tenuous financial condition” — shows the seriousness of CHA’s prognosis. Of the 22 CO-OPs the OIG examined nationwide, only one (Maine) did not show a net loss for 2014. Some CO-OPs have already closed. Others will follow if they continue to bleed red.

CHA is hemorrhaging cash. CHA posted net income in 2014 of negative $22 million. CHA took in $6.6 million in premiums, paid $8.6 million in claims and incurred $8.6 million in “General Administrative Expenses.” Reserves at CHA dropped by more than $11 million. CHA’s “tenuous financial condition” caused suspension of 2015 enrollment, and the CO-OP had to ask for a 32.6 percent premium increase for 2016.

Tennessee Insurance Commissioner Julie Mix McPeake, after examining CHA’s proposal, said even a 32 percent increase might not be enough “to make the company sustainable.” Regulators, effectively, prescribed 44 percent. In other words, the patient is so tenuous that insurance overseers injected harsh medicine to try to keep the patient alive. Taxpayers funded CHA’s birth. Now, the longer CHA lingers, the more it costs us. Hence, the hard question: When do we pull the plug?

Greg Johnson’s columns appear on Wednesdays, Fridays and the second Sunday of each month. Follow him on Twitter @jgregjohnson. Email him at jgregjohnson@hotmail.com.