The latest news on the CNBC Disruptor 50 companies upending the status quo in the markets:

Why won't Thom Yorke leave Spotify alone already?



Radiohead frontman Thom Yorke has made no secret of his displeasure with the Spotify business model, more or less saying that musicians can't get a fair shake through the online music platform. But he couldn't leave well enough alone, and has upped his Spotify criticism to a downright scatological level.

First, Yorke pulled the albums of his "other" band, Atoms for Peace, from Spotify. And in an interview first granted to the Mexican press and picked up by The Guardian, Yorke said: "This is is like the last fart, the last desperate fart of a dying corpse."

Oh, and the occasion for the latest Yorke rant (there were plenty of curse words we can't print in his Spotify analysis): It was Spotify's fifth birthday. Well, here's to a music service dying young, at least, if Yorke is right.

Why Airbnb needs to hire lobbyists, donate to political campaigns

Last week things were looking good for Airbnb in its ongoing battle with the world's real estate regulators. It won a court victory in New York, and even extended an olive branch, with its CEO writing a blog post about it being ready to work out deals with governments. What a difference a week makes!

New York Attorney General Eric Schneiderman this past week demanded that Airbnb turn over all records on New York residents who rent out their dwellings on the site—15,000 of the 225,000 New Yorkers using Airbnb. (The subpoena was actually issued Friday, Oct. 4, but wasn't revealed until last week.) The New York AG says he's just trying to catch the bad actors on the site; Airbnb says there's no reason to subpoena data on 15,000 Airbnb users as a result of a few bad apples. Airbnb wrote in a blog post it won't comply with the subpoena:

"The subpoena…goes well beyond bad actors…So, we made it clear to the Attorney General's office from the very beginning that we would never agree to this type of government-sponsored fishing expedition…We remain committed to fighting it with everything we've got."

(Read more: The booming business of 3-D printing)