Altru seeks efficiency, faces the challenge of change in the health care industry

That hasn't been a given recently for the area's main health care provider and one of, if not the largest employer in Grand Forks. Altru executives took a temporary pay cut in 2013 and announced they may keep some vacant positions open while avoiding layoffs. Altru ended 2013 with a $2.1 million loss in operating income.

But 2014 saw something of a financial turnaround. Operating income came in at $17.4 million as Altru executives said they were able to maintain relatively modest growth in expenses.

Thompson said the leadership's actions have helped, and Altru has become more efficient in some areas in recent years. The organization has at least 50 fewer transcriptionists than it had just a few years ago, for instance, thanks to automation technology.

"We're working to streamline processes so it takes fewer hours to deliver the care we provide, and everybody in health care is working on that," said Altru's Chief Planning Executive Dennis Reisnour. "We're going to have to become more efficient in order to provide care."

Altru executives said this week they're still expecting to face challenges from changes in the health care industry. The organization's audited financial report will be finished in the coming weeks.

By the numbers

As of March, Altru employed 4,057, which is slightly down from 2013's headcount of 4,162, according to that year's annual report.

"Every time we have an opening, we ask the leaders to see if we need to fill it; can we do the work differently," said Kellee Fisk, Altru's chief people resources executive. The organization does have more than 130 job openings currently, she added.

"I know we need more nurses if we can find them," Thompson said.

Altru also had 209 physicians in 2014, down from 216 the year before. That physician count has to do partly with several retirements, Altru spokeswoman Lindsey Reznicek said.

Altru's expenses grew 2.7 percent between 2013 and 2014, from $458 million to $470.5 million, which Thompson described as "modest" growth.

Thompson said roughly 60 percent of Altru's revenues go to employee salaries and benefits, and the organization has kept at market in salaries.

"The market has moved enough in the tight labor market that you have to pay more for every hour," he said. "You're going to have expense growth just by the salary movement of existing staff."

More people getting some kind of health coverage also helped Altru lower its bad debt by almost $8 million, Thompson said. Its net patient service revenue increased by 5.4 percent to $474.3 million in 2014.

Thompson said they spent less on capital improvements in 2014. This year, the organization will spend about $30 million in capital projects, mainly for remodeling existing facilities and new equipment like CT scanners.

Altru executives pointed to lower-than-expected Medicare reimbursements for part of its struggles in 2013. Those reimbursements are affected by more patients being classified as outpatient or observation rather than inpatient, they said.

Inpatient discharges decreased from 15,478 in 2012 to 14,106 in 2013, according to statistics provided by Reznicek. That number stayed relatively steady in 2014 at 14,091.

The number of outpatient tests and procedures grew from 212,683 in 2013 to 225,432 in 2014.

Altru saw a 2.6 percent increase in Medicare reimbursements in 2014, up to $142 million, according to figures provided by the organization.

Outlook

Moody's Investors Service described Altru's financial outlook as "stable" in December, citing its "solid market position, sound management practices, improved operating performance, and good levels of unrestricted cash and investments." Altru's challenges, according to Moody's, includes competition for outpatient services, physician recruitment and a high debt load.

"Given the system's prominence in northeastern North Dakota, its history of serving Grand Forks, and its ownership and management of a physician group representing the vast majority of physicians in the region, we believe Altru's credit profile enjoys a certain level of inherent stability," the report added.

Another Moody's report from January suggested a trend of hospital consolidation will continue this year. Sanford Health has pursued a number of mergers throughout the region in recent years, including a successful move into Bemidji and an failed attempt in the Twin Cities.

Still, Altru executives maintain they intend to remain an independent community health care system.

"We don't see ourselves as becoming part of a larger organization," Reisnour said. "We also know that requires a high level of performance from our organization."