Megan McKenna is the executive director and CEO of Mano a Mano Family Resource Center, which recently opened a small office in Mundelein.

Q: What does Mano a Mano do?

A: Our mission is to help immigrants who are new to Lake County become full participants in their new communities. We're like a middleman that connects people to resources, information and programming.

Q: Why did you choose to open an office in Mundelein?

A: We've been in Round Lake Park since 2000, and on average we serve about 4,000 people per year. We were noticing that a lot of people come from Mundelein and the Latin American immigrant population in Mundelein was growing as well. We had an opportunity to expand, and because travel is a big challenge for immigrants we decided to make it easier for those people in Mundelein.

Q: What can people get at your Mundelein location?

A: Mundelein is by appointment only. Immigrants always want to learn English, because of the obvious barrier. We help them find classes. With the Affordable Care Act there's now a big demand for health care, but the process is pretty complicated so we walk people through that. We've also seen a dramatic increase in people asking for help with paperwork to become a U.S. citizen.

Q: Why is Lake County a big immigrant destination?

A: Historically, immigrants go to the cities, like Chicago, New York, or Los Angeles. Now research shows that immigrants are bypassing cities throughout the country and instead going directly to suburbs. In Lake County, 18 percent of the population is foreign born. That's up significantly. A lot of it has to do with family connections, affordability of housing and the types of jobs that are typically given to immigrants, such as manufacturing, warehousing and landscaping.

Q: How did you first get involved with this movement?

A: I'm actually an urban planner by education, and I briefly worked for Lake County in the community development department. But before all this I grew up in St. Louis and taught high school in Honduras for two years after college. So I was, in a way, an immigrant going through all of these same things, and there were some very nice people who helped me find things and feel accepted in the community. Ironically, a lot of people who lived in that community were leaving and moving here to Waukegan, Round Lake, Mundelein, and so that's how I came to Illinois.

Shout Out is a weekly feature in which we introduce our readers to their fellow community members and local visitors throughout suburban Chicago.