Texas Insider Report: AUSTIN,Texas — Lakeway – The Dr. Dawn Buckingham for Texas State Senate Campaign released today that Texas Represenative Jonathan Stickland has endorsed Dr. Dawn Buckingham for Texas State Senate.

“I have served with Susan King in the Texas House for two sessions. That is why it is an easy decision to support her opponent Dr. Dawn Buckingham,” stated Rep. Stickland. “I hope Texans in SD 24 are not fooled by Rep. King’s campaign rhetoric. They should be aware of her record of voting to expand Obamacare in Texas and being weak on border security. More often than acceptable she chose to side with Democrats instead of conservatives in the Texas House, I have no doubt she would do the same in the Senate if elected. Dr. Buckingham has proven that she is a conservative fighter who won’t enter the Senate chambers with strings attached and favors to pay back unlike her opponent. I urge everyone to vote for Dr. Buckingham in the runoff election on May 24th.”

Jonathan Stickland is a conservative Christian Republican serving in the Texas State House for House District 92. He supports limited government, the right to life, individual liberties and personal responsibilities, and most of all strives to represent his constituents, not the lobbyists and special interests in Austin.

“It is fantastic to have a conservative champion like Rep. Stickland endorse my campaign for Texas State Senate,” Dr. Dawn Buckingham commented. “Senate District 24 does not need a senator that will talk one way during during campaign season then betray voters when it matters. As state senator, I will fight for the conservative values that make Texas great.”

The Dr. Dawn Buckingham Campaign has now received endorsements and support from Governor Perry, Senator Schwertner, Association of American Physicians and Surgeons, Carol Everett, Texas Ophthalmological Association, Brigadier General Richard Drury (ret.), Wes Riddle, Lori Devillez, Linda Kinney, Rural Friends of Electric Cooperatives, Bonny Cain, Jim Powers, Roger Borgelt, Craig Cosgray, Jerry Patterson, Joe McBride, JC Mathews, Commissioner Joe Don Dockery, Commissioner Dickie Clary, Commissioner PeterSenator Don Huffines, Grassroots and Tea Party Leader TJ Scott, Susan Combs, the Texas Alliance for Life, Texas Values Action, Texas Farm Bureau AGFUND, Texas Wildlife Association, Texas Home School Coalition Association, Texans Uniting for Reform and Freedom, the Independent Bankers Association of Texas, JoAnn Fleming, Grassroots America – We The People PAC, the Central Texas Republican Assembly, and Ryan Downton