EATONTOWN, N.J., Feb. 18, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- With all the costs parents have, it's good to know that a breast pump is now covered by most major health insurance plans with no out-of-pocket costs. Acelleron Medical Products, a durable medical equipment (DME) company, helps expectant and new mothers obtain a free breast pump under the Affordable Care Act.

To get a breast pump, fully covered by insurance, parents should order the pump from an in-network DME company, such as Acelleron. Since stores like Buy Buy Baby, BabiesRUs and Target are not DME companies, it is likely that breast pumps purchased at these stores are not fully covered.

Acelleron, a New England-based company that is now expanding into New Jersey and Pennsylvania, predominantly sells post-natal and pediatric medical equipment throughout the Northeast.

Jason Canzano, director of operations for Acelleron Medical Products, said, "Our business has absolutely exploded over the past six months thanks to our great customer service, our products, and a strong partnership with Medela, the breast pump market leader.

"Moms and physicians should just fill out our breast pump order form and then fax it to us. Once we receive the order, we verify your health insurance eligibility, bill your insurance company and ship the breast pump free of charge!"

Acelleron will ship the breast pumps to mothers within 24 hours. To order a breast pump from Acelleron call 877-932-6327 or visit http://acelleron.com.

About Acelleron Medical Products : Acelleron Medical Products, a Preferred Home Health Care Company, has focused on the distribution of nebulizers, breast pumps and other medical products throughout New England since 2004. In 2013, Preferred Home Health Care & Nursing Services, a medical and non-medical home health care company with headquarters in Eatontown, N.J., acquired Acelleron in order to expand its home care expertise to its clients in New Jersey and Pennsylvania.









Contact: Frances Kirschner---Public Relations

Frantasy Enterprises, LLC

(732) 363 – 3988

fakirschner@optonline.net

SOURCE Acelleron Medical Products