The annual Salute to Freedom event at the Panama City Marina drew hundreds of people this Independence Day.

The event was hosted by the Downtown Improvement Board, Panama City and the marina. The free, family friendly event drew hundreds of people to celebrate.

Six months of planning, 33 vendors and $25,000 worth of fireworks were all in preparation for the fourth.

“I loved it,” said Jim St. Aubin, listening to the band with his wife Charlotte. “They’re doing a real good job this year.”

The event drew young, old, vets and pets - all there to do one thing.

“Yeah, this is the best way to spend it,” said Nathaniel Rhodes, owner of Smokin on Wheels food truck. “Everybody together, come together, eat good.”

The free event offered plenty of food, live music and the best seat in the house for one of Panama City’s largest firework displays.

“So far, the event is going fantastic,” said Valerie Woods, coordinator with the Downtown Improvement Board. “People are starting to come in and get some food and listen to the band. And there are kid’s activities. Bounce houses and the children’s train, so everybody seems to be having a good time.”

“This area just gets flooded with locals pounding on the trailer for pizza,” said Guillermo Dovalina, owner of Dovalina’s Wood Fired Pizza. “It gets pretty intense.”

Music and merriment aside, locals also wanted to honor the red, white and blue.

“We decorated with some flags,” said local and military member, Ramsey Blankenship, while riding a decorated golf cart. “The EOD Wounded Warrior Foundation and actually I carried this American flag in Afghanistan with me while I was deployed.”

While downtown was simmering in the July heat like a fourth of July hot dog, locals said they wouldn’t have celebrated any other way.”

“Can’t beat this,” said St. Aubin. “In paradise? Having a good time, good food, good people, good music,”

Woods said the improvements board will meet this week. They will begin discussing how to make next year’s event bigger and better.