Intrauterine devices are one of most effective methods of birth control on the market, especially when you account for human error, such as condoms breaking during sex or occasionally forgetting to take a birth control pill.

Based on typical use, IUDs are 45 times more effective that the pill and 90 times more effective than male condoms, according to the Guttmacher Institute.

The small, T-shaped devices -- we're talking half the size of a tube of Chapstick -- are also long-lasting and easily reversible. After a doctor inserts the IUD into a woman's uterus, the device can prevent pregnancy for between three and 10 years, depending the model she chooses. There are currently four models on the market, including three that release low levels of hormones over time. The hormone-free version has copper coiled around its frame, creating a reaction in the body that makes the uterus toxic to sperm, thereby preventing fertilization.

Using the IUD can mean a faster return to fertility after it's removed, which is helpful for women who foresee wanting to get pregnant in the near future. "The pill suppresses ovulation more than the IUD," said Amy Bryant, an assistant professor of obstetrics and gynecology at the University of North Carolina. "Some women will return immediately to fertility, but others won’t. And with the IUD, it seems that it’s just a little bit quicker."

If IUDs are so great, why don't more women have them?

While IUDs are the contraceptive method of choice for female women's health providers -- 40 percent of whom choose the birth control method for themselves -- only 12 percent of contraception-using women in the general population chose the IUD.

This is in part because getting any IUD used to be more expensive, with total costs adding up to as much as $1,000 for women who either didn't have insurance or whose insurance didn't cover birth control. Now, with passage of the Affordable Care Act and a new low-cost device called Liletta, which runs about $50 at health care clinics, IUDs are more financially feasible.

Although the risks are low, the IUD does come with a few side effects. One out of 1,000 IUD insertions results in a uterine perforation, a risk that's slightly higher if the woman has just given birth and is still lactating, though it is still rare. Women who choose the non-hormonal ParaGard IUD can experience heavier periods and more intense menstrual cramps, symptoms they might not be accustomed to if they're switching from hormonal birth control. In contrast, women who opt for the hormonal Mirena IUD may find that their period goes away completely.

There's also a lot of mythology surrounding IUDs. Some women are under the impression that the device is only for approved for those who have already had children. Others have heard horror stories about IUD insertion and how painful it is.

Birth control isn't one-size-fit-all -- different women prefer different types of contraception -- but being well-informed about your options, and recognizing which myths are well, myths, will help you make the best selection for you.

Here are five myths about IUDs we can put to rest for good: