Aetna Inc (NYSE:AET) raised its earnings guidance for the ongoing fiscal year once again on Tuesday as the company posted higher growth in its government business while efforts to control medical costs paid off resulting in better-than-anticipated earnings growth for the first three months of the year.

Aetna now expects its earnings to fall in the range of $7.20-7.40 per share for 2015, higher than the previous earnings guidance of $7 per share.

The health care company, like its competitors, has seen a huge increase in the number of enrollments after the implementation of the Affordable Care Act. The company reported that it provided medical coverage for 23.7 million people by the end of the quarter, up from 22.7 million from the same period last year with the extra 1 million boosting the annual forecast. The total individual membership count is 1.3% accounting for 6% of the company's total 2015 projected revenues.

Although Aetna's public-exchange membership, now over 950,000, is slightly lower than last year, it was enough to draw a positive response from analysts such as Peter Costa of Wells Fargo who said in research note, “Aetna’s quarter displayed strong performance despite still significant headwinds from the Affordable Care Act.”

The industry, however, has been skeptical about rising health-care costs, especially for drugs designed to treat hepatitis C. Aetna, the third largest US-based health insurer, said earlier that the company expects to benefit from a deal that will allow it to secure Gilead's hepatitis C drugs at a lower cost. It also stated that the medical cost for the company’s commercial business was toward the lower half of projections.

The company's shares, which have risen 24.26% this year, went up another 3.24% in yesterday’s trading session to close at $110.38. Stock price gains on the news are, however, far from over, given that the company's stock is currently trading at 13.7 times its projected 2016 earnings and continues to remain a lucrative investment opportunity. With the company expected to beat its earnings estimates, stock price will likely go up further. In fact, Ana Gupte, an analyst with Leerink Partners, is of the opinion that the company’s earnings could go up to $7.50 per share. When applied to the industry average multiple of 17.5 times 2015 earnings, this would mean Aetna's stock price could go up 17%, changing hands at $129 apiece.

Ms. Gupte said: “While the health insurance group has had a nice performance rally and some names have moved into the GARP (growth-at-a-reasonable-price) category, Aetna remains firmly in the value camp.”

The company’s share price, however, could take a turn in the wrong direction if medical costs start ticking upward, although they remain below the company’s projections presently. The trend is similar to United Health, which too has seen costs stay firmly below expectations.

Aetna’s share price can be impacted by a pending US Supreme Court ruling. The Court is due to announce its decision in June regarding the subsidies received by millions of Americans who purchased health insurance through ObamaCare since it was passed in 2010. The law, if struck down, would result in millions of US residents losing health insurance, depressing earnings for health insurance providers.