Topics: aol_on, GESO-UNITE HERE, Graduate School, graduate student unions, Labor Rights, Michelle Morgan, neoliberalism, new haven register, Robin Canavan, yale university, News, Politics News

“I should not have to fight for Yale to respect me but I will keep fighting until they do.”

That’s what Grant Mao, a Chinese citizen, who claims his struggles with depression precipitated his expulsion from the university last April, told the New Haven Register during a recent on-campus demonstration in support of graduate student-employees’ right to form a union. Mao told the Register that the university’s administration “did nothing” to help him with his illness, but was quick to inform him that his health insurance was no longer valid — and that he had 15 days to leave the country. “I’m fighting because I want to get reinstated,” Mao said, “but also because I don’t want this to happen to anyone else.”

According to graduate student-employees and organizers, Mao’s story is not unique. And the allegedly brusque manner with which the administration treated him is, they say, not unusual, either. That’s one of the reasons why those urging Yale to recognize its graduate student-employees’ union are calling on the university to stop an anti-union campaign intended to “intimidate and confuse” graduate school faculty and students, and to agree to a neutral — or “no intimidation” — vote.

Recently, Salon spoke over the phone with two members of the organizing drive, Robin Canavan and Michelle Morgan. Canavan GESO–UNITE HERE co-chair and fourth-year in the Geology and Geophysics Department, while Morgan is a graduate student-employee. Our conversation is below and has been edited for clarity and length.

So let’s start with the obvious question: Why are graduate employees at Yale organizing?

Robin Canavan (RC): The graduate employees and student organisation have been organizing in the last 18 months over a variety of issues. Members join for a variety of reasons. We’ve got members who’ve had issues with teaching and funding in their upper years, issues created with health coverage and mental health care, child care availability and affordability, racial and gender issues on campus.

We really gained a lot of steam after NYU. In the last 18 months, we’ve had four major demonstrations, delivering a petition to the administration showing a majority of support for a union from grad student-employees. We’ve had two-thirds of the nearly 2,000 graduate employees of the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences show their public support by taking a photo and saying that they want a union.

Michelle Morgan (MM): My name is Michelle Morgan. I’m an upper-year in American Studies. I’m also a mom. I have a 15-year-old son who lives with me in New Haven.

Last year, I was teaching an American Studies junior seminar. I’ve done teaching assistant positions, but this was my own course that I designed myself. Then the university announced it was going to cut upper-year teaching pay by 40 percent. There was nothing that any of us could do about it.

So, this year, I’m teaching my own class and I’m also teaching another seminar in American Studies — and I’m doing it for 40 percent less pay, even though it is the same amount of work. Or more work, even. I’m trying to support myself and my son on this pay, but it’s not working.

When you’ve made these complaints to the administration, what has been their response?