As we’ve said many times before, it really pays for returning customers to the Obamacare insurance marketplaces to shop around for a 2015 health plan. Recent data from the federal government shows that a surprising number of people are doing just that.

More than 30 percent of federal marketplace customers who re-enrolled for 2015 did so by actively returning to Healthcare.gov and picking a plan, according to Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell. That’s still less than half of all customers, but it far exceeds what you might expect based on consumer behavior in other public health insurance marketplaces.

“I initially expected active renewals to be much lower than that,” said Caroline Pearson, a vice president at the health care consultancy Avalere Health, in an email.

The Obama administration expected that many people wouldn’t shop again. That’s why they set up a default setting that would automatically renew people into their existing health plans or a similar one.

The numbers released this week were the first that included any information about the people being automatically renewed into their existing plans. Altogether, the government estimates that 4.5 million people who bought 2014 plans in marketplaces managed by the federal government have been enrolled in plans for 2015. Of those, Ms. Burwell said that the proportion who returned to the Healthcare.gov website to actively pick a 2015 plan was in the “mid-to-high” 30-percent range.

Many Returning Obamacare Shoppers Switched Plans The rate of plan switching was far higher for HealthCare.gov than previous government insurance markets. Percent of customers switching HealthCare.gov Medicare Part D Federal employees Massachsuetts Commonwealth Care 29% 13% 12% 7% Percent of customers switching HealthCare.gov Medicare Part D Federal Employees Massachsuetts Commonwealth Care 29% 13% 12% 7%

An H.H.S. analysis estimated that more than 70 percent of customers would be able to find a cheaper plan in the same category if they were willing to switch. An Upshot analysis of data from the McKinsey Center for U.S. Health System Reform showed those savings could be quite substantial in some markets. Benefits in some plans are also changing, as a ProPublica analysis published in The Upshot highlighted.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Ms. Burwell said that returning customers received between three and 10 “touches” from the government, encouraging them to consider new options. Americans still have until Feb. 15 to switch into a new product if they wish.

Larry Levitt, a senior vice president at the Kaiser Family Foundation, says he thinks general confusion about how the Affordable Care Act marketplaces work may have also played a role in overcoming consumer inertia. The messages about the need to return to the market and shop, he said, may have drowned out messages telling people that automatic renewal was an option.

Photo

The high rate of returning shoppers may reflect differences in the marketplace’s customers, compared with those in the other markets that have been studied in the most detail: senior citizens buying prescription drug plans and federal workers picking plans on their health benefit exchange. These customers may be more sophisticated web users or more price sensitive. They are also more likely to have had in-person help picking their first plan from a counselor, a person they may have called again for advice about renewals.

We don’t know what percentage of the people who returned to the federal website actually changed plans after doing so. But a more-than-30-percent shopping rate still looks pretty good compared with the switching rates that have been observed in those programs, between 7 and 13 percent.

The high rate of shopping may be a good sign for the future of the exchanges, where price competition between health plans is the primary mechanism for keeping premiums low.

But the power of inertia in insurance markets remains a powerful force. Last year, President Obama signed up for a bronze plan on the D.C. Health Link, the district’s marketplace. The move was largely symbolic; the president receives his health care from the military. This year, according to a White House official, he stuck with the same plan.