In 2007, a local family lost their 3-year-old daughter, Elizabeth, to a drowning accident. But the for past eights years they've worked to turn their grief into a bigger mission to help more than 600 local kids.

The Bottorf family spent Saturday in St. Andrews for their annual event in memory of Elizabeth.

"It's not something that you get over. But this is a way to keep her memory alive for us," Elizabeth's father, Jeff said. "There's three tough weeks a year, This week, the week that we lost her, and her birthday."

But in bittersweetness, it's also this week that gives way to joy. The Elizabeth Bottorf Memorial Redfish Tournament draws local anglers. Lucky anglers draw prizes and lucky kids draw strokes.

"From our fundraiser we put children through swim lessons every summer," Jeff Bottorf said.

Through the foundation they have been able to raise more than $20,000 over the last eight years and granted swim lessons to more than 600 kids. Working with the local Boys and Girls Club, the Department of Children and Families and the Big Bend Community Based Care in Bay County, Jeff and his wife Carolyn said they're working to do the same for local foster children.

"So we're hoping to just blow it out of the water," Carolyn Bottorf said, "and get to do even more next year."

Allen Miekle is a local and one of Saturdays participating anglers. He said he fished in Burnt Mill Creek and spent more than 10 hours on the water. Holding up his dripping redfish, weighing 4.45 pounds, Mielke said he seeks out tournaments that are also for the benefit of the community.

"For the simple reason, it's for the children," he said. "I enjoy it and to me it's all about the kids."

The Bottorfs see it much the same way. They hope to someday open a community pool they would name for Elizabeth.

"We had a choice, we could be bitter, or better," Carolyn Bottorf said. "And we chose to be better. So we said OK, we're gonna take something terrible that we hope never happens to anybody else and just see if we can't do something good with it."

And a little something good sometimes comes as a big ole' redfish.