Haven't had time to get to know the Democrats who are running for president?

You've come to the right place.

We put together some key information about each of the Democrats who remain in the race -- from their political experience to their stance on issues like immigration, gay marriage and health care.

Scroll down to find out where Hillary Clinton, Bernie Sanders and Martin O'Malley stand on some big issues.

Hillary Clinton: The front-runner About Hillary Clinton Age: 67 Education: Clinton graduated from Wellesley and then got her J.D. from Yale Law School. Political experience: Clinton was first lady of the United States from 1993-2001. She then served as a U.S. senator from New York from 2001-2009 and as secretary of state from 2009-2013. Did you know: Clinton won a Grammy in 1996 for the audio version of her book, "It Takes a Village." Here's where Clinton stands on the issues... Minimum wage: Clinton this summer voiced support for a proposal to raise the federal minimum wage to $12 per hour. Health care: Clinton wants to build on the Affordable Care Act, lower copays and deductibles, and reduce the cost of prescription medication. Immigration: Clinton advocates comprehensive immigration reform and a path to legal citizenship for people who are in the country without documentation. Gay marriage: Clinton's position on gay marriage has evolved over the years. She recently supported the Supreme Court's ruling in favor of same-sex marriage. Equal pay for women: Clinton introduced the Paycheck Fairness Act back when she was a senator. She says she will work to pass this legislation, if elected. Citizens United: Clinton wants a constitutional amendment to overturn the Citizens United decision, which ruled that political spending is protected under the First Amendment. (Credit: Facebook / Hillary Clinton) About Hillary Clinton Age: 67 Education: Clinton graduated from Wellesley and then got her J.D. from Yale Law School. Political experience: Clinton was first lady of the United States from 1993-2001. She then served as a U.S. senator from New York from 2001-2009 and as secretary of state from 2009-2013. Did you know: Clinton won a Grammy in 1996 for the audio version of her book, "It Takes a Village." Here's where Clinton stands on the issues... Minimum wage: Clinton this summer voiced support for a proposal to raise the federal minimum wage to $12 per hour. Health care: Clinton wants to build on the Affordable Care Act, lower copays and deductibles, and reduce the cost of prescription medication. Immigration: Clinton advocates comprehensive immigration reform and a path to legal citizenship for people who are in the country without documentation. Gay marriage: Clinton's position on gay marriage has evolved over the years. She recently supported the Supreme Court's ruling in favor of same-sex marriage. Equal pay for women: Clinton introduced the Paycheck Fairness Act back when she was a senator. She says she will work to pass this legislation, if elected. Citizens United: Clinton wants a constitutional amendment to overturn the Citizens United decision, which ruled that political spending is protected under the First Amendment. (Credit: Facebook / Hillary Clinton)