Republican presidential candidate Ted Cruz has been the target of some particularly bizarre attacks in recent days by mainstream publications such as the New York Times and Rolling Stone Magazine.

On Thursday, Jeb Lund wrote an article for Rolling Stone Magazine lamenting, for example, that Ted Cruz's book A Time for Truth "possesses only 66 end notes." Lund's article, which links to Soros-funded hyper-partisan publications ThinkProgress and MediaMatters, further complained (hysterically):

"He [Ted Cruz] is gaffe proof because the gaffes are not arrived at by error."

Lund seems to make the point that Cruz's brilliance is "exceptionally nasty" because Lund can't really find anything in his book to dispute. Contrast Cruz's book with Barack Obama's autobiography, Dreams from My Father, which contained numerous unchallenged falsehoods.

Pulling at strings, Lund also claimed falsely that "a Ted Cruz spokesman...walks back the candidate's comment that Robert Dear might have been a 'transgendered leftist activist,'" referring to a retort Cruz made regarding a vicious killer in Colorado Springs. Lund linked to the New York Times for proof of this claim, perhaps hoping nobody would check his source, which made no such admission.

Speaking of the New York Times, an OpEd by Frank Bruni this week also praised Cruz's brilliance while fretting that "voters should be wary — very wary — of Ted Cruz," warning (hysterically) that Cruz will try to convince voters that he is not "nasty:"

"...Expect orchestrated glimpses of a high-minded Cruz, less skunk than statesman, his sneer ceding territory to a smile."

Bruni continues to provide a statement from Ted Cruz's "freshman roommate" who says he would "rather have anybody else be the president..." for evidence that Americans should be terrified. Ted Cruz was 17-years-old when he resided with this particular roommate.

While the mainstream media has largely ignored Cruz; it is unlikely that they will be able avoid him much longer.

Neither of the above articles addressed Cruz's stand on policy issues.