She is a determined force who moved from secretarial work to become a titan of international industry. Best known for nearly six years as CEO of Hewlett-Packard, Carly Fiorina was the first female to run a Fortune 20 company. She has been high on lists of powerful women, low on some lists of tech CEOs and her controversial $25 billion merger with Compaq went from criticism to applause. She is a cancer survivor, author and is a fluent Italian speaker. The race for president will be her second political campaign, after an unsuccessful U.S. Senate run in 2010. Here is where Fiorina stands on 10 key issues.

RELATED CONTENT

Climate change: It is real and manmade. But government has limited ability to address it.

Speaking in New Hampshire in February, Fiorina said there is scientific consensus that climate change is real and caused by humans. But she also argued that it is not clear that a single nation or state can reverse the trend. She implied that targeting the coal industry will not solve the problem.

Education: Set national standards but give local districts maximum control. No Child Left Behind was positive.

In a position paper while running for the U.S. Senate in California, Fiorina strongly advocated for metric-based accountability in schools. She praised No Child Left Behind as setting high standards and Race to the Top for using internationally-benchmarked measures. Fiorina also said that the ethnic achievement gap remains a problem but did not offer further specifics. In general she has spoken in favor of as much local control and input in education as possible.

Watch the PBS NewsHour Democratic Primary Debate, 9 p.m. EST Feb. 11, on your local PBS station, and in our live stream, which will begin at 8:30 p.m.

Guns: Gun access is an important right. Do not ban assault weapons. Allow some on the No-Fly list to own guns.

Fiorina has said that she is a strong supporter of second-amendment gun rights and that she opposed the 1994 bill which banned a large group of semi-automatic or assault weapons. In the 2010 U.S. Senate race, Fiorina said the No-Fly list is broad and some people on it should be allowed to own a gun. Politifact reviewed her statements on the issue and noted that at the time she did not have a firm stance on other potential proposed limits on gun access.

Health care: Repeal the Affordable Care Act. Increase health insurance competition.

Fiorina told NBC’s Meet the Press in 2014 that President Obama’s health care law needs to be repealed. She argued it has not lowered the ranks of the uninsured enough and that it has led to increased costs. To replace it, Fiorina indicated that the health insurance market should be made more competitive, though she has not offered specifics yet.

Immigration: Pass the DREAM Act. For other undocumented immigrants, a direct path to citizenship is unfair.

While running for the U.S. Senate in California in 2010, Fiorina said she supports the DREAM Act, which would give legal status to people who were brought to the U.S. illegally as children. More recently, she has criticized former Florida Governor Jeb Bush for offering other undocumented immigrants — those who arrived as adults — a path to citizenship, calling it “unfair” to those who immigrate legally.

Internet: Overturn net neutrality.

In an Op-Ed for CNN.com, Fiorina blasted President Obama’s policy of net neutrality, which is the idea that Internet providers must offer customers equal access and similar pricing for different content. Fiorina argues net neutrality will insert bureaucrats into the fabric of the Internet, giving government a role in pricing and establishing an obstacle for tech companies.

Social issues: The Supreme Court was wrong on gay marriage. No position yet on whether it is settled law. Ban most abortions after 20 weeks. Overturn Roe v. Wade.

Fiorina believes the Supreme Court overstepped its boundaries when it ruled that same-sex marriage should be allowed in all 50 states. She has not indicated yet if she believes the issue is settled law or if she would push for a Constitutional amendment to reverse the court decision. When running for U.S. Senate in 2010, the former CEO supported California’s Proposition 8 to make same-sex marriage illegal and said that gay couples should be afforded the right to civil unions and other legal benefits.

Fiorina supports the Pain-Capable Unborn Child Protection Act, which bans abortions 20 weeks after fertilization, except in cases of rape, incest or danger to the life of the mother. In the past she has said that, if given the opportunity, she would vote to overturn Roe v Wade.

Taxes: Simplify the tax code. Move to zero-based budgeting. Do not increase the gas tax.

Writing on Facebook, Fiorina said the current tax system is “in desperate need of reform” and argued for a simpler tax code, though she did not give specifics. In the same post, she advocated zero-based budgeting, which would start funding discussions from a base budget of zero every year and build from there, rather than starting with the amount of funding the department received the previous year. In addition, the former CEO argued against any increase in the gas tax in a Wall Street Journal Op-Ed, saying lower gas prices are an important factor in America’s economic recovery.

Iran and Israel: Support Israel by breaking off nuclear talks. Verify actions before Iran sanctions are lifted.

The former tech company executive would like Congress to intervene in the Iran nuclear negotiations and says the U.S. would support Israel if it broke off talks now. In general, she wants more inspections, verifications and compliance from Iran before the United States lifts any sanctions. Fiorina is watchful of Russia’s role in the process and has said Putin is on a quest to regain Russian dominance in the world.

Islamic State: Arm the Kurds.

Fiorina would send more weapons to the Kurds fighting the Islamic State in and around northern Iraq.

SUBSCRIBE: Get the analysis of Mark Shields and David Brooks delivered to your inbox every week.