The day after new details came out about two massive government data hackings, White House press secretary Josh Earnest said President Obama believes the Office of Personnel Management needs "new leadership." Earnest confirmed that Director Katherine Archuleta had resigned. (AP)

A mindboggling amount of personal information has been exposed as a result of the recent hacks against the Office of Personnel Management. The attacks now affect far more people than we originally thought: 22.1 million Americans, to be exact, or nearly 1 in 15 Americans.

While some retail and health insurance hacks have affected more people, the OPM attacks represent the most significant to hit the government to date.

To put the hack in perspective, here’s how it stacks up against the rest of the country.

If all the people caught up in the OPM hack lived together, they would amount to the nation’s third-largest state after California and Texas.



They would displace Florida as the nation's third most populous state. (Wikimedia Commons)

More people were affected by the hack than are unemployed in America.



Job seeker William Huarte, right, fills out an application at the Garden Grove Job Expo in Garden Grove, California, U.S., on Friday, Feb. 11, 2011. (Jonathan Alcorn/Bloomberg)

Nearly twice as many people had their personal information exposed as there are undocumented immigrants in the United States.



A line of people living in the U.S. without legal permission wait outside the Coalition for Humane Immigrant Rights in Los Angeles. (AP Photo/Damian Dovarganes)

[Q&A: What you need to know about the hack of government background investigations]

Almost 6 million more Americans got hit by the OPM hack than have signed up for Obamacare.



Demonstrators in support of U.S. President Barack Obama's health-care law, the Affordable Care Act (ACA), hold up "ACA is Here to Stay" signs after the U.S. Supreme Court ruled 6-3 to save Obamacare tax subsidies outside the Supreme Court in Washington, D.C., U.S., on Thursday, June 25, 2015. (Andrew Harrer/Bloomberg)

Fewer people are projected to attend college and graduate school in the U.S. in 2015 than were affected by the OPM hack.



Midshipmen graduate from the U.S. Naval Academy in 2013. ( U.S. Navy

You are more likely to have been caught up by the OPM hack than to be diagnosed with diabetes in the United States — and are only slightly less likely actually to have diabetes.



(AP Photo/Nam Y. Huh)

The number of people affected exceeds the number of Macintosh computers sold by Apple last year.



The 27-inch Apple Inc. iMac computer with 5K retina display is displayed after a product announcement in Cupertino, California, U.S., on Thursday, Oct. 16, 2014. (Noah Berger/Bloomberg)

It also eclipses the number of hot dogs that Major League Baseball fans ate at games last season.



Contestant Pete Davekos at the 2010 Nathan's hot dog eating competition. ( helloturkeytoe / Flickr

And the number of Americans who will eat a pizza today.

And, last but not least, more people got exposed by OPM than the entire group of people who got hit by identity fraud in all of 2013.

Many in the government privately suspect that China may have been behind the attacks. If that’s the case, then the people swept up in the OPM hacks may actually have less to worry about than if the attacks were perpetrated by a criminal gang; China is unlikely to use the information for garden-variety financial fraud.

But the larger breach, affecting 21.5 million people, was of a security-clearance database that includes information that could be used by a foreign government to put unwanted pressure on U.S. officials.

Correction: A sharp-eyed reader points out that there are 22 billion trees in Maine, not 22 million. Thanks for catching that!