Frankie KellerTwigg switches direction and rejoins the Bobcats on the hard wood. KellerTwigg took his junior season off from basketball, but returns for his senior year, adding some strength and size in the middle ( Walt Hester / Trail-Gazette )

Isaak Cirone shuffles backward during drills on Wednesday. The junior will lead the Bobcats into the 2013-14 season after leading the team in scoring last year. (Walt Hester / Trail-Gazette)

The Estes Park boys baskeball team is looking forward to a competitive season with a skilled varsity team, yet one with little experience on the court. The Bobcat team is younger than past years, with only four seniors on the varsity roster. This opens the door for the underclassmen to get more playing time.

"Tough players don't pace themselves for the fourth quarter," said head coach Chad Nachtrieb. "Tough players play the 1st quarter just as hard as they play the 4th.," something the Cats intend to make happen this season.

Another one of the philosophies that is important to Nachtrieb is that all team members "are always ready at all times," especially if the Bobcats want to compete at the top of their league. Nachtrieb believes that the team can be top 3 or 4 in their competitive league if they are ready to play hard and play hard all four quarters.

Estes is in one of the toughest leagues in the state. Last season the Patriot league had three teams in the top eight, of which two teams made it to the final 4 of the state championship tournament.

Nachtrieb thinks that this year has opportunities to bring the Bobcats closer together. After four years of coaching in Estes, "I finally feel that the entire team is buying into my coaching philosophies." Nachtrieb wants to take advantage of embracing those "teachable" moments on and off the court.

This year, the philosophy is going to include "Pride."

"It's been a rough fall for everyone. Still some of our teammates are displaced from their homes and everyone has suffered at some level," said Nachtrieb. "We will experience other teams pulling for us, just because of what we've been through. I want the boys to understand and be proud of our team."

Advertisement

Coaching with Nachtrieb are assistant coaches Renee Archambault coaching "C" team and Jim Bangs coach of the J.V. team.

The Bobcats will begin their season the first weekend in December competing in the Skyline Invitational, which will be held in Longmont.