Hello, MarketWatchers.



The Sex Pistols’ Johnny Rotten on Greece, the Confederate flag and Obamacare

Johnny Rotten reflects on his life and the world today.



A special invitation: The Fiduciary Quagmire

What do federal proposals to impose a fiduciary standard on retirement advisers mean for investors and advisers? If you’re planning to be in New York on Tuesday, July 28, you’re invited to an evening of cocktails and conversation on the Fiduciary Quagmire. The event is free but reservations are required as seating is limited.

In this free MarketWatch panel discussion, we’ll consider what investors and advisers need to know about the proposed fiduciary standard for retirement advisers, and what changes they might want to make to their financial plans and practices/businesses if new regulations go through.

Mark Hulbert, MarketWatch senior columnist and editor of the Hulbert Financial Digest, will moderate the event. Panelists include Robert Powell, senior columnist and editor of Retirement Weekly from MarketWatch; Knut Rostad, president and founder of the Institute for the Fiduciary Standard; Ira Hammerman, executive vice president and general counsel for the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association; and Brad Campbell, attorney and former Assistant Secretary of Labor for Employee Benefits and head of the Employee Benefits Security Administration.

The evening begins with cocktails at 6:30 p.m., followed by our panel discussion and a question-and-answer period. If you’re interested, email MarketWatchEvent@wsj.com for more information or to RSVP.

A surprising reason for rising college tuition

How federal aid balloons tuition rates.

How long does it take to pay a $2,000 credit card debt with minimum payments?

It takes less time to have children and raise them to adulthood.

First daughter Malia Obama may have the dream millennial internship

The 17-year-old firstborn of President Barack Obama was spotted on the set of HBO’s “Girls” last week.

10 states where people drink the most beer

No. 1: North Dakota.

Should the government have access to all your texts and emails?

Security experts say no.

Gold for your IRA?

How to invest IRA contributions in precious metal assets.



ELSEWHERE ON MARKETWATCH:

The latest on the Greek debt drama

We rounded up the news on Greece’s debt crisis after Sunday’s resounding vote to reject demands by the country’s creditors. U.S. stocks staged a rebound after a morning selloff to end the session with modest gains, following reports that Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras proposed an interim financing until the end of July. And no, Argentina isn’t a role model for Greece. By the way, Greece is lovely and all, but it’s never been very close to the U.S. politically or economically.



China’s stock-market collapse is not over yet

The Shanghai Composite Index has fallen nearly 30% in about a month.

Apple Watch sales plunge 90%

Apple has been selling fewer than 20,000 watches a day in the U.S. since the initial surge in April.

How a ‘safe’ strategy can pick stocks with gains of up to 234% over five years

It takes guts to be a long-term conservative investor.

When is the best time to buy a car?

We put to the test the idea that summer is the best time to get a car.

Netflix takes on big Hollywood studios with first original movies

Will the video-streaming company have as much success with feature films as it did with the television series “House of Cards” and “Orange is the New Black?”

More from MarketWatch