Chet Bell wasn’t the most qualified candidate to lead the county’s first drug court program when he interviewed for the position in 1980, but it was his well-worn work boots that caught Randy Croy’s attention.

As the program manager of the Volusia County Drug Council, Croy needed someone to manage a new program that redirected nonviolent inmates to drug rehab instead of prison. But Bell, a middle school social studies teacher, had no experience working with drug addicts when he walked into Croy’s office more than three decades ago.

“All the job candidates came in wearing shiny black shoes but Chet’s shoes were functional and utilitarian, which is my kind of style,” Croy recalled. “He didn’t have much experience in the arena, but he struck me as engaging and bright and a real compassionate person who could navigate the courts and justice system.”

Bell, 60, was recognized last week for his 35 years of leadership in mental health and substance abuse services in Volusia County and across the state. Bell’s Dec. 31 retirement as the CEO of Stewart-Marchman-Act Behavioral Healthcare marks the beginning of a new chapter for the $40 million organization that provides substance abuse treatment and related behavioral services to 21,000 people each year in Volusia and Flagler, Putnam and St. Johns counties.

As a tribute to his legacy, Stewart-Marchman will rename its Pine Grove Crisis Center after Bell and establish a scholarship fund in his honor, board members announced during a reception Wednesday for Bell at Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University.

“To have my name associated with that facility that helps people in crisis, it’s just an honor,” Bell said.

Those who worked with Bell recall his ability to earn the trust and respect of clients, employees and community leaders as well as his persistence to streamline treatment programs and maintain funding levels during the recession. He also had an open-door policy with clients and found ways to incorporate his philosophy into the most menial tasks, such as emails.

After moving to Daytona Beach from Ohio in 1980, Bell was looking to make a career change and responded to a job ad to help coordinate a new program that gave inmates with drug addictions the option of going to rehab as part of their sentence. Croy said this was the first drug court in Volusia County and required the help of former Volusia Circuit Judge James Foxman, who supported the initiative.

Bell was in charge of screening inmates to determine if they would be good candidates for rehab. Bell said the job came with a huge learning curve, but he liked having a role in changing the status quo. At the time, the justice system and drug treatment agencies “did not have a good relationship,” Croy said.

“Chet was really valuable as a liaison who worked with the courts,” Croy said. “It was important for both systems to be able to work together, and I think he helped set the stage for improving treatment in our community and across the state.”

Bell said Croy was one of his most important mentors and taught him the importance of being persistent, yet remaining patient.

After six years working for Daytona Beach-based Act Corp., which merged with the Volusia County Drug Council in 1982, Bell took a position with the Volusia-Flagler Safety Council for three years. In 1989, Stewart-Marchman Center CEO Ernest Cantley recruited Bell to work as assistant director for the organization.

“He had a lot of experience in the realm of human services and was very committed to his family,” said Cantley, who retired in 2005. “He encompassed the family values that we had at (Stewart-Marchman) and was very dedicated to the community.”

After Bell became CEO of the Stewart-Marchman Center in 2005, he helped identify a way to streamline services.

Clients who struggled with drug addiction often had a history of mental illness, but mental health services and drug treatment were disjointed. Despite sharing office space with Stewart-Marchman, Act. Corp operated separately.

Bell helped guide the two agencies through a merger in 2008.

Circuit Judge David Hood served as legal counsel at the time and said Bell put aside his own ambitions to help improve mental health and drug treatment services. The merger meant Bell took on more responsibility as CEO.

“Before we had personalities in places and no one was willing to compromise, but Bell was the epitome of doing what was best for the community,” Hood said.

Bell said the merger not only streamlined care, but it significantly reduced administrative costs. And while he couldn’t predict the housing market crash in 2007, the merger helped preserve programs while many other social service agencies grappled with funding cuts and loss of donations. By lobbying lawmakers, Bell helped maintain state funding levels through the recession.

Ivan Cosimi, who has served as chief financial officer for Stewart-Marchman since 1998, stepped in as CEO on Jan. 1. He said Bell has taught him how to lead with his heart.

“Chet had his head in (Stewart-Marchman-Act) but he also had his heart in it,” Cosimi said. “That funnels down through the ranks. It’s contagious. I caught it, too.”

While programs have improved, the demand for services is still the agency’s biggest challenge. Most programs have wait lists and clients who need substance abuse treatment or mental health counseling usually can’t afford to wait for care, said Bell, who will remain as a consultant and write grants to expand programs.

“We have to continue to work so we can be in a position to better serve those who need behavioral health care, and we are nowhere near that at this time,” Bell said.

Stewart-Marchman-Act Foundation Chairman John Greaves said Bell never kept a distance between himself and his clients and infused his work philosophy into everything he did.

Perhaps Bell’s mantra was summed up best in his email tagline: “Work hard, work smart, have fun and make a difference one day at a time.”

“If I could do that every day, I knew I could make a difference,” Greaves said. “When you measure the quality of a man’s life, (Chet) is as good as they come.”