One of the most closely watched congressional races will play out in Gila County with the high-stakes struggle between incumbent congresswoman Anne Kirkpatrick (D-Flagstaff) and the just-barely-victorious House Speaker Andy Tobin.

At first glance, Tobin would seem at a disadvantage, eking out a roughly 500-vote victory in a bruising Republican primary with just $82,000 left in his campaign coffers.

Kirkpatrick, by contrast, has stockpiled $1.3 million while raising money relentlessly during her unopposed primary.

But millions of dollars will likely come sloshing into the race on both sides from outside sources, since it’s one of a relative handful of seats in which either party could pull out a win.

Both national parties and big-spending independent groups like the U.S. Chamber of Commerce are likely to pump money into the contest for Congressional District 1, which encompasses more than a third of the land in the state — including all of Southern Gila County.

Northern Gila County remains in Congressional District 4, where incumbent Paul Gosar (R-Prescott) faced no Republican opposition in the primary and the token opposition of activist Mike Weisser in the general election.

District 4 runs from Yuma to Utah along the Colorado River, but swoops inland to take in Prescott, the Verde Valley and Northern Gila County.

Weisser is a former plumber, a homeless shelter manager and middle school teacher active in political causes, including Occupy Kingman, Move On.Org, Amnesty Interna­tional and an effort to qualify a ballot measure legalizing recreational use of marijuana in Arizona.

Gosar, a former dentist who has championed investigations of the state department, the Internal Revenue Service and the U.S. Attorney General’s Office, is a staunch conservative in a safe Republican district.

But the contest for the votes of Southern Gila County residents will likely prove fierce. Registration is 39 percent Republican, 40 percent Democratic and 43 percent Independent. But the district voted for Mitt Romney in the last presidential election and the figures on voting patterns for the district compiled by the Independent Redistricting Commission concluded the district is one of the few toss-up districts in the state, with Democrats enjoying only a slight edge. That explains why Gosar moved from Flagstaff to Prescott after the redistricting, to run in a safe Republican district. He had defeated Kirkpatrick in the old district boundaries in the election that enabled Republicans to seize control of the U.S. House of Representatives.

In November, Republicans hope to build their majority in the House and perhaps take control of the U.S. Senate.

Tobin started out as a heavy favorite in the Republican primary, with name recognition as speaker of the house and a broad fundraising network. He faced a surprisingly tenacious challenge from Springerville businessman and rancher Gary Kiehne and state Rep. Adam Kwasman. Kiehne conceded the race late last week, with most of the uncounted ballots in Coconino County — which proved a stronghold for Tobin.

The campaign at times turned into something of a gaff-fest, drawing national headlines and bits on comedy shows. Kwasman got attention for his statement that Democrats account for 99 percent of mass shootings, for which he later apologized. Tobin gained attention when he suggested that unaccompanied minors in the country illegally could bring the ebola virus into the U.S.

But Kiehne gained ground steadily in the primary against the better known Tobin with an injection of about $600,000 of his own money. Tobin spent about $520,000, but came on strong at the end thanks to independent expenditures totaling $300,000 from the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, $40,000 from Main Street Advocacy and $25,000 from Preserve America’s Future.

The National Republican Party wasted no time funding a barrage of ads attacking Kirkpatrick for her “baggage” including her vote to pass the Affordable Care Act.

The Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, meanwhile, announced plans to finance attack ads attacking Tobin for his role as speaker in supporting cuts in the state’s school spending that totaled some $1 billion during the recession.

Tobin was elected speaker in 2011. He has served in the House since 2006 and as majority leader from 2010 to 2011. He led the House through the bleak days of the recession, when state revenues dropped by nearly a third. He also championed a number of controversial measures, including SB 1070 — which gained national headlines when it cracked down on illegal immigration by giving local police more responsibility for enforcing federal immigration laws and broad authority to stop people they suspected were in the country illegal. Most of the law was later declared unconstitutional by the U.S. Supreme Court.

The Paulden banker and businessman is a Roman Catholic with five children.

In the House, he amassed a staunchly conservative voting record.

He has nearly perfect voting scores from the National Rifle Association, Americans for Prosperity, Arizona National Federation of Independent Businesses, Arizona Small Business Association, The Goldwater Institute’s rating on taxes and budget, the Center for Arizona Policy, and anti-abortion groups. He has already won the endorsement of the Arizona Police Association, Arizona Right to Life, Business-Industry Political Action Committee and Republican Main Street Partnership.

Republicans quickly closed ranks behind Tobin for the crucial struggle ahead, realizing Kirkpatrick’s seat remains one of the best chances for the party to increase its majority in the House. Kirkpatrick won the seat with just 49 percent of the vote two years ago, with 6 percent of the vote going to the Libertarian in the race.

However, Kirkpatrick has been preparing for the election for the past two years, developing a fundraising network and cultivating one of the most conservative voting records among House Democrats.

She’s a former state lawmaker and Coconino County prosecutor. Born in McNary, she graduated from the University of Arizona and lives in Flagstaff. She’s also a Roman Catholic, with two children. She served in the state Legislature from 2005-07 and in Congress from 2009-11, until her defeat by Gosar. She narrowly regained the redistricted seat in 2012.

She accumulated strong ratings for groups like Arizona’s Right to Choose, Women’s Political Caucus, Emily’s List, the League of Conservation Voters, the Sierra Club and other women’s rights, civil rights and environmental organizations.

On the other hand, she also got high marks from business groups and gun rights groups, according to the ratings posted on the Votesmart website.

She has faced attacks for supporting key policies of the Obama administration, including the Affordable Care Act. But she has also sharply criticized the administration on things like immigration polices and gun control efforts.

She has joined in several bipartisan efforts, notably joining with Gosar to push for a land exchange in Pinal County that would allow the development of a massive copper mine near Superior. She has also joined with Gosar to sponsor forest health bills as well as a bill to help Payson build the Blue Ridge pipeline by clarifying which federal agency has authority over the construction.

GovTrack.us tracks votes for every member of Congress and compiles a graphic showing the “ideology score” for each representative. The bills tracked focus on the most divisive issues, to draw as sharp a distinction as possible. The chart (https://www.govtrack.us/congress/members/ann_kirkpatrick/412286) shows no Republicans on the Democratic side of the dividing line and about nine Democrats who fall on the Republican side of the line. Kirkpatrick falls just barely on the Democratic side of the line.

The website says Kirkpatrick missed 147 of 2,775 roll call votes — an absentee rate of 5.3 percent — roughly double the average.