However distasteful he may find it, President Obama has no choice but to try to work with President Vladimir Putin if there is to be an end to the Syria debacle, just as Mr. Obama had no choice but to work with the Russian on the Iran deal. Thus a meeting of the two presidents on the relatively neutral ground of the United Nations General Assembly is the right thing to do. It thus seemed puerile for the White House press secretary, Josh Earnest, to portray Mr. Putin as a beggar “desperate” for a meeting and to belittle his personal appearance. That is not the way to prepare for a critical meeting.

Still, it is easy to sympathize with Mr. Obama. Mr. Putin has openly defied international law and Western sanctions by his annexation of Ukraine and support of rebels in eastern Ukraine. His backing of Syria’s President Bashar al-Assad is one reason the Syrian civil war has dragged on so long and has created so appalling a humanitarian crisis. He routinely blames the United States for his troubles. For these and other reasons it is not easy for Mr. Obama to acknowledge that he needs Mr. Putin’s cooperation.

Sign Up for the Opinion Today Newsletter Every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from Op-Ed columnists, The Times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world.

The hard truth, however, is that neither Mr. Obama nor Mr. Putin is on particularly solid ground. The American effort to train moderate Syrians who could roll back both the Islamic State and the Assad forces has been a dismal failure; indeed, it is becoming increasingly clear that ISIS cannot be confronted effectively without a political settlement in Syria between Mr. Assad’s regime and the opposition, which may mean keeping Mr. Putin’s client temporarily in power.

The Russian president has his own problems. His economy has been battered by dropping oil prices and Western sanctions and he is smarting from Western ostracism over Ukraine. Syria gives him a chance to push Ukraine into the background and mount the global stage as an indispensable player. This, of course, is the role Mr. Earnest was seeking to deny him by depicting him as a thuggish supplicant.

Mr. Putin may indeed be looking only for a spotlight. But the surest way to find out is for Mr. Obama to sit down with him and see whether there is anything Russia and America can do together in Syria. There is nothing demeaning in that.