On NBC's "Meet the Press" Sunday, Baltimore Mayor Stephanie Rawlings-Blake weighed in on the controversy surrounding the New England Patriots, who are being accused of cheating for using underinflated footballs during their 45-7 win over the Indianapolis Colts in the AFC championship game.

The Patriots narrowly beat the Ravens, 35-31, in the second round of the NFL playoffs a week earlier.

Addressing the controversy on the national politics show "Meet the Press," host Chuck Todd told Rawlings-Blake: "I know you want the Patriots totally disbarred from the Super Bowl."

The mayor responded: "I think there is a very simple way to resolve this whole issue: #RavensSeahawksSuperBowl."

Other panelists, though, defended the Patriots. Todd said the matter was like "prosecuting a traffic stop." And, NBC journalist Tom Brokaw argued that, even if the Patriots did cheat, it probably wouldn't have changed the game's outcome.

Ravens' Harbaugh on deflate-gate Ravens coach John Harbaugh talks about not noticing any differences in the footballs when his team played the New England Patriots. (Kevin Richardson/Baltimore Sun video) Ravens coach John Harbaugh talks about not noticing any differences in the footballs when his team played the New England Patriots. (Kevin Richardson/Baltimore Sun video) See more videos

"The only thing that was more deflated than the Patriots football was the Colts game plan," Brokaw said. "... A softer football doesn't make that much difference in terms of the spread at the end of the game."

Rawlings-Blake, the secretary of the Democratic National Committee, has become a frequent guest of the show.

In another discussion, Rawlings-Blake accused Republicans, including GOP presidential hopeful Mike Huckabee, the former governor of Arkansas, of "flip-flopping" on Common Core education standards.

Some Republicans, including Huckabee, initially supported the standards, but now routinely bash them, she said.

"Many people, like Huckabee, are flip-flopping on the issue," she said.

Huckabee told Todd he now opposes Common Core, because he believes it is "dumbing down" the schools.

He said he is now "absolutely against what Common Core has come to stand for. It's totally different than what it was intended to be. ... The whole idea was let the states decide the standards, but have high standards. Lift education up. I don't know of anybody in America who thinks we'd be better of dumbing down the schools."

lbroadwater@baltsun.com

Twitter.com/lukebroadwater