Brooklyn-based architect Melissa Cicetti, 46, had enough on her calendar this past fall without thinking about her health insurance. She was renovating her Red Hook home post-Sandy and juggling design projects for several clients at her one-person firm, Studio Cicetti Architect PC.



Then she got a cancellation notice from Oxford for the individual plan she had in 2013. With that, finding new coverage jumped to the top of her to-do list.



It was a rude awakening. Her broker told her that to get Oxford coverage that cost about the same as the $569 a month—with a $2,000 deductible—that she was paying in 2013, she would have to shell out about $590 a month for the insurer's new bronze plan. But that came with a higher out-of-pocket threshold: $5,500, compared with $3,000 for the old plan.



"Even the crappiest coverage would have cost me another $20 a month over what I was paying," she said.



Ms. Cicetti ended up buying coverage on the New York state health exchange at a lower price than her previous private insurance through a new, consumer-operated plan. She secured platinum coverage through Health Republic for $516 a month with no deductible and a maximum out-of-pocket expense of $2,000.



Ms. Cicetti would not say how much her firm makes, but added, "Rest assured, I am not eligible for subsidies." Despite the fact that the plan's network is smaller than that offered through her old coverage, she is happy with her choice. "I feel great about it," she said. "My primary-care physician is on it."



For many of New York's successful entrepreneurs, long accustomed to buying their own private coverage, Ms. Cicetti's dilemma is familiar. Faced with meeting the mandates of the Affordable Care Act, many insurers have dropped policies and offered new ones that, in some cases, are pricier—which made it tricky for owners to purchase health care that would kick in by the law's Jan. 1 deadline for individual coverage. Though New Yorkers already get most of these mandatory new benefits, such as maternity coverage, a few items, like dental and vision care for children, are now required.



For those who may qualify for federal subsidies, looking for coverage means scrutinizing plans sold on the fledgling state health exchange—including offerings from companies new to the market. (Under the Affordable Care Act, individuals with a net income of under $45,900 qualify for federal help with premiums. The limit for a family of four is $94,200.)



For those who earn too much, the quest means also looking at the reconstituted plans sold off the exchange. Not all of these new options have been better ones. Out-of-pocket costs can be higher. Provider networks tend to be smaller—and going to doctors or facilities not participating in a plan may be costly.



"Not a single plan on the state exchange offers out-of-network coverage," said Susan Combs, the Manhattan broker at Combs & Co. who helped Ms. Cicetti choose her new plan.



That fact is not always obvious to shoppers who focus first on the monthly premiums offered, Ms. Combs said. The rate charts for plans sold on the state exchange allow comparisons on the cost of monthly premiums, the size of deductibles, the covered services offered and the annual out-of-pocket maximum. But on all of them, a tiny asterisk leads to a fine-print footnote that contains the bad news: "Nonparticipating provider services are not covered, and you pay the full cost."



That can mean that care at a specialty hospital is not a benefit—or that it's time to say goodbye to a physician. "I know a lot of people who are upset, particularly if they can no longer see the same pediatrician or obstetrician," Ms. Combs said.



The smaller networks offered on the exchanges can be a major deal-breaker, agreed Tim Tracy, a Connecticut broker whose clientele includes New Yorkers.



"People are in two boats," he said. Entrepreneurs whose earnings are low enough that they can get federal subsidies to help pay premiums "are getting great coverage for their money, and some of them are thrilled," Mr. Tracy said. In the other boat are people who earn too much to get the subsidies and want to be sure they can get care at any hospital and from any doctor they choose.

Goes both ways

Leilani Arita, 33, a freelance designer in the Greenpoint section of Brooklyn, is in the happy-with-her-options category. She is enrolling in a silver plan offered by Oscar, a Manhattan startup created to be sold on the exchange. "I'm very excited about getting insurance," she said.



It will be the first coverage Ms. Arita has had since deciding to strike out on her own four years ago. Her old job as a designer for retail chain Anthropologie was fun and came with health coverage. "I made a 10-foot wire egg for the Rockefeller Center store," she said.



But being independent has brought a variety of clients that made it worth losing company benefits. "It's been a good four years, but I was always nervous about not having coverage," she said. Her design business is making money, but not enough to make her ineligible for a subsidy, Ms. Arita said.



There's no such joy at Syzygy3, a profitable Manhattan tech consulting company. Founder and principal Sean O'Rourke, 43, said he and his partners are still reeling from the nearly 40% premium increase the company may soon have to pay to provide health coverage for its four full-time employees.



Syzygy3's old Oxford HMO plan costs $533 a month per employee, has modest co-pays but no deductible and does not require a referral for specialists. The company picks up a percentage of the cost. But with a rate increase due when the company plan comes up for renewal in March, the monthly cost per -employee will rise to $733 and will include deductibles of at least $2,000 and a maximum out-of-pocket -expense of $5,000.



Despite the added cost, Mr. O'Rourke opted to stick with his existing plan, instead of trying one on the exchange, because it offers a greater choice of medical providers.



"I'm most concerned about offering out-of-network coverage," he said. "But we're getting hammered."

Get Crain's Small Business Alert Sign up for our FREE weekly Small Business Alert email newsletter. An essential summary of the week's top headlines selected for small businesses. More Newsletters ›

Comments