One of the definitions of a phobia is “extreme fear” of something. Many Americans have a fear of Muslims. They fear the woman in a burka walking down the street. Is she a suicide bomber?

This is entirely normal. It is rational. It is to be expected, the fear of the unknown, coupled with the very public scourge of Islamic terror.

This is not hatred or bigotry. No, it is a prehistoric reaction. A reaction to something that you know could very possibly inflict great bodily harm on yourself and your family.

I’m not saying it is preferred or the way things should be. I am saying, it’s just normal human instinct. Americans would rather not feel this way. They would rather have a pleasant feeling when they see someone who is obviously a Muslim. But years of jihad all over the world, including the United States, have prevented this from happening.

I don’t have to go through all of the Islamic attacks over the last few decades to prove my point. If you can’t see that, then you are in willful denial and irrational.

Americans are not bigots for feeling this way. They are not racist. They are rational human beings feeling things they can’t help but feel. President Obama and the media asking Americans to ignore and shame these feelings are not being honest. They have a hidden agenda.

Let’s for a second imagine there was a religion and a portion of that faith worshipped death. Let’s imagine that a small but powerful percentage of these worshippers wanted to kill Americans in brutal fashion any chance they could get. Now let’s add that 3,300 Americans were killed by airplanes flown by these worshippers crashing into buildings, and scores of innocents killed in many other distinct attacks. Let’s also imagine these extremists were sneaking into the country, taking advantage of the goodwill of Americans who welcome all who are interested in finding a better way of life.

Would any president be wrong to be concerned about the safety of his people? Should he take action?

Should he be shamed, ridiculed and called a bigot if he did so? I think not.

It is up to Muslims to fix this situation. Americans should not have to put aside their instincts to protect their families in order to not offend someone else. That is wrong and will only serve to cause more fear and distrust. The Obama administration is complicit in this shaming. Members of the administration would rather denigrate honest, innocent Americans rather than protect the people and the U.S. Constitution they swore to defend.

This is why Donald Trump is rising. It is not bigotry, hatred or racism. It is the fear mechanism that was built in our genes over the millennia. He simply has put a voice to what a majority of Americans already sense.

I wish it weren’t this way, but this is the reality.

At a recent event I attended, an Indian who brought his family to America seven years ago and now is a successful businessman, struck up a conversation which eventually moved to a political discussion. He was very interested in a variety of issues facing the country and I could tell he was a very intelligent man and had assimilated into American society. As the conversation ended and we said our goodbyes, he leaned over and whispered, “Don’t tell anyone, but I’m a Trump supporter.”