Donald Trump’s fall from atop the GOP presidential polls has started, turning Decision 2016 into a two-horse race with U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, in my opinion.

A national Reuters poll, released Friday, showed Trump’s support has tumbled 12 percentage points since making controversial, indefensible remarks about the Nov. 13 Paris terrorist attacks.

Trump suggested he would support a special database requiring Muslims to register with the government, a revolting idea to critics who likened it to registration of Jews in Nazi Germany.

It’s been an embarrassing, if initially successful, campaign for Trump, the self-absorbed New York businessman who bullied his way past Republican candidates with performances based on little more than, “I want to make our country great again.”

Trump’s insults, designed to inflame right-wing passions, have started to weaken his candidacy. While he’ll maintain a core of support, Republicans know they cannot nominate a fascist-leaning narcissist for president unless they want Hillary and Bill Clinton in the White House for another four years.

The novelty of Trump’s sharp tongue was somewhat refreshing and entertaining to eager supporters when he first announced his candidacy. To separate himself from the field, he unleashed racial, sexual and religious insults that made everyone gasp. The severity of your reaction to his politically incorrect meltdowns depended on your politics and humanity.

The candidate best positioned to pick up Trump’s pieces and win the nomination seems to be Cruz, the strongest remaining outsider in the jam-packed but weak Republican field.

Cruz qualifies as an outsider because he’s been harshly critical of current GOP leadership, which has presided over a do-nothing Congress and failed to turn back mandates and legislation pushed by President Barack Obama such as Obamacare and illegal immigration.

Republican voters do not want an establishment candidate this time around.

That’s why Ben Carson did well until falling apart on foreign policy and basic understanding of simple science. The retired brain surgeon turned out to be a head case.

That’s why Trump caught fire until he started exaggerating stories about seeing victims leap to their deaths from the Twin Towers from his New York penthouse four miles away and watching as Muslims in New Jersey cheered the attacks. Most establishment Republicans admit they’re afraid of nominating Trump, knowing such a decision would hand Clinton the keys to the Oval Office.

In reality, it’s not going to happen for Trump.

There’s going to be massive GOP campaigns to drive Trump’s poll numbers down even further. He’ll be flogged in attack ads leading up to the Iowa caucuses and New Hampshire primaries. He’ll be decimated with gang tackles in debates by his remaining rivals.

The Reuters poll showed Trump dropping from 43 percent support on Nov. 22 to 31 percent on Nov. 27, a five-day nosedive reminiscent of fluctuating GOP fickleness in 2012. Back then, at least five candidates — Rick Perry, Michele Bachmann, Newt Gingrich, Herman Cain and Rick Santorum — led in polls before former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney pulled away.

That’s why politicos will be looking for fast-rising stars between now and February. Gov. Jeb Bush, the establishment favorite, has fallen so low, he can’t get up. Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida does not have outsider appeal of Cruz. Others have no chance at this juncture.

It appears Cruz is ready for his closeup.

Cruz’s famous, liberal Harvard lawyer professor, Alan Dershowitz, says Cruz was among the smartest students he ever taught. And Cruz has been biding his time before facing off with Trump. Cruz created a bromance with Trump early in the campaign while others faced withering assaults from the unpredictable billionaire.

If Cruz wins in Iowa, and polls seem to be shifting that way, other Republican candidates will rally around him. The stakes are too high if Trump gets the nomination.

“I don’t believe Donald is going to be the nominee, and I think, in time, the lion’s share of his supporters end up with us,” Cruz said in an interview with a New York talk show host.

The final question remains. What will Trump do in response to the personal attacks and his eventual crash? His history in business suggests he will fight back and exhaust every resource.

If he feels slighted, Trump might mount an independent campaign, despite an earlier promise not to bolt the party. A third-party candidacy would devastate Republicans and guarantee Clinton’s election.

I’ve always maintained Trump was destined to be Ross Perot on steroids. Perot, a Texas billionaire, waged independent bids for the presidency in 1992 and 1996, actually leading in early 1992 polls until being exposed as somewhat of a crackpot.

On the other hand, Trump might accept a loss to Cruz, who holds views close to Trump on the economy and immigration. Cruz would be a better alternative to The Donald than Bush, Carson and Rubio, who have been obliterated by Trump in debates and his criticisms to media.

A picture of Trump as a gracious loser has never been taken. He has trouble even admitting when he’s wrong, as when he mocked a reporter for his disability and when he suggested a female Fox News reporter was menstruating for asking a tough question. Trump does not have the capacity to apologize.

If Trump were to listen to reason, he would moderate his bluster and stop insulting everyone who moves. He would spend every available resource proving he’s not a monster, or fascist, emerging from under the bed.

I can’t think of another candidate who scared the electorate more. Thinking back, the only other major candidate would be Republican Barry Goldwater in 1964. President Lyndon B. Johnson sailed to re-election then after Democrats portrayed Goldwater as having an itchy nuclear trigger finger during the height of the Cold War.

Trump vs. Cruz will be the heavyweight fight in 2016 the Republicans have asked to see. They’re two outsiders pushing their way into the conversation, one with the money to make it nasty and the other with a rising star, smarts and savvy to hold his ground.

◆◆◆

James Bennett is editor of The Daily Herald. Contact him at jbennett@c-dh.net. Follow him on Twitter @JamesBennettCDH.