Businesses can seek $1,000 grants for designated "lactation rooms"

In Boulder County, roughly fewer than half of all mothers, and about one-third of mothers earning below-average wages, are believed to still be breast-feeding six months after giving birth, according to county health officials.

That rate is a steep drop from the more than four out of five local women who report breast-feeding from day one.

"So what's happening at two months? At six months?" asks Linda Kopecky, project coordinator with Boulder County Public Health. "Moms are going back to work, back to school. They're re-entering daily life in public. That's when women cease to breast-feed."

American mothers, in general, breast-feed about as often, and sometimes for much longer than women in other Western nations. And the more than eight in 10 women estimated to breast-feed by pump far exceed pumping rates in other countries.

But in Boulder County and beyond, there is a movement to normalize breast-feeding for longer periods of time, and in public spaces.

In an effort to foster a more enduringly supportive system around mothers, and specifically working mothers, Boulder County now offers an incentive program, through which businesses and childcare centers can apply for up to $1,000 in reimbursement for costs associated with a designated "lactation room."

A conversation sometimes hard to initiate

Public health officials say that infants who are breast-fed are less susceptible to developing a slew of issues both in the short term and later in life, including respiratory infections, allergic diseases, obesity, diabetes and sudden infant death syndrome.

Advertisement

Additionally, these officials hope to banish widespread views of breastfeeding as something scandalous, sexual or, at a minimum, something that is not to be discussed aloud.

"It's 2015, and we're still separated from each other," Kopecky says. "Many women, the first person they've seen breastfeed is themselves."

It stands to reason, then, that female employees often say conversations about breastfeeding at work can be uncomfortable to initiate.

This is even more pronounced among women holding lower-paying jobs, who wield less leverage to self-advocate.

"Having a supervisor and an employer in tune and flexible and open in terms of helping moms transition back to work is really essential," says Victoria Lee, mother to a 1-year-old and a child health dietician in Boulder County.

"The accommodations the mom has in the workplace are going to play a role in whether she can continue."

Five years ago, the Affordable Care Act required employers to offer break time for women to pump breast milk during the workday — though the Fair Standards Labor Act never mandated that women had to be paid for that time.

The Boulder County Breastfeeding Coalition, in conjunction with the county Public Health office, is working to banish such practices so that breastfeeding at work can continue to be seen increasingly as a natural, critical activity, as opposed to something to hide during break-time. The $1,000 grants are key to the movement.

'Quite frankly, it's just the right thing to do.'

Imagine!, a Lafayette non-profit that provides services to people with developmental disabilities was the first to apply to the reimbursement program. Fifty-two percent of the organization's workforce is female and of child-bearing age, and employees there report the lactation room has been used every day since it opened in June.

Fred Hobbs, Imagine! spokesman, said the decision to designate a breastfeeding space came down to basic decency.

"Anything you can do within reason that provides the kind of comfort that allows you to overcome one barrier, and makes people better able to do their job — you'd be crazy not to," Hobbs says. "Quite frankly, it's just the right thing to do."

The room isn't anything fancy — a comfortable chair, some cubbies, a couple electrical outlets, a mini-fridge. But that's more than sufficient to health officials.

"It doesn't have to be fancy," Kopecky says.

"It can be a space that has a room divider, or a curtain. It can be a utility room. It can be a shower stall. ... It can be pretty much anything private, that can accommodate a person sitting down and pumping."

Though the available grants cover up to $1,000, it's expected that many participating businesses won't need to approach that figure.

As workplaces warm to the idea of lactation rooms the focus shifts to health.

"The large goal is to ultimately reduce chronic disease prevalence in Colorado," Kopecky says. "We know that when moms can provide breastmilk for their babies for an extended period of time, that provides a lifelong protective factor for cancer and chronic diseases. Our outcomes here are going to be many years down the road."

Alex Burness: 303-473-1389, burnessa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/alex_burness