CLEVELAND, Ohio -- Nearly $250 million that taxpayers spent in Ohio last year to help train young doctors was supposed to be equitably distributed among hospitals to ensure instruction in a variety of settings and specialties.

That didn't happen.

State records show millions of dollars were misdirected because of an outdated funding formula. Hospitals that should have gotten more money didn't receive it. And taxpayers footing the bill did not get what they needed most: More primary care doctors to help improve the quality and accessibility of care.



"It makes no sense at all," said Greg Moody, director of Gov. John Kasich's Office of Health Transformation. "A pattern is present throughout the state where hospitals that are essentially providing the same sorts of training programs for medical education receive drastically different amounts."



Moody is spearheading a committee established by the state legislature to recommend ways to improve the funding system by the end of the year. He and other officials said the most obvious problem is a 28-year-old payment formula that is distributing money unfairly among the state's hospitals.



But there is also a more systemic issue. At a time when Ohio is expanding Medicaid and its population of insured residents, the state is facing a shortage of primary care doctors and other caregivers to effectively treat those patients and keep costs under control.



The Ohio State Medical Association estimates the state is already short 130 primary care physicians, and will need hundreds more in coming years to care for the newly insured as well as for a growing population of older residents who will require more intense treatment.



"The question we're all struggling with is how can we get the physicians we need trained in Ohio and how can we successfully improve the quality of care," said Brent Mulgrew, executive director of the association and a member of the committee studying graduate medical education reform.



But before it can tackle that larger issue, the committee must address a broken formula of funding graduate medical education in Ohio. That formula, which hasn't been updated since 1987, is creating vast disparities in the amounts paid to hospitals, according to state records.



In Cleveland, Lutheran Hospital, which is owned by the Cleveland Clinic, received $385,000 per trainee in 2014. Meanwhile, Summa Barberton Citizens Hospital – a facility with a similar caseload – got only $23,000.



In another instance, the formula worked against the Clinic: Its main hospital in Cleveland – which trains more doctors than any facility in the state – received only $12,804 per trainee, while Ohio State University's Wexner Medical Center in Columbus received $73,188.



The formula makes payments through Medicaid, the federal insurance program for low-income Americans. Hospitals receive education funding through both Medicaid and Medicare because the federal government decided it was a good idea to subsidize training for doctors treating federally insured patients.



But states only handle the Medicaid portion of the funding, which in Ohio is allocated based on several factors, including a hospital's Medicaid caseload, number of trainees and size of its facility.



Because the data used to set the rates has not been updated in nearly three decades, the state is still distributing the money as though it was 1987, even though Medicaid caseloads – and medical training itself-- have changed dramatically since that time.



"Just on the face of it, anything we're doing in health care that's based on 1987 data deserves a fresh look." said Dr. Erik Steele, chief medical officer of Akron-based Summa Health System. "I don't know how it's going to shake out for Summa, but it's a good thing the state is doing this."



Renewed urgency to fix a broken formula



Concerns about graduate medical education have been around for some time. Hospitals and providers have continually raised flags about funding and the need to move more doctors into primary care, pediatrics and certain specialties facing shortages.



But in Columbus, officials said, the issue has continually been pushed to the back of the line amid larger concerns about rising health care costs and, more recently, the federal Affordable Care Act and the state's expansion of Medicaid.



With the state now covering more patients through Medicaid – and hospitals seeing more of those patients – the issue of training doctors to treat that population has come to the fore. It also gained urgency this year when the state released data revealing the payment disparities.



"We know it's generating some real heat among the hospitals in terms of who gets paid what," said Moody, the director of Kasich's office of health transformation.



At the Clinic's main campus, the current payment formula fails to account for huge changes that have occurred over the years in its Medicaid caseload and in the number of residents and interns being trained.



In 1987, when the rate was set, the Clinic's main facility trained 354 interns and residents and discharged 684 Medicaid patients, according to state records. By 2014, it was training 918 interns and residents and its Medicaid caseload had swelled more than tenfold to 7,853 patients.



Yet its payment for graduate medical education from the state -- $12,800 per trainee compared to a statewide average of nearly $39,000 – reflects none of that.



"The landscape is fundamentally different now than it was in 1987," said Elizabeth Sump, director of government and community relations at the Clinic. "I don't think there's been attempt to rationalize the cost basis from one institution to another."



The obsolescence of the payment formula is also affecting University Hospitals. UH's Rainbow Babies & Children's Hospital – which has also seen major changes since 1987 – received about $59,000 per trainee in 2014. Meanwhile, Children's Hospital Medical Center of Akron got more than $110,000 per trainee.



State officials said the disparity in the payments is not the result of anything the hospitals are doing incorrectly. It is simply due to a payment formula whose clock is stuck on 1987.



Administrators at UH said they are discussing possible reforms to the payment system with state officials. They said the formula doesn't just need to be updated to account for 2014 numbers, it also must be aligned with new health care goals to more carefully manage patients and root out chronic disease.



"There really needs to be a diligent look at what sort of influence do we want to have on the workforce to take care of the population," said Dr. Michael Anderson, UH's chief medical officer. "What are the innovative things we want to do?"



Changing the definition of primary care



The demand for change in graduate medical education is being fueled by a much broader shift toward preventative medicine.



Spurred by the Affordable Care Act and other regulatory changes, medical providers are placing a greater emphasis on more intensive front-line care by doctors to help people lead healthier lifestyles and head off expensive medical problems.



The trouble with that, industry specialists said, is that there are not enough primary care doctors, social workers, nutritionists and other caregivers to accomplish the goal.

"It's easy to say and hard to fund," said Mulgrew, the official from the Ohio State Medical Association who is on the medical education committee. "You're looking at the future as being an ongoing relationship between the patient and caregiver before he or she has medical needs."



But the current system of funding graduate medical education in Ohio and across the United States is based on an entirely different model, where doctors typically spend more time reacting to medical problems than preventing patients from getting them in the first place.



Because of the cost of that education – which often leaves students with more than $200,000 in debt – many young doctors choose higher-paying specialties such as orthopedics or cardiology in order to make enough money to pay their bills.



"It's a really complicated formula to get people attracted to primary care," said UH's Anderson. "It's an incredibly rewarding career, but I think there are so many factors to influencing a young medical student to choose primary care."



The committee examining graduate medical education is exploring a number of options, including directing more money to primary care training, and loan forgiveness programs that would encourage doctors to work in that field for a certain number of years, among other proposals.



Many administrators and doctors also noted that the doctor shortage stretches far beyond primary care. Also lacking are child psychiatrists and psychologists, pediatric surgeons and a range of other specialty surgeons.



"There is enormous value in the primary physicians' role, but they are only part of the needs that are out there," Mulgrew said.

"And the gaps in physicians (geographically) aren't just where people think they are. We've got some in the inner cities. We also have some in suburbs and certainly in rural communities. It's not going to be one solution that fits all."