Penn Hills School District's early retirement offer deadline extended, cash option added

Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

Penn Hills School Board members approved amendments to the district's early retirement incentive program that extend the deadline to take it and add a cash option.

The board voted 8-1 April 25 in favor of the action.

Board member Pauline Calabrese dissented. She said she would not vote to approve financial matters until state Auditor General Eugene DePasquale releases his audit of the district, which is expected in mid-May.

The early retirement incentive, similar to one offered in 2014-15, covers health care benefits for seven years beginning July 1, or until the employee turns 65 or becomes eligible for Medicare.

To be eligible, employees must have served at least seven years full-time.

The amendments include extending the deadline for resignations from April 29 to May 31.

Superintendent Nancy Hines said that change allows staff more time to consult with Pennsylvania State Employees Retirement System officials prior to declaring intent to retire.

The other major change is inclusion of a cash option.

Those who choose to discontinue health-care coverage when separating from employment and can provide proof of insurance effective July 1 through an unaffiliated party will receive a lump-sum benefit annually from the district equal to the amount of district-provided coverage that they discontinue.

“They added that on their own, which I thought was fantastic,” Penn Hills Education Association President Bob Hoffman said.

He said the lump sum would be what the employee would have contributed for the year, which on average could be between $7,000 and $8,000.

The previous retirement incentive agreement only offered health care coverage.

“With the Affordable Care Act, retirees would have to show proof that they switched coverage to a plan provided by the employer of a spouse, relative, domestic partner, or other,” Hines explained.

Donations

• Board members unanimously approved the donation of a scoreboard for the Nate Ferraco Memorial Field, a soccer field at Linton Middle School, from the Ferraco family and the Nate Ferraco Memorial Fund.

Ferraco played soccer, volleyball and football for Penn Hills. He was the valedictorian last year.

Ferraco,18, died Jan. 24 in a car crash in Butler County.

“I think virtually everyone in Penn Hills has been touched by the untimely death of Nate Ferraco,” Hines said. “(He's a) student who loved Penn Hills and who served as a tremendous role model within the community. The district has been happy to work with Nate's family to create a lasting memorial, and we very much appreciate the donation of the scoreboard that will display the new name Nate Ferraco Memorial Field.”

• The board also voted to accept a $488 donation from Target Take Charge of Education for the elementary school, a $227 donation to Linton from Original Works' art fundraiser, and donation of transportation costs for a high school field trip provided by a Chatham University Eden Hall grant.

Michael DiVittorio is a Tribune-Review staff writer. Reach him at 412-871-2367 or mdivittorio@tribweb.com.