Defenseman Nikita Zadorov’s demotion to the American Hockey League on Saturday further points to the Avalanche as the short-term loser in the Ryan O’Reilly trade. Based on O’Reilly’s team-leading 13 points with the Buffalo Sabres, one can suggest the Avs are taking a beating.

It does not, however, dub the six-player deal a disaster for Colorado.

In the long term, the Avs could still prevail, with all four return pieces 21 or younger — but undoubtedly it’s another reason Avs fans are losing faith.

Despite his tender age, Zadorov, 20, was considered the big addition in June, when the Avs sent O’Reilly to Buffalo, along with Jamie McGinn, for Zadorov, fellow Russian Mikhail Grigorenko, University of Michigan captain J.T. Compher and a second-round draft pick.

Grigorenko, 21, has played in 11 of the Avs’ 14 games but still is looking for his first goal and has produced just seven shots. He is where we thought he would be. McGinn, who missed most of last season with a back injury, has played all 14 games for the Sabres and is tied for their fifth-leading scorer.

Indeed, the comparison hurts right now.

Upon making the deal, Colorado immediately pegged the 6-foot-5 Zadorov as the left-shooting partner with Tyson Barrie on the second pairing. But after training camp, the Avs didn’t think Zadorov was developed enough to play big minutes. He has played mostly on the third pairing and was scratched in three of the last four games.

Make no mistake, Zadorov has great promise and could become a franchise defenseman. But like the Avalanche — 2-7-1 in its last 10 games — Zadorov isn’t ready to compete at the highest level.

With the right attitude, Zadorov will prosper with the San Antonio Rampage and be better prepared in his next stint with the Avalanche.

If nothing else, he will enjoy playing on a winning team. The Rampage was unbeaten (5-0-3) entering Saturday’s game at the Texas Stars.

Choose “Picks.” The Avalanche’s most exciting AHL prospect is goalie Calvin Pickard, who led the NHL in save percentage during parts of last season. Pickard, 23, is capable of stealing wins with consistency, something Semyon Varlamov and Reto Berra have not done.

Granted, Berra has played well in five starts. But your backup isn’t supposed to regularly outplay your high-priced former star.

Based on the last 13 months, the Avs’ best goaltender is Pickard, who is 5-0-2 with San Antonio and last week was named the AHL’s inaugural 2015-15 goalie of the month. In 16 NHL appearances last season, Pickard easily put up the Avs’ best goaltender numbers (2.35 goals-against average, .932 save percentage).

“I can’t control any type of call-ups and things like that,” Pickard said Saturday when reached by phone. “Last year I had some success, and I feel like I can compete at that level. That will happen when the time comes.”

Besides Varlamov’s 35-save performance in a 2-1 victory at Tampa Bay on Oct. 29, he has been next to awful. Among 42 NHL goalies with five appearances, Varlamov is 37th in goals-against average (3.26) and 36th in save percentage (.890).

Varlamov’s $5.9 million annual contract through 2018-19 should not keep him as Colorado’s No. 1 guy. Berra or Pickard should be No. 1B and challenge the Russian.

Pickard deserves a chance and could boost a team in dire straights heading into a seven-game road trip that begins Tuesday at Philadelphia.

In preseason, Avs coach Patrick Roy challenged Pickard to become the AHL’s best goalie. Pickard did just that.

“I’ve been in this league for three years now, and I feel confident that I could be one of the best goalies in the league, even if he didn’t say that,” said Pickard, who is on a two-way contract and waiver exempt. “We have a good team here. We’re jelling as a team, and I’m getting in a rhythm when you’re playing all the games.”

Mike Chambers: mchambers @denverpost.com or @mikechambers

Spotlight on …

Brad Marchand, LW, Boston Bruins

When: Amid a franchise-tying seven-game road trip, the Avalanche plays at Boston’s TD Garden on Thursday, after the trip opener Tuesday at Philadelphia.

What’s up: The 5-foot-9 Marchand had nine points (five goals) in his first 10 games. Upon returning from injury during a span when he missed the Bruins’ game at Colorado, Marchand produced a six-game scoring streak (nine points). Although he has missed two games, his five goals were second on the team entering Saturday’s game at Montreal.

Background: Marchand, 27, is from Halifax, Nova Scotia, and was drafted by Boston in the third round (71st overall), in 2006. In his first full season with the Bruins, he hoisted the Stanley Cup in 2011 after scoring 11 goals in 25 playoff games

Chambers’ take: Marchand is in the Andrew Shaw and Steve Downie mold. Undersized and unafraid. Huge hockey hearts will never be undervalued in this game. Young, pesky players will always find a place. Marchand is a bit more skilled than most, having scored 21 goals in his four full NHL seasons. Love him on your team, hate to play against him. It’s exactly how he wants to be remembered.