Ever since Donald Trump floated the idea of banning all Muslims from entering the United States, there has been overwhelming opposition to the plan. Democrats are, not surprisingly, universally aghast. Republicans, of all stripes, have blasted the proposal, and that includes Trump’s rivals for the GOP presidential nomination.

One candidate, however, has stood out for not condemning Trump — Senator Ted Cruz of Texas. Cruz said he disagreed with Trump’s plan (“I do not think it is the right solution”), but also commended Trump for “standing up and focusing America’s attention on the need to secure our borders.”

Advertisement

Cruz’s response, while certainly gutless, is also evidence of his political deftness. It’s the reason Cruz increasingly appears to be as well-positioned as any Republican to win the 2016 nomination.

Consider a few data points: He has raised the second largest amount of money of any candidate (Bush is first); he has spent weeks in Iowa and other early primary states building support; few Republicans say they wouldn’t vote for him; his support is strongest among those voters who consider themselves “very” conservative, back the Tea Party, or are white evangelicals (crucial blocs in a GOP nomination fight); he’s increasingly receiving endorsements from key conservative power-brokers, and his support is building. In Thursday’s New York Times poll, he moved to second place (16 percent), though still well behind Trump (35 percent).

To even write these words is shocking. A year ago Cruz seemed to most political observers to be the most extreme and most conservative of all the Republican candidates running for president — and, to many, practically unelectable.

Then Trump happened.

By so flagrantly adopting openly xenophobic, demagogic, and racist positions, Trump has moved the political debate in the Republican Party even further to the right. The result for Cruz is that he now seems like slightly less of a reactionary than Trump — a fallback candidate if Trump’s support fades.

Advertisement

But Cruz’s strong position is not all because of Trump. The Texas senator has done two things this election cycle that have put him in the political catbird seat.

The first began once he took office in 2013. He immediately became the biggest pain in Washington.

No matter how extreme a position the GOP caucus in Congress took, Cruz always took a more extreme one. The Republican leadership merely wanted to vote to repeal Obamacare; Cruz pushed the party to shut down the government in the fall of 2013 in order to kill it. This strategy, of course, failed, but it represented a big win for Cruz. He officially became the party’s enfant terrible, refusing to kowtow to the wishes of those Republican establishment sell-outs John Boehner and Mitch McConnell. In an election cycle in which the defining characteristic is grass-roots anger at the GOP establishment, running against Washington, and, in particular, the GOP leadership, is a winning message — and Cruz’s bona fides in this area are beyond reproach. At the same time, Cruz is still a senator, so he, at least theoretically, appears to have actual political experience and seems a less frightening presidential option than someone like Trump or the now-fading Ben Carson.

Cruz’s second smart tactic was to lay low as Trump ascended to the top of the polls. So far, virtually every Republican candidate has publicly tangled with Trump. While some have fared worse than others (see: Jeb Bush), none of them have come out of these exchanges well. Cruz has conspicuously avoided getting in Trump’s grill, instead regularly telling reporters, “I like and respect Donald Trump,” and chiding them for trying to create friction between the candidates.

Cruz’s positioning is one of the reasons that Marco Rubio — who is the darling of the pundit class and the one candidate seen as the best hope for seriously challenging Hillary Clinton in the fall — has started going after Cruz for previously supporting a measure that would have curtailed NSA data collection. Rubio has argued, dubiously, that doing so has made America more vulnerable to terrorism. On the surface, this is not a bad strategy — it’s hard to go wrong talking tough on national security if you’re a Republican. But the NSA issue plays both ways. There are plenty of Republican libertarians who are none too happy about the government collecting the phone records of Americans. Cruz may indeed be vulnerable on national security, but this is hardly a silver bullet.

The other, and possibly bigger, challenge for Cruz is that there is still no indication that Trump is about to falter. Trump maintains a dominating lead over the Republican field and his recent comments are likely to solidify or even increase that lead.

Still, if Trump’s supporters finally become turned off by his constant provocations, Cruz is best positioned to benefit. After all, he’s not only got the antiestablishment credibility but the two men’s policy proposals are virtually identical. Trump’s voters aren’t going to someone like Jeb Bush or Marco Rubio, the latter of whom is suspect on the far right because of his previous support for immigration reform. They could go to Ben Carson, but his numbers are already in freefall.

In this sense, Cruz is imitating a strategy used by Richard Nixon in 1968. Then, there was a third-party candidate, George Wallace, who was as prone to bombastic, racist rhetoric as Trump, particularly on the issues of race and crime. Both he and Nixon were on a similar wavelength, with the key exception being that Wallace was more extreme and politically radioactive, which had the effect of making Nixon seem less extreme, less dogmatic, and a better, more mature option than Wallace. To be sure, the situation today is not identical. Trump is running for the GOP nomination and Wallace was a third-party candidate; and in 1968 Wallace’s late fade didn’t translate into higher support for Nixon — but his campaign did raise the profile of issues that benefited Nixon, and his harsh rhetoric helped Nixon establish himself as a less divisive figure. Trump is doing the same for Cruz this cycle.

This doesn’t mean that Cruz is likely to be America’s next president. He is a decidedly unlikable figure, a deficit that he’s acknowledged. Moreover, to the extent that he is an appealing political figure, that appeal is largely restricted to far right voters. As bad as Trump would be for the national GOP, Cruz would be just as bad.

Nonetheless, Cruz is exactly where he needs to be to win the Republican presidential nomination.