Why I'm pulling for Bernie

Cockeysville, Md.: Gloria Steinem says many millennial women are Sanders supporters because “the boys are with Bernie.” I find it incredibly offensive to have my political beliefs reduced to pursuit of men’s affections. And I am deeply upset that these statements come from a so-called feminist icon.

I am with Bernie because I can trust him to stand firm in his beliefs, because I know he can’t be bought, because I believe that every man, woman and child deserves the opportunity to pursue their education and claim their piece of the American Dream.

I’m with Bernie because I don’t believe in making America the world’s policeman, because I am appalled by the growing economic disparity in our country, because he represents a Washington that operates by the people and for the people. I’m with Bernie because he stands for change, for democracy, for equality and for hope. Julia Clarke

Why I'm pulling for Trump

Medford, L.I.: Donald Trump has advocated for a wall on our southern border that will shut down the flow of illegal aliens, terrorists and drugs into our country. He will bring jobs back from foreign countries, fulfilling his promise of being “the greatest jobs President that God ever created.” He has said he will make the U.S. not only energy-independent, but the energy capital of the world. He has said that he will repeal Obamacare and Common Core on the first day of his administration. He is the toughest candidate on terror and would rebuild our military and properly take care of our veterans.

Exactly what would be so terrible about the prospect of a Trump presidency?

Eugene R. Dunn

Women wronged

Blue Mound, Ill.: Re Gloria Steinem on Bill Maher: The bigger issue is that twice she refused to answer Maher’s question regarding the ill-treatment of women in Muslim countries. She just kept saying that anyplace where there is monotheism is a bad place for women’s rights — as if U.S. women are just as oppressed. Jim Andrews

No complaints

Manhattan: Linda Stasi’s Sunday column was spot-on (“Carly, Hil’s fine whine,” Feb.7). As a single workingwoman, I know all too well how difficult it is and was to claw my way up the corporate ladder without assistance or mentoring, and doing it without whining, such as our politicians have done and continue to do. Bravo. Lisa Levy

Gravity gets Newton

Manhattan: To Cam Newton: What, no Superman poses? Damian Begley

Not even halfway there

Brooklyn: The Super Bowl halftime show sucked. Between what’s-her-name and that mutt dressed in black and gold, they really made me change the channel fast. Bring back Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers. That was the best halftime show ever. And to Peyton Manning, way to go! Jeffrey P. Smith

Beyoncé beats ’em all

Singapore: Beyoncé is not only an amazing performer but has grace and athleticism. She nailed the 50th Super Bowl halftime show! Fast on her feet and didn’t miss a beat. Thanks again to all of the artists for a great performance. Mary Anne Coleman

Emergency response needed

Staten Island: With all the controversy surrounding the City Council and its 32% raise, versus the minute raise given police, there has never been a mention of the most underpaid first responders of all: the EMS. Though a wing of the Fire Department, they are underpaid to the point that without substantial overtime or working a second job, supporting their families is a hardship. Even sanitation workers (and yes, they deserve it) make many thousands more. EMTs and paramedics literally hold the lives of people in their hands and should have pay parity with their brethren in the NYPD and FDNY. Joe Belvedere

Council raises hell

Wantagh, L.I.: I am appalled at the ignorance of fuming Voicers complaining about the City Council’s raise. Are they not aware that these Council members have not had a raise since 2006? I don’t know why there isn’t more sympathy for these part-timers struggling to make it on their $112,500. So, I have a perfect solution. Instead of letting these politicians suffer without any pay increases for 10 years, why not insist that they, too, receive the same magnificent 1% pay raise afforded our NYPD? If it is enough for uniformed personnel, it has to be just fine for the useless City Council. Joanne Urban

Run out of town

Floral Park: The only reason “underpaid” City Council members ran for the job was because it paid more money than they could make elsewhere. Now our esteemed mayor is planning to build a streetcar service for $2.5 billion since he can’t figure out any better use for that amount of money. I suggest we gather up all the Central Park horses, attach them to a huge wagon containing the mayor and City Council members, and haul them away forever. Just send the horses back; we love them. Irv Leshkowitz

Let a thousand flowers bloom

Douglaston: I totally agree with Voicer Thomas Hughes (no relation that I know of) about having horse-drawn streetcars and using their manure to grow lovely flowers in the park. The manure can be picked up by politicians, who seem to know how to handle it .Irene Hughes

Hauling bags of money

Manhattan: Re “Call him Mayor Clean” (editorial, Feb. 7): I’m surprised that the Daily News gave unequivocal approval to the mayor’s plan for increased garbage collection without at least some mention of the plan’s cost-effectiveness. A sanitation worker called in on a Sunday earns double time, which is a fast way to fatten a city pension. Like firefighters and police officers, sanitation workers need to be scheduled over a seven-day workweek at their regular rate of pay. It’s time to change antiquated work rules. David Moretti

Diagnosing de Blasio

Wauwatosa, Wis.: Mayor de Blasio is beating the same dead horse, still. What’s wrong with this man? What in the heck does NYCLASS have on him, anyway? It’s got to be more than a few measly millions, to explain why he would make this so personal, throwing one childish temper tantrum after another. The whole world keeps clobbering him. Maybe it’s brain damage by now? He reminds me of Monty Python’s Black Knight, with blood and limbs littering the ground: “It’s just a flesh wound!” Charlotte Allmann

Schools for scandal

Hackensack, N.J.: I was shocked, but not surprised at the scandal of the educational process in many ultra-Orthodox and Hasidic yeshivas (“Thousands of ill-educated boys,” Op-Ed, Feb. 7). These communities are extremely well-connected politically. The scandal is not that they practice their exclusionary faith, but that they fall so far short in providing the basic education that is required by law. After the taxpayers help provide these “schools” with millions of dollars for Torah studies, they are taxed again when they have to provide social services to these uneducated boys who have not been prepared to succeed in our society. Let’s see how that would work if another religious or ethnic group provided a phony, state-sanctioned curriculum. What will happen here? Nothing. Richard A. Naumann

Un-American invasion

Ridgewood, N.J.: Re “Kicked out for nothing” (Feb. 7): The NYPD locking people out of their homes is tyranny — cruel and excessive, the work of a Stalinist. This “law” should be erased and purged, immediately. Peter J. Peirano

Grinches at large

Brooklyn: I live in Sunset Park. During the Christmas season, a family in my area decorated their home, putting a lot of work and Christmas spirit into this display. They even had Santa standing outside taking photos with neighborhood children. Shortly after Christmas, some creeps wrecked the display. Why would they do this? The family is very upset and may not decorate again. The expense of what was wrecked is overwhelming, including to their spirits. Please, someone must know something about this crime. Sheila K. Pisciotta

Deadly greed

Manhattan: I am appalled by the behavior of that apology for a human, Martin Shkreli, who jacked up the price of a lifesaving drug from $13.50 to $750 a pill. I wonder how many people died as a consequence of his greed. I hope this narcissistic jerk is sent to jail for a very long time. Brenda Nicholls