Mrs. Clinton’s plan leans heavily on spending by the federal government, giving money to states that guarantee that students need not take out loans to cover the cost of tuition at four-year public colleges and universities.

Highlights From Hillary Clinton’s Plan

• Grants to states that guarantee public university students can graduate without loans.

• Grants to institutions that improve graduation rates, and those that help low-income and first-generation students to graduate.

• Tuition assistance in exchange for national service through AmeriCorps.

• Income-based repayment plans for student borrowers. Debt forgiven after 20 years.

• Refinancing at current rates for recent graduates.

• Free tuition at community colleges. Student aid money could be used for educational “boot camps” and online courses that teach job skills.

The full plan is here.

According to the plan, about a third of the overall cost would go toward reducing the interest rate on new or existing student loans — whether for public or private education — which currently bring the Department of Education billions of dollars in profits.

Republicans tend to take an approach to higher education overhaul that does not expand the size and scope of the federal government, instead arguing for colleges and universities to reduce their operating costs. “Her argument basically is, ‘Let’s just raise taxes and pour more money into the same system,’ ” Mr. Rubio said in an interview. “My argument is: We need a brand-new system.”

Since 2004, tuition and fees for in-state residents at public colleges nationwide have increased 40 percent, adjusted for inflation. State higher education spending per student, adjusted for inflation, dropped 20 percent since 2008 — tipping the balance so that students now pay a greater share of the costs than the states. In bad times, states often use their higher education funds as the balance wheel to keep their budget in order. Some governors, like Scott Walker of Wisconsin, a Republican presidential candidate, have found higher education spending cuts an alternative to trims from Medicaid or the prison system.

To balance their books, most flagship state universities are admitting more out-of-state and international students, who pay much higher tuition.

Though states would be eager for added federal funding, George Pernsteiner, president of the State Higher Education Executive Officers Association, said, they are likely to be wary of giving up their education budget flexibility unless there was a safety valve allowing education reductions in tough economic times.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

One fundamental question about Mrs. Clinton’s plan — already raised by several Republicans — is whether it would help cut college costs. A July report from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York concluded that more federal loan money did indeed contribute to higher prices. But last year, a Congressional Research Service report reached the opposite conclusion. And previous studies have gone both ways.

“To prove that X causes Y, you need research that consistently produces the same results, and we haven’t had that,” said Terry W. Hartle, senior vice president of the American Council on Education, the umbrella organization for colleges and universities. “And we think the New York Fed has serious methodological shortcomings.”

Where there is a clear causal relationship, he said, is between cuts in state education spending and tuition: “It’s a perfect inverse relationship: When spending goes down, tuition goes up.”

With ever-rising tuition, the nation’s outstanding student loan debt now tops $1.2 trillion. A Gallup poll in April showed that 36 percent Americans were worried about having enough money to pay for college for their children.

Photo

“Debt-free college is political gold for Democrats,” said Adam Green, a founder of the Progressive Change Campaign Committee, a liberal advocacy group. “That’s because it’s such great policy for ordinary people.”

There is widespread interest this year in the idea that colleges and universities should have a stake in ensuring that students are able to repay their student loans — although it would be tricky to develop a plan that does not lead institutions to avoid needy students who are at risk of defaulting on their debt. And given that so many students transfer in the course of their studies, it would be hard to know which institutions to penalize.

Still, there is bipartisan backing for this part of the Clinton plan. A bill recently introduced by Senators Jeanne Shaheen, Democrat of New Hampshire, and Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah, would penalize colleges whose students had low repayment rates, cutting off their eligibility to receive student aid.

Under the Clinton campaign’s estimation that about a third of the cost of its proposal — almost $12 billion a year — would go to debt relief, the government would lose the billions of dollars in annual profits it gets from student loans.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Student debt has become a profit center for the government, and we do need to revisit that, but I have to warn you that it is going to be obscenely expensive,” said Barmak Nassirian, director of federal relations and policy analysis at the American Association of State Colleges and Universities.

The Clinton proposal would greatly increase the federal government’s role in higher education, giving it the power to direct — or withhold — money to states, rather than funneling support through individual students. Half of the proposed $350 billion over 10 years would go to grants for states that guarantee the students will not need loans to pay the tuition at four-year public universities. But states would be eligible for the federal money only if they slowed tuition growth and stopped cutting their higher education budgets.

Ann O’Leary, senior policy adviser for the Clinton campaign, said Mrs. Clinton’s plan would “revitalize the partnership between the federal government and states — a concept that was critical to the creation of so many of our great public universities.”

She acknowledged both the practical and political challenges, particularly in wooing Republican-controlled state legislatures. “But by unveiling this proposal at such an early stage,” she said, “and putting it at the center of her platform, Hillary Clinton intends to build momentum for this plan throughout the coming months.”

Jeffrey A. Engel, the director of the Center for Presidential History at Southern Methodist University, predicted that if Mrs. Clinton was elected, the higher education plan would be difficult enough to pass that it could succeed politically only in the first year of her administration.

“If you need the states and you need the governors’ consent to make it work for their states, what you’re going to end up with is something similar to what happened with the A.C.A.,” Mr. Engel said, referring to the Affordable Care Act, Mr. Obama’s health care plan. That, he said, is “where you have more progressive states developing a more comprehensive and better education system, and more conservative states who are interested in defunding their own universities falling farther and farther behind.”