Middle-schooler Ariana O'Brien headed to world championships in Italy

When most kids her age were still struggling with Velcro, Ariana O'Brien had already mastered her ABCs — agility, balance and coordination.

Ariana, now an eighth-grade student at Southern Hills Middle School in Boulder, has been climbing at the locally owned gym ABC Kids since she was 3. Last month, she competed at the American Bouldering Series National Championships in Madison, Wis., earning fifth place in her age division and a spot on the USA team at the IFSC World Youth Championships in Arco, Italy, in August.

She'll be joined by other young Boulder climbers Brooke Raboutou, Joe Goodacre, Margo Hayes, Shawn Raboutou and Megan Mascarenas.

At 13, Ariana and Brooke are the youngest of the bunch. Brooke's parents are climbers and coaches, but Ariana came to the sport by chance as a toddler.

"I'm a pretty powerful climber," says Ariana, sitting on a bench that overlooks ABC's gym, "but not necessarily finessed. Bouldering is more powerful and dynamic," she adds, explaining her preference for the ropes-free style of rock climbing.

Below her, dozens of energetic toddlers scramble up a series of rainbow-colored walls, plunking down onto mats with dull thuds when their tired arms give out.

Ariana talks of bouldering with the ease you'd expect from someone twice her age. Slabs — smooth-surface, nearly vertical walls — are a lot more technical than "caves." They require more patience; overhangs are more dynamic.

Advertisement

"I have to prepare myself physically to get my core strong and my arms strong, but I also have prepare my mental game," she says.

'A lot of hard work'

At the age of 8, Ariana competed in her first national championship, where she went on to excel at speed climbing and bouldering in later years. Last November, she competed at the Pan-American Championships in Mexico.

"It's been a lot of hard work — not just one season," says her mother, Jennifer O'Brien. "I'm so happy for her."

Ariana O'Brien, 13, works on her bouldering skills at practice last month at ABC Kids gym in Boulder. Ariana has won a spot on the USA team at the World Youth Championships in Arco, Italy, in August. (Jeremy Papasso / Staff Photographer)

In many ways, Jennifer O'Brien is the one responsible for her daughter's bouldering success. Though never a climber herself, she was the one who introduced her daughter to the sport shortly after Ariana took her first steps, when ABC Kids was just a fledgling idea in a tiny studio at the Boulder Rock Club.

"It was just her and one other kid — and I remember the other kid cried the whole time," she recalls. "But Ariana just loved it. She decided she was going to give it a try, and the rest is history."

Now, Ariana trains four or five times a week with a roster of four coaches — including nine-time ABS champion Alex Puccio — at ABC's newer location at Walnut and 32nd streets in Boulder.

In order to keep up with such a hectic schedule, she races to finish her homework before 5:30 most nights. That's when practice starts.

"But there have been some late nights, for sure," she says with a maturity beyond her years.

The gym itself is a sprawling, multi-level complex that seems like something straight out of Dr. Seuss' imagination. Nets and twisty-turvy slides shoot from the upper levels, while kids race up dinosaur-shaped footholds. There's boundless energy everywhere you look — except, perhaps, at the orange plastic-covered couches, where knitting grandmothers wait for their charges to finish their lesson.

'One of those driven kids'

Brooke Raboutou climbs during a team practice in 2013 at the ABC Kids gym in Boulder. Now 13, Brooke is headed to compete at the World Youth Championships in Arco, Italy. (Jeremy Papasso / Staff Photographer)

Robyn Raboutou, a four-time world cup champion, founded ABC nearly a decade ago. Ariana was one of her first-ever kid clients.

"She's always been a star," she says, glowing with a coach's pride. "She's always been one of those driven kids."

Raboutou claims she can tell which kids will be athletic prodigies without ever seeing them on a wall.

"I can tell by their disposition, and by the way they're made genetically," she explains.

But Raboutou looks for more than just a buff build. She looks for the hard workers. Athletes can be gifted naturally, but they need the drive to be truly great.

Ariana, she says, has proved to have both. However, hard workers can also be incredibly hard on themselves — something that can be trying for coaches such as Raboutou.

"She's a pleasure to work with. Her downfall is she's very hard on herself," says Raboutou. "But we have a very close relationship, and she hears me loud and clear when I say it's not helping."

Her own daughter, Brooke, will also be on Ariana's team in Italy come August.

"I'm really excited," Brooke says. "I've always wanted to go to youth worlds, especially because it's in Italy, which will be really fun, and I'm excited to go with Ariana because she's a great person and really fun to be around."

Ariana, decked out in Under Armour, swings from hold to hold, shifting her body weight with precision to get up the route.

But despite her aptitude for bouldering, she's not sure whether she'd ever want to go pro, like her coach Raboutou. At school, her favorite subjects are math and science.

"I want to be an engineer when I grow up," Ariana says with determination. "I want to go Stanford, or an Ivy League."

It's not uncommon for kids to switch from passion to passion, says Raboutou. Ariana's younger brother, Liam, once competed in the national championships but has since moved on to football and lacrosse.

In August, Ariana will begin her freshman year at Fairview High School — at the exact same time she's competing in the World Youth Championships in Italy.

"She's going to have a really hard year come fall," worries Raboutou. "She'll be stressed out. It will be tricky. But I think she'll still make it to practice because I know Ariana."