Affordable Care Act brings $489M since 2010 to improve health care in Michigan, study finds

A study released today shows the Affordable Care Act has directed $489 million to Michigan over the last five years, ranking the state 14th highest in receiving funds, said the Ann Arbor-based Center for Healthcare Research & Transformation.

The CHRT report shows the funds were used to build infrastructure and expand access to health care services. Last year, Michigan received $183.9 million and placed ninth in the nation.

“ACA grant funding has contributed to a range of services and programs to improve access to care,” said Marianne Udow-Phillips, CHRT’s director, in a statement.

“In particular, there are new and expanded sites for federally qualified health centers, expanded training programs to enhance health care workforce capacity and considerable funding to the state of Michigan to test new models of financing and delivering health care."

A total of $21 billion in grants was awarded across all 50 states and the District of Columbia from March 2010 through fiscal year 2014, CHRT said.

Some federal funds helped states, including Michigan, reform their private insurance markets.

However, Michigan did not approve a state-based health insurance exchange. Instead, it uses one managed by the federal government. The decision by the state Legislature (Gov. Rick Snyder supported the state-based exchange) cost the state millions of dollars and led to Michigan receiving 0.9 percent for market reform compared with the national average of 10.8 percent, CHRT said.

In Michigan, the bulk of the grant and demonstration project funding went to the state of Michigan ($177 million), including the Department of Community Health, to support new health care delivery models and various community health programs. The next largest funding category in Michigan was for health centers.

Following are two examples of what the Affordable Care Act funded to improve health care services in Southeast Michigan:

The Detroit Wayne County Health Authority received nearly $5 million in fiscal 2014 to support Authority Health, its community-based teaching health center. Authority Health provides training in five primary care residencies and offers one fellowship in Wayne County. The program offers post-graduate rotations at federally qualified health centers, physician practice sites, community mental health agencies and other provider sites. The three-year grant will allow Authority Health to train 85 primary care residents, 53 of whom are in training.

The University of Michigan, in partnership with the Michigan Surgical Quality Collaborative, received $1.8 million in fiscal 2014. The funds are the first installment of a three-year grant, totaling $6.9 million, to implement the Michigan Surgical and Health Optimization Program in 40 hospitals across the state. MSHOP seeks to improve surgical outcomes and reduce health care costs by using data to inform surgical decisions and help high-risk patients better prepare for major abdominal surgeries.

Other health care organizations receiving funds were Michigan Public Health Institute ($14.2 million), Family Health Center Inc. ($12.9 million), Wayne State University ($12.3 million), Altarum Institute ($11.7 million) and Detroit Community Health Connection ($9.9 million).