A question-and-answer exchange with the nine candidates running in the June 7 primary for a Marin Superior Court judgeship. The candidates submitted their answers by email.

The candidates prosecutor Otis Bruce, public defender Michael Coffino, civil attorney Beth Jordan, county counsel Sheila Lichtblau, civil attorney Renee Marcelle, prosecutor Thomas McCallister, civil attorney Nancy McCarthy, prosecutor Nicole Pantaleo and civil attorney David Shane.

Q: To what extent are a judge’s political philosophy or party affiliation relevant at the Superior Court level?

Bruce: “None. The career I’ve chosen and my life-long community participation is all based on my dedication to service and achieving a better world for all.”

Coffino: “Political philosophy (how we define the relationship of the individual to the state) is important; party affiliation is not. As the only candidate with a master’s degree in philosophy, I’m familiar with the history of thought about the role of law in society. At the same time — as the candidate with the most high-stakes trial experience — I know how things actually work in the courtroom.”

Jordan: “Fundamental beliefs in democracy, equal access to justice, and the integrity of our legal system are vitally relevant to every judge. However, judicial elections are non-partisan; party affiliation should have no relevance.”

Lichtblau: “A judge must always follow the law regardless of political philosophy or party affiliation. It is imperative that a judge have broad-based professional and life experience to ensure decisions are fair and impartial, and that all parties have an equal voice in the courtroom.”

Marcelle: “A Judge’s political philosophy isn’t relevant because non-partisan in California. It would be speculation to assume certain rulings would be based thereon. The majority of the public is independent or a-political and thus it isn’t meaningful.”

McCallister: “Our society cannot afford to have activist judges who make decisions based upon party affiliation or bias. Government representatives can advance agendas for us, but judges cannot. Judges must be fair, ethical, and impartial always.”

Advertisement

McCarthy: “A Judge’s political philosophy should not play a role, but in reality it does to litigants who must decide who will give fair, unbiased consideration. I represent both sides and have no ideological or implicit career bias. My lifetime commitment to assuring justice to all despite the affiliation (‘side’) of litigants will result in me being the least disqualified, and therefore, most effective judge.”

Pantaleo: “A judge’s political philosophy or party affiliation should not enter the courtroom. A judge is ethically bound to make rulings on a case based on the evidence presented and the law, not politics.”

Shane: “I believe intelligence, compassion, reason and impartiality trump philosophy and party affiliation.”

• • •

Q: Are there any changes you’d like to effect in Marin Superior Court operations or policy?

Bruce: “Because of the limited resources and state budget cuts, I would like to continue the expansion of community/restorative justice programs.”

Coffino: “I would make jury selection less time consuming by processing hardship requests in the jury assembly room upstairs before people wait in long security lines, saving everyone time and aggravation.”

Jordan: “An electronic filing system, for greater efficiency, and greater public access to records. And expanding the Court’s restorative and collaborative justice programs, including the Marin Youth Court, STAR Court (mental health), the Adult and Juvenile Drug Courts, and the Family Violence Court.”

Lichtblau: “I’d like to see our Court find innovative ways to focus on how to better serve seniors, our growing Latino and ethnic populations, and programs for our youth related to substance abuse.”

Marcelle: “Demystify the judicial system by providing disputants in civil actions with information regarding the limits of the power of judges. Include explanations of why a litigant may believe the result may ‘not be fair’ in advance, at the time they file or are served. Include information regarding advantages for parties to reach their own agreements.”

McCallister: “Marin’s current Judges are forward-thinking and constantly seek to improve our civil and criminal justice systems. I embrace our collaborative courts, which provide alternatives to incarceration and help families in crisis move forward. However, we can increase efficiency, reduce backlog, and better serve the financially disadvantaged and mentally ill.”

McCarthy: “Changes to ‘policy’ should include recording how often litigants disqualify judges. Changes to ‘operations’ should include implementing ‘open access’ programs like other counties: allowing public access to court filings remotely/electronically.”

Pantaleo: “We need an Alternative Justice Court for chronic inebriants and recidivist misdemeanor offenders that are constantly in and out of the criminal justice system for quality of life crimes and alcohol related offenses. I have worked successfully with Star Court for mentally ill probationers and Adult Drug Court. Alternatives can work with a team approach.”

Shane: “There should be an emphasis on electronic filing, which would be more efficient and save money. The Court should encourage alternative dispute resolutions, and offer other options to limit costly and time consuming trials. The Court should focus on sentencing alternatives to encourage rehabilitation rather than imprisonment.

• • •

Q: Is there a point at which a society has too many laws? If so, where are we in relation to that point?

Bruce: “The job of a Judge is not to create laws. The challenge, however, is to adjudicate in the spirit of fairness and justice, and remember the position is a place of service.”

Coffino: “There aren’t too many laws, exactly; it’s more that our interpretation of those laws is always in flux — or as Holmes famously said, ‘the life of the law has not been logic. It has been experience.’”

Jordan: “While having too many laws may be theoretically possible, we are far from that point. Laws protect citizens, safeguard human rights and freedoms, provide rules that allow people to live and work together (from basic traffic laws to laws protecting property ownership and governing property use, to laws against sexual harassment and discrimination in the workplace), and punish people who commit crimes.”

Lichtblau: “It is not for the court to make law; it is the court’s duty to interpret and apply the law before it. As judge, I pledge to fairly apply the law to the citizens of Marin County and to provide equal access for all.”

Marcelle: “The IRS and the IRC regulations are a perfect example of too many laws now. The Affordable Care Act and TTP are too long. This results in an inability to absorb or understand legislation passed. So many laws require an enormous amount of attorneys, which most people cannot afford. Such complexity may also be rife with loop holes.”

McCallister: “Our laws are based upon fundamental behavioral tenets that we have been taught since we were 3 years old: Don’t lie, cheat, steal, or cause harm to others. The fact that we must explain in detail and enforce these basic rules is unfortunate, but necessary, to protect our citizens.”

McCarthy: “The judge’s job is to implement existing law uniformly and fairly to all; only the Legislature can write or abolish laws. However, it would help if laws were stated in plain language, so fewer may be needed.”

Pantaleo: “The issue is not the number of laws, but at times their complexity. As a judge, regardless if you agree or disagree with a particular law, you must enforce the rule of law.”

Shane: “Reasonable laws always make sense. I do not believe that there (are) too many laws. In fact, revisions to laws are necessary to reflect a changing society.”