By Gary Sinnen

Letter writer Ward Nelson ("Health insurance doomsday," May 14), in commenting on a previous letter, nicely summarizes the sorry state of our private corporate health insurance system post-Affordable Care Act. Too many people are still uncovered, or can't afford to use the coverage that they are mandated to buy because of outrageous — and rising — premiums, copays and deductibles.

The reason for this ongoing failure is that the ACA was only a Band-Aid on a system that was already in failure, the best that could be politically accomplished at the time, when what we have needed all along — for decades — is a completely new payment system.

It continues to be a huge irony that in this county we have a great system of health care providers — highly trained and dedicated doctors, nurses, therapists — and a poor, fractured, inefficient and needlessly expensive way of paying for the care we — who are lucky enough to have insurance — receive from them.

Our employment-based health insurance system, as it evolved in the middle of the last century, never covered everyone (while the rest of the developed world was building systems of universal coverage for their citizens) and has only become more unsustainable over time. Both large and small employers have an increasingly hard time providing benefits, maintaining employment levels, staying in business and being competitive in the world marketplace as the corporate health insurance industry continues to milk their profits by raising premiums while rationing the care they will pay for.

How much closer could we get to full employment and a fully recovered economy if employers were not hampered by this fastest-rising cost of doing business?

Ward questions what can be done and what anyone is doing about it. The fortunate answer is: more than most people are aware of.

A number of states, including Oregon, are studying and working towards universal coverage and nonprofit systems of paying for health care. Colorado will actually have a measure on the ballot this November to create such a system. Here in Oregon, Health Care for All Oregon (visit HCAO.org) has been working for several years with chief sponsor Mike Dembrow — a state senator from District 23 — to legislate a study of several options for funding such a system in our state. Currently, the request for proposal (RFP) for the study has been awarded and the study should be commencing soon.

Can't happen here? Why not? The rest of the world has been doing it for decades. And we have our own model — Medicare — that has been humming along since the 1960s with about 3 percent administrative overhead, no seven- (or eight-) figure CEO salaries and high customer satisfaction (ask any senior).

Remember: We're not talking about health care services or providers; we're talking about a bloated, profit-driven, unaccountable private corporate insurance system that is not primarily about health outcomes but about preserving a stranglehold on our health care for private company gain.

We will only fail if people do not educate themselves about this option we are pursuing and are not prepared for the public relations onslaught of the "health" insurance industry once they are pushed to defend their turf.

They survive by making us think they are indispensable.

They are not, and we will be better off without them.

•

Gary Sinnen lives in Clackamas.