From the 1999 attack at Columbine, to the recent San Bernardino shootings, the American public has become used to seeing news coverage of mass shootings.

Mass shootings have become a part of American culture. They have dominated media coverage this year and this has led to discussions on gun control laws and prompted various public institutions to adopt active shooter drills. It is clear that something must be done with America’s gun legislation, as well as its attitude toward mental illness.

Smaller-scale shootings are covered by media outlets almost weekly throughout the country, which is one reason why the public is increasingly becoming more desensitized to the term “mass shooting.”

Between 1999 and 2013, over 1,500 people were killed in mass shootings, according to the Congressional Research Service, which used the FBI definition of “mass murder” — four or more victims murdered within the same instance and in close geographical proximity — in its report.

President Barack Obama, along with politicians from various states, have emphasized the need for more gun control laws.

Obama recently released a plan of action for gun control, the details of which have been released in a summary by The National Conference of State Legislatures.

One key point made in this plan asks Congress to pass a $4 billion proposal to keep 15,000 police officers on the streets to help prevent gun crimes.

But stricter gun control laws cannot be the only solution.

Another way to eradicate mass shootings is to improve mental health awareness and provide more training to mental health employees across the United States.

President Obama’s plan “calls for coverage of mental health treatment under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and the Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act of 2008,” according to the NCLS summary of the proposal.

It seems people fail to understand that the root of the issue begins not when a potential shooter is buying his gun, or planning his plot but when he is going through emotional and psychological distress that could have been dealt with early on.

If these would-be shooters had had help early on to deal with issues from circumstances that life threw at them, they most likely wouldn’t have become shooters.

It is society’s job to reshape American culture in a way that is conducive to solution-oriented approaches to solving problems that affect everybody.