Photo

The Kansas Supreme Court on Thursday sided with the Democratic candidate for Senate in his attempt to drop off the November ballot, creating a tougher contest for the Republican incumbent, Pat Roberts, in a race with a strong independent candidate.

But the Kansas secretary of state, Kris Kobach, a Republican who had fought the withdrawal, said afterward that Democrats would have to pick another candidate, adding to the uncertainty about whose names would appear on the ballot.

The election is one of the races that could decide control of the Senate, where the Democrats have a majority. Republicans have had a lock on Kansas’ two Senate seats since 1939. After the Democratic nominee, Chad Taylor, said he would step aside, national Republicans moved to take control of the Roberts campaign, sending in a longtime troubleshooter to bolster it.

“I understand some partisan Democrats will falsely claim that I am acting out of party loyalty,” Mr. Kobach said in a telephone interview Thursday evening, “but the law is clear.”

Mr. Taylor, who had been trailing, sent a letter on Sept. 3 to Mr. Kobach, saying that he was withdrawing. Several prominent Democrats are said to have been instrumental in nudging him to do so to clear the way for the independent, Greg Orman, who has been leading Mr. Roberts in some recent polls. Mr. Kobach, who is a member of Mr. Roberts’s honorary campaign committee, said that Mr. Taylor had failed to meet the requirements for removing his name from the ballot. Kansas law says candidates can be removed from the ballot if they die or declare that they are unable to complete the duties of office.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Taylor petitioned the state Supreme Court, and in an opinion Thursday afternoon, the court, which is dominated by Democratic appointees, ruled unanimously that Mr. Kobach had erred in refusing to accept Mr. Taylor’s letter and ordered that his name be removed before ballots are mailed to overseas military personnel, a process that was scheduled to begin Saturday.

Mr. Kobach said Thursday that he would require the Democrats to select a replacement, a step he insisted was required by law. Mr. Kobach said he would extend the deadline to mail those ballots so the Democrats could pick someone else. If the party refuses to do so by noon next Friday, Mr. Kobach said he would “review our legal options.”

A spokesman for the Kansas Democratic Party, did not respond Thursday to questions about whether his party would name a new candidate. But in a statement, the state Democratic Party chairwoman, Joan Wagnon, praised the ruling and said “democracy is threatened” with Mr. Kobach as secretary of state.

Mr. Orman, a 45-year-old former energy entrepreneur, has notably refused to commit to caucusing with the Democrats if he wins.

His campaign manager, Jim Jonas, said Thursday, “No matter who’s on or off the ballot, Greg Orman is running as an independent against the broken system in Washington that has failed Kansas and failed America.”

The court’s decision prompted loud criticism from Kansas conservatives and enthusiastic praise from Democrats, including Mr. Kobach’s opponent in his re-election campaign, who issued a statement calling his effort to block the withdrawal a “circus.”

“Kris Kobach attempted to control this situation single-handedly so that it would work for his personal agenda,” said Jean Schodorf, the Democratic candidate for secretary of state. “He unilaterally bypassed the standard practice of allowing the challenge of a contested election issue to be reviewed by the several members of the State Elections Board so that he alone could rule on what is legal and what is not.”

Mr. Roberts’s campaign manager, Corry Bliss, issued a statement saying the court’s decision “disenfranchised” voters in the Democratic primary.

“This is not only a travesty to Kansas voters, but it’s a travesty to the judicial system and our electoral process,” Mr. Bliss said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The race is one of at least three that Republican incumbents could lose this year in Kansas, where conservatives often win by wide margins. The governor, Sam Brownback, is considered vulnerable after many criticized his tax-cutting regimen. Mr. Kobach himself, who has become a national figure in efforts to require voter identification and to identify unauthorized immigrants, is in a close race with Ms. Schodorf.