If you ever wondered why Americans hate Washington, the answer is in a national survey conducted in January by the Pew Research Center showing that 80 percent of Americans believe strengthening the economy should be a top priority for the U.S. There is much less concern about the issues on which Democrats and Republicans in the nation’s capital fixate.

For instance, far down on the list of public priorities are health care (59 percent) and the deficit (63 percent). According to the Pew data, concern about the deficit has decreased from January of 2013, when 72 percent of the public thought deficit reduction should be a top priority.

The gap between the public and the politicians and the partisan fixation with health care were on display in the special congressional election in Florida that Republican David Jolly won last week. Not only did Jolly and his Democratic opponent, Alex Sink, endlessly debate the merits of the Affordable Care Act but outside groups pumped in millions of dollars to beat up or defend the law. Whatever happened to “It’s the economy, stupid"?

If you are wondering why President Obama has used his constitutional power to issue executive orders to improve the economy, just look at these headlines on page B8 of The Boston Globe on March 13: "More trapped in low wage jobs," "Wall St. bonuses rise 15%, profits fall," "Large U.S. firms boost off shore profits."

[See a collection of political cartoons on Congress.]

Last Thursday, Obama announced that he would issue an executive order to require federal government agencies to make sure that hard working Americans are paid for their overtime work. Back in January, in his State of the Union address, the president announced that federal agencies would require their contractors to pay a minimum wage of $10.10 to their employees.

Democratic candidates should follow the president’s lead and make a strong argument for economic populism during their 2014 campaigns. The agenda should highlight an increase in the minimum wage, protection of federal programs for the poor and middle class, opposition to a decrease in the top income tax rate and the end to corporate tax freebies that cost taxpayers billions of dollars a year.

These statistics should be both food for thought and a call to action: