Arrested in 2012 at the Land of Make Believe and charged with filming children in a bathroom, Patrick Deck was sentenced Monday

Patrick Deck (Photo: Courtesy of the Somerset Country Prosecutor’s Office) Story Highlights Salas also sentenced Deck to serve a lifetime of supervised release and register as a sex offender

Patrick Deck was sentenced to 34 years for producing and transporting sexually explicit videos of children

He also took two minors to locations across the country to film them in sexually explicit conduct

A Watchung man was sentenced Monday to 408 months, or 34 years, in prison for producing and transporting sexually explicit videos of children, U.S. Attorney Paul J. Fishman said.

Previously, Patrick T. Deck, 54, pleaded guilty before U.S. District Judge Esther Salas to two counts of transportation of child pornography. Salas imposed the sentence Monday in Newark federal court.

According to documents filed in this case and statements made in court, on Aug. 12, 2012, Deck was arrested at the Land of Make Believe amusement park in Hope by the State Police for allegedly filming children, without their or their parents' knowledge, in the men's restroom. The following day, law-enforcement officers executed a search warrant at Deck's home in Watchung and found multiple videos and images containing child sexual abuse on Deck's computers and other electronic devices.

Deck also admitted that between 1997 and 2010, he transported two minors, beginning when they were approximately 11, to locations across the country, including New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Colorado and Montana for the purpose of filming the minors in sexually explicit conduct. Deck produced the videos and images of child pornography and then transported those images back to his home.

In 1988, Deck was convicted in state Superior Court, Burlington County, of two counts of endangering the welfare of a child. The convictions arose out of prior incidents in which Deck photographed or filmed minors engaged in prohibited sexual acts.

As part of his guilty plea, Deck agreed to forfeit the video cameras and other devices that he used to commit the offense. He will also be required to register as a sex offender.

In addition to the prison term, Salas sentenced Deck to serve a lifetime of supervised release.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1LXTEYa