Browse > Home Tribune News / 2015 Legislative Session: Challenges ahead for NW Denver Rep. Crisanta Duran

2015 Legislative Session: Challenges ahead for NW Denver Rep. Crisanta Duran

Laurie Dunklee |

LaurieC@northdenvertribune.com |

Chaffee Park—As the newly-elected Democratic majority leader for the Colorado House of Representatives, Rep. Crisanta Duran expects to experience new opportunities and new challenges as the 2015 legislative session begins January 7. Duran represents District 5, encompassing parts of the Chaffee Park, Sunnyside, and Elyria-Swansea neighborhoods, as well as downtown and a swath south to W. Jewell Ave.

For the first time since 2004, Republicans hold a majority in the state senate by one seat. Since Democrats still control the House and the Governor’s office, any bill that passes will need bi-partisan support.

Duran pointed to the bi-partisan successes of the 2014 session: “In 2014, 96 percent of the bills passed had bi-partisan support, and we passed a bi-partisan budget,” said Duran. “I’ll continue to work across the aisle. We may not all agree, but both sides can find middle ground.”

A big question for next session is how hard Republicans will try to undo some of the Democrats’ recent policy gains. Those include laws benefiting undocumented immigrants, gun control bills, and an election that moved Colorado to all mail ballots.

“As majority leader, I’ll be reaching out to Republicans in the House and the Senate to figure out common ground,” Duran said. “Compromise is key. It’s important for Democrats and Republicans to work together. I’ll work with both sides to do what works.”

Duran, 34, is a Chaffee Park resident. She is an attorney specializing in family law and labor and employment. She began her term in the House of Representatives in 2011.

Duran’s election as majority leader makes her part of the first all-female top leadership team in Colorado legislative history, along with Speaker Dickey Lee Hullinghorst, D-Boulder. Never before have women held both the top post in the chamber and the position of majority leader.

Duran is chair of the Appropriations Committee, which examines the fiscal impact of pending legislation. She will continue as a member of the Joint Budget Committee, a committee she chaired last session.

She said her top priority this session will be continuing Colorado’s economic recovery. “Colorado has risen from 40th place in the nation to 4th place in job creation,” she said. “We still have work to do in workforce development. We need continued investment in education and higher education, to give people the ability to succeed and care for their families.”

Bills likely to be introduced this session include the re-introduction of police-reform bills; expansion of state oversight of the state insurance exchange; changes to Colorado’s construction defects law; and a proposal to reduce the legislative session from 120 days to 90 days.

Bills may be introduced in light of the recent deaths of black men at the hands of police. Possible expansion of the state’s racial profiling law could include mandatory use of body cameras on officers, mandatory taped interviews and a further examination of chokeholds.

“The direction we take with this is very important,” Duran said. “We need to build community trust between police and the public. It’s important to listen to all the stakeholders involved.”

A House bill already approved by the Audit Committee would expand state oversight of Connect for Colorado, the state’s insurance marketplace under the Affordable Care Act. A recent financial audit indicated a lack of financial control, including $489,000 in questionable payments to vendors. The bill would allow the Office of State Auditor to broaden its authority over the performance of the exchange.

“Colorado’s adoption of the Affordable Care Act was unique because it had both bi-partisan and business support,” Duran said. “We need to continue to monitor the exchange closely, to keep it going in the right direction and continue building a strong foundation.”

Colorado’s construction-defects law allows faulty building claims to go into litigation too easily, say proponents of changes that give builders a right to repair defects first. Last year such a bill was introduced and defeated in the Senate, so it never reached the House. Duran said she’ll wait to see what bills get drafted this session before making any decisions.

“Is there evidence that such a bill will produce the desired difference? I’m waiting to see the changes to this year’s bill. I’m interested in listening to everyone involved to come up with the best conclusion.”

Also on the horizon is a proposal to let voters decide whether to reduce the length of Colorado’s legislative session from 120 to 90 days. Duran doubts that 90 days is enough time for legislators to accomplish their work. “In the past we’ve not gotten done in 90 days because of the number of bills to review and the work that needed to be done. Based on our work load, it would be a challenge to condense the time we have.”

Duran sponsored or collaborated on several successful bills during the 2014 legislative session. These include House Bill 1317, helping low-income families pay for childcare; House Bill 1017, giving tax and other incentives to developers to build affordable housing; Senate Bill 28, giving tax credits to consumers of electric cars; and House Bill 1093, establishing a loan fund for development in state-established creative districts including the Santa Fe Art District and the RINO Art District.

by