Because they hail from the United Kingdom, Longmont Master Police Officer Keith Bell and Officer Graham Wale endure the occasional ribbing when they work a Fourth of July shift.

"They like to point out the irony," Bell said.

Wale agreed, saying the two were paired up on Independence Day one year and never heard the end of it from people they came into contact or ticketed that night.

"There was no hope," he joked. "We were two ex-British officers sounding British. We had it more than normal that night."

Nevertheless, Wale, who works in patrol, loves his adopted home in Longmont, saying that he applied to work here because he liked the reception he got from the recruiting staff at the police department.

Longmont Master Police Officer Keith Bell leaves the Le Deauville Apartments after talking to the manager in Longmont on Wednesday. (Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call)

Colorado is also one of two states that allow non-citizens — Wale has a green card — to become police officers.

"The only other one is Alaska," Wale said. "I didn't fancy going to Alaska. It's too cold."

Bell covers the Crime Free Multi-housing Program as part of the Gang Crime Suppression Unit and said he had family living in southern Florida which he came to visit. He found the sunny skies and warm temperatures alluring.

"You're living in England, and it's kind of dull and dreary," he said. "You come to Florida and it's sand and sun. It's pleasant."

After working a series of civilian jobs, he obtained his citizenship in 1994 and started working for the Hillsborough County Sheriff's Office, eventually moving to Colorado and finally Longmont police.

Advertisement

Wale started as a community support officer in 2005 with West Midlands Police before becoming a "Bobby" with the Warwickshire Police.

He said the crimes and evidence are the same in the UK as they in the United States. Most officers don't carry guns, however, and Wale said an officer often has to use what he calls "acute communication."

"You only have an asp and CS spray," he said. "You have to talk quickly when you're in the UK. That would be the only real difference. The nuts and bolts of policing are really the same."

Bell started off as a police officer in Manchester in 1980 and walked a beat, which he liked, because an officer gets to know people in the community and the area he patrols.

"I walked for my first year in England," he said, adding that most officers walk for two years, but he was moved to a patrol car because of short staffing.

Wale likes the community-oriented policing he has found in Longmont that focuses on what he calls the "broken windows philosophy" where a community deals with quality-of-life issues and the rest falls into place.

"It's about listening to the people you serve," he said. "It's been really drummed into personnel and management. And I believe it works."

Bell said he decided to become a police officer when he was riding a double decker bus through Manchester with a group of friends when he saw a man being arrested in the city center.

"There was a van and a police car on the sidewalk and several police officers around," he said. "Two of us said, 'You know what? I think that's what I want to do.' I carried on and went through with it."

Wale said when he became a police officer in England, he knew he had found the perfect career, and he can't imagine himself doing anything else. He added that residents in Longmont have more trust in the police and it's a great feeling.

"I plan on finishing my career out in Longmont, as long as they'll have me," he said. "I really feel blessed living in the U.S.A. and doing the job I love."

John Bear: 303-684-5212, bearj@timescall.com or twitter.com/johnbearwithme