Freedom! Retirement day arrives for 110 chimpanzees as they are rehomed from controversial government bioresearch lab

200 acre sanctuary launched Road to Chimp Haven, a $5 million campaign to rehome the animals

Chimps were due to be sent to a lab in Texas - until campaign was a success

All 110 chimps from the controversial New Iberia Research Center in Lafayette have arrived at their 'retirement home'.

After a year and a half of fundraising, the animal all arrived safely at Chimp Haven in Louisiana, the National Chimpanzee Sanctuary.

'We are thrilled that this great day has finally arrived,' Chimp Haven President and CEO Cathy Willis Spraetz said.



Tosha, Sassy and Paula, three of the chimpanzees formerly used for biomedical research by the US National Institutes of Health explore their new surroundings at Chimp Haven, a federally funded sanctuary in Keithville, Louisiana following a $5m campaign to retire them.

CHIMP HAVEN

The 200 acre sanctuary launched Road to Chimp Haven, a $5 million campaign that would cover needed construction and care for the incoming chimpanzees.

Since the start of construction last year, six play areas have been completed which enabled the sanctuary to complete the transitioning phase for the chimpanzees.

Currently, several bedrooms and one large open play ground are nearing completion which will allow more room for future growth.

'Many organizations and individuals have worked tirelessly to ensure these chimpanzees would have a new beginning in a sanctuary environment.



'Our dreams have finally been realized for these amazing animals.'

The campaign to bring the chimpanzees, ranging from 1 to 50 years of age, from the southern Louisiana laboratory to Chimp Haven began in November 2012 when the National Institutes of Health determined that they be retired.



Initially, plans were made to only send 10 to the northwest Louisiana sanctuary and the remainder to a laboratory in Texas.

'When we learned that all of the chimpanzees would not be retired to Chimp Haven, we felt they were being robbed of what was promised to them in the CHIMP Act, signed into law in 2000 and reauthorized in 2013,' Spraetz said.



'It was necessary to devise a plan that would offer a safe and caring atmosphere, one where these chimpanzees can live the rest of their lives in large social groups and determine on their own how they will spend their days.'

The 200 acre sanctuary launched Road to Chimp Haven, a $5 million campaign that would cover needed construction and care for the incoming chimpanzees.

Since the start of construction last year, six play areas have been completed which enabled the sanctuary to complete the transitioning phase for the chimpanzees. Currently, several bedrooms and one large open play ground are nearing completion which will allow more room for future growth.

The 200 acre sanctuary launched Road to Chimp Haven, a $5 million campaign that would cover needed construction and care for the incoming chimpanzees.



Since the start of construction last year, six play areas have been completed which enabled the sanctuary to complete the transitioning phase for the chimpanzees.



Currently, several bedrooms and one large open play ground are nearing completion which will allow more room for future growth.

'Because of the generosity of our donors, we have made great strides for these beautiful animals,' Spraetz said.



'However, the public’s help is needed to close the $2 million funding gap that still remains and must be earmarked for their daily care for the remainder of their lives.'