Toss all of this into a caldron. Stir. Heat to boiling and see if the mix, when done, remains as confusing as it was when the individual ingredients were being thrown in.

A 12-21 record.

Which, going into Saturday, was …

• Three games out of the eighth playoff slot in the West.

• A game and a half out of 14th place.

There is an eight-game losing streak. And wins in four of five. And losses in six of seven. And wins in five of six. The Nuggets average 98.9 points per game, their fewest in 12 seasons, but have averaged 103.4 in the last seven games.

The Nuggets are hard to figure out. But help is on the horizon.

Help in the form of a healthy roster, allowing a more accurate look at what coach Michael Malone wants to do with this crew. After the return of Danilo Gallinari and Jusuf Nurkic at Golden State on Saturday night, the Nuggets are just two players — Emmanuel Mudiay and Kostas Papanikolaou — from having everyone not named Wilson Chandler available. That’s going to be huge in figuring things out.

This much we know: Offensively, the Nuggets are a heavy pick-and-roll team, a heavy drive-and-kick team, and lately have been looking for some quick-hitting post-up plays after whipping the ball from one side of the court to the other, as well as some early offense post-ups. That may get tweaked, but it generally is now what it’s going to be in March and April.

Defensively, it’s clog the paint and build out from there, paying special attention to running opponents off the corner 3-pointer and limiting gambling for steals. That’s what Malone believes in. Don’t expect that to change much during his time here.

But as players knock the rust off and work through restrictions in playing time, we eventually will start to see what he would like his rotation to be. It’s been patchwork at best as Malone scrambles to find the most effective combinations, given the players he has available. On a team that, before Saturday, had lost 106 “man games” to injuries and illnesses this season, you can imagine the difficulty there.

The next 25 games are ones to watch. As long as the Nuggets avoid more extended-absence injuries, this is when we will get to know Malone as a coach — what he likes combination-wise, what style he wants to play, whether he will keep a deep rotation or shorten it up. To this point, much of what Malone and his coaching staff have done came out of necessity.

It hasn’t been all bad. Rookie forward Nikola Jokic was slated for inconsistent minutes until the Nuggets needed him to play. Then he played well. Now he is one of the top rookies in the NBA. The Nuggets wouldn’t have seen that so soon had everyone been healthy and Jokic been buried deep in the rotation.

My gut says don’t get married to anything you see offensively under Malone. Ever. He appears to be Bill Belichickian in his approach — tailoring his offense to the personnel instead of jamming the personnel into one system. Do not be fooled into thinking George Karl-style supersonic fast-break basketball will return. It won’t. The Nuggets will play as fast as they can, but Mudiay is a midtempo guard, not a John Wall-esque speedster.

And then there’s this little nugget, no pun intended, which went largely unnoticed last week.

“I’m a defensive-minded coach,” said Malone, who fought against that label early on. “I know for us to get to where we all want to go, we have to defend at a high level. … If you have the right culture, if you get guys to buy in to the defensive end of the floor and play together, at some point good things will happen. And that’s our hope here in Denver.”

Christopher Dempsey: cdempsey@denverpost.com or @dempseypost

Spotlight on …

C.J. McCollum, G, Portland

Why: No game was too big and no opponent too tough for Portland’s McCollum, who performed his way to being named The Denver Post’s first player of the week of the new year.

What’s up: In four games, the 6-foot-4 McCollum averaged 28.0 points, 6.3 rebounds, 6.3 assists and 1.5 steals. He shot 50.5 percent from the field and 41.9 percent from the 3-point line. The Trail Blazers won three of the four games.

Background: McCollum had a big week, and it was required. Portland was playing without injured star Damian Lillard and needed not only the production of their star guard replaced, but his leadership. McCollum accepted the challenge and flourished, doing everything the Blazers needed. His best game was a win over Sacramento in which he scored 35 points and had 11 rebounds and nine assists. McCollum contributed 16 points, six assists and four rebounds in the team’s best win of the week, a victory over LeBron James and the Cleveland Cavaliers.

Dempsey’s take: McCollum is getting his chance to shine. The process started late last season, when he was pressed into service after injuries to former players Wesley Matthews and former Nugget Arron Afflalo. McCollum delivered then, and he’s continuing to deliver now.