Topics: Health Care, martin shkreli, Obamacare, News, Politics News

“I don’t mean to be presumptuous, but I liken myself to the robber barons.” — Martin Shkreli

Last September, when so-called “pharma bro” Martin Shkreli was revealed to be the CEO of a drug company that had increased the price of a 62-year old medicine commonly used by AIDS patients by more than 5,000 percent, Republicans and Democrats had finally found something to agree on. What followed was bipartisan disdain for the former hedge-fund manager. Donald Trump remarked that Shkreli looked like a “spoiled brat,” while Hillary Clinton said that if he was going to try to gouge American families “for no good reason” — as if there is any good reason — then she was going to hold him “accountable.”

A few months later, after Shkreli had been indicted for securities fraud, the most hated man in America was called to appear before the most hated institution in America. Both Republican and Democratic members of Congress scolded the former executive, who invoked the fifth amendment throughout with a smirk, and later tweeted that he couldn’t believe “these imbeciles” represented the American people (a slight that would have sounded quite reasonable coming from anyone other than Martin Shkreli).

It was a political exhibition, put on by self-absorbed politicians hoping to score points by assailing the number-one villain of the year. Of course, watching members of Congress — Republic members, no less — feign outrage at such callous greed is kind of like watching Donald Trump acting surprised that his rallies have become violent. Shkreli, while no doubt deserving of the scorn he has received over the past few months, is just a minor-league player in the big con that it is modern American medicine — a con that politicians in Washington has long served obediently.

Of all the industries in America, the one that Shkreli represents spends by far the most on political lobbying — more than $3 billion between 1998 and 2015 — and also tends to be the most profitable. These distinctions are hardly coincidental. In 2015 alone, the pharmaceutical industry spent nearly a quarter billion dollars on lobbying — with the insurance industry coming in a distant second; during this same period, drug prices in America increased by about 10 percent.

Of course, drugs are already two-to-six times more expensive in the United States than elsewhere around the world, where prices are directly or indirectly controlled.

When Shkreli defended his price gouging by claiming it was for “research and development,” he was simply repeating the traditional Big Pharma excuse for its exorbitant profiteering. While the process of drug development is unquestionably expensive and risky, the majority of companies tend to spend considerably more of their profits on marketing and advertising than research. In 2013, the biggest spender, Johnson & Johnson, spent $17.5 billion on marketing, compared to $8.2 billion on R&D.

Now, it is easy to blame the greed of one person, such as Martin Shkreli, or even one industry for the massive costs of healthcare in America, which remains one of the unhealthiest country’s in the developed world. People need a villain to point a finger at. Unfortunately, the real villain isn’t something or someone you can point your finger at; it’s not an executive or a corporation, but the very system that modern medicine has been founded on, where public health and welfare is subordinated to the cause of making of money.

As with the American economy at large — best described as corporate capitalism — healthcare is considered a commodity rather than a public good, which consequently leads to sickness being treated solely as a source of profit by various industries. Big players in this profit-obsessed social order do not want a healthier society, but one full of hyper-consumers who have been convinced that a pill — rather than diet, exercise, therapy, or any kind of lifestyle change — can solve every perceivable health problem, whether real or, especially now, imagined, thanks to a steady diet of pharmaceutical fear mongering.