2 years ago

(CNN) - Hillary Clinton said Friday she's donated her speaking fees from colleges and universities over the past year and a half to her family's foundation.

In an interview with ABC News, Clinton also weighed in on immigration, as well as the Supreme Court's recent rulings thwarting Obamacare mandates that require certain employers to cover contraceptives.

Speaking fees donated

Amid criticism about her personal wealth and the sky-high speaking fees she collects from colleges, Clinton said "all of the fees have been donated to the Clinton Foundation for it to continue its life-changing and life-saving work."

Her comments come as students at the University of Nevada-Las Vegas are asking the former secretary of state to return her $225,000 fee for an upcoming speech in October.

Her hefty speaking price was unwelcome news to the students, who learned last month that Nevada's higher education board had decided to raise tuition by 17%.

The university, however, said the speech was being funded by private donations secured by the school's foundation, not from the university's operating budget.

A Clinton aide told CNN last week that the UNLV speaking fee would go to the Clinton Foundation, not to the former first lady directly.

But her comments in the ABC News interview go further in saying that she's donated all university speaking fees to her family's organization.

"So it goes from a foundation at a university to another foundation," she said.

Clinton has been hammered in recent weeks by Republicans over remarks she's made about her family's personal wealth.

Asked if the foundation would return the money to UNLV, Clinton gave no indication that she planned do so, according to ABC.

“It’s been my experience,” Clinton said, “That they’re not worried about my speaking or my household, they’re worried about their own. And that’s the kind of debate I think I’m furthering as I go around the country speaking.”

Clinton, who's considering another presidential bid, is currently in Europe promoting her new book, "Hard Choices."

Supreme Court rulings, immigration

Days after the Supreme Court ruled in favor of family owned Hobby Lobby - which protested the federal mandate requiring certain employees cover contraceptives in health care plans - the high court angered many Democrats again, letting Wheaton College avoid the mandate, as well.

Clinton called the latest development “a serious breach of a woman’s right,” and urged Washington to take action.

"There has to be some action taken, in the Congress or by the executive to try to clarify what the court just did,” she said.

On the situation at the border involving an influx of immigrant children trying to get into the United States, Clinton said they should not be allowed to stay in the country.

“If they do make it they cannot believe they have any opportunity to stay. They have to be processed appropriately and then returned,” she said.

CNN's Dan Merica contributed to this report.