Mequon — Facing a tough reelection bid, U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson visited Concordia University of Wisconsin on Thursday, Sept. 3, to speak with college students and local Republicans.

Hosted by the university's college Republicans group, none of the attendees challenged Johnson's politics, with the exception of a town of Cedarburg man questioning the first-term Republican's conservative credentials and how he is different from his opponent, former Democratic Sen. Russ Feingold.

That man was one of several attendees who voiced frustrations with the Republican Party's shortcomings in fighting President Barack Obama's policies, including the Affordable Care Act. Johnson replied that some talk show hosts and Republicans "are overpromising what we can't deliver."

For example, Johnson said the effort to defund Obamacare was "intellectually dishonest" because Republicans didn't have the votes needed. Johnson, meanwhile, proposed legislation allowing individuals to keep their current health care plan. Johnson's legislation would have eliminated individual and employer mandates.

Speaking with media before the event, Johnson was asked to clarify comments he made at a WisPolitics luncheon last year, when he said there shouldn't be a federal minimum wage. He also said there should be a minimum wage for guest workers, so as not to encourage cheap labor from across the border. He walked back those comments prior to the town hall event.

"Nobody is recommending removing the minimum wage," he said. "What I am opposed to at this point in time is President Obama's proposal to increase the minimum wage to $10.10, because the Congressional Budget Office estimates it would cost the economy 500,000 to a million jobs. Now you've got Senator Feingold one-upping the president, saying he wants a $15 an hour minimum wage. How many jobs would that cost?"

Cheryle Rebholz, the first vice chair of Ozaukee County Republicans, asked if he would consider legislation limiting the length of primary campaigns to 90 days, in order to prevent constant campaigning by politicians and political parties. While he finds that part of the political process "repulsive," Johnson said he opposes restrictions on campaigns. He equated those restrictions, as well as efforts to regulate campaign finance, as an infringement on free speech.

Johnson ran his first campaign on the promise that he would never make a policy decision with reelection in mind. At the time, he said, he never planned to run for a second term.

"My gameplan was (to serve) two years, work really hard to get up to speed and elect a serious president. By the way, Mitt Romney and Paul Ryan would have been that serious team. (I intended to) spend (the next) four years, structurally fixing these problems and then go home," he said. "But unfortunately that game plan didn't pan out, so I have decided to run again. I didn't do this for six years not to be able to fix these problems. We're mortgaging our kids' future. This is way too important. I just can't quit."