TORONTO -

Money can’t buy brains.

There are 188 schools across the province in this year’s Fraser Institute Elementary School Report Card that have shown improvement over five years. Of those schools, the average parental income is $43,300 compared to the average income of $73,000 for the overall report card.

“If people still want to believe that it’s how much money parents make that decides success in schools, they’re simply wrong,” said Fraser Institute’s Peter Cowley, who co-authored the report.

The Toronto District School Board has remained consistently around a 6.6 out of 10 in recent report cards.

Of the board’s 283 public schools listed in this year’s study, J.G. Workman in Scarborough continues to be on the top of the fastest improving list with a score of 5.5 out of 10.

In 2009, that school started at 2.0, increasing to 2.8 the next year and 4.8 in 2011. It received 6.5 the year after, and and dipped back to 5.5 in 2013 — but regardless, they are the fifth-fastest improving school in terms of improvement over time. And that’s with a parental income of $54,000 and one out of three kids are special needs students.

“So, what’s going on at Workman? We know who is improving, but we don’t know why,” Cowley said.

“I’m worried if you ask the minister of education what the fastest improving elementary of the province is, she won’t know. But she should. Because if you can find those aspects of practice that have resulted in schools going from a 1 to a 5 (out of 10) in just five years, you might be able to magnify that result to the benefit of hundreds of thousands of kids.”

In J.G. Workman’s case, it was designated as a high-needs school by the TDSB in 2012. As a result, additional funding and resources have been funnelled into student learning and parental engagement, including $3,000 for library books, new literacy-based computer technology, and an emphasis on writing-based class trips that are kept affordable for parents.

“A lot of our model schools are in areas where there are high-priority neighbourhoods,” Vicky Branco, a Model Schools for Inner Cities coordinator for the TDSB, told the Sun last year. “If we didn’t provide all these pieces, they wouldn’t have access to them.”

Doretta Wilson, of the Society for Quality Education, said there is also now a strong emphasis on tutoring, be it parents working with children after school or paying for private lessons.

“It’s become almost a requirement in some areas and we still don’t know the link between affluence and student achievement,” she said. “Is that fair? Of course it isn’t. But it still says in either case of affluent or less-affluent households, the school system is not meeting the needs of our students.”