Fundraising organizers for the Downtown Aurora Visual Arts center are nearly finished with a three-year capital campaign to expand the 20-year-old building in the Aurora Cultural Arts District.

Susan Jenson, executive director of the group, said $1.4 million out of a needed $1.7 million is in the bank. Right now, the nonprofit art education and youth intervention organization at 1405 Florence St. is a rough collection of storefronts that were all purchased and patched together at different times more than a decade ago.

The renovation and expansion project will repurpose all of the existing space and add about 1,600 square feet of new space for a flowing, 8,500 square foot facility complete with a new ceramics room, more studio space and extra instructional rooms.

“We’ve been very deliberate in how we will make the best use of what we already have in terms of land and square footage,” said Shubhra Raje, an architect with Built Environments in Denver. “We’ve repurposed a lot of the existing facility … and a whole part of the facility is going to be demolished and built back up.”

Original cost projections for the project in 2011 were about $1.5 million, Jenson said. Increasing construction costs drove the bill up, but she said she doesn’t believe that will stop the organization from breaking ground this year.

“We’re in the last $200,000 to $300,000 of fundraising to put the shovels in the ground, and we really believe that we can finish fundraising by the end of the year and begin construction before December,” Jenson said. “It’s been an extraordinary year getting down to the finish line.”

The new building will use 2,385 square feet in the currently unused south wing for the popular job training program. Raje said only about 30 percent of the current facility is used for instructional space, and that will grow to 55 percent after the project is complete.

About 1,000 students participate in the free art education programs at the center every year. During the summer, Jenson said 100 kids come in every day. The rising popularity of the center is what prompted the expansion project in 2011, when Jenson said she had to start turning away students based on capacity.

“Our programs are inhibited by lack of space,” Jenson said. “The vision for our building allows us to see more kids, brings together art and technology, and grows our on- and off-site programs. It is truly a dedicated plan with arts education for inner city kids at the very heart of the design.”

The proposed new building is an L-shaped structure that will create an enclosed, outdoor courtyard for students to use. Raje said she designed it that way with the needs of the community in mind.

“One of the biggest challenges in this … urban neighborhood has been to connect the campus with its context while retaining a sense of enclosure,” Raje said. “This courtyard is designed to be a comfortable and inviting environment to gather, play and explore within a neighborhood whose outdoor spaces are scarce and often unsafe.”

Ward 1 Councilwoman Sally Mounier said she’s glad to see that Downtown Aurora Visual Arts is on the verge of its long-awaited renovation.

“DAVA has been part of this neighborhood for years and years,” Mounier said. “They’re an integral part of this community, and they do a great job with the kids. I’m pleased that they’re close to their goal and are going to be expanding.”

Megan Mitchell: 303-954-2650, or mmitchell@denverpost.com