As Mayor de Blasio’s approval ratings cratered last year, New Yorkers waited to see if he’d ever manage to get out of his own way.

When you effectively become mayor by winning a primary you’d been all but counted out of just weeks earlier, you’re due for a few weeks or even months of Smartest Guy In The Room Syndrome. But two years of unforced errors — most recently including clumsy, nakedly political and utterly unsuccessful bids to ban the carriage horses and put the brakes on Uber, along with his stature-diminishing attempts to offer himself as a national progressive icon — is really pushing it.

Still, critics who breathlessly branded him a one-term mayor should admit: The city’s fundamentals — low crime, cranes everywhere, record crowds and swollen tax coffers — have held up in de Blasio’s New York. And while white voters in particular remain skeptical, his public opinion numbers have rebounded enough that fellow Democrats at least have put down the 2017 primary lines of attack they’d started field-testing last year.

Speaking of fundamentals, though, the chronic conditions that were sapping New York City’s vitality when de Blasio took office are still doing so. You could even call it a tale of two cities — a tale that, it turns out, defies cheap slogans and quick fixes.

The New York City Housing Authority, our city within our city housing a population about the size of Miami’s, remains a moldy, deteriorating mess.

Street homelessness is up, the shelter system is an overcrowded disaster and the seriously mentally ill still aren’t getting the help they and the rest of us need them to receive.

The city’s public hospital system, the care provider of last resort, is hemorrhaging money.

And Rikers Island, despite a prisoner population less than half its peak two decades ago, is a dysfunctional if not downright dystopian place.

There are two through-lines connecting these problems.

First, that these are systems that deal with the neediest among us, and that are overburdened, underfunded and overlooked by too many of the New Yorkers who don’t depend on or encounter them — even as every New Yorker senses in their peripheral vision, as they see more panhandlers and mentally ill people on their streets and trains, how these problems interlock.

Second, these are systems that festered under Mayor Mike Bloomberg, who largely got a political pass for them. De Blasio, in part because of the grandiloquent promises he made when running for mayor, does not.

The truth is that these are things a mayor can’t do alone. That the feds have largely abandoned their financial commitments to. That Gov. Cuomo has little interest in helping de Blasio claim credit for fixing.

But in shining a light on the “other” New York, and blaming Bloomberg for its troubles, de Blasio has taken political responsibility for its wellbeing.

And having done so, he’s been getting pummeled by left-right combinations, both from New Yorkers who just want orderly streets and the “bad old days” kept at bay and from those who want the miracle cures — to keep failed hospitals open, make NYCHA’s aging buildings decent places to live again, city jails places that treat every inmate with basic human decency — de Blasio suggested he could provide but has yet to deliver.

This is a fix to be in.

Occasionally, in attempts to wriggle free, de Blasio has turned his back on parts of that second city, as when he seemed to promise a powerful business group last year that he’d resume his predecessors’ practice of rousting the street homeless from Manhattan’s sprawling central business district.

But for the most part, he’s taken ownership of the intractable problems of the neediest New Yorkers — not the many of us who’ve felt like bystanders to or casualties of the city’s prosperity, but the group economically below that. The ones who need outside help, temporarily or for years, to stand up their own lives and who are often unable to access or even resistant to accepting that help.

The ones who aren’t exactly a potent voting bloc. And who the rest of us are at the mercy of in public spaces if they don’t either find the help they need or end up jailed in lieu of it, but are instead just left to their own devices.

Standing up for those New Yorkers is to de Blasio’s credit. The question now is what he does to actually improve their lives.