POLITICO Pro King lawyers: Veterans coverage won't upend Obamacare lawsuit

The attorneys challenging Obamacare’s tax subsidies say that the lead plaintiff’s potential eligibility for veterans health coverage won’t derail their lawsuit in the Supreme Court.

A Wall Street Journal story suggested late Friday that David King qualifies for veterans’ health coverage, which could mean he doesn’t have to comply with the health care law’s individual mandate and might not have a legal right to pursue his challenge to Obamacare.

Story Continued Below

King is a Vietnam War veteran, as POLITICO reported on Friday.

The Competitive Enterprise Institute, which is coordinating and funding the lawsuit, says that the veteran’s status is a non-issue. And even if it were, there are other plaintiffs in King V. Burwell whose standing — the legal term for the right to bring a lawsuit — is not contested

.

“We examined this issue at the outset of the litigation,” CEI general counsel San Kazman said in a statement on Saturday.

Neither King nor Douglas Hurst, another co-plaintiff who also served in the military, was ever enrolled in a veterans health program, Kazman said. And Obamacare regulations specify that only individuals who actually enroll in a veterans health plan are treated as “eligible” for them under the law, he said.

“Therefore, since neither Mr. King nor Mr. Hurst had even enrolled, neither was ‘eligible’ for veterans health care,” Kazman said. “Further, there are also non-veteran plaintiffs in this case whose standing is uncontested by the Department of Justice, and so the veteran status of two plaintiffs is of no legal consequence in any event.”

King filed an affidavit in the court proceedings in which he said that he was not eligible for any government health program or employer-sponsored health insurance.

Early on, the Justice Department challenged the standing of King and another plaintiff, Rose Luck, by saying that they were eligible for a “catastrophic” health plan. But the department made no mention of veteran’s coverage eligibility.

U.S. District Court Judge James R. Spencer made no mention of standing problems in his ruling last February. The Court of Appeals for the 4th Circuit did not stop the case on standing grounds, either.

The Supreme Court does examine such issues as it considers a case. Yet standing and ripeness — whether it is the right time to bring a particular challenge — are typically dealt with at lower court levels.

Were the justices to decide that none of the plaintiffs in King v. Burwell has the right to bring the suit, they could toss the entire case on that legal point — an easy “out” for a highly controversial case.

But the challenge involves a total of four plaintiffs, and “only one person needs standing for the case to proceed,” said Carl Tobias, a University of Richmond law professor.

The Supreme Court “can be a stickler for standing before it reaches the merits, and this would allow the Court to avoid resolving a very controversial issue,” Tobias said on Saturday. However, he said, even if the justices ruled against King on this issue, another case opposing the Obamacare tax subsidies is already at the appellate level and could reach the court in the next term.

That case — Halbig v. Burwell — is one of three other lawsuits challenging the tax subsidy issue.