MICHAEL CADORE: Central Florida Humanitarian

By Space Coast Medicine & Active Living Magazine // October 20, 2014

Loading the player ...

ABOVE VIDEO: Michael Cadore is a true public servant who he lives by the mantra that if you don’t serve your community now, don’t expect your community to serve you later.

Dedicated Volunteer, Innate Passion To Serve Others

CENTRAL FLORIDA, USA – Michael Cadore is a true public servant who he lives by the mantra that if you don’t serve your community now, don’t expect your community to serve you later.

Cadore started early, walking that walk, volunteering at the Titusville YMCA as a youth with his oldest brother Jeff and with his parents, often taking clothes and food to those in need.

You see, Cadore has always had an innate passion to serve others.

During high school, the young star athlete from Titusville would participate in ride-alongs in police cruisers with his father, who served as an Auxiliary Policeman for 27 years and often gave wise talks to those needing a helping hand.

Cadore was blessed with strong and inspirational parents and their unconditional love and sense of community spirit has led him to a life of service.

PATH OF COMMUNITY SERVICE

Drafted into the NFL in 1989 by the New Orleans Saints, Cadore starred for the Montreal Machine in Canada and was inducted into the Space Coast Sports Hall of Fame in 2014.

Cadore could have chosen a career path with large financial rewards taking him away from Brevard, but he chose a path to serve his community with a multitude of projects including Law n Order, a youth workshop which emphasizes the importance of positive communication, respect, attitude and professionalism as it pertains to dealing with authority; the “Uncle Mike Can We Talk” session to discuss life issues; the “We are Men of Good Character” event; the “Tying Ties” program on teaching youth how to properly wear a tie as well as providing words of encouragement; the “Dream, Prepare, Take Action and Don’t Quit” workshop; the “Principles of Success” workshop; the “Act like a C.E.O” program to promote good character; and the “Education, Optimism and Listen” program to strengthen relationships with youth.

All along the way, his wife and soul mate, Cornelia, of 23 years has been his biggest supporter, always by his side, encouraging and helping with his community projects.

Forever humble and unassuming, the Cadores have instilled in their own three children the importance of giving to others, taking their children to hospitals during the holidays to give presents to those less fortunate.

Cadore, who has a masters’ degree in management, was the Public Safety Coordinator of the Year in his role at the Law Enforcement Academy at Eastern Florida State College, and while serving as Supervisor of the Rockledge Community Relations Unit, his unit was named the National Neighborhood Watch Program by the National Sheriffs Association.

As president of Magnus Solutions Inc., named after his inspirational grandfather, his company provides security assessments, policy review, and crime prevention training for corporations.

Florida Governor Rick Scott appointed Cadore to the Brevard County Housing Authority and he also serves as a Board member for the Brevard Family Partnership, LEAD Brevard, Aging Matters and the Space Coast Sports Commission.

CLICK HERE TO SEE THE CENTRAL FLORIDA HUMANITARIAN ALUMNI

ABOUT THE 2014 CENTRAL FLORIDA HUMANITARIAN AWARDS

The Central Florida Humanitarian Awards were created to recognize outstanding individuals and organizations that dedicate their Time, Talent or Treasure to help people in need locally – and around the world.

This year, more than 30 deserving humanitarians will be honored during the Gala, which will be held Thursday, Nov. 6 at the Hilton Melbourne Rialto Place, with the festivities beginning at 6 p.m.

“Over the years, our editorial team has had the distinct honor and pleasure of identifying and featuring the many members of our community who give back so much and are dedicated to reaching out and helping others, here and throughout the world, in a multitude of ways,” said Maverick Multimedia Editor-In-Chief Dr. Jim Palermo.

“We remain firmly committed to identifying and telling those stories and providing a timely media platform to recognize Space Coast and Central Florida residents’ altruistic contributions on a regular basis in our magazines, as well as SpaceCoastDaily.com,” said Dr. Palermo.

This inspiring and compelling event is sponsored by M.H. Williams Construction, Brighthouse Networks, Health First, Brevard Physicians Network, Clear Choice Health Care, First Choice Medical Group, Knudson Brain & Spine Law Injury Office, Florida Pain Institute, Sangiv Patel, DDS, PA, Brevard Geriatrics, Space Coast Medicine & Active Living magazine and SpaceCoastDaily.com

For more information about the Central Florida Humanitarian Gala call 321-323-4460 or e-mail MaverickMultiMedia@gmail.com

BELOW MAP: The 2014 Central Florida Humanitarian Awards will take place Thursday, Nov. 6, 2014 at the Hilton Melbourne Rialto Place, located at 200 Rialto Place in Melbourne, Florida.

[gmarker marker_latitude=”” marker_longitud=”” marker_label=””] [/gmarker]

Click here to contribute your news or announcements Free