Buy Photo A photo of Lyndon "Shane" Beharry, his common-law wife Amanda Morris, and their two children, 7-year-old Brandon and 4-year-old Brian, sits among candles last Wednesday evening outside their Joline Avenue home in Long Branch. (Photo: Thomas P. Costello, staff photographer)Buy Photo

— The man who shot his common-law wife and his two children inside their Joline Avenue home will be memorialized alongside his family on Tuesday, according to an obituary to be published Sunday in the Asbury Park Press.

Visitation for all four family members will be held from 4 p.m. until the time of the service at 8 p.m. at the Damiano Funeral Home at 191 Franklin Ave. in Long Branch.

Authorities have said that Lyndon “Shane” Beharry, 30, murdered Amanda Morris, 29, and sons Brandon and Brian Beharry, ages 7 and 4 respectively, before he committed suicide after turning the gun on himself. A suspicious fire in the house at 245 Joline Avenue followed. All of the victims had gunshot wounds, but a medical examiner determined Shane Beharry’s injuries were self-inflicted.

However, their extended family members have sought to raise doubts about the information released by authorities. They have publicly questioned whether a gun was actually recovered at the scene and they want to know what other evidence investigators have that makes them conclude that it was Shane Beharry who murdered his family.

Charles Webster, spokesman for the Monmouth County Prosecutor's Office, has declined to comment on whether a weapon was recovered at the scene or whether they suspect Beharry set the house on fire before his death.

Despite what authorities say happened, Shane Beharry is still part of the family, said Avika Lalloo, the sister of Amanda Morris.

"Regardless of what he did, we still love him," she has previously told the Press. "He loved his kids ... and they loved him so much."

Multiple 911 calls came in from the Long Branch neighborhood at 11:48 p.m. Tuesday, reporting a fire at the Beharry home. Firefighters struggled to break down the front door, but managed to enter the single-family home through a side-door and contained the blaze.

All four victims were found huddled together in a second floor bedroom. They were taken to Monmouth Medical Center but died despite efforts to save them, all according to the Prosecutor's Office.

In lieu of flowers, the family requests that donations in memory of Brandon and Brian Beharry be made to the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia Foundation, P.O. Box 781352, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19178-1352.

Letters of condolence may be made online through the funeral home www.damianofuneralhome.com.

The deaths remain under investigation by the Prosecutor's Office and Long Branch Police Department. Authorities ask that anyone with information call Monmouth County Detective Pamela Ricciardi at 1-800-533-7443 or Long Branch Police Detective Rich O’Brien at 732-222-1000.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1EITghy