The current world record for most people brushing dogs’ teeth simultaneously is 268, set in Hong Kong in 2012.

Here’s what he had to say:

Question: What kind of dog does your family have?

Answer: I’ve got a Goldendoodle. Her name is Lucy, and she’s one and a half years old now.

When I first got married, my wife said, “Let’s get a dog.” She prevailed, and I absolutely fell in love with our dog, Aggie. She passed away last year. I took being a dog parent very seriously. One of the tactics they say to establish pack hierarchy is put your puppy down in the woods and walk away, and they’ll know you’re the leader and start following you. She followed right after me, and there was a bond ever since then.

+ Scenthound Owner Tim Vogel poses for a photo at the company’s Jupiter office. The dog care club provides monthly bathing, ear-cleaning, ... read more ×

Q: How is Scenthound different from other dog grooming places?

A: We really call it a monthly care club. Grooming is really about health and preventative maintenance, not just the haircuts.

There were so many times I was walking around my neighborhood, and I’d meet someone with their dog. I was like, “Oh, I own a grooming shop.” They’d say, “That’s great. My dog doesn’t need grooming,” but you’d smell the ear infection, or you could smell their breath from the periodontal disease.

That’s when it dawned on me. We need to make this fast, easy and affordable.

Q: What’s the secret to brushing a fussy dog’s teeth or trimming his or her nails?

A: The relationship you have with your dog. When you get your dog, you need to really start playing with their feet, their ears, actually letting them put your fingers in their mouth — allowing you to touch them anywhere.

Q: Speaking of tooth-brushing, where did you get this idea to set a world record for most people brushing dogs’ teeth simultaneously?

A: Dental care is one of the most important and overlooked issues in the dog care industry. If you cared for your dog’s teeth on a regular basis, you could potentially extend your dog’s life by three or four years. It’s really just an area that needs to be brought into the light to help people care for their dogs better.

Q: What’s your favorite place to take your dog in Palm Beach County?

A: One of the reasons we do a lot of work with Friends of Jupiter Beach is because we go there every week. That is hands down my favorite place to take our dog.