As life ebbs from our parents and grandparents, their health care can follow different paths. Hospital care is the most expensive. Nursing and skilled nursing facilities are less so, but still costly. Both can be impersonal.

Last year, federal auditors found that 33 percent of skilled nursing facility patients were infected or injured because of lack of care. They were taken to a hospital, where the average bill was more than $10,000.

The more affordable option can be hospice care.

When it becomes apparent to a doctor that the patient has a terminal condition, Medicare encourages the medical community and families to move the patient to hospice care.

It can be delivered in a nursing home or an assisted-living facility. Many times, it gives people an opportunity most of us want — to die at home.

Unlike hospitals and nursing homes, hospice care givers don’t have much oversight for safe practices. The standards they are required to meet aren’t made public, either.

The price is lower than for hospital or nursing home stays. Medicare pays an average of about $150 a day until the patient reaches a crisis and needs constant care. At that point, the pay goes to roughly $881 a day.

Hospice care companies must be licensed to get paid by Medicare. But there are fewer checks on their practices than there are on other types of care.

Hospice care is paid for on a daily basis, no matter the amount of services delivered.

In a report released last week, federal auditors found that hospices treating patients in assisted living facilities were getting as much as $1,100 a week for less than five hours of care.

The Affordable Care Act directed federal health officials to come up with a different hospice reimbursement method. It also requires a tighter safety and quality regime, and a way to make that available to the public.

Hospital and nursing home quality can be checked on Medicare websites (medicare.gov/hospitalcompare/search.html and medicare.gov/nursinghomecompare/search.html). Hospice care ratings aren’t there yet.

Last week’s report on hospice at assisted-living facilities was written by the Office of Inspector General of the Department of Health and Human Services’ Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.

“We found that Medicare paid a lot more money for hospice care provided in assisted-living facilities, compared to hospice care provided in other settings like private homes or nursing facilities,” said Jenell Clarke-Whyte, a team leader for the OIG Office of Evaluation and Inspections.

Once a doctor says a patient probably has less than six months to live, Medicare pays for hospice care for two 90-day periods and will keep paying in 60-day increments as warranted.

The OIG found that, in 2012, hospice patients in assisted-living facilities were under hospice care an average of 98 days. The average for a hospice patient receiving care at home was 45 days.

Because of the longer stays, the cost of hospice care soared. Between 2007 and 2012, Medicare’s spending for hospice at assisted-living facilities increased from less than $1 billion to $2.1 billion.

Also disturbing to the auditors was the type of care delivered in assisted-living facilities.

“Some hospice providers are targeting certain beneficiaries with medically uncomplicated conditions because they may offer hospices the greatest financial gain,” Clarke-Whyte said.

What to do?

Change the payment system from a daily rate to paying for what’s actually done. And rate hospice care givers publicly on such measures as their willingness to deliver care on weekends, Clarke-Whyte said.

Follow Jim Landers on Twitter at @landersjim.