Stethoscope and EKG (Photo: Getty Images)

WASHINGTON — Indiana continues to rank among the lowest-performing states on measures of health status and health care systems, despite recent improvements in some areas, such as increased insurance coverage for kids, according to a new report from The Commonwealth Fund.

Indiana also kept its low rank in a second analysis released this week, the latest health tracking report from the United Health Foundation.

Only nine states ranked lower on that report, which has tracked a decline in health determinants and outcomes in Indiana since the 1990s.

In recent years, Indiana improved on the percentage of adults who aren’t physically active, on preventable hospitalizations for Medicare patients and on infant mortality rates.

But the share of children living in poverty increased from 14.7 percent to 23.3 percent last year.

And Indiana still is one of the lowest-ranking states for public spending on health, air pollution levels and smoking rates.

“Too many Americans today are developing chronic illnesses due to their lifestyle choices,” said Rhonda Randall, an osteopath and senior adviser to the United Health Foundation, which releases the America’s Health Rankings report every year. The 2015 rankings are based on the most recent statistics available from secondary sources.

The Commonwealth Fund’s Scorecard on State Health System Performance looks at access to medical care, prevention and treatment of disease, avoidable hospital use and cost, healthy lives and health equity.

More states — including Indiana — improved than worsened on the 42 indicators tracked in those areas, the first time that’s happened since the scorecard was created in 2007.

Improvements in Indiana included an increase in the rate of health insurance among children and decreases in colorectal cancer rates and in mortality rates for Medicare patients hospitalized for heart attack, heart failure or pneumonia.

But Indiana’s overall rank of 43rd was unchanged from last year’s report.

The areas where Indiana lost ground were vaccination rates for young children, adult obesity rates and the rate of adults reporting their activities are limited by poor physical or mental health.

“There are wide differences that persist in state performance, and the lack of change we saw in many indicators indicates there are many remaining opportunities that states have to improve,” said Douglas McCarthy, senior research director for The Commonwealth Fund. “The states that rank in the bottom half have the most to gain.”

Researchers found that better health outcomes strongly correlated with timely, affordable access to care.

McCarthy said that even areas with fewer resources can improve with a combination of leadership, policy changes and local health care system action.

This year’s scorecard documents changes during 2013 and 2014 to assess the Affordable Care Act’s health insurance expansion last year, as well as payment reforms and incentives to reduce readmissions to the hospital.

Physician David Blumenthal, president of The Commonwealth Fund, said he "can't with scientific precision" attribute all the gains the report found to the Affordable Care Act but said several positive trends coincide with implementation of the law.

Still, the report cautions, “the effects of the ACA are not yet fully reflected” in this year’s results, and “it may take many years to see the resulting changes.”

The top-ranked states overall were Minnesota, Vermont and Hawaii, while Mississippi, Oklahoma and Arkansas were the worst. Highest-ranked states performed up to eight times better than lowest-ranked states.

Louisiana, Kentucky, Oklahoma and Tennessee saw the greatest gains across health measures — improving on at least 13 indicators despite being among the bottom states overall.

For example, Kentucky ranked just 40th overall but improved on 13 indicators and worsened on only three. The state led the nation in declines among uninsured adults, for example, and improved substantially in adults who went without care because of cost; infant mortality; and adults 50 and older who got recommended screenings and preventive care.

Kentucky expanded its Medicaid program under the Affordable Care Act, although new Gov. Matt Bevin, who was inaugurated Tuesday, has pledged to scale back that expansion and dismantle the state’s online insurance shopping site.

USA TODAY reporter Jayne O'Donnell contributed to this story.

Email Maureen Groppe at mgroppe@gannett.com. Follow her on Twitter: @mgroppe.

• More information: Visit the U.S. Health System Data Center at http://datacenter.commonwealthfund.org for interactive maps, state profiles and comparisons of state performance.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1QE2FtZ