BOSTON - Republican gubernatorial candidates Charlie Baker and Mark Fisher, at a forum on Monday, disagreed on fundamental principles, ranging from the science of climate change to whether health care is a human right.

Fisher, for example, said "the science isn't there" to prove that climate change is happening. "Climate change is a wonderful thing. I just celebrated going from spring into summer," Fisher said.

Baker responded, "The climate is obviously changing, and there's data to support it." Baker said the state, and private businesses, should find the "most economically efficient" ways to reduce the state's carbon footprint.

The two met on stage for the first time at a forum at District Hall on the Boston waterfront sponsored by A Better City, the Massachusetts Competitive Partnership, and CommonWealth Magazine. A Better City focuses on increasing economic development through transportation and infrastructure; the Massachusetts Competitive Partnership focuses on business and job growth. Four of five Democrats running for governor appeared at a similar forum last month.

Baker, a former health care executive, was the 2010 Republican gubernatorial nominee and has the party's support again this year. Fisher, a business owner, is affiliated with the Tea Party. The Republican Party said originally that Fisher came just shy of getting the 15 percent support from activists at the state party convention required to get on the party's ballot. However, after Fisher challenged the results in court, the Republican Party gave him a spot on the ballot. The differences between the established candidate and the challenger were clear at Monday's forum.

One stark difference came on health care, when moderator R.D. Sahl, a long-time broadcast journalist, asked whether health care is a basic right.

Fisher said no. "I don't believe so. I think it's a nicety. Do we have a right to a home, a car, an in-ground pool?" Fisher asked.

Fisher said people have "God-given" rights to life, liberty and pursuit of happiness, and everyone should be free to decide how to pursue happiness. "I know people, my employees, feel that happiness for them doesn't include health insurance, but the state forces it on them or they'd have to pay a penalty," Fisher said.

Baker disagreed. "I think access to health care is a basic right," Baker said. "It's a basic right under federal law, a basic right under state law. No one knows when they're going fall off a ladder, break a leg, or find out they have cancer."

Baker praised the system instituted under Republican Gov. Mitt Romney, under which around 98 percent of Massachusetts residents were insured. Although Democratic President Barack Obama's national health care overhaul was based on Romney's law, Massachusetts has struggled with implementing the federal law – particularly with a website meant to govern its health insurance exchange. Baker has said Massachusetts should have sought a waiver from the Affordable Care Act.

"The overlay of federal reform in Massachusetts is a disaster," Baker said.

Fisher opposes raising the minimum wage, saying wages should be up to the employer and employee.

Baker supports raising the minimum wage. He said he supports the Massachusetts House's version of a minimum wage bill, which would raise it from $8 to $10.50 an hour over three years. He said he thinks there should be a tax credit for small businesses to help them absorb the increased labor costs.

Fisher has signed a pledge, circulated by anti-tax activist Grover Norquist, not to raise taxes. Baker said he will not raise taxes, but he will not sign the pledge because it might prevent him from signing a law that simplifies the tax code.

Asked whether government has a role in stimulating investment in broadband internet, Baker said yes, as long as the state is sure broadband will be the best technology to use five or 10 years down the line. Fisher said government should make Massachusetts "business-friendly" so private industry will develop broadband, if there is a need.

Fisher brought most of his responses back to the core of his campaign, which is making Massachusetts business friendly. He has proposed lowering the corporate tax rate, reducing regulations, stopping taxpayer funding of particular industries such as renewable energy and removing an "inventory tax," a tax on inventory that he says discourages distribution centers from building in Massachusetts. "I'm not going pander to individuals, I'm not going to pander to industries, I'm not going to pander to regions," Fisher said. "I'm going to raise the tide that floats all boats."

Fisher repeatedly referred to Republican Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker as his model. Walker gained national attention for his moves to lessen the power of that state's unions.

Baker said he believes government should help each region by assisting the type of industry that has grown up there. For example, he said the Pioneer Valley has a strong precision manufacturing industry; Worcester also has a major manufacturing presence. The state, he said, should have explicit agreements with local authorities "that build on the capabilities we already have in different places."