A uniformed police officer shot and killed a 29-year-old man brandishing a yellow-handled utility knife on a Queens sidewalk early Sunday after moving to arrest him for menacing workers at a hospital several hours before, the police said.

The police said the officer fired twice, striking the man once in the torso. He was pronounced dead at New York Hospital Queens.

The deadly encounter, in Flushing, echoed the brutal hatchet attack on Thursday in Jamaica, Queens. That attack left two officers wounded, one severely, and the suspect, described by the police as a “self-radicalized” extremist bent on killing officers, dead.

There did not appear to be any political overtones to the confrontation early Sunday, which the police said stemmed from an effort to arrest the man, whose name was not immediately released.

He first entered the emergency room at the hospital complaining of difficulty breathing sometime late Saturday or early Sunday.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

He was discharged around 2:30 a.m., the police said, but returned roughly an hour later with a kitchen knife and demanded syringes. He left without any violence, the police said, and hospital workers called 911.

After reviewing hospital video footage, four uniformed officers, including a sergeant, began searching for him in an area around Kissena Boulevard. Around 8:20 a.m., the officers believed they spotted the man near Ash Avenue.

The officers split up and intercepted him on a pedestrian path, the police said. There, the man, knife in hand, and two officers confronted one other; one fired. He was taken back to the hospital where he had been twice before.

A kitchen knife was found in the man’s right front pocket, the police said.

The police said the man had two arrests last year: He was accused of stealing three Xbox games from a store, and he was charged with weapons possession for having a switchblade and tear gas in a local laundromat.

In an unrelated episode hours earlier, a 22-year-old woman died at a police precinct station house in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, after what the police described as an apparent seizure. The woman, Jasmine Lawrence of the Bronx, had been arrested with two men around 8 p.m. Saturday on charges of selling marijuana on Bedford Avenue near Dean Street.

No force was used in her arrest, the police said, and she did not request medical attention. She was placed alone in a holding cell, to separate her from the male arrestees, the police said.

Just before midnight, she appeared to have a seizure, the police said. An ambulance arrived in seven minutes. About an hour later, she was pronounced dead at Woodhull Medical Center. The cause of death had yet to be determined by the New York City medical examiner.