The Obama administration is once again trying to push the Affordable Care Act’s so-called benefits for young Americans — the most crucial demographic to the success of the law.

On Monday night, the White House hosted a #WHYouth Google+ Hangout to answer questions about Obamacare and how it influences young people specifically.

And if the White House is to be believed, there’s nothing but good things in store for young Americans.

“About 50 percent of young people can get coverage for under $50 a month in the marketplace,” Christen Linke Young from the Domestic Policy Council at the White House eagerly told viewers.

Linke Young and fellow moderator, Kyle Lierman, youth liaison at the White House Office of Public Engagement, gave the staid administration talking points throughout the Hangout: that the “product” (health insurance) is good and that the website issues are mostly resolved.

“We are now happy to report that the website is working smoothly for the vast majority of users,” Linke Young said. “There are still times where there is a high volume on the site and people face some challenges, but for the most part, the website is working smoothly.”

Linke Young also pushed the rhetoric that young people are enthused about buying health insurance and know that buying into Obamacare is the smart financial decision. She said that young people will find Obamacare to be affordable.

The moderators were joined by the winners of the “Healthy Young America” video contest — who were each given the chance to ask questions during the Hangout. Actor Kal Penn controlled which additional questions from Twitter and Google+ were selected, ensuring no unflattering questions were posed.

After all, the White House wanted to ensure that only correct information — the “facts,” Lierman said — on Obamacare were discussed during the Hangout. Penn lamented the fact that social media can disseminate “misinformation” about the law, but added that it can also help spread stories of how the ACA is helping people.

“I feel like that kind of stuff [social media] can go a long way in dispelling some of the myths and making sure that folks have the facts to make decisions that are important for their families,” Penn said.

Watch the full Hangout below: