Colorado State University students help care for pets through Pets Forever

By volunteering at Pets Forever, Colorado State University student Michelle Albright found a couple of grandmothers to adopt as she helped care for their pets.

Albright, who is pursuing a master's degree in environmental health, originally signed up for the pet assistance program to fulfill a community service requirement to apply for veterinary school: 1,000 hours working with animals and 1,000 hours doing other community service.

But she's stayed on for more than two years, developing her skills in client interaction and learning about career opportunities beyond veterinary medicine.

"The thing I love about it is sitting and talking with my clients and getting to know them," said Albright, who sees five clients a week and subs for other student volunteers during school breaks. "It has a twofold benefit. You get to hang out with people and pets at the same time."

Albright walks dogs for her clients, administers medication and takes the pets to veterinary and grooming appointments.

"It helps keep the clients in good spirits, as well as their animals," Albright said. "They've become family."

Pets Forever is a community service program that helps low-income elderly and disabled Larimer County residents keep their dogs and cats by offering basic pet care. That way, the residents, who typically are homebound, can benefit from the comfort and companionship animals offer.

"It's really important that our community do everything we can to support the bond between people and their animals," said Lori Kogan, program founder and associate professor in the clinical sciences department of the College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences at CSU.

Kogan started the program nearly five years ago to avoid pet owners having to give up their pets when they're no longer able to care for them, she said.

The program, which is run by the College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, helps 80 residents at any given time by pairing them with CSU student volunteers and a few community volunteers. The volunteers walk dogs, provide pet hygiene and yard and litter-box cleanup, administer pet medications, transport pets to veterinary appointments and assist with pet-related errands, such as buying pet food and supplies.

This year, there are 60 volunteers working with the pet owners, who get daily or less frequent visits depending on their needs.

The volunteers, if they are students, can earn one academic credit if they commit to a minimum of four clients per week for one semester and attend weekly meetings that include class discussions and presentations by local nonprofits. That way, they are knowledgeable about the community resources clients may need to access to receive support services.

"These relationships are so important to the clients and the students," Kogan said. "These people really become surrogate grandparents a lot of the time."

For information about the program or about volunteering, go to petsforever.colostate.edu or email Kogan at lori.kogan@colostate.edu.

Shelley Widhalm can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 531, or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @ShelleyWidhalm. Read her blog: shelleywidhalm.wordpress.com.