One set of triplets and three sets of twins graduate from Cañon City High School today with the class of 2014. Graduates, from left to right, are Brooke and Bryan Buchholz, Tim, Edward and Alex Skerjanec and Spencer and Frankie Bethune. Not pictured are Steven and Michael Ortega. ( Carie Canterbury / Daily Record )

Twins Steven and Michael Ortega graduate today with the Cañon City High School Class of 2014. (Courtesy Photo/ Special to the Daily Record)

If you go What: Cañon City High School Graduation When: 9 a.m. today Where: Citizens Stadium, 1313 College Ave.



Parents of twins and triplets have been through the newborn stage, learning to care for two or three infants at a time; the "terrible two" stage; and the new-driver stage, when suddenly two or three teens are asking to borrow the keys.

Today, four sets of parents will begin the next journey with not just one child leaving the nest, but two or three.

One set of triplets and three sets of twins graduate from Cañon City High School today with the class of 2014. Brooke and Bryan Buchholz; Tim, Edward and Alex Skerjanec; Spencer and Frankie Bethune; and Steven and Michael Ortega will walk across the stage at Citizens Stadium to receive their diploma and then prepare to head off to new ventures.

Brooke and Bryan, 18, the children of Dianne Buchholz and Jim Schoch and the late Brad Buccholz, had a fragile start to life, being born 12 weeks early. Today, they are finishing their school careers strong.

"I am so proud of the growth they've accomplished while they have been in Cañon City schools," Dianne said. "The school system has done awesome with them since they were in preschool and early childhood education."

Advertisement

Buchholz said the district has done a good job in servicing her children with special needs.

"Some of that credit goes to (the district), and the rest of it goes to (Brooke and Bryan's) hard work and how much they participate every day and show up and are in the moment," she said. Brooke and Bryan are Dianne's ninth and 10th, and final, children to graduate.

Bryan said he hopes to find a job through the Student to Work Alliance Program, and Brooke will attend the adult program, "Possibilities" in Colorado Springs.

Tim, Edward and Alex, 18, the sons of Ed and Pam Skerjanec, will leave their parents at once, leaving an active, bustling household now quiet. Tim plans to attend the University of Wyoming with a campus-based ROTC scholarship; Alex is going to attend the University of Wyoming on a national ROTC scholarship; and Edward is going to attend the Universal Technical Institute in Arizona to become an automotive mechanic.

Edward said it will be different heading off to Arizona without his brothers.

"It will be a unique experience," he said.

The only class the three brothers all have been in together was their senior government class.

Spencer and Frankie, 18, are the sons of Gene and Joanie Bethune. The brothers said they have shared a room their entire lives, and it won't be easy being apart.

After they spend the summer in Monte Vista with a friend, Frankie plans to enlist in the army, and Spencer plans to attend college in the fall.

"It will be the first time that we've ever been apart for more than a week in our entire lives," Frankie said.

"It will be weird," Spencer said.

As the youngest in their family, Frankie and Spencer are the last to leave the nest.

"My mom has been raising kids for 40 years," Spencer said. "This will be the first time in 40 years she doesn't have kids in the house; she doesn't know how to handle it with it being just them now."

Frankie and Spencer participated in wrestling together, and they also worked at Sonic together for about a year.

Steven and Michael are the sons of Tony and Elizabeth Ortega. They were unavailable for comment.