For a lame duck president, Barack Obama has had an excellent summer, with a slew of domestic and foreign policy wins, capped this week by a historic deal with Iran.

Obama—the careful president who sometimes frustrated even supporters with his slow motion decisions—is clearly on fire.

See also: All the times Donald Trump has pretended to run for president

We take a quick look at some of his biggest victories recently.

Iran Deal

Image: Evan Vucci/Associated Press

Under the deal announced this week, sanctions against Iran will be lifted. In exchange, Iran has agreed to scale back efforts to develop nuclear weapons or stockpile enriched uranium. Some Republicans are critical of the deal but Obama has vowed to veto any legislation sent to him by Congress intended to torpedo the agreement. Should the deal hold, it will almost certainly mark Obama's biggest foreign policy accomplishment, and may lead to improved relations between the United States and Iran.

Same-sex marriage

Image: Pablo Martinez Monsivais/Associated Press

Though the White House took some time to come around and support same-sex marriage, the June 26 Supreme Court decision to make it the law throughout America was a clear victory for Obama, especially given the vehement opposition from several high-profile Republicans.

Obamacare

Image: Andrew Harnik/Associated Press

The Supreme Court handed Obama a huge legacy victory on June 25 when it ruled that the Affordable Care Act can legally have the federal government give tax subsidies to poor and middle-class Americans who might otherwise not be able to afford healthcare. Commonly known as "Obamacare," Obama's healthcare plan was his earliest major legislative accomplishment as president and it is likely to go down as his biggest domestic achievement.

Huge trade deal

Image: Susan Walsh/Associated Press

Obama partnered with Republicans in Congress to push through a trade deal in June that analysts say will provide the U.S. with an economic edge over China in the coming years. The deal will supposedly speed up the process with which the U.S. can make deals with other nations.

Normalizing relations with Cuba

Image: Evan Vucci/Associated Press

Speaking of foreign policy accomplishments, the president took a huge step toward normalizing America's relationship with Cuba in December. OK, so that's a little outside the summer timeline but given that, essentially, the two countries haven't had normal diplomatic relations for half a century, we thought the president should get brownie points for that one, too. The two countries aim to soon re-establish embassies in each other's capitals.

His "Amazing Grace" moment

Image: Carolyn Kaster/Associated Press

Obama eulogized Rev. Clementa Pinckney on June 26 after Pinckney and eight other parishioners at Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church in Charleston, South Carolina were murdered at the church. A white supremacist has confessed to the murders. In an extraordinary moment, Obama led the congregation in a rendition of "Amazing Grace."

Bonus: Pluto pictures!

Image: Charles Dharapak/Associated Press

Don't act like Obama didn't personally bring us all these brand new, incredible photos of Pluto. Let's just give this one to him, too, because, let's be real, he probably had something to do with it.

Pluto just had its first visitor! Thanks @NASA - it's a great day for discovery and American leadership. pic.twitter.com/FfztBSMbK0 — President Obama (@POTUS) July 15, 2015

Have something to add to this story? Share it in the comments.