For-Profit Hospital Regulations Weighed

The General Assembly's public health committee heard arguments Wednesday for and against two bills that would put additional requirements on non-profit hospitals that seek to convert to for-profit.

HARTFORD — Depending whom you ask, two proposals would either protect hospital employees and their communities, or create a regulatory burden that would prohibit hospitals from taking the necessary steps to financially survive.

The issue of hospitals making the conversion from non-profit to for-profit has gained attention in recent years, as more hospitals in the state have begun courting for-profit partners. Some say such moves are needed for hospitals to survive amid the many changes in health care, but others fear that for-profit hospitals will be more devoted to shareholders than to patients and communities.

This legislative session, lawmakers are considering several bills that would regulate the process of converting from non-profit to for-profit. The two bills discussed at Wednesday's hearing, Senate Bill 460 and House Bill 5571, would create more stringent requirements for the regulatory approval process and give the attorney general more authority in approving conversions.

Opponents of the two bills say they are overly broad and create obstacles to partnerships that will, in the long run, allow the state's hospitals to operate amid the many changes in health care and how it's paid for. Supporters say such regulations are needed to ensure that employees are treated fairly and that health care quality not erode.

Earlier this month, Tenet Healthcare Corp., a Dallas-based for-profit, signed a partnership with Yale-New Haven Health System. Because both companies would remain separate entities, no regulatory approvals were needed. Together, the two hospitals are working to acquire Waterbury Hospital. Bristol Hospital and Eastern Connecticut Health Network are also in merger talks with Tenet.

Trip Pilgrim, senior vice president of development for Tenet Healthcare, said at Wednesday's hearing that converting to a for-profit model doesn't mean health care will suffer.

"You cut quality, you end up with an empty hospital," he said.

The state's current regulatory process, he said, should satisfy any concerns people have about conversions.

"We fully support having safeguards," he said. "We believe the current system strikes the right balance. The current system allows hospitals to adapt to the health care landscape so they continue to provide quality care in a community setting."

Barbara Simonetta, president of Connecticut Health Care Associates, an affiliate of AFSCME and the National Union of Hospital & Health Care Employees, said more regulations are necessary.

"The risk is too great to the communities, to the hospitals and to the workers and the patients," she said.

In particular, Simonetta said she supports a stipulation in Senate Bill 460 that would require more transparency and oversight of any partnership deal between two hospitals. She suggested that an additional requirement be added that would prevent hospitals from reducing employees' salaries during a transition from non-profit to for-profit.

Gayle Capozzalo, executive vice president and chief strategy officer of Yale-New Haven Health System, said in written testimony that the bills create "obstacles" and that the "current approval and regulatory process ensures sufficient review and protections."