Sen. Joni Ernst's Roast and Ride political fundraiser made its debut Saturday, and Ernst said she hopes the 50-mile motorcycle ride to a pig roast becomes a tradition.

Watch video

It all started at the Harley Davidson Barn in Des Moines Saturday morning. Ernst led about 300 motorcyclists, including Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker to the Central Iowa Expo in Boone, where about 1,500 people were waiting.

Seven declared 2016 presidential candidates spoke about everything from the economy and health care to national security and renewable energy.

“It’s time for America to be energy secure and use North American energy, open up the XL Pipeline use all of American energy,” Rick Perry said.

“Everyone who wants to work hard, everyone who wants to live by the rules and play by the rules should be able to live their piece of the American dream in this country,” Walker said.

"We have come to a place where in this nation, where the potential of the people of America is being crushed by the weight, the power, the cost, the complexity, the ineptitude, the corruption of the federal government,” said Carly Fiorina.

“Here's what's going to save the middle class: more jobs, less regulation, a simplified tax code,” Lindsey Graham said.

“The reason I don't like Obamacare is because it fundamentally changes the relationship between the people and the government in this country. The people are supposed to be in charge, not the government,” Ben Carson said.

“We need an America where small businesses don't pay more taxes than big businesses, an America that limits regulations because small business can't deal with runaway regulations,” Marco Rubio said.

“I don't want to be president so I can't create jobs in China. I want to be president so we can create good jobs in America for Americans. I'm not a globalist, I’m a person who believes Americans deserve good jobs,” Mike Huckabee said.

Ernst said she hopes to host the Roast and Ride every year.

KCCI political analyst Dennis Goldford said the inaugural political event was a success for Republicans.