Bruce Bartlett is a 1973 Rutgers grad who later moved south to the Washington area, where he served in the administrations of Ronald Reagan and George H.W. Bush.

He now spends his time driving the Beltway establishment crazy by pointing out that all of their chattering and feuding masks the fact that there really isn't a heck of a lot of difference between the two parties.

I wrote about him in 2009 when he came out with a book attacking the notion that the Republican "starve-the-beast" strategy was really just camouflage for the big-spending politics of George W. Bush.

Now he's ticking everyone off by pointing out that there's really not much difference between the politics of Barack Obama and the politics of Richard Nixon. In an article in the American Conservative, Bartlett argues that "Obama Is a Republican" as the headline states.

Here's the nut of his argument:

"In my opinion, Obama has governed as a moderate conservative—essentially as what used to be called a liberal Republican before all such people disappeared from the GOP. He has been conservative to exactly the same degree that Richard Nixon basically governed as a moderate liberal, something no conservative would deny today."

In fact you could argue Nixon was to the left of Obama. Imagine if Obama instituted wage and price controls as Nixon did. Imagine he created avast new federal bureaucracy and handed it to radical environmentalists. Nixon did. It's called the Environmental Protection Agency. Imagine if he got tens of thousands of Americans killed fighting a war he inherited from his predecessor.

And so on.

I called Bartlett to discuss his theory. I was at Rutgers around the same time he was, so he shared this observation about the current state of American politics:

"You're old enough to remember when there actually was a left in this country," Bartlett said. "There hasn’t been since the collapse of Soviet Union. What we call the left today is people who were called moderates 30 to 40 years ago."

Exactly. During my time as a newspaper columnist and editor at Rutgers, I tangled with such characters as the members of "New Jersey Workers League: Marxist-Leninist" as they were trying to put together a student union based on the Stalinist model.

Now those were some real commies. As for Obama, a lot of people amuse themselves calling him a socialist, but he's yet to do anything to crack down on Wall Street, Bartlett said.

"Most Democrats would be stringing up bankers if they had their druthers," he said. Obama hasn't done anything in that regard."

That's the real reason the Democrats are in such bad shape this year, he said. The Republicans are fired up but Obama has yet to do anything to fire up the Democrats.

“There’s absolutely no energy on the Democratic side,” said Bartlett. “There’s a big, big lack of enthusiasm. From the point of view of Democrats, what is the point?”

I would add another parallel to Nixon. Nixon was famous for using social issues to create the impression he was a conservative. Obama uses social issues to create the impression he's a liberal. That sort of thing fires up the boobs, but it has little to do with actually running the country.

When it comes to issues that really do matter, the Republicans are in a state of denial. Take Obamacare. The individual mandate originated with the conservative Heritage Foundation and became the linchpin of the system Mitt Romney instituted as governor of Massachusetts.

Republicans thought that was a great system - until Obama cloned it and called it Obamacare. Here's how Bartlett describes that:





Conservatives wanted to avoid too much government control and were adamantly opposed to single-payer. But they recognized that certain problems required more than a pure free-market solution. One problem in particular is covering people with pre-existing conditions, one of the most popular provisions in ACA. The difficulty is that people may wait until they get sick before buying insurance and then expect full coverage for their conditions. Obviously, this free-rider problem would bankrupt the health-insurance system unless there was a fix. The conservative solution was the individual mandate—forcing people to buy private health insurance, with subsidies for the poor. This approach was first put forward by Heritage Foundation economist Stuart Butler in a 1989 paper, “A Framework for Reform,” published in a Heritage Foundation book, A National Health System for America. In it, Butler said the number one element of a conservative health system was this: “Every resident of the U.S. must, by law, be enrolled in an adequate health care plan to cover major health costs.”



When Romney implemented the mandate, the GOP called it personal responsibility.When Obama did the same thing, they decided it was socialized medicine.

But even with control of both houses of Congress, the Republicans really have no idea on how to replace Obamacare. Maybe they could use Romneycare instead. But that's the same system. Yet some of them are talking about nominating Romney for president again.

Why do the boobs fall for this sort of thing? I have my theories. But let me give you Bartlett's.

He cited an April 2012 poll in which a majority of Republicans responding said they believe Obama was born in another country.

"A total of 55.6 percent said they always believed he was born in another country," said Bartlett. "My personal opinion is that every single one of them is racist."

I would disagree, but only to the extent that I believe that boobs in general are susceptible to conspiracy theories. Those Kennedy assassination kooks are not necessarily pro- or anti-Kennedy. They're just kooks.

Anyway, read Bartlett's entire piece.