Dr. Eugene Cleek

Age: 67

Education: Undergraduate degree from Whittier College; medical degree from Autonomous University of Guadalajara in Mexico; post-graduate study at UC Irvine; five-year residency at the Atlanta Medical Center in Georgia

Occupation: Trauma surgeon and medical director of the Enloe Hospital Trauma and Emergency Surgery Program in Chico

Endorsements: Cleek reported that he’s been endorsed by “most all of the counties in the district. … Every (GOP) central committee that can endorse us has endorsed us,” but some of the central committees haven’t met yet

Platform issues:

* Simplify the tax system, and lower individual and corporate tax rates

* Develop new sources of clean, reliable energy while minimizing bureaucratic red-tape for entrepreneurial innovators

* Supports an amendment to the Constitution which forces Congress to live within its means

* Protect freedom, secure borders and maintain a strong armed forces

An issue that Republican candidate Dr. Eugene Cleek, 67, understands better than most is the challenges surrounding medical care in California and the country.

Cleek, a trauma surgeon and medical director of the Enloe Hospital Trauma and Emergency Surgery Program in Chico, said bluntly, “Affordable Care isn’t about affordable care … Obama lied to us.”

Instead, Cleek said, “It’s about control, about the government controlling our lives.”

He is quick to say that the Affordable Care Act cannot be immediately overturned, however. “We can’t pull the rug out from people who are insured,” Cleek said.

But in his estimation, “That’s not what is ruining medicine so badly.” Instead, the problem is that “the doctor-patient relationship is now the patient-government-doctor relationship, and that works very poorly. … Why does the government come in and tell me how to do surgery?”

Cleek added, “The closer we get to the people’s needs, the better we do.”

This philosophy squares with his ideas on farming, as well.

Cleek’s family arrived in Northern California in 1850, homesteading the land in 1864 and building the first frame house in Glenn County.

“We are solid into the land,” Cleek said, adding, “Nobody cares about that land more than the farmers that own it. We need to turn farmers loose without restrictive regulations and let them farm the land.”

On his family’s land — where he and his wife of 38 years, Laurel, raised five children — “We farm walnuts, almonds, pecans and a few other little things,” Cleek said, with evident pride. He mentioned that he’d “had his hands in the dirt” as recent as the day before this interview.

Schools and skills

Regarding education, Cleek again proposes less federal intervention. He believes, “Schools are best run by local school boards, with parents and local communities developing curriculum and testing standards for their students.”

As for higher education, the costs need to be more affordable for students, he said, and colleges and universities that receive federal tax dollars need to be more accountable “for their costs, and there must be greater financial transparency so that students and parents can make well-informed decisions regarding higher education.”

Cleek also wants better avenues for training in skilled trades, such as paths that lead to careers as mechanics, electricians and plumbers. “Not everyone wants to go to college,” he said,

And Cleek believes that he is not alone in being “fed up” with career politicians. “We need citizens who’ve worked and understand what it takes to make the country real and what we have to do to make it happen.”

He challenges the notion that his lack of prior experience is a hindrance to being elected. “If you shoot for nothing, you hit it every time,” Cleek said.

He explained that part of what has motivated him to run for elected office now — he was student body president at Orland High School as well as having been elected to the Orland High School board of education — is a desire to “bring back American to where it is supposed to be,” believing that doing so is rooted in “not what’s right for me, but what’s right for the United States.”

Cleek also said that “I’ve made zero political promises. My commitment is to do the right thing every time, regardless of consequences.”

Success breeds success

He believes that his prior successes in life — which includes being an Army surgeon in the Gulf War, and caring for wounded soldiers and POWs along the borders of Iraq and Saudi Arabia, as well as 13 years in the Army Reserves — might be a fitting background to succeed in Congress.

“Maybe we need someone like me who doesn’t need to prove anything,” Cleek said.

Cleek also doesn’t completely embrace the distinction of being the Republican candidate. “When people ask me what party I am, I say ‘I’m an American.’ ”

Indeed, if elected, Cleek plans to work with Democrats, Republicans and independents. “I’m going to represent them all.”

— Reach Tanya Perez at [email protected] or 530-747-8082. Follow her on Twitter at @EnterpriseTanya