BOULDER — There are times when meaningful improvement can come through something as simple as what you tell yourself.

Colorado is currently crossing that bridge.

CU coach Mike MacIntyre knows the transformative significance of increased self-worth. But he also knows he cannot simply instill confidence into his players. They have to figure it out on their own.

That’s why this calendar year has been a big boost for a team looking to qualify for its first bowl game since the 2007 Independence Bowl. They, in fact, are figuring it out.

“I hear them talking, or they come to me and say, ‘Hey coach, what’s our schedule for Christmas, for a bowl?’ ” MacIntyre said. “They haven’t asked me that before. So, they feel that. Now, we’ve got to go do it, but until they see it in their mind’s eye I can’t make them see it. I can mention it, but I can’t make them see it. They have to do it.”

And by all accounts, they are.

Colorado is coming from a difficult space — just six wins in the last two seasons, one win in the Pac-12 in the last two seasons and just one win against a team from a Power 5 conference in that span. But in their view, the mountain to go from last season’s 2-10 to the seven wins needed to qualify for a bowl this year isn’t as steep as it appears.

First, there were the four losses by five or fewer points last season. Two of those losses — at Cal, and home against UCLA — were in double overtime. Win those, and this season simply looks like the next step rather than a Grand Canyon-sized leap from two to seven wins.

Late-game mistakes were a staple of last year’s team, so attention to detail will be key for this year’s Buffs.

Experience is quickly fading as an issue. CU returns experience with 14 starters (six on offense, eight on defense) and 25 other players who have started a game at least once. In addition, and perhaps most importantly, a bigger, stronger Buffs team has injected some of that confidence that MacIntyre says he sees.

The CU coach said he’s seen the attitude of his bunch go from: ‘Who can we beat?’ to ‘Who can beat us?’

“That’s the mind-set this year: Who can beat us?” senior offensive tackle Stephane Nembot said. “That’s why we see ourselves going to a bowl game. You can’t be going to battle expecting to not come back. When you go to battle, you’re going to come back and see your family, right? We know how much work we put in.”

Said junior linebacker Addison Gillam: “Everybody’s gotten bigger, everybody’s gained weight, gotten a lot stronger. I think that just brings confidence with it. I don’t really think a whole lot of people outside of Colorado believe in us, and we kind of wear that chip on our shoulder. We can use it to our advantage.”

CU has already gone through four practices in preseason camp, and MacIntyre says all of the confidence gained from spring drills and summer workouts has carried over to on-field preparation for the regular season.

He’s not the only one.

“We challenge each other in practice, ever since the summer,” senior cornerback Ken Crawley said. “We absolutely have that mentality. If you don’t think you can go out there and play against those guys, you have no confidence. So we go out with the confidence that we can beat anybody in the conference and nonconference.”

Christopher Dempsey: cdempsey@denverpost.com or twitter.com/dempseypost