In teacher Deanna Finney’s classroom, a cap and gown hang on the wall alongside dozens of diplomas of past graduates — all reminders to her students of what they can achieve.

Finney’s job is to prepare the 16- and 17-year-olds in her underage GED class to take a new computer version of the test that will determine whether they receive the high-school equivalency diploma — their ticket to college and careers.

It was a tough job before. Teachers knock on students’ doors from time to time, encouraging them to come to class, knowing many are facing language barriers and challenges in their personal lives that kept them off the traditional education track.

It’s an even tougher job now.

Across the state and nation, the number of students receiving high school equivalency diplomas plummeted in 2014 after the launch of a rigorous new exam.

Aligned to the new Common Core State Standards now being taught at public schools in most states, the new test also is nearly twice as expensive for those who take all four sections — $130 compared to $70 — and now is offered only on computer.

Nationwide, 90,000 test-takers received a high-school equivalency diploma in 2014, down from more than 540,000 in 2013 and 400,000 in 2012. The numbers were unusually high in 2013 because there was a rush to earn a diploma while the old test was still available.

The same trend is seen across Florida and the Tampa Bay area.

More than 13,000 Floridians completed the GED exam last year, but just 7,814 passed and received diplomas — a 58 percent pass rate, according to data provided by the Florida Department of Education. In 2013, about 44,700 received diplomas in Florida. In 2012, 29,200 received diplomas.

In Hillsborough County, fewer than 600 GED diplomas were issued last year — down from about 3,000 in 2013 and 2,200 in 2012, said Debbie Sass, the school district’s chief GED examiner.

“You’re always going to have those growing pains,” Sass said. “I think people now realize it is a rigorous test and they have to prepare for it. I believe it is very much in line with the high-school diploma. It truly is an equivalency diploma.”

❖ ❖ ❖

While local educators welcome the idea of a more challenging test, they say rollout of the new exam could have been smoother.

The GED test can be taken by anyone 16 or older who has no diploma and isn’t enrolled in school. It was last revised in 2002.

Marc Hutek, Hillsborough’s director of adult education, blames the dip in diplomas on a lack of preparation materials aligned to the new exam, which tests students in four subjects —language arts, math, social studies and science.

“Textbook companies didn’t have materials to support the new standards,” Hutek said. “We found only one textbook company that could provide resources.”

The new test was developed after the nonprofit GED Testing Service began working with the Pearson testing company. Some states, including Texas, New York and New Hampshire, decided to drop the GED and go with other high-school equivalency tests.

Even though the numbers don’t look good, the outlook is improving, Sass said. In Hillsborough, and across the state, there was a 15 percent increase in the passing rate in the second half of 2014 compared to the first.

The school district’s adult education department offers the GED during the day at the Learey Technical Center, 5410 N. 20th St., and at night at Lennard High School in Ruskin. The district also has a mobile testing lab that travels to prisons for inmates who want to earn their GED.

Tampa resident Maria Si, 32, is halfway through the new test. She passed the language arts and math portions, which she said were easy enough.

“I thought it would be more difficult, but it wasn’t bad,” she said, adding that she likes how fast she receives her scores now that everything is done on the computer.

As a high-school student in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, Si said she “slacked off” and was a few credits short of earning her diploma. She hopes to work in social services once she receives her GED.

“For me, it’s like starting over,” she said. “It’s only to better myself.”

Evan Gestrich, 19, of Temple Terrace, has passed the social studies portion but failed the language arts test by just a few points.

“The questions weren’t difficult,” he said. “It was the extended response part.”

Just as the new test has been an adjustment for students, it has created a learning curve for teachers of GED prep classes.

Finney, the underage GED teacher at Chamberlain High, has taught the class in Hillsborough for 16 years. She now leads trainings for other teachers to get them up to speed on the new test.

The math portion of the GED includes tougher concepts than the old test, such as quadratic equations. The new test includes more than just multiple-choice questions. There’s also drag-and-drop, fill-in-the-blank, short answer and extended response questions.

Finney prefers the new test to the old one because it requires critical thinking, much like the new Florida Standards Assessment that students will begin taking in public schools next month. It will test students’ knowledge of the Florida Standards — language arts and math goals that are based on Common Core.

“We’ve taken away the ability to spoon feed,” Finney said. “I know some teachers don’t appreciate that, but I love it.”

❖ ❖ ❖

More than one year after the new test was launched, Finney still tunes in to every webinar that’s offered and studies in her spare time.

“I don’t mind that I’ve had to study to effectively deliver the material,” she said. “I’m learning to prepare them better.”

In Finney’s classroom, located on the north end of Chamberlain High, a group of students meet for five hours a day, five days a week.

From 7:15 a.m. to 12:15 p.m., Monday through Friday, the students work assignments on their own, at their desks and on computers. Three times each day, Finney gives a lesson that everyone will understand, even though all of the students are on different levels — their skills range from second-grade to 12th-grade level.

The 21 students enrolled in Finney’s class this semester face a variety of challenges that have kept them from succeeding in a regular K-12 setting.

Some have emotional issues that hinder them from performing at their best in a large high school. Others couldn’t pass middle school or were kicked out of their high schools for bad behavior. Some are pregnant. Some have children of their own. One boy is from Africa and is still learning English.

Finney, her co-teacher Mary Ellen Wolfington and aide Patty Shaffer sometimes drive to the students’ houses to get them to come to class. They give out their cellphone numbers and encourage the teens to text and call with questions if they are having trouble with the material.

Finney said many of her current students have made great strides since they started coming to her class.

“It’s fun to be able to see these kids flourish and realize they don’t have to give up on their dreams because they couldn’t make it in K-12,” she said.

Finney has seen a decline in the rate of diplomas in her own class, although the numbers are slowly ticking upward.

In any given semester before 2014, Finney might have deemed 30 students ready to take the GED. In early 2014, she sent 12 to take the test and nine passed. Last semester, she sent 16 to take the test. Of those, 10 earned their diplomas and six are still finishing up.

“I think once we get used to it, these numbers will rise again,” Finney said.

One of her students, Quanae Toussaint, 17, enrolled in the class after being kicked out of school.

“I got in trouble a lot, so I came here,” said Toussaint, who returned last month for her second stint in the class.

Finney said the teen has improved dramatically.

“We have a great class.”

ekourkounis@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7999

Twitter: @ErinKTBO