DEMOTTE, Ind. — The Latest on accident involving high school basketball team bus (all times local):

10 p.m.

A freshman boys basketball coach at Griffith High School is in stable condition in the hospital and all of the 26 other occupants of a school bus that rolled over have been treated and released.

The school district says in a statement late Saturday that 20 students had been released as well as three coaches, the team trainer, a ball boy and the bus driver.

Freshman coach David Garrett is at Advocate Christ Medical Center in Oak Lawn, Illinois, in stable condition.

Griffith Public Schools will have counselors available to students and staff next week to help heal the emotional wounds.

A community prayer service will be held at 2 p.m. on Sunday at a local park.

___

5:15 p.m.

Authorities say a driver who spilled a drink on herself sideswiped a bus carrying an Indiana high school boys basketball team, causing it to overturn on an interstate.

Indiana State Police Sgt. Ann Wojas says 23-year-old Dominique T. Small of Terre Haute was southbound on Interstate 65 Saturday when the lid of her drink came off.

Small tried to grab it and lost control of her car, then sideswiped the bus as it traveled in the adjacent southbound lane near DeMotte.

The bus was carrying 27 Griffith High School players and staff who were traveling to a state semifinal game in Lafayette.

One coach was airlifted to Christ Advocate Medical Center in Oak Lawn, Illinois. The other people on the bus were taken to area hospitals.

Wojas says none of the injuries were life-threatening.

___

4:45 p.m.

A northwest Indiana high school basketball coach has been airlifted to a hospital Saturday after a bus carrying 27 players and staff overturned on an interstate and landed on the side of the roadway with part of its roof smashed in.

The Griffith High School boys basketball team was traveling to a state semifinal game in Lafayette when the rollover occurred around 12:30 p.m. on Interstate 65 near DeMotte, authorities said.

Superintendent Peter Morikis said "several" players and coaches were injured. He said everyone on the bus was taken to one of three area hospitals.

Morikis said freshman coach David Garrett was airlifted to Christ Advocate Medical Center in Oak Lawn, Illinois. Morikis didn't describe his injuries.