Tactical Firearms

A bankrupt gun retailer in suburban Houston that hasn’t been shy about its political views will get a new owner once it emerges from Chapter 11 protection.

A judge has approved a reorganization plan for Tactical Firearms, which filed for bankruptcy in June to stop a bank from foreclosing on its store and shooting range in Katy, Texas.

It is unclear whether the company’s new owner, Texas businessman Steven Coe Wilson, will be as outspoken as current majority owner Jeremy Alcede, who blamed the store’s financial problems on President Barack Obama and others in billboard messages posted outside the store.

Mr. Coe Wilson already owns 30% of Tactical Firearms’ business. Earlier in the case, his lawyers argued that Tactical Firearms shouldn’t be profiled in a reality show, stating that the show’s filming “risks disrupting the [company’s] current retail operations,” which employ about 30 people, according to documents filed in U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Houston.

Tactical Firearms had been approached by U.S. division of British production giant ITV Studios about being in a show, promising to pay Mr. Alcede “$1,500 per episode plus ten percent (10%) of ITV’s gross receipts from the show,” according to court papers. ITV Studios America—the producer of TLC’s “Four Weddings“ reality show and Animal Planet’s “Rocky Mountain Bounty Hunters”—hadn’t found a cable operator to carry the show at the time that Tactical Firearms’ lawyers asked the court for permission to participate.

In his two-page decision, Judge Jeff Bohm ultimately sided with Mr. Coe Wilson and declined to allow the store to be filmed, though he didn’t explain why. (Bankruptcy geeks: The request was filed as a “motion for use of property outside ordinary course of business.”)

To get the business out of bankruptcy, Mr. Coe Wilson is proposing to spend $1.5 million on the company’s operations and refinance the company’s loan with Icon Bank of Texas NA.

Mr. Alcede, who owns 70% of the business, faced a deadline to repay loans of about $1.4 million and couldn’t negotiate a refinancing deal with bank executives. Putting the store into bankruptcy on June 27 bought him a little extra time.

Under the reorganization plan, Mr. Alcede would no longer be involved with the business, according to court papers. His lawyer did not return a request for comment Tuesday.

As for President Obama’s role in all this, Mr. Alcede’s political statements came after several Republican lawmakers had accused the Obama administration of trying to cut off industries it doesn’t like—think tobacco sellers, short-term lenders and gun ranges— from the U.S. banking system.

Icon Bank officials deny that their moves have anything to do with that effort, which has been called Operation Choke Point.

Write to Katy Stech at katy.stech@wsj.com. Follow her on Twitter at @KatyStech