Buy Photo Children walk across Ninth Street in Lakewood on their way to school in this 2014 Asbury Park Press file photo. (Photo: Thomas P. Costello)Buy Photo

LAKEWOOD An Administrative Law judge has rejected a motion from the Board of Education to override a veto by its state monitor, who prevented the board from reappointing an educational firm popular with parents in the Orthodox Jewish community whose children attend private schools.

In August, state monitor Michael Azzara exercised his veto authority after the school board voted to renew the district's annual contract with Catapult Learning. The Camden-based company provides federally-funded support services to eligible schoolchildren with disabilities.

Initially, two other firms, Tender Touch and Tree of Knowledge were appointed instead to provide the same services. At a subsequent board meeting, parents and others upset about Catapult’s exclusion urged the board to keep the company and its staff in place, even though a district committee had found a number of problems with Catapult's application. When the board acquiesced to the public pressure and awarded a third contract to Catapult, Azzara overrode the vote.

With the new school year underway, the board sought an emergency hearing in state court arguing that Azzara had acted in an "arbitrary and capricious" manner and that his position as state monitor did not give him "unfettered power in decisions for the district." That hearing was held Wednesday at the New Jersey Office of Administrative Law in Hamilton Township in Mercer County.

While state Administrative Law Judge Susan M. Scarola recognized in her ruling that a state monitor does not have unfettered power based on existing case law, she also cited the broad authority empowered to state monitors under New Jersey law to overrule the decisions of a school board and its chief administrative officer. The reasons a state monitor may overrule are outlined in the statute Scarola quoted and include but are not limited to budget appropriations and reductions, purchase orders and approvals, budget transfers and payment of bills.

"Indeed, given past rulings of the (state Department of Education) Commissioner as affirmed by the Appellate Division, the Monitor's authority is broad and wide-ranging when a matter has fiscal involvement, such as prevention of costly litigation," Scarola wrote in a 12-page ruling.

Moreover, since there was no evidence presented that Tender Touch and Tree of Knowledge are incapable of doing the same work as Catapult Learning, there are no grounds for emergency action to be taken by the court unless and until such time as the two firms demonstrate a failure to meet the expectations of the awarded contracts. In that event, the board may reapply for "emergent relief" from the court, the judge ruled.

Scarola wrote: "The Board also contends that the actions of the Monitor in overruling the Board are harmful to it because the Board will be 'forced to abide by an illegal and capricious action.' The Monitor contends that his action in overruling the Board is not harmful in and of itself. The Board's position assumes that what the Monitor did was arbitrary and capricious, but this can only be determined by a full hearing."

The judge's decision is subject to the approval of state Education Commissioner David C. Hespe.

After the ruling was released Thursday evening, Azzara said he would let the decision speak for itself when asked if he would like the opportunity to comment.

"We're very pleased that the judge accepted our arguments," added attorney David B. Rubin, a Metuchen-based lawyer who represented Azzara in the matter.

Marc H. Zitomer, a partner in the law firm Schenck, Price, Smith & King of Florham Park, represented the Lakewood school board before Scarola. Zitomer said Thursday night that he expected there would eventually be a full hearing on the matter.

“I am disappointed that the judge did not grant our motion for emergent relief," Zitomer said. "However, I am confident that when she ultimately hears the case on the merits, she will agree with our position that the state monitor exceeded his authority and that the board should prevail.”

Erik Larsen: 732-682-9359 or elarsen@gannettnj.com

School Scoop

What's going on in our schools? Visit Home & School,blogs.app.com/learning for more.

Social Spotlight

See what people are saying about Lakewood schools. 'Like' us on Facebook, facebook.com/asburyparkpress.

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1F01Qsk