Wednesday night, Glen Robertson and Jodey Arrington proved they will both put up a fight to the finish, as the May 24 primary run-off election inches closer.

At KCBD's District 19 Congressional Debate, the candidates weighed in on many different issues, and how they would tackle those topics in Washington.

FULL VIDEO: District 19 congressional candidates meet for live debate on KCBD

Starting with changes to the Affordable Care Act:

"There is not a lot in Obamacare that I think is worth keeping. Pre-existing conditions, people that have pre-existing conditions, that is one element that I think we need to preserve," Arrington said.

"I am a proponent of killing every word of Obamacare. It is failed policy. It is crippling our economy, and it's hurting the medical care for every citizen in this great country," Robertson said.

And a subject that means a lot to many across the South Plains: Agriculture.

Which drew some back and forth between the candidates.

"If you're not fighting agriculture every day, if your life is not dependent on it, you will not fight for the farmers like I will," Robertson said.

"My opponent again, has not called to attention the fact that the ag community has rallied around me as the best candidate to represent them," Arrington added.

Both also responded to comments about campaign advertising.

"Unfortunately I think we've seen Washington style politics enter this race because my opponent chose to do that. He did that in the primary with what I believe is misleading at best, dishonest attack ads," Arrington said.

"There's never been a personal attack on Mr. Arrington. There have been personal attacks in tens of emails that him and both his wife have sent to supporters calling me a liar, and questioning my integrity."

But sparks seemed to fly when Robertson brought up former candidate Michael Bob Starr.

"When it comes to Dyess Air Force Base, you're going to have to rely on two people. You're going to have to rely on the current base commander for his advice and his input. But more importantly you're going to have to reach out to Michael Bob Starr," Robertson said.

"Glen, how are you going to reach out to Michael Bob Starr after you've tried to destroy that man's reputation?" Arrington asked.

It's an issue we asked them about following the debate.

"I don't know who gave that information to this local radio host, but I do know it was an Arrington supporter so I felt like it was a little disingenuous for the attack," Robertson said.

"There is no truth to that, he knows that," Arrington said. "There was only one candidate that put that information out there and repeatedly ran those attack ads throughout 29 counties," Arrington said.

The full debate will air on KCBD this Saturday at 1:40 a.m.

Click here to download our mobile app for iPhone or Android.

Find voting places, sample ballots, candidate announcements and more on our Decision 2016 page.

DECISION 2016: What you need to know for May 7 and May 24 elections

Copyright 2016 KCBD. All rights reserved.