Graduates of the 2015 Brown County Sheriff’s Department Citizens Academy. (Photo: Jennifer Cross Photography)

I recently attended a 10-week, 25-hour-long Citizens Academy at the Brown County Sheriff’s Department.

Fifteen attendees filled out applications to see Sheriff John Gossage’s innermost workings of the department. They comprised of all walks of life, from teachers, legislators, to prior service military and possible new recruits.

We were exposed to all of the department’s best they had to offer. Everything from the K-9 unit, SWAT, divers, crisis intervention, Bomb Squad, courthouse and jail system and firing range.

The range of exposure spans from learning the physics of a car accident scene to knowing how they go about their lengthy preparations of a drug bust. How would you like to know what it feel like to have 50,000 volts of electricity tasered into your body? I can tell you from personal experience that it is paralyzing and leaves lasting results.

Also, knowing that the task force in charge of Internet Crisis against Children (ICAC) watches for trafficking and child pornography case development is something every parent should be aware of.

We learned about the Drug Abuse Resistance Education (DARE) program, field training officers who are responsible for the training of all new officers, the Unified Tactical Training Unit referred to experts in their field, and the Crisis Negotiation Team, and of course the DWI task force. Specialty units include recreation, motorcycle, drive, field force. In writing this article, it is impossible to mention all the units within this division.

Every presenting team, beginning with Lt. Jody Lemmens to team captains, answered every question posed to them. I had no idea how many aspects of the department were working/training every day to aid in keeping Brown County citizens safe. Reaching out to children in school as early as eighth grade, spanning all the way to the elderly with handling individual with mental health conditions.

Touring behind closed doors of the courthouse and jail system really exposed behind the scenes how to help keep guards safe to the daily comings and goings of courthouse attendees. Listening to Judge Hammer talk about his mission on how to limit repeat offenders showed the compassion of his dedication in making things better as opposed to the perception of just processing criminals similar to checking out groceries at the check-out counter.

Excessive force has been in the news a lot lately. One of the reasons for attending this academy is to know how this is handled by peace officers. I had some direct involvement with this type of civilian treatment in 1992.

It’s been 23 years since my activation into the Los Angeles riots. I was based at the 49th Military Police Brigade as a communications specialist when I was pulled into a conflict that had me locked and loaded at a mall, on the ground in a firing prone position with only a cement parking lot car stop to use for cover. I was aiming my M16 down range due a report of a gang headed our way. All the time I was thinking, how did this situation come to this? Rodney King was reported to be wrongfully attacked by several officers whom were later were acquitted of the attack, leading to a six-day full-on riot that left 53 dead and multitudes injured. I am happy to report that not a single shot was fire during that occurrence.

The academy peaked with being able to fire handguns at targets from a 25-yard range after practicing multiple scenario simulations at Northeast Wisconsin Technical College.

I can tell you that the sensitivity training has improved over the years as well as the health and wellness for officers since my time with the military police.

Clark (Photo: Clark)

Now knowing the split-second decisions officers make every day in life-or-death situations in such a volatile world should warrant the utmost respect in an underpaid profession that is already understaffed and under-budgeted.

I recommend this Citizens Academy if you want to learn what it’s like to live in the day of the life of a peace officer.

Brian P. Clark of Green Bay works for UnitedHealthcare and owns BPC Photography. He served for 11 years with the U.S. Army National Guard in California.

Read or Share this story: http://gbpg.net/1VgYEvA