Print Email Font Resize Font Resize Olympic medalist to share sexual-abuse saga with Boulder audience

Olympic medalist Kellie Wells will be in Boulder on Thursday to share her story about surviving sexual assault as a child and to discuss how she overcame it to make a positive difference in the world. (Courtesy photo) If you go What: Olympic medalist Kellie Wells is the featured speaker at Bold, Brave and Beautiful, a fundraiser for Moving to End Sexual Assault When: 6:30-9:30 p.m. Thursday, Nov. 7 Where: Hotel Boulderado, 2115 13th St., Boulder Tickets: $60 general admission; $30 students, nonprofit employees and volunteers Info: 303-443-0400 or movingtoendsexualassault.org By the numbers 1 in 4 women in Colorado will be victims of sexual abuse during their lifetime. 1 in 17 Colorado men will be victims of sexual abuse. Source: Moving to End Sexual Abuse Kellie Wells has an Olympic medal. But that's not her proudest accomplishment. More important are the lives she has touched by transforming her own personal trauma into hope for others. More important is igniting the dialogue. Wells, a hurdler and sprinter from Richmond, Va., is known for winning a bronze medal in the 100-meter hurdles at the 2012 London Olympics. So she's no stranger to challenging herself. But going public about her childhood sexual abuse and a domestic-violence tragedy that culminated in her mother's death -- that was much more difficult than training for the Olympics, she says. "It's one of the hardest things I've done," Wells says. "Compared to training and competing, being transparent and looking at yourself in the mirror is one of the hardest things to do." Wells will share her story at the Hotel Boulderado on Thursday in hopes of spreading awareness about sexual assault and domestic violence, as well as providing hope and inspiration to other survivors. She's the keynote speaker for Moving to End Sexual Assault's annual fundraiser, Bold, Brave and Beautiful. Donald Matthews, of Naropa University, will speak at the MESA fundraiser. (Cliff Grasmick/Daily Camera) Organizers expect the event to draw more than 220 people and raise more than $10,000, after expenses, to help fund sliding-scale services and other programs. Boulder author and professor Rev. Donald Matthews also will speak. Matthews, an associate professor of religious studies at Naropa University, wrote the novel "Sex Abuse in the Black Church." Moving to End Sexual AsSault (MESA) is the only rape crisis center in Boulder and Broomfield counties. Since its inception in 1972, it has helped more than 36,000 local survivors, averaging more than 1,000 per year. But that's just the people who have reached out for help -- not nearly all of the survivors, says Lora Atkinson, executive director of MESA. "Statistically, we know that this is a silent epidemic crime," Atkinson says. People don't like to talk about it." Wells admits she didn't want to. "I swept it under the rug for many years," she says. "I couldn't understand why my relationships were suffering, my friendships were suffering. I had this sadness or darkness I couldn't describe." Shortly after Wells began track and field at age 6, her parents divorced. For years, her mother suffered in a physically, emotionally, mentally and even monetarily abusive relationship with her new fiance. Kellie Wells crosses the finish line at the 2011 USA Outdoor Championships. (Kirby Lee/Courtesy photo ) What's new at MESA? Adolescent support group: In January, Moving to End Sexual Assault (MESA) will launch a new adolescent support group. Like Olympian Kellie Wells, nearly 80 percent of women who reported being raped said it happened before age 25, according to MESA's executive director, Lora Atkinson. The group, Girls Rising, brings young survivors together to share and support. "It's pretty progressive," Atkinson says, adding that she doesn't know of any other nearby rape crisis centers that offer such a service. "They're dealing with high school and their life and parents and boyfriends and all the pressures from social norming. They have different needs than an adult woman in her 30s." Trauma-informed yoga group. Starting this month, MESA is offering a yoga class specifically for sexual-abuse survivors -- designed to intentionally allow survivors "to slowly be back in their bodies and work through trauma," Atkinson says. The class will include deep breathing and easy postures as a way to help re-teach the participants that their bodies are safe and reclaim a sense of strength. "We believe trauma gets stored in your body and it's hard for survivors to be in their bodies," Atkinson says. The lunchtime classes are donation-based with a suggested offering of $10. When Wells turned 13, the man turned the abuse toward her. That's how she lost her virginity, she says. She says her mother's fiance raped her for three years, before she got up the courage to go live with her father. Two weeks after Wells moved out, her mother and her fiance were killed in a car accident. He was intoxicated, Wells says. "It affected me in so many ways," she says. She says she struggled with trusting anyone: If the very people who were supposed to keep her safe did not, why would someone who was not family -- someone who didn't have to love her? "But you can't live like that," Wells says. "Especially in my profession. You have to be able to trust your coach wholeheartedly." At age 28, she decided to go public about it. It wasn't an easy choice. "You never know how you're going to be received," Wells says. "But it's not about being received. You'll always have a naysayer or someone who's going to question you. I did it for myself. My family. The people who don't have a voice, like I do." That was the first step in her healing, she says. She encourages other survivors to speak out, too. "I don't want anybody to hold things in out of embarrassment or shame, because it's only going to mess with you," Wells says. "That person will be free, and you'll be captive in your own mind. It's such a terrible feeling to be captive inside of yourself." Studies show that 1 in 4 women in Colorado will be victims of sexual abuse during their lifetime, according to MESA. That number is one in 17 for men. Sexual violence is one of the most pervasive and serious public health issues in this country, says Atkinson, referencing 2010 data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's National Intimate Partner and Sexual Violence Survey. That report found that nearly 1 in 5 women nationwide have been raped. Still, she says she meets plenty of people who are surprised that sexual violence happens in Boulder County. "I get that quite often. People still have this mindset that it's not an issue here," Atkinson says. The truth is, MESA continues to see an increase in demands for its service -- not necessarily as a sign of increased sexual violence but more likely because more people are coming forward for help, Atkinson says. "I'm hoping we're starting to talk more about what is rape culture and what we can do to really change this," she says. She hopes Wells' story assists that movement. After first reading Wells' story in a running magazine several years ago, Atkinson says she was so inspired that she found Wells on Twitter and sent her a thank-you. This began a social-media dialogue that continued throughout Wells' triumphant effort at the 2012 Olympics. "I invited her to come (to Boulder), hoping it would help bring visibility to the movement and the cause," Atkinson says. "And because Boulder's athletic, we thought her story could speak to a lot of our community." Atkinson adds, "You can move forward. You can heal from this trauma. You can move beyond it, yet come back to help make change." Contact Staff Writer Aimee Heckel at 303-473-1359, heckela@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/aimeemay.