TRENTON — When Gov. Chris Christie delivers his 2015 State of the State address Tuesday, lawmakers and public workers will no doubt be listening for remarks on pension reform.

On the eve of that speech, and months after a commission’s report on recommendations for the ailing pension system was expected to be released, legislators, union leaders and lobbyists say they are expecting to hear from the governor on one of the biggest issues facing Trenton. Christie’s office has not yet provided any details about his annual address to the state Legislature.

The governor made mention of the ailing public employee pension system nine times in his 2014 address, proposing to crack down on pension fraud and engage on pension reform.

“If we do not choose to reduce our soaring pension and debt service costs, we will miss the opportunity to improve the lives of every New Jersey citizen, not just a select few,” he said at this time last year.

The debate over pensions heated up again last spring when a budget gap suddenly erupted and Christie cut back on payments that were promised in a highly touted pension reform law he signed in his first term.

Since late summer, recommending ideas about overhauling public worker pensions has been the job of a bipartisan commission Christie designated. The commission issued a report in September laying out the severity of the state’s unfunded pension and health benefit liabilities, but has not released a final report with recommendations. The commission’s chairman Thomas J. Healey did not return calls for comment.

“At some point it becomes like a deadline for a college paper or a senior thesis,” said Tom Byrne, a Democrat appointed by Christie to the commission. “There’s a deadline, and maybe not every loose end is tied down as tightly as one would like, but at some point you’ve got to put down your pen and publish.”

If the pension recommendations are released soon, that would give lawmakers a month to digest it before Christie releases his budget for the next fiscal year, said state Senate budget committee chairman Paul Sarlo (D-Bergen).

In a letter to lawmakers, Hetty Rosenstein, the state area director of the Communications Workers of America, said she hasn’t been let in on recommended changes to the pension plan, but that the union will not “participate in any gimmicks, in the destruction of our health care, in kicking the can down the road further, or in off-loading the state’s responsibility onto our members.”

Assembly Budget Committee Chairman Gary Schaer (D-Passaic) said he hopes the report won’t be perceived as the silver bullet to solve all the state’s economic ills.

“We are woefully at the very bottom of states when it comes to economic rejuvenation, employment, etc.,” he said. "There are a number of things that we need to be doing. The pension is part of that, but it cannot be looked upon as the totality.”

In September, Christie’s commission said in a report that with $53 billion in unfunded health benefits and $37 billion in pension liability (that number’s since been revised to $83 billion to reflect new accounting rules), “there is no choice” but to act.

“New Jersey must make its public employee pension and health benefits program affordable and sustainable. This problem is dire and will only become much worse if meaningful steps are not taken quickly,” it said.

The commission warned that those costs are growing faster than the projected 4 percent growth in state revenue, and New Jersey would have to contribute $4 billion to $5 billion a year for the next 30 years to cover promised payments.

Health care costs occupy 8 percent of the state budget and could reach 14 percent in 10 years. The majority of public workers are enrolled in what could be considered a “platinum” plan under the Affordable Care Act and that will be subject to a 40 percent federal excise tax beginning in 2018, costing the state another $58 million that year and $284 by 2022.

“The state health programs provide generous benefits with little pricing incentive for employees to select anything but plans with the most comprehensive coverage and highest cost to the state,” the commission said.

Samantha Marcus may be reached at smarcus@njadvancemedia.com . Follow her on Twitter @samanthamarcus. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.