From The Associated Press

ALBUQUERQUE, N.M. — Though abortions among residents are down the number of out-of-state women traveling to New Mexico for abortions has grown significantly over the past three years.

According to state Department of Health data, about 20 percent of the roughly 4,500 abortions performed in New Mexico in 2014 involved women from out of state, the Albuquerque Journal reports. Reports suggest that number can be attributed to New Mexico’s few restrictions on abortion.

New Mexico hasn’t passed an abortion law in 16 years and is one of seven states that permits abortions at any stage in a pregnancy.

Comparatively, neighboring Texas, Arizona and Oklahoma each adopted 10 or more abortion restrictions from 2011 to 2015.

Texas women had nearly 9,000 fewer abortions in the first full year since those restrictions were put into place.

A survey by The Dallas Morning News revealed that 23 of the state’s 40 abortion clinics had stopped offering the procedure since July 2013. That’s when former Gov. Rick Perry signed a bill into law requiring all doctors who perform abortions to maintain admitting privileges at a nearby hospital and all abortions to be performed in hospital-like surgical facilities.

The sweeping law also included a ban on the procedure after 20 weeks of pregnancy and changed the rules for how doctors can prescribe abortion-inducing drugs. It drew national attention in part because of the dramatic filibuster that then-Sen. Wendy Davis used to temporarily derail the bill.

Two Planned Parenthood clinics transferred their abortion services to facilities that comply with the new restrictions, and one compliant clinic opened in San Antonio in June 2015 — bringing the total number of clinics open in Texas today to 18.

The state says the requirements are meant to make the procedure safer, but providers argue that they are unnecessary for patients to be safe and that the state is trying to force clinics to close.

Abortion providers sued to block the requirements, and after 2 1/2 years of back and forth in federal courts, the U.S. Supreme Court is now reviewing the restrictions.

Staff writer Brittney Martin contributed to this report.