America isn’t the only Western country where expressing opposition to gay marriage will unleash serious backlash from progressives. At Sheffield University in the UK, one student has been expelled after he voiced his opposition to gay marriage on his personal Facebook page.

Felix Ngole, 38, was expelled from Sheffield University after faculty staff decided he ‘may have caused offence to some individuals’. The postgraduate father of four, who was studying to become a social worker, has been told his actions affect his fitness to practise and was ordered to hand back his student ID and library card. Mr Ngole was reported after using his private Facebook account to express support for Kim Davis, a county clerk from Kentucky, who was jailed for refusing to issue marriage licences after the introduction of same-sex unions there last September. Mr Ngole argued that homosexual activity is against the teaching of the Bible, quoting a verse from Leviticus describing it as an ‘abomination’. Yesterday, he said he was appealing the university’s decision because the case had wider consequences for the ‘freedom of religion and freedom of expression’.



Ngole says he was censored.

“The university claims my views are discriminatory, but I am the one being discriminated against because of my expression of Christian beliefs,” Ngole said, the Daily Mail reports. “I wonder whether the university would have taken any action if a Muslim student who believes in Sharia law, with its teaching about women and homosexuality, had made moderate comments on his Facebook page. I don’t think so.’

Following a disciplinary hearing, the student was told he had brought his profession ‘into disrepute’ and breached ‘personal conduct’ guidelines. A separate ‘fitness to practise’ panel later concluded that he was entitled to his opinion about gay marriage but may have ‘caused offence to some individuals’. They said his comment would affect his ability to operate in the social work profession even though he was not yet qualified.

If his appeal is unsuccessful, Ngole said he plans to take legal action against the university.

“My beliefs about marriage and sexual ethics reflect mainstream, biblical understanding, shared by millions around the world,” Ngole added. “Simply expressing that understanding, in a personal capacity, on my Facebook page, cannot be allowed to become a bar to serving and helping others in a professional capacity as a social worker.”

Andrea Williams of the Christian Legal Center argued that since he’s not in a public position he is allowed to express his opinions. Furthermore, she said, there’s no proof Ngole’s opinions affected his work.

“Sadly, this is yet another case of Christians being ‘neutered’ in the public arena, and of censorship of views,” she said.

Welcome to college in the age of intolerance.