Axel Springer Chief Executive Mathias Döpfner considers Google a ‘frenemy’ of the company. Axel Springer SE

In the not-too-distant future, companies that treat their customers’ data with openness and sensitivity will find that they have a competitive advantage over companies that abuse customer data, the chief executive of Germany’s largest publisher said.

Mathias Döpfner, CEO of Axel Springer, told a telecommunications, media and technology conference in Barcelona on Wednesday that companies should use and monetize data properly but must be sensitive to privacy.

“In the digital world, data is a kind of currency and is of tremendous value,” Döpfner said. “Fairness toward data usage is crucial because in the long run—perhaps not that much today—customers will really care about what you do with their data: whether you’re giving it directly to the secret service or whether you’re using it to sell to other companies, or whether you’re really doing something that’s to their benefit.”

Döpfner, who over the past year has been spearheading a sort of counterrevolution in Europe against U.S. tech giants such as Google, said that while it was important for publishers to create incentives to boost customer lock-in, gaining access to as much customer data as possible, the use of that data needs to be in the interest and for the benefit of the customer.

“To be transparent and fair will be a competitive advantage,” Döpfner said.

Döpfner said Google was a “frenemy”—friend and enemy. “We work with them closely, we benefit from traffic, we benefit from advertising revenues that we get via Google,” he said. “But in certain areas we have very, very different interests and agendas. It’s not just a Google thing—the same is true for Facebook, Amazon and other big tech monopolies.”

Döpfner said that if publishers, car companies, banks or insurance companies provide their customers’ data—what he called their most valuable treasure—to Amazon, Google or Facebook, then the latter can provide the customers with services directly. “In the long run, it’s slightly stupid for us,” he said. “We have to have the data of our customers and that’s the only way we can compete.”

In early November, Axel Springer backed off its demands that Google pay for access to some of its content, bowing instead to the U.S. Internet giant after restricted access caused traffic to plunge.

Springer, one of Google’s most outspoken critics in Europe, said continuing to limit Google’s access to four of its websites would have cost each of them tens of thousands of euros in revenue every year.

“It was necessary to have a broader debate about competition in the digital ecosystem,” Döpfner told The Wall Street Journal on Wednesday. “The question of Google’s over-90% market share of Europe and self-preferential search results is a far bigger question than media-industry interests.”

At the time of Axel Springer’s capitulation, Google said, “We send over 500 million clicks to German publishers each month and our advertising partnerships have generated more than €1 billion [$1.25 billion] in revenue for them in the last three years.”