Foothills Service League fundraiser will raffle off Christmas trees as a fundraiser

Tai Mayes hangs a gift card ornament she donated to add to the Christmas tree that Thompson Town Center Starbucks employees made in 2013 for the Foothills Tree for All fundraiser. ( Lilia Munoz / Loveland Reporter-Herald file photo )

If you go What: Foothills Tree for All Christmas Tree Raffle. When: 11 a.m.-2 p.m. Sunday, Dec. 6. Where: First National Bank Building at The Ranch. Cost: $40, available at www.foothillsserviceleague.org, a Foothills Service League member or from Cloz to Home, 120 W. Fourth St., or Rowes Flowers, 863 N. Cleveland Ave. Includes: Brunch, door prizes, shuttle service and a cash bar. To enter a tree: Submit the entry form, available online, to a Foothills Service League member or mail to 205 Meadowview Drive, Loveland, CO 80537. The tree must be valued at $150 or more.

Finding the decorations that fit the theme is the biggest challenge for assembling a tree for the annual Foothills Tree for All.

Lisa Kreutz, travel agent at Travel Leaders in Loveland, found this to be true as she and Kristy Osborn, owner and manager of the travel agency, decorated two Christmas trees for the Christmas tree raffle Dec. 6. One of the trees celebrates Disneyland's 60th anniversary with Disney keepsake items and gift certificates and the second carries a beach theme and includes two tickets for a trip to Mexico.

"It's the challenge of coming up with something unique and finding decorations that went with each theme," Kreutz said.

Advertisement

The Foothills Service League puts on the Tree for All event as one of two major fundraisers — the other one is the Foothills Taste of Loveland tasting event in the spring — that support programming for Foothills Gateway Inc. and the Namaqua Center, a program of SummitStone Health Partners. Foothills Gateway in Fort Collins provides adult day services and the Namaqua Center provides prevention, intervention and treatment services for families with vulnerable children.

In May, the Foothills Service League donated $25,000 to each of the organizations.

The Tree for All event, held at the First National Bank Building at The Ranch, features a brunch buffet, live entertainment, a photo booth and door prizes, plus bidding on Christmas trees and wreaths. The trees and wreaths are on the perimeters of a large room and are decorated to a theme with ornaments, gift cards and gift items on or around the tree.

Raffle tickets can be purchased to bid on the trees at a cost of six for $5 or one for $1. The trees are valued at $150 or more.

"It's a good kick off for your holidays. It puts everyone in the Christmas spirit," said Pam Osborn, co-chairwoman of the Tree for All committee. "It's kind of neat because it's all about the trees."

As of Tuesday, 49 individuals and groups signed up to decorate trees, one more than last year. Additional donors are still welcome to submit trees to the event.

"Even our members will do trees," said Osborn, who plans to decorate a tree but hasn't decided on the theme. "It's a fun activity to do with someone, the camaraderie, the creativity."

Co-chairwoman Diane Precht also plans to decorate a tree and has chosen Home Depot as her theme. She thinks of the decorating as friendly competition among the individuals and groups involved, she said.

"They take a lot of pride in knowing that perhaps their tree will get the most tickets," she said.

Last year, 325 people attended the event and organizers hope this year there will be 400.

"It's really a unique experience to have the opportunity to see so much holiday in one location, the chance to have a tree that someone put a lot of love and effort into and take it home and display it," Precht said. "It's a very visually interesting place when you walk in."

The Foothills Service League, founded in 1959, has 25 members and is seeking new members. If interested, call 541-0716. The group doesn't meet during the summer months.

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm