Protection groups underplay the pain and suffering they cause.

Grey Wolf (Canis lupus) Next to Birch Tree (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

The reaction of pro-wolf groups to the wolf harvest quota being exceeded by one animal was predictable. Those groups paint wolf hunting and trapping as inhumane and agitate for unlimited numbers of wolves. They foster the myth that the wolf population is endangered, although the minimum number of wolves in the upper Midwest is over 3,600 and the worldwide population is over 70,000.

The pro-wolf groups ignore the pain and suffering that wolves inflict. In New Mexico in 2014, wolves set a record for the number of confirmed cattle kills. Five ranchers lost 651 cattle valued at over $382,000. In one case, a rancher found a mother cow being eaten by wolves while it was still alive and its unborn calf was found dead after being ripped out by the wolves. The rancher had no choice but to put the cow out of its misery.

The devastation by wolves is not limited to the U.S. French sheep farmers have been frustrated by increasing wolf attacks after the European Union placed wolves on protected status. This fall, farmers descended on Paris with their sheep to demand the government develop a plan to stop the wolf attacks that had numbered over 4,000 from January to August 2014.

Wisconsinoutdoorfun.com: More news on the wolf hunt

The wolf protectors would have us believe that wolves aren't a threat to humans. Granted, wolf attacks on people are unusual but they do happen and have been increasing as the wolf population grows. In late October, a hunter in Washington was stalked by a wolf pack. After failing to scare them away by shooting in the air, he shot at one of the wolves, grazed it and succeeded in scaring off the pack.

Wisconsinoutdoorfun.com: Browse wolf photos from around the state

Common sense and realism are required for controlling Wisconsin's wolf population to minimize wolf depredation and prevent attacks on people.

Earl Stahl,

Neenah

Read or Share this story: http://post.cr/1AKsPB6