Staffing shortages at the local Dallas-Fort Worth National Weather Service office left forecasters scrambling to cover Saturday’s tornado outbreak and could slow the process of completing damage surveys.

NWS officials insist all weather warnings were issued in a timely way. But the union that represents forecasters says forecasters covered the storms with the help of meteorologists who volunteered to come in from home and managers pulling extra duty.

The Dallas-Fort Worth National Weather Service office currently has three vacant front-line forecaster positions. The meteorologist who serves as the union representative for the DFW area office says Saturday’s storms highlight the urgent need to fill those jobs.

“This office needs to be fully staffed. We shouldn’t have to be spending time trying to find people to cover shifts and do surveys after high impact weather,” said local National Weather Service Employees Organization representative Jason Dunn.

“We serve more than 8 million people. Densely populated with lots of weather,” Dunn said.

Read more at KXAS-TV (NBC5).

Complete coverage of the storm’s devastation

‘Total devastation’: Residents, emergency crews work frantically after tornadoes

Tornado in Rowlett classified as EF3; 11 confirmed dead in storms in Garland, Collin County

Officials identify six of eight tornado victims who died in Garland

Storm damages over 100 buildings in Glenn Heights

Floyd: Weather’s tragic capriciousness is still beyond our control

NBC5: Staff shortage left NWS scrambling to cover tornado outbreak

Colliding weather systems caused tornado outbreak

Gov. Abbott offers condolences, says state is taking action in midst of storms

Rescue workers assessing damage, needs in wake of tornadoes across North Texas

Tracking the storm

Interactive map shows storm’s route of destruction in North Texas

After the storm: Before and after images of the damage done by December tornadoes in North

Video, photos, tweets show massive damage tornadoes brought to North Texas

Updated photos: Daylight reveals damage from D-FW holiday season storm

El Paso to East Texas: Widespread images/video of extreme weather shake social media

Tales from the damage

Heartbreaking call during storm was Mesquite couple’s last

Survivor stories: Ruined churches, a flying lawnmower and a truck ride through the air

Editorial: What’s stronger than even catastrophic tornadoes? North Texans

Video: Glenn Heights family reunited with dog after tornado

Children hide under mattress as house falls around them

Resources

How you can help | How to get help

Resources for tracking lost pets in North Texas storms

Shelters are popping up in wake of tornado damage across North Texas

Watchdog: In tornado’s wake, protect yourself from bad builders’ scams

Check here for pet shelter updates

Managing traumatic stress after a tornado