One year ago, Wyatt Scott was born with a locked jaw at an Ottawa hospital. Still unable to open his mouth, and defying odds for survival, his parents recently threw him a big birthday party, celebrating a moment they didn't expect to come. Nevertheless, it has been a tough year for his parents. Wyatt’s first three months of life were spent in a hospital, and once he was finally home, he still had to be rushed to the hospital six times afterward due to choking.

Wyatt's parents have spent the last year trying to understand his condition. They've had numerous scares, including a nosebleed that came out of his mouth, and another time when they had to perform CPR, ABC News reported. Frustrated and searching for answers, his parents still don’t know why he can’t open his mouth. Doctors at his hospital had never seen a case like his, making it very hard to understand and treat. "There's no kind of obvious reason for it," Dr. J.P. Vaccani, Wyatt's doctor and a pediatric otolaryngologist at Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario, told ABC. In addition to being unable to explain why he was born this way, doctors also don't know how long he'll have the condition for.

"Nobody can tell us if Wyatt is going to be better in two years, five years, and 10 years, or if he will be eating from a tube for the rest of his life," Amy Scott, Wyatt’s mom, told CBCNews. The condition has been broadly diagnosed as congenital trismus, a disorder that limits mouth movement. A doctor at a children’s hospital in Eastern Ontario told CBC that the rare disorder “causes issues of getting food in with any nipple or bottle feeding, and it can also have trouble for the secretions, so they often have associated swallowing difficulties."

Wyatt’s doctor says that congenital trismus is usually caused by an extra band of tissue, or a fused joint, in the mouth. But Wyatt does not exhibit either one of these problems. However, he does show signs of unusual blinking patterns, and sometimes has problems with motor skills and swallowing. Doctors have mentioned that it could be a muscle problem but they just aren’t sure. Despite efforts to open the young boy's mouth, including administering botox to his jaw muscles, doctors have only been able to open his mouth a little bit.

Because his future with the condition is unclear, Wyatt’s parents have already started teaching him sign language. They aren’t sure if their baby will ever talk. Scott created the website WhatsWrongWithWyatt.com a few months ago, hoping that someone knew what was happening to her son. Among all the feedback they've received, one dentist said he'd seen the condition before, giving hope to the family. But until they can find their answers, the family is just happy to celebrate Wyatt's first birthday.