All the technology in the world can't keep patients safe if there aren’t enough health care workers -- that’s the message Catholic Health nurses tried to get out Monday. With no law mandating nurse-to-patient ratios, those numbers are often negotiated in union contracts -- something that’s been going on at Catholic Health for months. As Time Warner Cable News reporter Katie Gibas explains, workers hope their message reaches Albany.

CHEEKTOWAGA, N.Y. -- Nurses say there aren’t enough of them to go around, arguing nurse-to-patient ratios should be at least one-to-three, not one-to-eight.

While there is a national shortage of health care workers, nurses at Catholic Health say the hospitals are understaffed, jeopardizing patient care.

“I got into it to help people and am I not helping or helping enough? It plays a big role in when you go home, emotional, physical everything, not enough staff is a big issue,” said Kevonna Neely, a certified nursing assistant.

That’s why health care workers held a vigil Monday outside Sisters of Charity Hospital, St. Joseph Campus, to raise awareness.

They say those ratios are recommendations by professional organizations and something that is usually negotiated in union contracts.

Advocates say even though legislation has passed at the local level, requiring certain staffing levels for nursing at hospitals, it’s an issue that needs to be taken up at the state level. That’s why legislation has already been introduced.

“In California it is. That is the only state that has mandatory nurse-to-patient ratios. You need somebody with a little bit more power, but it’s grassroots. The more communities we get on board, the more legislators, it’s a movement. It’s going to build. You have to start somewhere,” said CWA 1133 President Deborah Arnet.

“I remember one day on my floor, I was working a double and nearly every light on the floor was lit up and I skipped my lunch. I skipped my break, and I knew I wouldn't be able to help everybody. And unfortunately that’s what nurses at Catholic Health face every day. We need to do this. We need to pass a safe standard legislation now," said Erie County Legislator Patrick Burke, a Democrat.

Catholic Health released a statement in response to this vigil, saying this vigil does nothing to move forward bargaining on the contract with the union. They say this has been a difficult bargaining process since the beginning four months ago. They claim the union is ignoring some key issues that affect staffing.

They also say they've hired several nurses, about 30 since the beginning of the year. Catholic Health says the union is calling for an additional 200 nurses, which administrators would cost the hospital an extra $1 million.

Catholic Health's Full Statement:

After four months of bargaining and two months since the expiration of its current contract, Catholic Heath presented Communication Workers of America (CWA) 1168 with a final contract offer on October 30 for registered nurses at Sisters of Charity Hospital, St. Joseph Campus. Throughout the course of negotiations, the union has refused to bargain as needed, ignored the hospital’s repeated requests to schedule additional bargaining sessions and failed to respond to many of the hospital’s proposals. These delays have cost each of the nurses hundreds of dollars in lost wage increases to date and led the National Labor Relations Board to issue a complaint against the CWA for failing to bargain in good faith – a charge the union has failed to resolve.

Earlier this year, union leaders communicated publicly that they were raising issues and allegations to gain political leverage in the contract talks. Among a host of issues, the CWA has made safe staffing a focal point of the negotiations and the subject of a rally being held in front of the hospital today. Despite repeated requests from the hospital, however, the union has not presented any specific concerns or proposed any feasible solutions to what they see as unsafe staffing practices. Since bargaining began on June 29, 18 RNs have been hired at St. Joseph Campus, with 32 new RNs hired year-to-date.

Nurse staffing is a national issue and the subject of much debate throughout the healthcare industry. Research shows no direct link between arbitrary government-mandated staffing ratios and improved patient outcomes. Instead, industry experts believe better preparation and education of nurses, use of evidence-based patient care protocols and better communication and empowerment within the nursing team – all initiatives underway in Catholic Health – are critical to quality outcomes.

Catholic Health remains committed to working with the CWA on staffing related matters. “We’ve presented a new staffing proposal, which includes provisions for the hospital and union to work collaboratively to address staffing concerns,” said Mary Dillon, Vice President of Patient Care Services at Sisters Hospital and its St. Joseph Campus. “As the union knows, hospital staffing is a complex issue affected by a number of factors, including fluctuations in patient volume, a shortage of qualified specialty care nurses and union-imposed provisions in our current contract.”

The hospital contends that the union continues to ignore contractual language that contributes to staffing related issues, such as excessive absenteeism, unscheduled absences before and after holidays, and cumbersome “bumping” rules that make it difficult to fill vacant positions. “It’s unfortunate that the union will not work with us to resolve these issues, but continues to point the finger at the hospital for things that are often beyond our control,” said David DeLorenzo, RN, Senior Director of Human Resources at Sisters Hospital.

With its final offer, the hospital proposed a new four-year contract agreement. The offer includes a fair and competitive wage and benefit package, taking into consideration the local economy and the hospital’s ongoing financial losses, which includes nearly $3.3 million through September 2015 and another $39 million in reimbursement cuts over the next 10 years as part of the Affordable Care Act. The union has proposed a one-year contract with wage increases ranging from 7-10%, increases in overtime, and premium pay of $10/hour for working extra shifts in addition to daily time and a half. With the addition of healthcare improvements, the demands from the Union’s proposal would cost the hospital an additional one million dollars for 207 nurses.

“At a time when most employers in Western New York are giving little or no increases and cutting health benefits, the economic package Catholic Health has on the table is a generous offer,” DeLorenzo added. “For the CWA to assume the cost increases they are proposing can be borne by the hospital is unrealistic, unfair and jeopardizes the future of St. Joseph Campus.”

Despite very few changes to the current collective bargaining agreement, which expired August 31, the union has been resistant to settle the contract, delaying wage increases to more than 200 nurses. In order to provide the scheduled increases, which include a 3% wage increase upon ratification, the hospital is asking the union to bring its final offer to a vote before November 20.

“This has been a difficult bargain from the start, with the union delaying negotiations, refusing to respond to many of our proposals, and more importantly, failing to recognize the economic reality of today’s healthcare environment,” DeLorenzo continued. “Today’s rally does nothing to move the bargaining process forward. We would like nothing more than to reach a tentative agreement and give our nurses a chance to vote the merits of the contract offer.”