Around meal times on most other days, Cisco Montoya, who has lived homeless in Boulder off and on since the '60s, would likely be diving in trash bins for a bite.

"I get food stamps, but food is expensive, and the stamps go quick," said Montoya, 53. "This is how I survive."

As the snow came down on Christmas afternoon, Montoya and about 250 other homeless people got a much needed reprieve from cold and hunger, as Pearl Street's Lazy Dog restaurant opened its doors for three hours of free warmth, company, turkey and pie.

For many years, the Walnut Brewery had served the homeless free Christmas meals, but that tradition came to a halt in 2012. The Boulder non-profit Bridge House, a homeless resource and advocacy center, took up Walnut's torch last year, using kitchen and dining room space at First United Methodist Church downtown.

Ricardo Rincones, left and Steven Kaufman watch their meals being brought by volunteers Andrea and Carlos Neri and Damaris Andrews, at right, at the Bridge House Christmas Meal held at the Lazy Dog on Thursday. For more photos and a video of the event go to www.dailycamera.com (Paul Aiken / Daily Camera)

Six months ago, the Lazy Dog owners, believing the homeless deserved better than a church basement on Christmas, agreed to team with Bridge House for this year's event.

"It's really our honor," co-owner Kenny Goldman said. "We're blessed with having this location, and to be able to share it makes us feel great."

The gesture was highly appreciated by the hundreds of attendees who spilled in for a meal, and for the camaraderie.

"I was moderately depressed about Christmas coming up," said Alan Wright, 58, who has been homeless in Boulder since 1994, "but things like this are, to me, and I'm sure to everybody here, very uplifting. It shows that people still have warmth and compassion for another human being."

Advertisement

Wright only wishes he felt the same coziness for the other 364 days of the year.

"Some people see us as being problematic for society, with addictions and mental health issues in our lives," he said. "So, stuff like this is so meaningful to me. These people could be doing something else, besides waiting on tramps like me."

Indeed, dozens of volunteers — a surplus, in fact — helped with the event. Much of the donated food, however, was prepared by homeless folks who've been trained through Bridge House's Ready to Work program.

"When I got here four months ago, I didn't want to just be idle," homeless man John Wilson, 53, said. "And so I went to the Bridge House and they told me about Ready to Work, and I got involved in it within about a week being here.

"It's great for me. It gives me something to do, and a reason to focus each morning. Sometimes, when you're in recovery, having that idle time isn't the best."

Bridge House's executive director, Isabel McDevitt, said rehabilitation programs, including Ready to Work, are particularly crucial in a city like Boulder, which sees a constant influx of new transients in critical need of a number of services.

"We have some major challenges," she said. "Affordable housing is a huge challenge, and so is having access to mental health services and substance abuse treatment services and employment."

In 2014, 23 homeless people lost their lives in Boulder. Eight of them died outside.

"It's remarkable how many people do end up improving their situations, but there are many more people who are finding themselves in hard times," McDevitt said. "We just continue to really focus on the positive, and focus on solutions. Hopefully 2015 will bring more of them."

Alex Burness: 303-473-1389, burnessa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/alex_burness