Survey: Medical bills surprise many patients

Many patients, including those in the Houston area, often are caught off guard by out-of-pocket health care costs and think their medical bills are confusing, according to results from a recent national survey.

The poll conducted by Chicago-based TransUnion Healthcare found 25 percent of patients receive pretreatment cost estimates, and 12 percent of respondents found it easy to get cost information before receiving care. Nearly half of Americans said it was difficult to get that information.

In Houston, 60 percent of patients said out-of-pocket medical costs surprised them, and more than half said their medical bills confused them. Fifty percent said it was difficult to get pretreatment cost information.

"Today's cost-aware consumer has a greater expectation that providers will offer upfront cost estimates and timely and accurate post-treatment bills," said Dave Wojczynski, TransUnion Healthcare's senior vice president. "With consumers placing more emphasis on billing and payment when evaluating quality of care, it's imperative that providers have the technology and processes to meet this consumer demand."

Additionally, the survey found cost transparency and upfront cost estimates improve overall consumer perception of quality of care and influence consumers' opinions of providers. Nearly 80 percent of patients who gave high quality of care ratings in the last year also said their billing and payment experiences usually were positive. Meanwhile, about 85 percent of patients who gave poor quality of care ratings also provided poor billing and payment experience ratings.

Health care experts and providers think many patients, especially those recently insured for the first time under the Affordable Care Act, don't understand their coverage, which causes confusion when it's time to pay for appointments and treatments. They recommended patients contact their insurers to determine how much they'll pay before going to the doctor. Some insurers' sites include cost calculators.

Maximum out-of-pocket cost limits for plans sold in the health-insurance marketplace are $6,350 for an individual and $12,700 for a family. Patients must reach their out-of-pocket limits each year before insurers pay 100 percent of their medical costs. The limits typically don't include charges from out-of-network providers.

"As people purchase high-deductible plans with narrow (provider) networks to reduce premiums, they'll have a stake in the financial decisions they make," said Lee Spangler, Texas Medical Association's medical economics vice president. "They should understand their exposure before they get treatment."

Dr. Patrick Carter, Kelsey-Seybold Clinic's family medicine department chairman and care coordination and quality improvement medical director, said state law requires providers to give patients their best estimate of what services cost. Providers can give patients an estimate of what an office visit might cost before they make an appointment. However, it's impossible to know how much a visit will cost until a doctor examines a patient, diagnoses a problem and recommends tests, he said.

"If a patient comes in for a cough, it's very difficult to say, sometimes, what could be wrong," Carter said. "I might hear something in the lungs. I might need to do a chest X-ray. I don't know that until I see you."

It's not unusual for patients at Dr. Elizabeth Torres' Sugar Land office to dispute out-of-pocket costs due at the time of service. Many don't realize they have deductibles to meet.

"People don't understand the system," said Torres, president of the Harris County Medical Society. "Patient education is way, way lacking. We need the insurance companies to sit down and explain what their cash breakdown is. Put it out there simply. We're arguing with people about their responsibility to pay the bill."

David Gonzales, executive director of Texas Association of Health Plans, agreed understanding health insurance, not lack of transparency, is the problem. His organization represents insurers doing business in Texas.

"We are finding that during this important time, it is the most fundamental health-insurance concepts and access issues people are struggling with, not necessarily the costs, yet," he said. "We have consumers who have never had health insurance and don't know how to use it. They don't even know enough to know if their providers are in or out of network. I'm not laying blame. It's just the way it is."