This is the new world that we are trying to develop in healthcare.' - Christopher Dadlez

SPRINGFIELD - Healthcare executive Christopher M. Dadlez said area residents can expect expanded access to community and specialized care thanks to a new not-for-profit regional system whose components include Mercy Medical Center and St. Francis Hospital and Medical Center in Hartford.

"Our concerns include health equity, taking care of every person who is in need," said

Dadlez, president and chief executive of Trinity Health-New England that is based at St. Francis Hospital and Medical Center in Hartford.

"The new enterprise of health care delivery is from wellness, in terms of making sure people stay well and manage their health care, through acute to post acute care to managing chronic disease, and being able to provide healthcare at home and in physicians' offices and ambulatory centers. This is the new world that we are trying to develop in healthcare."

Dadlez was in town for the annual meeting of the Sisters of Providence Health System headed by Daniel P. Moen.

SPHS, whose hospitals include Mercy, became part of Michigan-based Trinity Health when Catholic Health East merged with Trinity in 2013. The merger made Trinity Health the second largest Catholic healthcare system in the country. It owns 88 hospitals in 21 states and has an annual operating revenues of about $15.8 billion and assets of about $20.4 billion.

It is also the second largest not-for-profit or nonprofit health system in the country, with Catholic healthcare system Ascension Health being the first.

Trinity Health began acquisition of St. Francis Care, whose hospitals include St. Francis, in 2013, and that merger was finalized in October. It was also announced then that the merger would create a New England regional ministry for Trinity Health with Dadlez as its leader.

"By coming together we can do some really dramatic things," Dadlez told a reporter before the start of Wednesday's meeting that took place at CityStage.

"We just installed Epic, which is probably the leading information system in the country, for St. Francis and all of our physicians. So, all of our physicians are off paper and they are all integrated and can talk to each other. We are going to be implementing Epic here at Mercy and its physician groups, so we can all engage and be able to talk to each other and access information from the physician offices to the hospitals."

Dadlez added that the creation of a Trinity Health-New England within Trinity Health is allowing St. Francis and SPHS to share a variety of resources. St. Francis recently became the northern campus for the Smilow Cancer Hospital at Yale-New Haven to expand treatment and research possibilities at St. Francis.

"We have just implemented Smilow Cancer Hospital-Saint Francis with Yale. We are going to be bringing Smilow Cancer opportunities and support up to the Sisters of Providence Health System to be included in the network with Yale," Dadlez said.

"There will be a lot of back and forth and building of our medical capabilities that are being brought to the table. Trinity, being a really large organization, can do things no other organization can do."

For the past 11 years, Dadlez has been president and chief executive officer of St. Francis Care. St. Francis agreed in March to acquire, out of bankruptcy and pending regulatory approval, the 72-bed Johnson Memorial Hospital, in Stafford Springs.

St. Mary's Health System in Waterbury recently agreed to merge with Trinity Health.

The New England entity that these facilities create within Trinity health is referred to as a "regional health ministry."

"This comes out of the whole aspect of being a part of Catholic organization. Trinity Health is the second largest Catholic health care system in the country and the second largest not-for-profit. We are focused on our mission and core values," said Dadlez, noting that the "majority of patients we treat are not Catholic."

"We are a faith-based organization that is in the health care business specifically to focus on community patients. They are the center of our universe. When you talk about ministry it is really to minister to our community to the patients that we serve, to the public that we serve, that is the genesis of it."

Dadlez added that "Trinity Health has 21 regions where they have aggregated hospitals to create delivery systems for population health and accountable care."

"Each of those of those are called ministries. This is our regional ministry. This is the newly formed Trinity Health-New England. It brings together St. Francis Care, in Hartford, the Sisters of Providence Health System, the soon to be St. Mary's in Waterbury, Johnson's Memorial in Stafford Springs in Connecticut and others that we are talking to form a very significant health care delivery system that has scale and has the resources to really be a game changer as far as delivery of health care to the community."

Healthcare reform and mandated coverage under the Affordable Care Act has lead many community hospitals to become part of larger networks to stay solvent. Baystate Health, which has the region's only level 1 trauma center for 24-hour specialized care for life-threatening injuries, acquired Wing Memorial, in Palmer, in August 2014, and this summer Noble Hospital in Westfield. Northampton's Cooley Dickinson Hospital became an affiliate of Boston-based Mass General Hospital in 2013 and this fall the Mass General Cancer Center opened at Cooley.

Dadlez said the creation of Trinity Health-New England should ensure the "viablity" of its entities in terms of employment. He was also asked about the impact of lawsuits that the U.S. Supreme Court has agreed to hear that are faith-based challenges to the Affordable Care Act mandate on contraception coverage.

"This is an issue around Catholic healthcare, but we have had healthcare benefits that have been developed for our employees and they are long standing and they are not going to change. Whatever is in place now is not going to change along those lines, " Dadlez said.

"Coming together in this enterprise offers security, strength and stability to the organization, so all our associates and colleagues should feel they have the opportunity to be with a strong organization that ensures the viability of that organization for the next 100 years."

He added, "There is tremendous intellectual capital and opportunity with combining what has been developed here by the Sisters of Providence Health System and Mercy, St. Francis and others.

"These are organizations of the highest quality coming together to provide care," Dadlez said.

"We want to continue the legacy of what has been developed here by the Sisters of Providence and will always be here. We want to value that, acknowledge that and build upon that. What we want to do is bring resources into play that raises the boat for everyone."

He added that the acquisition of Johnson's Memorial will mean better population health management and better access to care.

"With the support of Sisters of Providence and St. Francis, we can actually manage that northern Connecticut community here in Hartford in a much better fashion We are talking about physicians from this organization having offices in Enfield and possibly helping to bring primary care to that community in a more comprehensive fashion ," Dadlez said.

"There is even a surgery center in Enfield that could be used by our physicians and Mercy to provide surgical services for people, even people on this side of the border in Longmeadow. There are lots of ways we can help that community get better care."

Saint Francis Care includes the Connecticut Joint Replacement Institute, the Hoffman Heart and Vascular Institute of Connecticut, the Saint Francis/Mount Sinai Regional Cancer Center, the Joyce D. and Andrew J. Mandell Center for Comprehensive Multiple Sclerosis Care and Neuroscience Research, and Saint Francis HealthCare Partners.

The Sisters of Providence Health System includes the 182-bed Mercy Medical Center, in Springfield, where a $15 million expansion of the Sister Caritas Cancer Center is underway; the 126-bed Providence Behavioral Health Hospital, in Holyoke; Weldon Rehabilitation Hospital, a comprehensive hospital-based rehabilitation center on the campus of Mercy Medical ; Brightside for Families and Children, an outpatient service offering counseling and family support programs; two outpatient substance abuse treatment centers; and Mercy Continuing Care Network that includes skilled nursing facilities, residential care facilities, an adult day health program.