What’s the hardest part about working with younger employees, and what’s the best way to deal with it?

MOLLY METTLER: It’s hard on everyone if generational differences in the workplace are seen as a drag rather than a gift. You can choose to see that headphone-wearing, texting, eye-rolling co-worker as brash, disrespectful and self-entitled OR you can see them as wired, aware and ready to collaborate. What’s it going to be?

If you spend your workday collaborating with people just like yourself, you run the risk of putting a chokehold on innovation and new perspectives. You miss opportunities. Our younger co-workers brought us into social media, mobile apps, Salesforce and Chatter, online collaboration and technical improvements for off-site workers. (Not to mention an uptick in vegan offerings at company potlucks.) Our seasoned employees bring the gift of perspective and commitment to sustainability, as well as a steadying, thoughtful presence to rapid decision making. Lean meets Serene.

If you want to bridge a generational divide, consider two-way mentoring. There’s no rule that says a mentor has to be older, more senior, than you. A Gen Y co-worker–a hardworking rising star with a full-time job and a young family–asked if I would mentor her as she assumed some new job responsibilities. I was happy to, especially if she mentored me in workforce development challenges for our younger employees. I’m learning lots.

In my workplace, we operate under the shared culture of respect, teamwork and “do the right thing.” We quote Goethe, “The way you see people is the way you treat them. The way you treat them is what they become.” So, if you want a good way to deal with people you don’t understand, be inclusive, give people the benefit of the doubt and listen well. Compassion works too. Remember, 30 years ago you were the brash, disrespectful, self-entitled one.

Molly Mettler (@mollykmettler) is senior vice president of mission at Healthwise Inc., a nonprofit founded in 1975 with a mission to help people make better health decisions. She also serves as a fellow with the Center for Advancing Health and the author of books on health care, including “Healthwise for Life.”

Read the latest Encore Report.