By Keith Gushard, The Meadville Tribune, Pa. McClatchy-Tribune Information Services

June 14 -- MEADVILLE -- A Meadville teenager, who admitted to the brutal beating of a city man outside a downtown drug store on New Year's Day 2013, has been ordered to serve at least three years in state prison for his crime.

On Friday, Timothy Bolden , 18, was sentenced by Crawford County Court of Common Pleas Judge John Spataro to spend three to six years in state prison with 251 days credit for pre-sentence incarceration to be followed by two years of probation on a first-degree felony charge of aggravated assault.

Spataro also ordered Bolden to pay court costs, a $500 fine and $63,238.01 in restitution to the victim for medical bills. However, the amount of restitution is subject to modification due to insurance the victim may have or if expenses were written off by medical providers.

Bolden could have received a maximum sentence of up to 20 years in state prison and a $25,000 fine for his guilty plea to the aggravated assault charge.

Bolden was 16 at the time he attacked a then-34-year-old man outside the CVS drug store on North Street at 3 a.m. Jan. 1, 2013 . Bolden was certified to be tried as an adult following a three-day county court hearing in March 2013 before Spataro.

At the certification hearing, Bolden admitted to kicking the man in the face while the man was down on his hands and knees. At Bolden's certification hearing, the victim testified he had sustained multiple facial fractures that required surgery, had medical bills in excess of $60,000 , and continued to suffer some social anxiety from the attack.

The victim was not in county court Friday at Bolden's sentencing.

Bolden initially was charged by Meadville Police Department with one count each of aggravated assault, criminal conspiracy and reckless endangerment; two counts of simple assault and two summary counts of harassment for his attack on a

In a plea agreement with the Crawford County District Attorney's office, Bolden pleaded guilty on Feb. 20 this year to a charge of aggravated assault for the attack in exchange for all other charges being dropped.

Bolden's minimum sentence for the aggravated assault charge had been four years based on Bolden's pre-sentence report which included previous felonies Bolden had committed as a juvenile. However, Spataro agreed to follow the three-year minimum sentencing recommendation made by the Crawford County District Attorney's Office and Melvin Raiford , Bolden's defense attorney.

In handing down the sentence, Spataro said there were several factors he considered when agreeing to follow the lesser sentencing recommendation made by the attorneys.

Bolden's conduct "was more reckless than intended, but it was based on comments made by the victim," and that "the victim had initiated contact" in the incident, Spataro said. Spataro added the incident "should not have escalated."

Spataro said Bolden was "in essence in solitary confinement" for having spent more than eight months in the Crawford County jail segregated away from all other inmates because of his young age following his arrest. Spataro said Bolden was on house arrest for eight months prior to Friday's sentencing and had committed no violations. A county juvenile probation office evaluation of Bolden found he had a "low to moderate chance" of committing additional crimes, Spataro said.

Spataro also followed the attorneys' recommendation that Bolden serve his sentence at the State Correctional Institution Pine Grove in Indiana County , which houses the state's young adult offender program, or "boot camp" style prison, housing young offenders with a structured environment. However, the Pennsylvania Department of Corrections will make the final determination where Bolden will serve his sentence.

Bolden had little to say at his sentencing.

"I want take this time to better myself," Bolden told Spataro.

Following Friday's sentencing, attorneys for both sides called it a fair outcome.

"The judge was compassionate and considerate," Raiford said. "A sentence shouldn't be just punishment, but therapeutic in nature as well."

"We believe it was an appropriate," Craig Howe , the assistant district attorney who prosecuted the case, said.

A co-defendant in Bolden's case, Tyler Adams , who was 15 at the time of the assault, was ruled delinquent in Crawford County Juvenile Court by Judge Spataro in March 2013 .

Spataro ruled Adams was delinquent of aggravated assault, simple assault and harassment and placed Adams in the High Impact Program of Hermitage House Youth Service Inc. of Cambridge Springs .

While in the High Impact Program, Adams had to participate in anger replacement therapy, an education program, drug and alcohol counseling and family counseling. The HIP's intensive intervention for youth is a 60-to-90-day residential program whose features include writing apology letters to victims and community service.

After his time at Hermitage House, Adams was placed under supervision of the county's Juvenile Probation Department .

Adams also has to pay $250 fine for aggravated assault and $55 in other costs and restitution.

Keith Gushard can be reached at 724-6370 or by email at [email protected].

___

(c)2014 The Meadville Tribune (Meadville, Pa.)

Visit The Meadville Tribune (Meadville, Pa.) at meadvilletribune.com

Distributed by MCT Information Services

Wordcount: 834

[jetpack-related-posts]