Coordinated Health Orthopedic Hospital in Bethlehem is among a tiny percentage of hospitals nationally facing a maximum Medicare penalty under a controversial measure of readmissions that some health care administrators say is fundamentally flawed.

Under the Affordable Care Act, the U.S. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services punishes hospitals whose patients are readmitted within a month of discharge. The hospital's reimbursement rates are docked on a sliding scale up to 3 percent, depending on the percentage of patients readmitted.

Nearly 2,600 hospitals across the country — including nearly all of the Lehigh Valley's hospitals and three-quarters of those in Pennsylvania — are being penalized, although to varying degrees, according to government data released this month.

For the second year in a row, Coordinated Health has the dubious distinction of being among several dozen institutions nationally that are being docked the full 3 percent.

Amy Nyberg, Coordinated Health's chief integration officer, said the readmission rate is misleading, describing it as an "indirect measure of quality."

Coordinated Health orthopedic surgeons perform more joint surgeries than any other physicians group in the Lehigh Valley, she said. But because Coordinated Health's Bethlehem hospital has so few beds — only 20 — even a small number of readmissions can have a sudden, outsized impact on its readmission rate. (In 2012 and 2013, the hospital was among the relative few that avoided the penalty altogether.)

Moreover, the readmission rate fails to adequately distinguish between patients readmitted because of complications related to their treatment and those readmitted for other issues, according to Nyberg. And Coordinated Health specializes in hip and knee replacements, often in older patients who suffer from a multitude of "co-morbidities," such as heart disease, diabetes and obesity.

"There's absolutely no problem at our hospital," she said. "We're not allowing the penalty to change the way we practice … The rate that we have is not necessarily an indication that we are out of the norm."

The Hospital Readmissions Reduction Program, in its fourth year, is part of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services' efforts to change the health payment system to one that rewards quality rather than one that automatically provides payment for services regardless of outcome.

Fewer readmissions — one in five discharged Medicare patients are back in the hospital within a month — could have a dramatic impact on the nation's health care spending. Studies have shown readmissions occur much more frequently in the United States than in other developed countries. The Medicare Payment Advisory Commission has estimated that cutting readmissions by 10 percent would save approximately $1 billion annually in health care spending.

The program focuses on Medicare patients who enter a hospital for heart attack, heart failure, pneumonia or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, or who undergo hip or knee replacement. Those who end up back in the hospital within 30 days are counted as readmissions, unless a procedure is pre-planned.

The Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services penalizes the hospitals with too many readmissions. This year's fines, which will be applied to Medicare payments when the federal fiscal year begins in October, are based on readmissions between July 2011 and June 2014.

For Coordinated Health, a for-profit enterprise, this year's 3 percent penalty translates into a loss of about $350 for each of an estimated 400 Medicare cases this year, totaling roughly $140,000, according to Nyberg.

Nationwide, 2,592 hospitals are being penalized, collectively losing an estimated $420 million in Medicare reimbursements.

The 2,232 hospitals not being penalized have been spared not necessarily because of low readmission rates, but because of automatic exemptions — because they don't serve many Medicare patients or because of other technicalities.

The average Medicare payment reduction this year is .61 percent, an analysis by the nonprofit Kaiser Health News found. Since the penalty was instituted in 2012, readmission rates have dropped.

The penalty at the Lehigh Valley's biggest hospital, Lehigh Valley Hospital-Cedar Crest in Salisbury Township, has steadily risen, however. This year, it is .55 percent, which is more than double what it was in 2012.

Dr. Anthony Ardire, the senior vice president for quality and patient safety at the hospital's parent, Lehigh Valley Health Network, also questioned the validity of the Medicare readmission rate.

LVH gets high marks from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services for its low patient mortality rate, he said, which is in part because of its readiness to readmit patients in need of additional care. Ironically, the opposite extreme — a hospital whose patients all died upon discharge — would result in a flawless readmission rate.

"So go figure," he said.

Ardire echoed Nyberg's complaint about the readmission rate failing to adequately distinguish between related and unrelated readmissions. He said large teaching hospitals such as LVH tend to serve diverse populations that include many people with co-morbidities.

"We've always had an issue with [the readmission rate]," he said. "It's not a great quality metric."

According to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, the agency does account for co-morbidities and "clinical conditions" in the complex formulas it uses to determine hospital readmission rates. But at the moment, it does not adjust for demographics — for example, the economic status or racial make-up of the populations hospitals serve — because doing so could diminish the incentive to improve the quality of care in the very places where it's most needed.

The Centers' approach, however, could soon change. Studies authorized by Congress last year are underway to evaluate the impact of demographics on readmission rates. And the agency says it is committed to improving outcomes on hospital readmissions while minimizing any negative unintended consequences.