Cognosante has expanded its operations inside the United States with the launch of a delivery center in Phoenix, Arizona. The 75,000-square-foot facility will house 400 professionals who will provide health data services for the federal government’s Affordable Care Act program.

The McLean, Virginia-based outsourcing provider is one of the beneficiaries of the Affordable Care Act, better known as Obama Care, which has given birth to a slew of contracts in the healthcare outsourcing services sector. In September last year, the company announced it had landed a contract with the Wisconsin Department of Health Services (DHS) to help develop its Wisconsin Medicaid Management Information System (MMIS).

In a statement issued this week the company stated that it chose Phoenix because the city has abundant professionals, technical, and educational resources. Cognosante’s CEO Michele Kang says he wants to turn the Phoenix facility into what he called a “leading center of excellence in health IT and BPO.”

Although operating for the past 25 years, Cognosante seems to have recently found more opportunities to capitalize on its expertise in executing health information programs following the implementation of the Affordable Care Act.

Sign up for our Nearshore Americas newsletter:



Under the act, most Americans must be enrolled in some form of health coverage. According to latest report, nearly six million people have signed up so far. As part of implementing the programs, all U.S. states are building online exchanges which buyers can use to evaluate and select service providers, leading to the creation of a string of outsourcing contracts worth hundreds of millions of dollars.

“Cognosante’s presence enhances and continues to solidify our vibrant technology sector, which includes Fortune 500 companies, market innovators, and dozens of highly visible corporate and regional headquarters,” said Jeffrey Durbin, senior business development executive for the Phoenix Chamber of Commerce.