Follow Tom Jackson’s “The Right Stuff” blog at TBO.com.

Donald Trump stormed to his most impressive victory to date in New York Tuesday, winning his home state with 60 percent of the vote — his first clear-majority triumph — and gobbling up all but a small handful of 95 available delegates.

But as eye-popping as his landslide was, what seemed to catch commentators’ attention was his post-election performance. What a switch, everyone marveled.

Previously, Trump’s victory speeches seemed sprung from the WWE writers’ room, all graceless boast and bombast. If he wasn’t Muhammad Ali roaring over a crumpled Sonny Liston, he was the taunting chump on the sidelines of the Divison I national championship game.

Tuesday night, he was brief, subdued and, toward his chief GOP rival, borderline respectful. Ted Cruz was “Senator Cruz,” not “Lyin’ Ted.”

He even ticked the boxes of several topics that qualify as legitimate issues: trade, exporting jobs, Obamacare, military strength, illegal immigration. Why, it’s almost like he really does have a presidential on-off switch, marveled the pundit class.

Subsequently, Paul Manafort, Trump’s de facto campaign manager via K Street — home to the very lobbyists Trump rails against — told Republican National Committee hotshots gathered in Florida last week his guy’s outrageousness has all been performance art, that he’s all depth and substance behind closed doors, and — wait for it — he’ll be rolling out his amazing indoor self as he rumbles closer to the nomination.

At Hotair, Allapundit posits a disquieting theory:

“This has always been the great mystery of a Trump presidency: Will he be some sort of loose cannon, issuing illegal orders to the military and using Obama’s precedents for a major executive power grab, or would he actually be too docile in being led around by Washington Republicans eager to fill the gaps in Trump’s policy and institutional knowledge with their own preferences? Manafort’s presentation is a small data point for the latter theory. But what a treat to be on the cusp of nominating a guy who could go in either of those two terrible directions — without having any firm sense of which it’ll be.”

I’m going with the-whole-thing’s-a-con theory, and we’re all marks.

After all, come Wednesday’s daylight, Trump was back to his oldies playlist during a rally in Indianapolis, conjuring up “Lyin’ Ted” and ordering the ejection of a demonstrator with a familiar, “Get ’im outta here.” Hey, you gotta give the crowd what it wants.

Luckily, we have Rick Wilson, the Tallahassee-based GOP consultant, to help pierce the veneer.

“Politics has surprised this man-baby in a lot of ways, but most fundamentally in that people not only take shots, but land them. ... He expresses endless outrage that the RNC hasn’t cut to the chase and named him the nominee — even saying darkly about the party’s convention, ‘I hope it doesn’t involve violence’ — and it’s pretty clear that the 67 percent of Republicans who have cast a vote against him are on his enemies list.

“Actual pressure has made Trump brittle, bitter, and reflexively nasty. ... Trump expected he would be treated as the entitled, rules-are-for-the-little-people billionaire brat he plays on television.”

Imagine this petulant, self-absorbed, spoiled narcissist who never allows a slight, real or imagined, to pass, entrusted with real weapons of mass destruction, says Wilson.

“And that, kids, is how we nuked Pyongyang.”

The Trump we’ve seen for all those years on the small screen is the same guy we’ve seen in the campaign these eight months. I mean, they don’t call it reality TV for nothing. Trump is who he is: a whining, thin-skinned, petty, grudge-working bully, a walking outrage whose massive negatives are well-earned, and whose opinions have worked violent vandalism on Republican principles that have formed the party’s core since William F. Buckley was at Yale.

For the next two weeks, as the presidential primary wends through the Northeast and upper mid-Atlantic states — bizarrely, Trump territory — we’re bound to hear more about his inevitability even as we seek precious signs that he’s begun to assume the majestic airs of Lincoln, Ike and Reagan. All those who believe that didn’t just drink the snake oil; they’re marinating in it.

The rest know a hustler when they see one. The only remaining question is which cohort comprises a majority.