Posted on November 13, 2013

Tapper: If I Were Hillary Clinton, I Wouldn't Talk About Obamacare

Please enable Javascript to watch this video

HUGH HEWITT, HOST: Now I want to switch over back to Hillary, which you were talking about with former Governor Palin today. The former Secretary of State was the first out of the box on what became Obamacare. She is, in fact, Obamacare’s grandmother, is what I like to tell people about her. Does she have to distance herself from Obamacare at this point, Jake Tapper?



JAKE TAPPER: I don’t know, it’s interesting, we had Joel Pollack from Breitbart News on our panel today, and he thought that Bill Clinton, what Bill Clinton said today in that interview in which Bill Clinton extolled the virtues of Obamacare, but then also made this comment that got a lot of press, and he must have known it would, saying that he thought that the bill would need to be, the law would need to be tweaked so that the commitment that the President made, that if you like your health care you can keep your health care, would have to be kept. And Joel Pollack thought that that was, that was a way for Hillary to be distancing herself from Obamacare. Her husband out there presenting himself and the Clinton brand as pragmatic and opposed to some of the unpopular parts of the bill.



HEWITT: But Jake Tapper, does that work? If we remember correctly, Ira Magaziner and Hillary cooked up an even more complicated, even less market-oriented disaster of an Obamacare bill back when it was Hillarycare. Can she possible distance herself from this fiasco?





TAPPER: Well, first of all, I’m sure she would distance herself from your description of if then. But I mean, it’s an interesting question. You go back and look at the ’93-’94 debate, the Clinton bill was an employer mandate. And the Republicans, not all of them, but Bob Dole and the mainstream establishment Republicans were pushing the individual mandate. Now Obama has embraced the individual mandate after, and you might remember this during the Democratic primaries, Hillary was supporting it and Obama was against it. But now Obama has the individual mandate. I don’t know. And again, this is just Joel’s theory. I mean, Hillary Clinton hasn’t said anything about Obamacare. And if I were her, I probably wouldn’t until the bill has had more time to play out and have the kinks worked out. And obviously, the coverage that it’s been experiencing since October 1st is not going to be the coverage that it has in perpetuity.



HEWITT: So Jake, I’ve got 40 seconds left. When she finally comes out and answers questions, the first questions are about Benghazi, and the second questions are about Obamacare/Hillarcare. What’s the third question? Is there a third question? Or does it all depend upon Benghazi and Obamacare?



TAPPER: I think her tenure at the State Department. And I think NSA wiretapping. I think she will now be tagged with the legacies, positive and negative, of not just her husband’s administration, but Obama’s administration. And she’s going to have to reconcile herself to distancing herself and embracing parts of both and carving a new path. And that’s not going to be easy to do.