Niles Barnes (right), coordinator of the South Atlantic region of the East Coast Greenway Alliance, thanks Charleston City Councilman Mike Seekings for his work on helping urge officials to make bike and pedestrian improvements on the T. Allen Legare Bridge.

One of the "gems" of 2,900-mile East Coast Greenway route is less than three miles from one of its most dangerous links, according to the greenway's leader.

Dennis Markatos-Soriano, executive director of the East Coast Greenway Alliance, called the Arthur Ravenel Jr. Bridge spanning the Cooper River "a world class piece of infrastructure that accommodates biking and walking so well."

And yet it is juxtaposed with T. Allen Legare Bridge over the Ashley River that is one of the most dangerous segments in the entire route.

Markatos-Soriano urged local officials and advocates to follow through on plans to re-allocate one car lane on the bridge to bike and pedestrians, which was approved by Charleston City Council by an 8-5 vote in February.

"We need to make sure we close the deal in the next 12 months," said Markatos-Soriano.

He and 40 other people representing 11 states are in Charleston this weekend for the East Coast Greenway Alliance's biannual summit, in which they will get updates on projects along the corridor and especially in South Carolina.

Markatos-Soriano said he was amazed to see the number of cyclists, runners and walkers in Charleston and that the bridge improvement will be an overdue link between the eight-mile-long West Ashley Greenway and a downtown filled with cyclists.

Charleston City Councilman Mike Seekings vowed to make sure it happens and anticipated a ribbon cutting in the early summer of 2015. He recalled running for council five years ago on a single issue - to convert a car lane to a bike and pedestrian lane on the bridge.

"People looked at me and said it's a great idea but you're crazy. You will never get elected running two wheels against four," said Seekings. "Here we are five years later, and although it isn't done yet, I can tell you the idea is no longer crazy."

Some, however, are critical of the idea for taking away a lane, inbound from West Ashley to downtown, for non-motorized traffic. They cite current and anticipated traffic congestion.

The East Coast Greenway Alliance will be getting updates on progress on the route, of which 850 miles is completed, on Saturday at the Charleston Maritime Center.

Niles Barnes, the alliance's South Atlantic coordinator, said the vision of the 23-year-old nonprofit is to provide "connected, safe, multi-use trails that are accessible for all abilities and ages to bike and walk to work and school and for recreation.

"Greenway trails have many, many benefits in the communities where they are located. They can be gateways to a healthy lifestyle. They are good for the environment. The more people walking and biking . And they are also good for the economy."

Reach David Quick at 937-5516.