Food, toys, supplies, and perhaps someday a dog wash

When the first Whole Pets opened in central Boulder in 2001, the natural pet food and supplies store found a fitting neighbor in Whole Foods.

Whole Foods' store off 28th and Pearl streets remains the Austin, Texas-based natural foods grocer's flagship store in the region, and there was plenty of clientele cross-over for the locally owned Whole Pets.

So when Whole Pets recently moved forward on a second location, the Boulder-based retailer stuck with what worked.

Whole Pets last week opened a store at the Whole Foods-anchored Basemar Shopping Center, off Broadway and Baseline Road.

"I always said that Whole Pets is Whole Foods for pets," said Carol Kuzdek, Whole Pets founder. "The one misconception is that we're affiliated — we're independently owned and operated since 2001 — but I don't see it as a negative. I think they do a great job."

At 1,000 square feet, the Basemar Whole Pets doesn't have the room yet for a dog wash, but carries a similar assortment of food, toys and supplies, said Kuzdek, who partnered on the Basemar store with Lleane Grimditch .

"Honestly, it's just a smaller version of our Pearl Street store," she said, noting the 3,600-square-foot store at 2835 Pearl St. "We really haven't done anything different. If there's a chance for us to expand, then we'll expand and put in a dog wash."

The new store's arrival came on the heels of Whole Pets shedding its Broomfield location. Kuzdek sold the location to a local resident who converted the shop at 8855 W. 116th Circle to an Urban Dogg holistic pet supply store.

"I really wanted to concentrate on Boulder," Kuzdek said. "It made sense because we really wanted to concentrate on south Boulder, and Broomfield was a little far away to be convenient."

The Broomfield location opened in 2011.

"I feel like south Boulder, it's almost a city unto its own," she said. "I think people down there are looking for more retail to become available to them. I think there's a whole new crop of animal guardians down there that this would be a lot more convenient for them to come to."

Whole Pets' expansion is occurring at a time when the natural pet food industry is booming. In recent years, sales in the roughly $2 billion industry saw double-digit percentage gains.

Market research firm Packaged Facts has estimated that the natural pet products industry could record $9.4 billion in sales in 2017.

After seeing flat sales during the recession, Whole Pets has seen a return in spending in recent years, Kuzdek said.

"We're a utilitarian store," she said. "It's like grocery, you still have to feed your pets," she said.

Contact Camera Business Writer Alicia Wallace at 303-473-1332 or wallacea@dailycamera.com