Mountain View High School's theater department to present 'Shrek' Feb. 28-March 1, March7-8

Performers from Mountain View High School's upcoming production of "Shrek the Musical" sing and dance together during a rehearsal Wednesday at MVHS. ( Steve Stoner )

Mountain View High School's performance of "Shrek The Musical" focuses the story, but also on the stage set.

"I wanted the students to experience fine storytelling," said Phil Forman, music director and producer of the show, adding that he likes the challenge of using technology in the stage design, lighting and costumes.

Caught in the Act Productions and Mountain View are presenting "Shrek The Musical" Feb. 28-March 1 and March 7-8. The musical is based on the film story of how an ogre, and not a handsome prince, shows up to rescue a feisty princess in a world of fairy tale misfits that includes an extremely chatty donkey.

"The ogre has the natural feelings we have," Forman said. "The best part of acting is when you find connections between fantasy and real human emotion."

If You Go What: "Shrek The Musical." When: 7 p.m. Friday, Feb. 28, and Friday, March 7; 2 p.m. and 7 p.m. Saturday, March 1, and Saturday, March 8. Where: Sue E. Wall Auditorium, Mountain View High School, 3500 Mountain Lion Drive. Admission: Adults: $12 pre-sale, $15 at the door; students and seniors, $10 pre-sale, $12 at the door; children, $8 pre-sale and $10 at the door. To purchase: Pre-sale tickets, go to showtix4u.com, or call the box office at 613-7804.

The original Broadway musical cost millions to produce and is the most expensive production so far to hit New York City's professional theater, Forman said.

Advertisement

Mountain View is one of five high schools in Colorado that signed up to do the show after its public release last summer, he said.

A majority of the musical's expense can be attributed to the integrated technology of the sets and the costumes, Forman said.

Most of the stage set is automated and includes pieces from the Midtown Arts Center in Fort Collins. A show deck elevates the stage with wires that maneuver the set pieces running underneath the set floor.

"We have never automated a stage before," Forman said. "It's pretty complex, because we have scenes from a swamp to the inside of a castle. The machinery allows us to do that seamlessly. ... It's magic before your eyes."

Student Brennan King engineered a motorized winch to move the set pieces that will work in addition to a hand-crank winch.

"There are so many transitions in the show, I didn't want students moving the pieces," Forman said. "Everything is large and heavy and done by machinery."

A few of the special effects include:

Pinocchio's growing nose operates through a pneumatic device, so that when he lies, a push of the button makes his nose grow through air pressure, Forman said.

The 30-foot dragon, a puppet operated by four students, flaps its wings, breathes smoke and moves its eyes.

Traditional stage lighting is integrated with projections of video and still images, a form of painting with light.

The cast has 38 students, plus another 24 students in the pit orchestra, which will be playing parodies of 30 different musicals and a variety of styles form jazz to Broadway.

Scott Sipes, 16, will be playing Shrek. Princess Fiona's role will be double cast with Tessa McQueen and Hannah Reed. Nick Petersen is playing Lord Farquaad and Arturo Lopez, Donkey.

"This is probably the best cast I've worked with," Forman said. "They are a huge family. They are constantly striving to do their best. They are really passionate about bringing the show to life."

Shelley Widhalm can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 531, or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @ShelleyWidhalm. Read her blog: shelleywidhalm.wordpress.com.