If you’re uninsured and want individual health coverage starting on Jan. 1, you’re mostly out of time, if you want to buy on the government marketplaces. Some individual plans are still available outside the marketplaces, however, with late-December enrollment deadlines, provided you don’t want financial help with your premiums.

More than three dozen states have at least one insurer offering individual plans outside the government exchanges, according to the online insurance brokerage eHealth.com. Insurers in some states are offering enrollment deadlines as late as Dec. 31, for coverage starting Jan. 1. (They include Alaska, Colorado, Idaho, Minnesota, Montana, Nevada, New Jersey, North Dakota, Oregon, Utah, Washington, and Wyoming, eHealth says.)

The catch is that because the plans aren’t offered through the marketplaces, they aren’t eligible for financial help, like tax credits to reduce your premium. So, if you make less than 400 percent of the federal poverty level — $46,680 for a single person in 2015 — you’ll probably find a better deal on Healthcare.gov or one of the state-based exchanges. (With a few exceptions, since some states that have extended their marketplace deadlines, the earliest marketplace coverage can begin now is Feb. 1).

If your income is much higher than the federal limit, however, you may want to compare plans off the exchange to see if one meets your needs. The plans have to meet the requirements of the Affordable Care Act, so they can’t exclude people who are already sick and must offer essential benefits, including preventive care. They may differ, however, in details like doctor availability, since some on-marketplace plans may have narrower provider networks in order to hold down premiums. “One big issue, certainly, has been network design,” said Elizabeth Carpenter, a director at the consultant Avalere Health.

Carrie McLean, eHealth’s director of customer care, noted that availability of “platinum” level plans, the most costly level of marketplace plans, may vary by state. Washington State, for instance, didn’t offer any platinum plans on its exchange this year. So if you wanted such a plan, you’d have to shop off exchange in that state, she said. (A spokeswoman for Washington’s exchange said that platinum plans were being offered in 12 counties for 2015 by the insurer BridgeSpan.)

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Also, Ms. McLean noted, consumers who have a history with a specific insurer and prefer to stick with that company may also want to shop off exchange in some states. In California, she said, the insurer Cigna isn’t participating in Covered California, the state-run marketplace.

Even so, there are good reasons for shopping on the marketplaces. If your income is close to the financial help cutoff, or if it fluctuates throughout the year, you probably should stick to marketplace plans, said Karen Pollitz, a senior fellow with the Kaiser Family Foundation.

That’s because if your income drops, you could become eligible for a “special” enrollment period and begin receiving the premium tax credit midyear, said Ms. Pollitz — provided you were already enrolled in a qualified marketplace plan.

Also, “plan choices and trade-offs in premiums and deductibles are likely much easier to see on the marketplace websites,” said Sara Collins, a health insurance expert with the Commonwealth Fund.

Here are some questions about non-marketplace individual coverage:

■ How can I find companies that offer non-marketplace coverage in my state?

Healthcare.gov, the federal marketplace, also offers a “plan finder” tool that lists A.C.A.-compliant plans offered outside of the exchanges.

■ What if I find a plan that appears much cheaper than a comparable one on the marketplaces?

Ms. Pollitz advises that you should make sure the plan is actually A.C.A. compliant. There are still plans available off the marketplace that don’t comply — but if you buy one, you won’t meet the mandate to have coverage, and could be subject to penalties.

■ What is the penalty for not having health insurance in 2015?

The fee for a single person rises to the higher of $325 or 2 percent of income (up from $95 or 1 percent of income in 2014).