‘Public education on that period of history is abysmal … because no one wants to talk about it,’ he says.

He said his mission is to educate the public because April is Confederate History Month. He has relatives, including his great-grandfather, who fought for the Confederacy.

“The public education on that period of history is really abysmal and continues to get worse because no one wants to talk about it,” said Little.

But the 66-year-old retired Texas National Guard colonel has plenty to say.

One sunny morning this week, he stood outside the Georgetown courthouse holding a Confederate flag and chatting with Anne Maduzia, a native Texan now studying in London who was in town visiting her brother. “Williamson County voted against secession,” he said.

+ Ralph Barrera Longtime friends, from left, Arlene Smith, Callie Wood and Laurie Peek-Norene, stop to chat about history with retired Col. Shelby Little ... read more Ralph Barrera ×

When the state of Texas decided to secede, however, the county sent troops — including a company called the Williamson County Grays — to fight for the Confederacy, Little said. He told Maduzia that Texas troops were more likely to be killed by Indians than Yankees because they were sent to fight in New Mexico and Arizona.

“That surprises me,” said Maduzia. She said she stopped to talk to Little because “he looks like Robert E. Lee holding a flag.”

Laurie Norene from near Sacramento, Calif., also stopped by to chat and get a picture taken with Little and two of her friends. “How can you stand wearing that wool suit?” she asked Little.

+ Ralph Barrera During the month of April, Shelby Little puts on a Confederate soldier uniform and stands by the Confederate memorial statue outside ... read more Ralph Barrera ×

“You get used to it,” said Little. “I spent a year in Saudi Arabia.”

Little said he has used his experience as a tank commander and training officer in the Texas National Guard to teach officers in Saudi Arabia and in African countries how to conduct peacekeeping missions. It’s part of his work for a company in the U.S. Department of State’s program called Africa Contingency Operations Training and Assistance, he said.

Most people are pleasant when they talk to him when he is in a Confederate uniform in front of the courthouse, Little said, but some aren’t. “I got called a Nazi yesterday by a man walking by with his dogs,” he said.

Little said many of the people who disagree with what he’s doing just say the word “slavery.” He said he doesn’t condone slavery and that none of his relatives who fought in the Confederacy owned any slaves.

“We aren’t just all ignorant rednecks,” said Little, who said he is part Chickasaw Indian.

What’s important for people to know, he said, is that many of the Confederate soldiers who returned to Williamson County from the war helped build up the area.

The founder of Southwestern University in Georgetown, Francis Asbury Mood, was in the Confederacy, Little said.

Little doesn’t need official permission to stand by the statue in his uniform because he is on public property, said Connie Watson, a county spokeswoman.

The statue — built in 1916 by the United Daughters of the Confederacy — has been controversial. The Unitarian Universalist Church in Georgetown started a petition last fall to remove it, saying it was an ugly reminder of slavery and segregation. There also was a petition started in support of keeping the statue.

The Commissioners Court has not discussed the issue, Watson said. Any changes to the courthouse lawn and items such as statues would require the approval of the Texas Historical Commission, she said.

About 100 people also protested in January against a Civil War-era ball at the courthouse as a fundraiser for the Williamson Museum, saying it was racist. Museum officials said the dance was held to help promote its Civil War exhibit.