WASHINGTON — Rep. Joaquin Castro, D-San Antonio, predicted Tuesday that neither Gov. Rick Perry nor Sen. Ted Cruz can win the presidency in 2016, calling them both too divisive to garner broad support.

“When you get to the general election, people don’t generally want either an angry person or a very harsh, shrill, partisan person,” Castro said about Perry’s prospects. “They want somebody … whose aim at least is to bring people together.”

Castro — in a rare joint appearance with twin brother Julián Castro, the Housing and Urban Development Secretary, at a Politico event titled “Lessons from Leaders” — said Cruz would face a similar hurdle. The senator needs to become a “true leader,” he said, pointing to Cruz’s crusade to defund Obamacare last fall as a time when Cruz lost support even among his own party.

Julián Castro has been mentioned as a potential running mate for Democrat Hillary Clinton, and the congressman said his brother has “a lot of options” in the future.

The congressman endorsed Clinton for president in a September fundraising email. The housing secretary didn’t join the endorsement.

The brothers didn’t only talk politics on Tuesday. They joked about their sibling rivalry growing up — and their similar looks. In high school, they switched places one time, when there was a substitute teacher.

“He always says the way to tell us apart is that I’m a minute uglier than he is,” Julián Castro said of his twin.

Both Castro brothers are considered rising Democratic stars in Texas. In 2012, Julián Castro delivered the keynote address at the party’s national convention.

On Tuesday, they each noted the GOP’s sweeping gains in the 2014 midterm elections, in which the party won control of the Senate and padded its House majority. Six Texas Republicans will hold committee chairmanships in the House.

Joaquin Castro said that his Republican colleagues are enjoying their power, acknowledging “they’re in very influential positions.” He added that Texas Republicans have promoted a narrative of job creation in the state but said the reality is less rosy.

His brother agreed, arguing that Texas lacks a “long-term view of success.”

“We’ve moved into an era where brain power is the new currency of success in the 21st century,” Julián Castro said. “And Texas has not necessarily moved along at the rate that it should.”

The housing secretary also spoke highly of his brother’s political prospects, saying that Joaquin Castro will be well-positioned to hold statewide office in Texas if he wants to. The congressman similarly predicted Julián Castro’s future is bright, saying “everybody knows I’m his biggest supporter.”

The brothers also poked fun at how infrequently they see each other, though they both work in Washington. Joaquin Castro said Congress has had so few work days that they’re rarely in the city together.

“I’m the one in D.C. with the real job,” Julián Castro joked.