Orpheus Music Club Young Artists perform at First Friday

From left; Bryony Trump, a senior at Sterling High School, and Maddy Vogel and Makayla Swingle, seniors at Fleming High School, were the recipients of the 2015 Milligan Music Award at the First Friday @ First Presbyterian concert Friday. ( Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate )

Click photo to enlarge «

1

2

3

4

5

» Bryony Trump performs "Serenade" during the First Friday @ First Presbyterian concert. (Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

STERLING — Three area high school students were recognized for their musical talent Friday. Makayla Swingle and Maddy Vogel, seniors at Fleming High School, and Bryony Trump, a senior at Sterling High School, received the 2015 Milligan Music Award at the First Friday @ First Presbyterian concert.

The award was presented by Orpheus Music Club members Elsie Fetzer, Iris Lambert, Jean Williamson, Audrey Carey and Annette Lambrecht. Fetzer noted they had a very difficult time selecting this year's recipient, which is why they chose three.

Swingle, Vogel and Trump are all lifelong performers.

Swingle, a flutist, is the daughter of Coletee and Russ Swingle. Her teachers are Sarah Vogel and Lee Lipstrew.

Makayla Swingle performs "Pan: Pastorale" First Friday @ First Presbyterian concert. (Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

Maddy Vogel, a vocalist and guitar player who also writes music, is the daughter of Kurt and Hope Vogel. Sarah Vogel and Lippstrew are her teachers.

Trump, a vocalist, clarinet player and actor, is the daughter of Cullen and Jeneen Trump. She is the voice student of Don Johnson and the instrumental student of Lee Lippstrew, Sarah Vogel and Mary Smith.

The Milligan Music Award is presented to an outstanding graduating senior who plans to continue music.

This award was established by the Orpheus Music Club in honor of Johnnie Milligan (1876-1960), who taught piano in Sterling for many years. She came to Sterling with her husband, the Rev. Dr. Martin Gatewood Milligan (1878-1924), who pastored First Presbyterian Church from 1915 to 1920. The present building was constructed during his tenure.

Advertisement

Johnnie began teaching around 1916, and in 1956 she wrote to the University of Colorado School of Music to ask if they had a piano major who would come to Sterling to take over her piano studio, as she was planning on retiring. The student who responded was Eugene Evans, an Ohio native, who not only came to teach Milligan's students, but who also bought her grand piano, which can be seen in her photo downstairs in Milligan Hall, at the church. The piano still resides in Evans' studio, where he has been teaching continuously for 58 years.

Maddy Vogel performs "Hallelujah" during the First Friday @ First Presbyterian concert. (Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

In Orpheus records, the earliest reference to the Milligan Award is 1954.

The award is given once a year to a deserving high school senior who plans to make a career in music. Several of the past winners have returned to Sterling to teach music, both in public schools and privately.

Some of Milligan's granddaughters have come to present the award over the past year fives. They were unable to be at Friday's event, but they did send greetings and best wishes to the students who performed at the concert.

In addition to Swingle, Vogel and Trump, other performers at Friday's concert included vocalist Scott Glissmann, pianist Ella Norman, vocalist and guitarist Alyssa Cheever and vocalist Donnie Wright.

First Friday @ First Presbyterian is an ongoing series of musical performances showcasing the talents of local artists, with performances on the first Friday of every month, from 12:05 to 12:35 p.m. The next concert will be on Friday, April 3 (Good Friday), featuring tenor Jim Yahn, who will perform Songs of the Cross.

Callie Jones: 970-526-9286, cjones@journal-advocate.com