Website For details about other events, visit www.slamminfamine.com or www.fmsc.org/volunteer.

Members of the Fort Collins-based 4-H Club Happy Go Lucky took turns scooping a vitamin mix, dehydrated vegetables, soy and rice into plastic bags through a funnel on Sunday at The Ranch.

Andrew Hufford, 5, held the bag sealer down with all his might to seal a bag of food.

Corben Macy, 9, tossed bags as fast as he could into a box to get it ready for shipment.

Families in hairnets like the Kasteins of Fort Collins and Huffords of Johnstown stationed themselves at various stages of the assembly line at The Ranch on Sunday to put together bags of food that cost about $1.36 each and feed about six children in developing nations.

The Sunday shift was the last of eight shifts staffed by over 2,800 volunteers this weekend who packaged around 640,000 meals to send to northern Haiti through a "NoCo is Slammin' Famine" event partnered with Feed My Starving Children.

The nonprofit organization sends out millions of boxes of food a year — it will send out 270 million this year — to countries in need through its permanent locations in Illinois, Minnesota and Arizona, and through MealPack events around the country.

Advertisement

Almost a year ago that Brian Zonnefeld and Eric Dowdy of Fort Collins visited a MealPack event in Denver, watched their two 13-year-old sons get bustled off by a woman in a hairnet to work a shift, and decided that they wanted to contribute to the eradication of hunger in developing nations by starting their own MealPack event in Northern Colorado.

They hoped to get enough volunteers to pack 100,000 meals bound for northern Haiti, but the concept exploded. The event exceeded all expectations.

"This vision we have is not about us, or an individual church," said Eric Dowdy, co-organizer. "It's about the broader faith-based community coming together as well as Northern Colorado to benefit people and save lives. It's something we want to do annually."

Brian Zonnefeld added that this is an easy way for people who want to volunteer somewhere but can't go to Haiti.

"The food is going into areas where there isn't a sustainable food source, or areas like Sierra Leone where people are dead or sick and can't produce food," Dowdy said. "Once you get starvation off the books in these areas, it frees the mission organizations over there to do what they need to do."

He added that a near-starving child who is given this food for a month can be brought back to nominal health.

Dowdy said children as young as 6 wore hairnets and helped scoop food and seal bags this weekend.

Annie Hufford, 6, stood between her mom, Kim Hufford of Johnstown, and Julia Cherry of Loveland, on a platform to reach the ingredients.

"I'm doing veggies," she said, while brandishing a ladle to scoop dehydrated onions, carrots and potatoes into a bag. "It's to help people that don't have food."

She added proudly, "We've already had eight boxes!" Every time a table completed a box of packaged food, they screamed and rang a cowbell, and a runner came to pick up the box.

"They call them manna rice packs," said Andrea Kastein of Fort Collins about the food packages. "It's been scientifically researched so it has so much nutrition packed into it. You just add water to them."

Her daughter Erin was holding bags under a funnel and her son Caleb was helping to scoop a vitamin powder.

"It's fun. Other kids who don't have enough food can get enough food," said Ella Macy, 7.

Five-year-old Andrew Hufford helped his dad, Brian Hufford, by pushing down on a sealer to close each bag.

"Want to show how we quality check?" Brian Hufford asked and pretended to dump the bag over Andrew's head while the youngster giggled.

Feed My Starving Children supplied the food, bags, tables and other tools, and The Ranch donated space at the McKee 4-H Building.

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/jessicabenes.