Photo

Miosotis Munoz stood outside the main entrance to Montefiore Medical Center in New York on Tuesday, calling out to the throng of patients, hospital workers and other passers-by with all the enthusiasm of a carnival barker. But on this day, Ms. Munoz was selling health care, not hotcakes.

“Do you want to learn more about affordable health care?” she asked, in English and Spanish, near a promotional sign for New York’s health insurance marketplace that read “Today’s the Day.”

Ms. Munoz, a community relations manager, was helping to staff an informational booth outside the hospital on Tuesday as part of Montefiore’s extensive efforts at helping patients and other community members enroll in insurance under the new health care law.

Hospital administrators had initially wondered how many people would show up, but by noon on Tuesday, they had their answer: the booth was bustling. The questions were as diverse as the crowd that approached the tables — some were nurses and other hospital workers, asking for information for friends and neighbors. Others were regulars at Montefiore’s health clinics who were hoping to get more comprehensive coverage. Still others had been researching their options online and wanted to put their questions to a real person.

Beatriz Nunez was bringing her mother, who receives Medicaid and Medicare, to the hospital for X-rays but stopped at the booth to pick up information for herself. Ms. Nunez, who is 25, works as a secretary but said her boss did not pay for health insurance. She said she had applied for Medicaid in the past but was told she made too much. Buying private insurance was too expensive, she said.

“I spoke with my doctor a while back and he said, ‘wait for Obamacare to kick in,'” she said. “The sooner I can apply, the better.”

Michael Echevarria, 33, works in the hospital gift shop — which is run by an outside entity — and said he could not afford the health insurance that his employer offered. He was curious about his options and confused by the onslaught of news coverage in recent days. “I’ve heard a lot of different things — we have to have it, we don’t have to have it, the government is shutting down,” he said.

Like Ms. Nunez, Mr. Echevarria said he was interested in buying health insurance and had been told previously he did not qualify for Medicaid. He said doctors had warned him he was prone to diabetes and had kidney troubles, but those conditions have largely gone untreated. He sometimes visits a free health clinic intended for homeless people to get care, he said. Having health coverage would be a relief, he said, but he’s still not sure he can afford it. “I’ve got to do the math,” he said.