Democratic give on tax extenders?

With help from Toby Eckert

AS THE EXTENDERS TURN: Hey, look at that — that looked like a little optimism on Thursday in the soap opera that is negotiations over a tax extenders deal that could end up costing some $800 billion over a decade.

Story Continued Below

Sen. Ron Wyden, the top Democrat on the Finance Committee, certainly sounded like someone who wanted to shake hands on a big deal, after Senate Democrats met to discuss end of the year opportunities. “There is a growing appetite to find a substantial and balanced deal,” Wyden said. Some aides were saying there was still a decent shot at the larger agreement, and remaining interest from both parties. Perhaps one sign that there’s something to that: There hasn’t been a ton of sniping, anonymous or not, from either Republicans or Democrats over how negotiations are going — certainly compared with talks over the omnibus spending bill.

MOVING INTO NEXT WEEK: Democrats said for much of this week that they wanted to index to inflation the Child Tax Credit, one of the refundable tax credits for families that they want to make permanent in an extenders deal. Sen. Elizabeth Warren, a hero among progressives, stressed that in no uncertain terms on Thursday: “Indexing will ensure that the CTC continues to work for families in the future and gives low-wage parents the same purchasing power that others get.” http://politico.pro/1HJEBnX

But while that remains the Democrats’ preference, aides and lobbyists said Thursday that it looked increasingly like Senate Democrats would be willing to back off the indexing demand, as they seek to get expansions of the child credit and Earned Income Tax Credit locked in for good. “The indexing of the credit is a very important priority,” said Sen. Ben Cardin, a Finance member. “But it's relative to what size package comes out and what else is in this package.”

Still, House Democrats might not be so willing to drop the indexing demand, and the issue of how to deal with improper payments for the EITC and child credit remains a key point of contention for the two parties. Rep. Sander Levin, the top Democrat on the House Ways and Means Committee, noted that negotiations over the omnibus are overshadowing the talks on tax breaks.

So there remain plenty of reasons to think this won’t come together next week, when Congress comes back for what lawmakers hope are their final few days in the Capitol in 2015.

AND ANOTHER WEEK IS ALMOST IN THE BOOKS. Rest up this weekend because next week looks like a bruiser. Especially if Congress decides to take it all into next weekend. Either way, we’re here for tips, corrections, ideas — you name it. Email: bbecker@politico.com, teckert@politico.com,bfaler@politico.com and kodonnell@politico.com. Twitter: @berniebecker3, @tobyeckert, @brian_faler, @katyodonnell_ , @POLITICOPro and @Morning_Tax.

LOOK AT THAT: Both the House and the Senate passed the five-year highway bill on Thursday, capping off a genuine bipartisan victory and allowing our Pro Transpo team to catch up on some sleep. Heather Caygle’s story at the end: http://politico.pro/1YMnAOf

CADILLAC TAX TRUCKED OVER: As it turns out, nine out of 10 senators recommend scrapping the Affordable Care Act’s tax on pricy employer-sponsored insurance plans. The 90-10 vote, taken as part of the Senate’s broader reconciliation bill to gut the health care law, is the first ever on repealing the controversial tax.

There’s no chance for the underlying bill to become law given President Barack Obama’s promise of a veto. But the overwhelming vote total underscored just how bipartisan the opposition to the Cadillac tax is, with Republicans generally disliking taxes and Obamacare, and Democrats worried about the tax’s impact on their supporters in organized labor.

WHAT’S NEXT?: The Cadillac tax, scheduled to take effect in 2018, still has backing from the Obama administration, and economists from across the ideological spectrum. A slew of congressional Democrats want to at least delay the tax’s implementation as part of a massive extenders deal. And as our Brian Faler reported this week, there’s reason to believe that the White House wouldn’t let its support of the Cadillac tax get in the way of a big extenders deal.

Still, congressional Democrats’ decision to take aim at the Cadillac tax in an extenders deal marks something of a shift for them. Many Democrats never supported the tax in the first place, but have always wanted to replace the roughly $87 billion in revenue it provides for the ACA. But there hasn’t been much talk of offsetting the cost of the Cadillac tax — or any of the taxes — in a potential massive extenders deal.

Rep. Joe Courtney, a Connecticut Democrat sponsoring a Cadillac tax repeal bill, told Morning Tax on Thursday that Democrats made a mistake in making the case that pay-fors in the health care law needed to be replaced, noting that there are plenty of other areas in the federal government financed with deficit spending. Courtney pointed to the deal this year to end the so-called doc fix in Medicare, which wasn’t all paid for. “The notion that there’s this total fidelity to paying for every penny of that measure or any other tax extender, I think, is very overblown,” Courtney said.

Of course, one of Democrats’ major selling points for the Affordable Care Act is that it reduces the federal debt over the long term.

** A message from The Broad Tax Extenders Coalition: Failure to pass tax extenders would hurt families, farmers, charitable organizations and businesses. Permanent and multiyear tax extenders will support jobs, generate new investment and innovation, and boost charitable giving. Learn about at: www.consensusisclear.org **

RECONCILIATION WRAP-UP: The Senate passed the measure to repeal major parts of the health care law 52-47, with Susan Collins and Mark Kirk the only Republicans to defect. Read Pro Health Care’s Jennifer Haberkorn here: http://politico.pro/1TCVTED

Other tax votes of note in Thursday’s vote-a-rama: A proposal from Democrat Sherrod Brown that would’ve targeted inversions to help pay for Medicaid expansion went down on a largely party-line vote. Senate Republicans voted down a proposed credit from Democrat Bob Casey that would’ve established a new tax credit for working married couples with children. And a proposal from Republican Dan Coats to extend a deduction of medical expenses for seniors barely got the required 60 votes. Much more here in Katy O’Donnell’s story about the political ramifications of Thursday’s marathon votes: http://politico.pro/1N5WY36

RYAN ON TAX REFORM: Perhaps this isn’t surprising for someone who called being House Ways and Means chairman a dream job, but Speaker Paul Ryan singled out tax reform as one of the GOP’s top priorities should they get a mandate at the polls in 2016. From Ryan’s first major speech as speaker: “We want a tax code that rewards good work instead of good connections. When people know they will keep more of their hard-earned money, they will work more, save more, invest more — and create more jobs for all of us.” Brian’s take: http://politico.pro/1LRtnJ7

GOOD NEWS, BAD NEWS: The IRS’s Criminal Investigation unit initiated 3,853 cases in fiscal year 2015, with targets ranging from top FIFA officials in Europe to the founder of Happy’s Pizza in Detroit, the agency reported Thursday. However, the number of cases continued to tumble — from 4,297 in FY2014 and 5,314 in FY2013 — along with the number of agents. “[T]he story that the report tells this year is that fewer agents do mean fewer cases,” said Richard Weber, the chief of CI. “I’m extremely proud of all that we accomplished in spite of our budget challenges, but the inability to hire is really taking a toll.” Congressional Republicans, however, have shown little sympathy for the agency they love to hate, and are preparing to cut its budget again. Here’s the report: http://bit.ly/1NK32UR

Not to be ignored, the Justice Department reported that it collected a cool $350 million in penalties from dozens of Swiss banks that reached non-prosecution agreements with the department in FY2015. A Justice spokeswoman added that there were 39 Swiss banks in all that agreed to a penalty during fiscal 2015. http://1.usa.gov/1TnZuFS

SPEAKING OF THE IRS’S BUDGET: The agency told its watchdog, for a report released Thursday, that its budget situation left it unable to give identity theft victims a single employee to contact for their case. IRS chief John Koskinen has long said that battling refund fraud is one of the agency’s top challenges. But bipartisan congressional efforts to help the IRS have gotten bogged down over the question of whether to allow the agency more power to regulate paid preparers.

The Treasury inspector general for tax administration’s report found that more than one in three victims of tax fraud didn’t get required case status letters from the IRS or didn’t get the letter on time. http://1.usa.gov/1O6hZL2

CONDOLENCES TO SAM JOHNSON: The veteran Republican on the House Ways and Means Committee lost his wife of 65 years, Shirley, on Thursday. Sam Johnson called Shirley Johnson, who was 85, “the love of my life and my best friend.” Tributes to Shirley Johnson, who waited while her husband was a captive in Vietnam for seven years, at the Dallas Morning News: http://bit.ly/1MZVKst

ZUCKERBERG RESPONDS: Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s founder, took to — what else? — Facebook to respond to news stories that noted he would get some tax benefits by setting up a regular limited liability company instead of a foundation to follow through on his vow to give tens of billions of dollars to philanthropy. “By using an LLC instead of a traditional foundation, we receive no tax benefit from transferring our shares to the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative, but we gain flexibility to execute our mission more effectively,” Zuckerberg wrote. http://politico.pro/1NKwI43

INTERNATIONAL NEWS —

WE’RE NO. 31!: When it comes how much it taxes, the U.S. actually fares pretty well compared with other industrialized nations. America ranks near the bottom — 31st out of 34 among Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development countries — in tax to GDP ratio, one way to examine a country’s tax burden. The U.S., according to the OECD’s latest data release, has a tax to GDP ratio of just over 25 percent, down from 28 percent at the start of this century. The entire OECD has stayed pretty level on that score, moving from 34.2 percent in 2000 to 34.4 percent in 2015.

Of course, roughly three-quarters of OECD countries are in Europe, and Republicans who complain that the federal government needs to lessen the burden on taxpayers have long said that Europe shouldn’t be the blueprint for tax policy and government size. (Denmark, for instance, came in first on the OECD list, crossing the 50 percent mark on tax to GDP.)

But you can also note that lawmakers like Ryan have insisted that they’d like to have some of the qualities of other OECD countries’ tax systems here in the U.S. The speaker, for example, likes to point to Canada’s 15 percent corporate rate, less than half the 35 percent statutory rate here. But Canada’s 30.5 percent tax to GDP ratio, 23rd among the OECD, is actually higher than America’s. More from the OECD here: http://bit.ly/1lz5Nvh. And Katy’s take: http://politico.pro/1O6HfAN

QUICK LINK

— What’s the price of a carbon tax? http://on.wsj.com/1m0okBf

** A message from The Broad Tax Extenders Coalition: Failure to pass tax extenders would hurt families, farmers, charitable organizations and businesses.

Over 2,000 nonprofits, charitable organizations, businesses and associations agree: Permanent and multiyear tax extenders will support jobs, generate new investment and innovation, and boost charitable giving.

Find the facts at www.consensusisclear.org **