Image via everything possible / Shutterstock

Big data has a lot to offer people involved and healthcare and the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) is taking steps to apply it to its work. The agency has created a new office of enterprise data and analysis and hired its first chief data officer to run it. The idea is to turn all of the massive amounts of information collected into clear, useful decisions on how CMS can improve patient care. Since CMS has expanded its scope of responsibility with the Affordable Care Act and other programs, finding a way to funnel the information it takes in to clear decisions is vital not only for the agency but stakeholders like hospitals and medical researchers as well.

“It’s clear how much data transparency will help the country improve outcomes, control costs and aid consumer decision making," said CMS principal deputy administrator Andy Slavitt in a statement. "This appointment signals to the industry that there is no turning back from the health care data agenda. Niall Brennan will help make sure CMS leads the way.

The new office will be run by Niall Brennan, who previously ran the office of enterprise management. It's not an entirely new proposition for CMS although its in many ways the biggest step the agency has taken. It uses big data analysis to try to and get ahead of fraud and keep an eye on hospital admissions. It's also created an online data center for use by researchers looking to improve healthcare. And of course the numbers are public information and the agency has published data on how hospitals and doctors are used by people around the country. That kind of data transparency is really important to the agency as it works to improve the country's health system for healthier outcomes. It ensures that there's no underhandedness and that people can trust the system as it has nothing to hide.

"Our commitment to transparency is matched by our commitment to keeping personal information safeguarded. We can't expect to advance health outcomes unless we also ensure that our policies and practices around data privacy are leading the way," Slavitt said. "We look forward to building on the success of recent releases, providing a clearer picture of the health care delivery system."