Many employers are in the final stages of designing their 2016 health benefit programs, contribution strategies, vendor terms, and employee communications.

To assist in this effort, Mercer has recently published the top 10 compliance-related issues with respect to the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) and other health benefit regulations employers should address in planning for the upcoming year.

At the top of the list are refining the ACA employer shared-responsibility (ESR) strategy and getting ready for ESR reporting. Employers should ensure that their intended goal of avoiding or paying ESR assessments for 2016 coverage is supported by coverage offers, administrative and recordkeeping processes, and benefit documents.

Judy Bauserman, interim leader of the Washington Resource Group and partner at Mercer in Washington, D.C., notes that 2015 was the first year employers were required to offer coverage meeting certain requirements for employees or to pay assessments. “The rules are complex and the definition of full-time employee is not intuitive, so employers have had a challenge determining who full-time employees are,” she tells PLANSPONSOR. “The law requires coverage of a certain percent of the employee population and employers have had to learn how to determine that and make sure changes in the employee population will not trip them up.” Bauserman says employers should have figured most of this out for 2015, but many employers will still be refining strategies in 2016.

Bauserman adds that reports are due for the first time in the beginning of 2016 to both the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and employees related to health coverage in 2015. Employers will need to arrange data sources, systems, and administrative processes to collect all information about enrollees with minimum essential coverage (MEC), full-time employees, and coverage offers needed for reporting. They should also create a process for correcting any erroneous IRS filings and personal statements.

“The reporting is complicated and electronic filing is required,” she says. “Employers have to figure out how to develop software themselves or what vendors can do this for them. Some employers are well on their way and many have outsourced, but what providers are developing and what employers are expecting don’t always align properly.”

Bauserman says these first two items have been so all-consuming for employers this year, but there are many other issues related to health benefits on which to focus.