SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

During a Tuesday appearance before the Hispanic Chamber of Commerce, Ohio governor and Republican presidential candidate John Kasich offered to buy Bibles for those of us who don’t agree with his decision to increase the welfare state. Quite famously, Governor Kasich agreed to ObamaCare’s Medicaid expansion in Ohio. This is his latest defense:

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

—



—

Look at Medicaid expansion. Do you know how many people are yelling at me? I go out to events where people yell at me. You know what I tell ’em? … I say, there’s a book. It’s got a new part and an old part; they put it together, it’s a remarkable book. If you don’t have one, I’ll buy you one. It talks about how we treat the poor. Sometimes you just have to lead.

Apparently, ObamaCare critics have missed that part in the Bible where Jesus calls on us to expand an already-deadly federal welfare state that destroys the human spirit, breaks up the family, and creates generational dependence.

I don’t mean to argue with Brother Kasich, but I must have missed the part where the Christian thing to do is to use the punitive power of The State to force your personal Christian values on others.

This is not the first time Kasich’s lorded his superior Christianity over the rest of us selfish sinners. He made this argument back in 2013:

Kasich continued: “I had a conversation with one of the members of the legislature the other day. I said, ‘I respect the fact that you believe in small government. I do, too. I also know that you’re a person of faith.

‘Now, when you die and get to the meeting with St. Peter, he’s probably not going to ask you much about what you did about keeping government small. But he is going to ask you what you did for the poor. You better have a good answer.’ ”

According to the Real Clear Politics average of polls, Kasich currently enjoys 3.1% national support. In a recent NBC News poll, Kasich dropped from 12% to just 6% in New Hampshire.

Undoubtedly there is some tri-level strategy involved in Kasich’s decision to win the Republican nomination through a cynical political decision to expand the slavery of the Welfare State and attack the Christianity of those who disagree.

Kasich sounds like a theocrat and a tad loony.

Follow John Nolte on Twitter @NolteNC