Gov. Robert Bentley's steadfast stand against expanding Medicaid in the state is no different than the views of Dr. Jack Kevorkian, whose advocacy for assisted suicide earned him the name "Dr. Death," a Selma lawmaker said.

In an Aug. 26 column for Alabama Political Reporter, State Rep. Darrio Melton, D-Selma, had harsh words for Bentley, a physician who is seeking his second term in office. He wrote:

"We've all heard the stories of Dr. Kevorkian--also known as "Dr. Death," who assisted more than 130 patients in committing suicide. Dr. Kevorkian gained his fame as he fought for patients' rights to control their own bodies, but the medical industry took a harsh view of his practices. The medical industry frowned on Dr. Kevorkian because the Hippocratic Oath says, "I will prescribe no deadly medicine to anyone if asked, nor suggest any such counsel." Many doctors feel it is their duty to heal, to repair, to cure - not to kill. But Dr. Kevorkian would have probably found a friend in Alabama's own Governor Bentley."

Melton said Bentley's failure to expand the program denies "medical care to 300,000 Alabamians who work hard but fall into a coverage gap.

"Without Medicaid expansion, our own Gov. Death is allowing 700 people to needlessly die each year - that's 700 people whose lives could be saved with the stroke of a pen," he wrote.

Bentley's been steadfast in opposition to expanding Medicaid – a key provision of federal healthcare regulations – saying any short-term benefits would be outweighed by higher costs for the state down the road. Under the Affordable Care Act, the federal government pays 100 percent of the cost of expansion for the first three years and then 90 percent after that.

Bentley has maintained the government's promise of reimbursement can't be trusted.

"The anything but Affordable Care Act has done nothing to gain our trust," he said earlier this year. "As a practicing physician, I would never want anything to come between me and my patient – especially the federal government."

Melton is not buying that argument.

"Dr. Bentley is putting his hand in the face of hundreds of thousands of needy Alabamians who are begging for his help, looking down out of his taxpayer funded plane at the 700 people who will die this year," he wrote.

"Who do you think we should call Dr. Death?"