The five digits are as familiar to Wayne Thomas as his mother’s phone number. But unlike the numbers that dial him back to his childhood, Thomas spends every day as an adult wishing he could forget 94667.

It’s his inmate number.

“It’s like I still have that DOC number,” Thomas said. “I feel like I’m owned by the state, still.”

Thomas was 17 when he was convicted of one count of aggravated robbery with a deadly weapon. Now, 17 years after he was convicted and 12 years after he completed his sentence, Thomas is seeking a pardon for his crime.

But more than two years after Gov. John Hickenlooper ordered the re-creation of the Executive Clemency Advisory Board, meant to review requests and make recommendations for pardons or commutations of a sentence, the board has yet to review a single application.

The board has never met. Only on Monday did Hickenlooper fill all seven seats on the board he created in October 2012.

“I expected to get an answer back within 10 days,” Thomas said. “It’s been months.”

About 150 applications have been submitted since 2012, said Stephanie Donner, chief legal counsel for the governor. Not all of those applications are ready to be reviewed by the board, but Donner did not know how many were ready to be considered.

Thomas’ pardon request was first reported by Law Week Colorado in August.

Colorado governors have issued dozens of pardons during their time in office, but doing so can be politically controversial, and it is not uncommon for governors to wait until the end of their terms to grant them. Hickenlooper can review and grant pardons without the board, but Donner said he values input from experts in various fields when making these decisions.

The governor has not yet granted any pardons.

Surprising review

The Arapahoe County district attorney’s office, which prosecuted Thomas in 1997, reviewed his application and sent a letter recommending a pardon back to the clemency board. Applications for pardons are reviewed by the district attorney before being reviewed by the board.

Chief Deputy District Attorney John Hower, who successfully prosecuted two of Colorado’s three death row inmates, was asked to review Thomas’ application. What he found surprised him.

“We often see defendants and prisoners say they are sorry, but it’s hard to tell if they are really sorry for what they did or if they are just sorry they got caught,” Hower said. “There was simply no attempt (by Thomas) to evade full responsibility.”

Hower reached out to Christopher Town, the man whom Thomas pistol-whipped after he thought he snitched on him to police. Hower found Town in the Wyoming State Penitentiary serving 75 years to life for shooting and killing his estranged wife.

“I forgave him a long time ago,” Town told Hower. “I believe everyone should have a second chance, and I hope someone will think that about me someday.”

Thomas, now 35, speaks about his journey in a confident cadence more familiar to a pregame motivational speech than a story of redemption.

Thomas met with Hower this past summer and described growing up in Aurora, where he went to high school and started dabbling in dealings he should have avoided. In 1997 Thomas was sentenced to five years in the Youth Offender System for hitting Town.

Often the only person who could read his podmates’ letters, Thomas quickly decided to take advantage of what opportunities he had.

“I just started to really count my blessings and started to realize how fortunate I was,” Thomas said.

From there, the teenager who claimed he didn’t like school began what would be a 12-year academic journey, earning his bachelor’s and master’s degrees before going after his doctorate. Twelve years to the day after Thomas finished serving his parole, he graduated with his doctorate in health sciences.

His wife, Jaymee, and 5-year-old son attended his ceremony.

“You get out what you put into life. I wasn’t putting much into life, and that was the result I got,” Thomas said. “And when I realized that about my life and invested in myself, I got more out of it.”

Now Thomas works as a director of durable medical equipment and back office manager at a local orthopedic practice.

Despite his successes, Thomas says he still falls back into the same feelings of frustration and inferiority he felt right after he was released. He’s been turned away from apartments and jobs because of the felony on his record, he says.

David Beller, president of the Colorado Criminal Defense Bar, said there is no legal requirement for Hickenlooper to review or grant requests for pardons, but slowing down the process could discourage people working to rehabilitate themselves.

“A pardon is a legal forgiveness. It doesn’t forget the act, but it forgives it,” Beller said. “We want that system to be in place because we want people to be motivated and incentives to do phenomenal things that Mr. Thomas has done.”

Board finally filled

Donner said the empty board’s seats did not stop people from applying for a pardon.

The governor’s office started reviewing applications for the five empty board seats — two of the seats were designated for the executive directors of the Department of Corrections and the Department of Public Safety — in late 2014. Prior to vetting board candidates, the governor’s office worked to streamline the application process for adult and juvenile offenders seeking pardons, Donner said.

“There’s no step in the criminal justice process that requires the governor to consider an application,” Donner said. “A criminal defendant never has an expectation that the governor will look at the application, will do anything with the application or will grant the application.”

Thirteen people were given pardons by Gov. Bill Owens during his eight years in office. Gov. Bill Ritter granted pardons to 42 convicts.

No matter the wait, Thomas said he will continue to find success with or without a pardon.

“Who knows what type of person I would be now if I would have just stayed focused and did what I was supposed to do,” Thomas said. “But then again, who’s to say this situation didn’t make me the person I am today.”

Jordan Steffen: 303-954-1794, jsteffen@denverpost.com or twitter.com/jsteffendp