You can now have booze delivered like takeout to your apartment. We sense a Domino’s partnership in the works. This is THE MORNING EMAIL for Wednesday, May 21, 2014.

The Scuttlebutt

TOP STORIES

GOP ESTABLISHMENT SCORES BIG WIN IN PRIMARIES

“Republicans’ hopes of taking back the Senate received a big boost in primary elections Tuesday, with Minority Leader Mitch McConnell (Ky.) easily winning and other candidates favored by the party establishment beating back tea party challengers...in Georgia, Democrats were banking on Republicans nominating a candidate so far to the right that he or she would alienate suburban centrist voters. But the two contenders considered to have the broadest general-election viability — businessman David Perdue and Rep. Jack Kingston — advanced to a July 22 runoff, complicating Democrat Michelle Nunn’s path to victory.” Here are the five things we learned yesterday, as well as the front page of the Louisville Courier-Journal. [Story via WaPo, Image via Salon]

CHINA AND RUSSIA: BEST BUDS

“China and Russia signed off on a huge gas deal worth as much as $400 billion Wednesday that heralds a pivot east for Russian business amid ongoing tensions with the West over Ukraine, though few details of the deal were made public.” Here’s why this is a diplomatic slap in the face for the U.S. And meanwhile, it appears all that talk of Russian troop withdrawal from Ukraine’s borders has not happened yet. Wish we could say we were surprised. [USA Today]

MORE TRIPS TO THE ER UNDER OBAMACARE

“More people may be visiting hospital emergency departments this year as health benefits from Obamacare went live, according to a survey of physicians published Wednesday.” About half of ER docs said they saw an uptick. Take a look at the overall numbers. [HuffPost]

In scaring the children news, check out McDonald’s new happy meal mascot.

In redneck wedding news, have you ever seen a cake with taxidermied squirrels on top?

In forget the hamster wheel news, rodents just need turntables.

SCOUTING REPORT: AAA Player Goes Mike Tyson on Teammate

Here’s a breakdown of what college quarterbacks are worth. Indians pitcher Corey Kluber got pelted during his latest in-game interview by his teammates -- wait and see if he cracks a smile. You should want all your pitchers to throw submarine-style. A Dodgers prospect need surgery after an AAA teammate bit off part of his ear in a dugout fight. And the Superbowl is heading to...

In gotta pay the rent news, this guy makes a living off of his backflipping skills.

CULTURE CATCH-UP: Rust and Marty, Part 2

“True Detective 2” wants Jessica Chastain for its lead. We’re dreaming of a skeevy Louisiana world where Arya Stark is the Marty to her Rust. Nineteen apparently is not enough for the Duggars, who consulted a fertility doctor about having baby #20. This “Girl Meets World” sneak peek has us beyond excited to see Cory and Topanga as parents. The author of the infamous 300 Sandwiches blog is engaged at sandwich #256. It took that many. Hey girl, Ryan Gosling is a director now. And the Coen brothers are rewriting a script for a film starring Tom Hanks and directed by Steven Speilberg. It doesn’t get any better than that.

In aerial fail news, this is what happens when a drone hits a mountain.

In telling it like it is news, this cat says what we’re all feeling about her owner’s incessesant playing of ”Let It Go.”

In bottle opener news, here’s how to make do without one.

TWITTERATI

@nickthune: "The FBI confiscated my computer" is the new "dog ate my homework"

@BuzzFeedStorm: Large hail from a severe thunderstorm in Aurora, Illinois - @ABC7Chicago pic.twitter.com/kQz94RtZIs



@blakeshelton: Nervous as a dog shittin' peach seeds!!!

@lenadunham: We just wrapped the 36th episode of Girls. That's the most anythings I have ever anythinged.

@Brilliant_Ads: Interesting classified Advert in the Star pic.twitter.com/oTCaIUnvEU



ONE MORE THING

Forget the wedding kiss: wedding handshakes are apparently all the rage.

Got something to add? Send tips/quips/quotes/stories/photos/events/scoops to Lauren Weber (lauren.weber@huffingtonpost.com). Follow us on Twitter (@LaurenWeberHP). Does somebody keep forwarding you this newsletter? Get your own copy. It's free! Sign up here.

More: The Morning Email