U.S. Rep. Trey Gowdy, R-S.C., is leading the House investigation into former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s handling of the 2012 U.S. consulate attack in Benghazi, Libya. Now, a liberal watchdog group says Gowdy’s emails should be public fodder too.

To stay up-to-date on South Carolina politics, go to palmettopolitics.com or download the Palmetto Politics app for iOS or Android.

“Correct the Record,” which is defending Clinton this election season, again is asking Gowdy to turn over his personal and business emails, along with those from the members of his staff, to see who he is talking with.

Group founder David Brock outlined his demands in a letter shared with Politico last week, saying Gowdy should have to play by the same scrutiny.

“I asked earlier what it is you may have to hide by not releasing your own emails and I recognize that I am unlikely to receive a response,” Brock wrote.

Not surprisingly, the demand was not met with a positive response.

“The Select Committee on Benghazi may have uncovered Hillary Clinton’s unusual and unprecedented email arrangement, but it is the FBI that is investigating it,” committee spokesman Jamal Ware said. “As such, it would be more appropriate for this group to direct its request to the FBI.”

In his letter, Brock speculated Gowdy’s refusal to disclose his contacts is because he is “hiding correspondence with GOP presidential candidates, the Republican National Committee or other political committees” that would show a route of “character and political assassination against Hillary Clinton in an effort to win a political campaign.”

Haley on national stage this week

Gov. Nikki Haley will be a featured speaker in Washington, D.C., this week where she’ll delve into the “Lessons from the New South.”

Haley will speak Wednesday at the National Press Club, the epicenter of journalism in Washington where its collection of meeting rooms attract figures from across the country.

The speech is expected to get heightened attention from the D.C. press corps in the wake of the June 17 mass shooting at Charleston’s Emanuel AME Church and the subsequent removal of the Confederate flag from the Statehouse grounds.

“The governor has always believed that when you have a story to tell, you tell it,” Rob Godfrey, Haley’s deputy chief of staff, said of the invite.

“There’s a lot of good that’s come out of South Carolina over the last five years, and she’s looking forward to talking to the state and the country about it.”

Haley’s name has been mentioned in the vice presidential discussion among Republicans and the appearance will be a first for many in the political pack to see her speak in person.

It’s documented: Trump gets more TV coverage

If you thought there was a TV news obsession with GOP presidential front-runner Donald Trump, you’re right.

The Media Research Center found that in the two weeks prior to the Republican field’s first televised debate, Trump garnered 55 percent of all the coverage that was dedicated to Republican candidates by three network evening newscasts - ABC, CBS, NBC.

But after the debate, the Media Research Center found that Trump’s share of coverage jumped to 72 percent, compared to 28 percent for all 16 of the other GOP candidates.

The center also found the networks covered Trump more than Democrat and former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton during the two weeks after the debate. The margin was 69 minutes and 50 seconds to 40 minutes.

Observers called the imbalance “particularly amazing” since during this stretch of time in August is when the FBI took control of Clinton’s controversial email server for review.

Mount Pleasant forums set

Filing closed for Mount Pleasant Town Council elections last week, and 12 candidates are seeking the four seats up for grabs.

Town voters will have at least three chances to hear from and compare the candidates in a public forum:

On Sept. 21, the East Cooper Republican Club will host a forum during its regular lunch meeting at the Mount Pleasant Holiday Inn, 250 Johnnie Dodds Blvd.

On Oct. 8, the League of Women Voters of the Charleston Area and Save Shem Creek Corp. will hold a forum at 6:30 p.m. at Moultrie Middle School.

On Oct. 15, the Mount Pleasant Business Association will host a candidate forum at noon at the Mount Pleasant Holiday Inn. Dr. Gibbs Knotts, chairman of the Political Science Department at the College of Charleston, will moderate.

The Town Council seats are all at-large races, meaning whichever four candidates get the most votes on Nov. 3 will be sworn in on Nov. 10.

Wanted: Poll managers

Charleston County is looking for people interested in helping staff the polling places for the Nov. 3 municipal elections in Charleston, North Charleston and Mount Pleasant – a job that pays $120.

Anyone interested must be at least 17, able to attend a poll manager training session of a few hours and pass a written test. They also must work from 6 a.m. to about 7:30 p.m. on Election Day.

To apply, visit http://www.charlestoncounty.org/departments/bevr/poll-managers.php to download an application or email electionworkers@charlestoncounty.org or call 974-6421.

Compiled by Post and Courier reporters Schuyler Kropf and Robert Behre