For more than a century, Fort Lewis College in Durango has served an important role in providing free tuition to American Indians.

The pact struck in 1910 deeded the college to the state in return for an agreement that Fort Lewis College would provide free education to American Indians in perpetuity. A similar agreement was struck in Minnesota.

Fort Lewis at the time served only a few dozen students but now provides free education to 1,123 American Indians and Alaska natives from more than 150 tribes around the country.

On the hook for nearly all of the costs is the state of Colorado’s hamstrung higher education budget, to the tune of more than $16 million a year.

So credit Colorado U.S. Sens. Michael Bennet and Cory Gardner for introducing the Native American Indian Education Act, which would provide federal relief.

Specifically, the bill would allocate federal funds to pay out-of-state students.

For the 2014-15 school year that would be $15.2 million in federal aid for the $16.2 million total in tuition waivers.

At the other school, the University of Minnesota at Morris, federal funds would pay $912,132 of the $3.5 million in tuition waivers.

This is a fair outcome.

The United States must not renege on its promise for free tuition to Indians, but Colorado and Minnesota can’t be expected to bear sole responsibility for the cost of students from all of the other states.

Eighty to 90 percent of the students come from out of state and most go back to their reservations when they graduate. Colorado is left with the bill.

Ominously, previous attempts at similar legislation have failed. In 2013, both Bennet and U.S. Rep. Scott Tipton, R-Cortez, introduced bills that failed to advance.

But the state delegation must continue its attempts to redress this situation. Colorado should not be on the hook for what was a well-intentioned federal mandate.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.