For Immediate Release

Chicago, IL - March 07, 2016 - Zacks.com announces the list of stocks featured in the Analyst Blog. Every day the Zacks Equity Research analysts discuss the latest news and events impacting stocks and the financial markets. Stocks recently featured in the blog include Valeant Pharmaceuticals International, Inc. ( VRX ), Gilead Sciences Inc. ( GILD ), Biogen Inc. ( BIIB ), Amgen Inc. ( AMGN ) and Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc. ( REGN ).

Today, Zacks is promoting its ''Buy'' stock recommendations. Get #1Stock of the Day pick for free .

Here are highlights from Friday's Analyst Blog:

What Does Trump's Healthcare Plan Mean for Investors?

Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump's plans for healthcare reform and Obamacare have been posted on his website. His first course of action, -- once elected -- for Obamacare (Affordable Care Act, or ACA) will be to ask Congress to repeal it immediately.

Other key features of the 7-point plan call for allowing the sale of health insurance across state lines, full deduction of health insurance premium payments from tax returns of individuals under the current tax system, allowing individuals to use Health Savings Accounts (HSAs), price transparency from all healthcare providers, block-grant Medicaid to the states and allowing drug re-importation.

Repealing Obamacare: Cause for Concern?

This is not the first time that a proposal to repeal Obamacare has been made. No law is perfect, and Obamacare does come with its set of flaws. But the key question is will Obamacare really be that easy to repeal? According to a June 2015 report issued by the Congressional Budget Office, repealing Obamacare would increase federal budget deficits by $137 billion during 2016-2025 (including the budgetary effects of macroeconomic feedback). It would also affect the number of people with coverage as well as their source of coverage.

And as far as drug re-importation goes, a much-talked about issue in election campaigns has been the high prices of drugs with companies like Turing Pharmaceuticals and Valeant Pharmaceuticals International, Inc. ( VRX ) being the subject of debate due to their drug pricing policies. Share prices of major biotech companies like Gilead Sciences Inc. ( GILD ), Biogen Inc. ( BIIB ), Amgen Inc. ( AMGN ) and Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc. ( REGN ) were hit by Hillary Clinton's "price gouging" tweet last year and her vow to fight drug pricing.

Any move that will give access to cheaper drugs would be welcomed by consumers. But drug re-importation is another thing that has been discussed frequently over the years and not much has come out of it. There has always been strong opposition from the pharma industry against drug re-importation. In fact, last year, the pharma industry had a big win when a federal judge in Maine ruled against a state law that allowed residents to import certain prescription drugs from some countries. So, it could well be a case of easier said than done especially with regulatory agencies being concerned about the safety aspect of re-imported drugs.

Public Opinion

A look at the February Kaiser Health Tracking Poll shows that more Americans (36%) want policymakers to build on ACA to improve affordability and access compared to 16% who would like to see the healthcare law repealed and not replaced. Meanwhile, 13% say ACA should be repealed and replaced with a Republican-sponsored alternative and 24% want guaranteed universal coverage through a single government plan.

Given the amount of attention on healthcare, the repealing of Obamacare, drug pricing, drug re-importation and new healthcare legislation will all remain focus areas this election.

Want the latest recommendations from Zacks Investment Research? Today, you can download 7 Best Stocks for the Next 30 Days . Click to get this free report >>

About Zacks Equity Research

Zacks Equity Research provides the best of quantitative and qualitative analysis to help investors know what stocks to buy and which to sell for the long-term.

Continuous coverage is provided for a universe of 1,150 publicly traded stocks. Our analysts are organized by industry which gives them keen insights to developments that affect company profits and stock performance. Recommendations and target prices are six-month time horizons.

Zacks "Profit from the Pros" e-mail newsletter provides highlights of the latest analysis from Zacks Equity Research. Subscribe to this free newsletter today . Find out What is happening in the stock market today on zacks.com.

Want the latest recommendations from Zacks Investment Research? Today, you can download 7 Best Stocks for the Next 30 Days. Click to get this free report