Starting with the 2014 tax year, the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, legislation established the premium tax credit or PTC. It’s a refundable credit, which means you can collect it even if you don’t owe any federal income tax. Here’s what you need to know about the PTC at tax return time:

PTC basics

The PTC is intended to make health insurance more affordable for folks with relatively modest incomes who do not have access to employer-sponsored coverage.

Individuals and families that meet the applicable income-level requirement and enroll in a qualified health plan through a state-operated individual insurance marketplace or a federally-operated state marketplace are potentially eligible for the PTC.

Those with lower incomes receive larger credits. For lower-income households, the PTC can amount to thousands of dollars and potentially pay for a significant percentage of the cost of health insurance.

Calculate the PTC by completing IRS Form 8962, Premium Tax Credit (PTC). Then file Form 8962 with your Form 1040.

Myeloma patients have new hope thanks to new treatments (4:02) Medical scientists have made major advances in treating different types of cancer in the past decade, but perhaps none more so than the blood cancer known as myeloma.

Eligibility requirements

To be eligible for the PTC for a particular tax year, you cannot be eligible to enroll in minimum essential coverage under a government sponsored program such as Medicare, Medicaid, CHIP or TRICARE.

You must also demonstrate that you do not have access to affordable employer-sponsored minimum essential coverage. Employers that offer coverage must tell you if it meets the definition of minimum essential coverage. Employer-sponsored minimum essential coverage is considered affordable if the required employee contribution for the lowest-cost self-only coverage does not exceed 9.56% (for 2015) of household income. Household income is the employee’s modified adjusted gross income plus that of every other individual in his or her family for whom the employee can properly claim a personal exemption deduction and who is required to file a federal income tax return.

Finally, to be eligible for the PTC, you must be an “applicable taxpayer,” which means you meet one of the following requirements for the tax year:

• Your household income is between 100% and 400% of the federal poverty line (FPL) for your family size. The instructions to Form 8962 provide the FPL numbers to use for PTC eligibility purposes.

• You cannot be claimed as a dependent by another taxpayer.

• You file a joint federal income tax return if you are married. (Special rules allow married-filing-separate status for victims of domestic abuse and spousal abandonment.)

Advance PTC payments

If you are eligible for the PTC, you don’t have to wait until after filing your Form 1040 for the year to benefit. Instead, you can choose to have the estimated credit amount paid directly to the insurance company in monthly installments to lower your monthly premiums. These payments are called advance PTC payments.

Eligibility for advance PTC payments is established during the process of determining if you are eligible to purchase coverage through the health insurance marketplace. The marketplace must verify that you are not eligible for minimum essential coverage through another source (such as Medicaid, CHIP, TRICARE, or an employer-sponsored plan). The marketplace will also determine if your projected income for the year meets the criteria for advance PTC payments and calculate the monthly advance PTC payment amount. Generally, the marketplace will obtain income information for the most-recent available tax year from the IRS and use that information to calculate your projected income for advance PTC payment eligibility purposes.

The difference between advance PTC payments sent to your insurance company and your actual allowable PTC amount is calculated by filling out Form 8962 when you file your return. Because eligibility for advance PTC payments is based on projected information, your actual allowable PTC amount for the year may turn out to be less than the advance payments sent to your insurance company. If so, the difference is treated as an addition to your federal income tax bill for the year. The addition will increase your tax bill or reduce your refund when you file your return.

Conversely, if your allowable PTC amount turns out to exceed the advance payments sent to your insurance company, the difference will decrease your tax bill or increase your refund.

Key Point: If you benefitted from advance PTC payments last year, you must file a 2015 federal income tax return even though you might not otherwise have been required to file.

Calculating the PTC

Your allowable PTC amount for the tax year is actually calculated on a monthly basis using the number of months during the year that you have and pay for qualified coverage (so-called coverage months). Generally, a coverage month does not include any month in which you are eligible to enroll in minimum essential coverage that is not provided by a plan offered through the applicable state or federal marketplace (such as a government plan or employer-sponsored plan). To determine the allowable PTC amount for the year, you must compare the actual premiums paid for coverage to a calculated affordable premium amount, which is based on your household income. The difference between your actual premiums and the calculated affordable premium amount is the allowable PTC amount for the year. All this stuff is figured by filling out Form 8962 when you prepare your Form 1040.

Each health insurance marketplace is required to send the IRS copies of Form 1095-A, Health Insurance Marketplace Statement, which supplies information about taxpayers who obtained coverage through that marketplace. You will also get a copy of the form. You then use information on the form to complete Form 8962 and reconcile any advance payments received by your insurance company with the actual PTC amount to which you are entitled.

The bottom line

The PTC rules are complicated, and I’ve left out some details that may apply to your situation. For help, go to the IRS website and enter premium tax credit in the search bar.

More from MarketWatch