Coloradans with flood-damaged homes who call in a flood-recovery team can expect a test of patience.

Tim Graffam, owner of 24/7 Flood Response said Monday that his waiting list is 200 jobs deep. His advice:

“Get on every list you possibly can. Call everybody in the book, call everybody on the Internet. You might be lucky” — sometimes those waiting lists advance quickly as flood victims get estimates, then balk at the cost and decide to do it themselves.

Graffam, whose small family business in Wheat Ridge has been around for 10 years, says that in this emergency, redundancy and persistence are your friends. (That, and a little healthy suspicion of potential flood-recovery scammers who don’t have business addresses and aren’t properly registered.)

The return of flooding to Boulder over the weekend and the sheer widespread size of the flooding damage are nothing like he’s ever seen; his job list stretches from Boulder to Castle Rock, he said.

And flood damage is emotional and exhausting for homeowners.

“It’s overwhelming,” said Laurel Kubin, director of Colorado State University Extension’s Larimer County office.

There are, however, a slew of resource and instruction sheets for flood cleanup and recovery on extension web pages. Monday Kubin was busily updated one of them on food safety in preparation for it to be included in a packet that will be printed and made available at flood assistance centers.

One page on a flood-cleanup .pdf document organizes homeowner priorities step by step, beginning with taking pictures of the damage and keeping records and receipts of all expenses. Another gathers contact numbers and agencies for those who’ve lost important household documents.

The Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment also has a fact sheet on “Re-entering your flooded home”; go to colorado.gov and type the title in the search field.

If water is only ankle deep, Graffam said, homeowners can get a wet/dry vac and start removing it — after making sure electricity and other hazards are removed. Then pull everything out and begin sorting the damaged from the salvageable.

Airflow to formerly flooded areas is crucial, so bring in fans, open windows and – ONLY if it never flooded, or if an HVAC specialist has certified that it’s mold-free – run the air conditioning. “Your air conditioning is actually a pretty good dehumidifier,” he said.

If the HVAC system was flooded with water, turning on heating or air conditioning will spread mold throughout the house, so get a professional cleaning from a company experienced with mold removal, says the health department, and wait to turn it on until they say it’s clean and safe to do so.

Kubin said one of the most important and first things families in recover can do is get a notebook and write down every conversation with insurers, contractors, every other responder they can; the date and the phone number. “We think we’re going to remember the details, but under stress, we’re not.”

Susan Clotfelter: 303-954-1078, sclotfelter@denverpost.com or twitter.com/susandigsin