Cordillera Communications stations in seven states went dark to DirecTV customers on Jan 1, after the parties could not reach a retransmission consent agreement.

The dispute affects 10 stations in Colorado, Kentucky, Louisiana, California, Arizona, Texas and Montana. While Cordillera has had lengthy battles in the past with distributors – its Corpus Christi, Texas stations went dark to Time Warner Cable customers in 2012 for about six months – the parties appear hopeful they can reach a deal.

On its website, Cordillera said that talks continue and that “both sides have made considerable compromises to try to come to terms, but fundamental differences remain on several key points including the fair value of our programming.”

In a statement, DirecTV said it is working to return the stations to its customers as soon as possible, but complained of the high cost of so-called free over-the-air programming.

“Satellite and cable customers now spend $9.3 billion to have “free” over-the-air programs, yet Cordillera is withholding its permission for DirecTV to keep offering its stations into these communities unless DirecTV obligates all of our customers to paying nearly six times more just to return what they always had,” DirecTV said in a statement. “We believe loyalty should always be rewarded and never abused, and appreciate our customers’ patience since it has a direct impact on what they ultimately spend. Congressional representatives are also paying attention and the House and Senate recently passed legislation to help rein in some of these chronic abuses and end these station shakedowns like Cordillera’s once and for all. We join member of Congress and the rest of our affected customers in demanding Cordillera’s stations return to their homes now.”

The affected stations are: KOAA (NBC), Colorado Springs, Colo.; WLEX (NBC), Lexington, Ky.; KATC (ABC), Lafayette, La.; KSBY (NBC), Santa Barbara, Calif.; KVOA (NBC), Tucson, Ariz.; KRIS (NBC) Corpus Christi, Tex.; KPAX (CBS), Missoula, Mont.; KBZK (CBS), Butte, Mont.; KTVQ (CBS), Billings, Mont.; KRTV (CBS), Great Falls. Mont.