There were some things Rep. Tom Reed, R-Corning, didn’t like about the compromise $1.1 trillion omnibus spending bill the House narrowly approved 219 to 206 on Thursday.

But the congressman worked hard in a bipartisan effort to have the Revitalize American Manufacturing Initiative (RAMI) bill he co-sponsored with Rep. Joseph Kennedy, D-Mass., included in the omnibus bill.

“There are many victories in this proposal,” the congressman said. “It moves the ball forward in that it continues us on a path of reducing the budget deficit and authorizes less spending in FY 2015 than the agreed upon cap in the Murray-Ryan Budget Control Act.

“The package is far from perfect and I do not agree with everything in it, but it cuts spending, advances a number of energy policies, contains no new spending for Obamacare, and protects and creates jobs by including my Revitalize American Manufacturing and Innovation Act. On balance it is a victory for taxpayers.”

In an interview with the Times Herald Friday, Rep. Reed said, “We saw an opportunity” to advance the RAMI bill in the omnibus bill.

It worked.

The RAMI bill had been a focus of Rep. Reed’s in the 2014 legislative session and now in the lame duck session after the election. The two congressmen pushed RAMI to be added to the omnibus bill.

Senators Roy Blunt, R-Mo., and Sherrod Brown, D-Ohio, shepherded the RAMI bill in the Senate and helped convinced Senate negotiators and Majority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev., to include it in the omnibus bill.

“The four of us worked together to set it up for the omnibus. There were a lot of moving parts. I’m very optimistic about the opportunities,” Rep. Reed said.

“There were pros and cons” about the omnibus bill, he said. With RAMI included and its promise of training workers in advanced manufacturing and the creation of new jobs, it was a no-brainer for the Corning congressman.

The RAMI bill would establish regional Centers for Manufacturing Innovation to focus on the next generation of manufacturing technologies. Of course, Rep. Reed would like to see one of the centers in the 11-county 23rd Congressional District. With the Southern Tier’s combination of manufacturers like Dresser-Rand and Corning Inc., and universities like Alfred University and St. Bonaventure University, and the University of Rochester to the north, Rep. Reed said, “I can see it in our backyards. We have all the ingredients.”

The bipartisan effort “to create the jobs of tomorrow” had its seed in the Southern Tier, Rep. Reed recalled. The idea evolved out of town halls he’s conducted and factory tours he’s taken over the past four years.

The congressman has been using the mantra “build it here, sell it there” for the past year to help advance RAMI.

“It will be a tool in the tool box,” Rep. Reed said. “Our bill sets the stage for those jobs and makes sure the U.S. is a world leader in advanced manufacturing,” Rep. Reed said. “RAMI will create new high-tech, high-paying manufacturing jobs for our children and grandchildren.”

The retraining of existing workers in American manufacturing as well as tomorrow’s workers will come with “focusing critical resources in collaboration with public-private partnerships led by industry, universities, community colleges and non-profits,” he added. “It also addresses the skills gap by producing the next generation of skilled workers and engineers focusing on education, workforce training, research and development and commercialization.

The Senate took up the Omnibus spending bill on Saturday, laboring under a midnight deadline to avoid a government shutdown and continue to fund federal agencies through next summer.

In the end, the Senate passed a five day-extension of the existing funding to keep the government operating through Wednesday.

Late-breaking developments in the Senate led to the bill’s approval, 56 to 40 shortly before press time.

For more details on the bill’s passage, please see page A-6.

(Contact reporter Rick Miller at rmiller@oleantimesherald.com. Follow him on Twitter, @RMillerOTH)