The Supreme Court's decisions on gay marriage and Obamacare drove another nail into the coffin of limited government.

Marriage has historically been a cultural tradition. In fact, marriage licenses came about in the late 19th century to prevent mixed-race marriages. If the Supreme Court had just invalidated state marriage licenses years ago, marriages would then have had to be consecrated—validated—where they had been for hundreds of years, in churches, synagogues and mosques.

Now that the Supreme Court has ruled that gay marriage is constitutional right, will the court now force religious institutions to perform gay marriages—a union that may violate their religious principles?

As far as Obamacare is concerned, the court's decision upholding subsidies provided for people who purchase medical insurance on the federal exchange is yet another ruling turning the Constitution on its head.

The Constitution does not authorize the federal government to either provide medical care for the people or subsidize health insurance. In short, for decades the Supreme Court has just rubber-stamped hundreds of unconstitutional activities of the federal government.

And the results have been predictable—federal government promises to take care of the people have led to a $210 trillion unfunded liability, the creation of a vast military-industrial complex, erosion of our individual rights and an economy micromanaged by the Federal Reserve's endless manipulation of interest rates.

Murray Sabrin is a Fort Lee resident and a former Libertarian gubernatorial nominee and Republican U.S. Senate candidate in New Jersey.

More "pain" for N.J. taxpayers

A Star-Ledger editorial on June 26 called for tax increases and spending cuts, declaring, "We need to spread the pain." Please note that on June 18 the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported, "Real average weekly earnings decreased by 0.1 percent" in the month of May. The average paycheck has not kept up with the cost of living in decades and now working people in the Garden State and the rest of the country have had still more pain spread their way.

Has it been painful for corporations in New Jersey, where Gov. Chris Christie's approved $5.4 billion in corporate tax cuts since 2010 and, last month, vetoed a measure that would allow taxpayers to evaluate if those subsidies are working? I hope you are not asking New Jersey wage earners, for whom every dollar counts, to take yet another hit while they're picking up the check for corporate welfare.

Jim LaRegina, Westfield

Follow The Star-Ledger on Twitter @starledger. Find The Star-Ledger on Facebook.