Image of University of Mississippi Medical Center from Facebook.

GE Healthcare has acquired advisory firm The Camden Group, adding its more than 2,000 health organization customers to its consulting business in the United States and solidifying its position in the health sector.

Financial terms were not disclosed.

The new company, GE Healthcare Camden Group, will act as the U.S. business unit of GE Healthcare's global advisory firm, GE Healthcare Partners.

The merger forms one of the nation's leading business advisory firms serving the healthcare industry, GE said.

The acquisition builds on GE Healthcare's broader mission to develop analytics-based solutions for healthcare.

[Also: Capital One buys GE Capital healthcare finance unit for $9 billion]

Last year, GE Healthcare acquired Finnamore and Foresight Partnership to further expand its consultancy and solutions business globally.

GE has been streamlining the company, selling off real estate and other business units to focus on other divisions, like GE Healthcare. In August it sold its healthcare finance division to Capital One in a $9 billion deal.

In September, GE Healthcare also invested $300 million in Sustainable Healthcare Solutions to develop healthcare technology in emerging markets in India, South Asia, Africa and Southeast Asia.

GE said the move would help grow its $18 billion healthcare technology division by offering low cost technology solutions, a sector estimated to be worth over $8 billion and growing significantly.

Like Healthcare Finance on Facebook

Also on Tuesday, Intel-GE Care Innovations -- a joint venture between Intel Corporation and GE Healthcare -- and the University of Mississippi Medical Center, announced they had entered a five-year agreement to deliver telehealth to the home.

Intel-GE Care Innovations will provide a remote platform as well as data analytics and application integration services to the university to offer care in the state and beyond.

The new agreement builds on a statewide population health program, the Diabetes Telehealth Network, involving both Care Innovations and UMMC's Center for Telehealth. The service will focus on patients suffering from expensive chronic conditions, including congestive heart failure, diabetes, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, asthma, and hypertension.

Twitter: @SusanJMorse