By Andy Hoffman, The Hawk Eye, Burlington, Iowa McClatchy-Tribune Information Services

Aug. 29 --A <location value="LU/us.ia.burltn" idsrc="xmltag.org">Burlington fugitive who failed to appear in court last month on charges of intimidation with a dangerous weapon and possession of a firearm by a felon was arrested Thursday afternoon by bounty hunters in Chicago .

Calvon Miles , 23, was arrested without incident at his mother's home by bounty hunters associated with Free Bird Bail Bonds, according to C. Sorrentino , lead agent for Fugitive Recovery Inc.

"We finally caught up to him at his mom's house in Chicago ," Sorrentino said Thursday afternoon. "He was caught with ammunition and a gun magazine and is being held in Illinois on misdemeanor charges there. He will have to be extradited back to Iowa after he takes care of the new charges in Illinois ."

Sorrentino said members of his team had been searching for Miles since July 29 , the day after Des Moines County District Judge Michael Schilling ordered Free Bird Bail Bonds to forfeit the $10,000 surety it posted for Miles.

"We had been chasing him hard," Sorrentino said. "We spent a lot of time following lead after lead (in Burlington ) and finally decided to go to Chicago after talking with his mother."

Sorrentino said his team was assisted by Illinois law enforcement officers in Miles' capture.

Schilling ordered the bonding company and its insurer, Universal Fire and Casualty Insurance Co. , to forfeit the surety it posted with the Des Moines County clerk of court after neither Miles nor a representative of the bonding company appeared for a hearing July 28 to determine why the bond should not be forfeited.

After no one from the bonding company appeared at the hearing, Schilling also issued a warrant for Miles' arrest. He also set a new bond for Miles at $10,000 cash only.

According to Iowa law, "the court shall direct the clerk of the district court ... to give 10 days notice in writing to the defendant and the defendant's (bonding company) to appear and show cause, if any, why judgment should not be entered for the amount of the bail."

However, Iowa law also allows the judgment to be set aside "if, within 90 days, the defendant shall voluntarily surrender to the sheriff of the county, or the defendant's (bonding company) shall, at their own expense, deliver the defendant to the custody of the sheriff."

Miles, along with Dwayne G. Jefferson Jr ., 20, andâ Kijana Ivey , 16, all of Burlington , were charged in June in Des Moines County District Court following an armed disturbance in the 100 block of South Seventh Street in Burlington .

Jefferson remains in the Des Moines County jail in lieu of a $20,000 bond on a charge of intimidation with a dangerous weapon. District Associate Judge Mark Kruse doubled Jefferson's bond last month to $20,000 after learning he recently had been convicted of an unrelated weapons charge.

Ivey was charged with carrying weapons and criminal mischief for causing thousands of dollars in damage to a vehicle parked at a home where the incident occurred.

Ivey was taken to the Lee County Juvenile Detention Facility following his arrest last month. However, a spokesman at the facility said he was not allowed to say if Ivey was still in custody at the juvenile facility because of his age.

Investigators said the disturbance resulted from Fabian Martinez's attempts to force Miles, his daughter's boyfriend, to move from her apartment. Police responded to the Seventh Street location after reports of shots being fired.

Lt. Jeff Klein , commander of Burlington's criminal investigation division, said at the time of the arrests the investigation determined no shots were fired, but several people at the home were threatened with handguns. He also said the suspects threw rocks at the side of the home, making the occupants inside believe shots were being fired at them.

Martinez said he went to the home of his daughter, Josalyn Martinez , on North Eighth Street because he wanted Miles to move from the apartment due to "all the drugs and crap that's been going on over there. ... I just had enough."

A short time later, Martinez said he was confronted by the armed men at a home in the 100 block of South Seventh Street .

___

(c)2014 The Hawk Eye (Burlington, Iowa)

Visit The Hawk Eye (Burlington, Iowa) at www.thehawkeye.com

Distributed by MCT Information Services

Wordcount: 715

[jetpack-related-posts]