Schwarzenegger Melts Down On Facebook Over Climate Change Skeptics

Chris White

Arnold Schwarzenegger took to his Facebook page Monday to plea to his followers to take seriously the health hazards brought on by pollution, and the dangers fossils fuels present to the general population.

Schwarzenegger’s post, titled “I don’t give a **** if we agree about climate change,” lists several reasons why he believes his cadre of Facebook friends should shut their traps and look for solutions to anthropogenic, or man-made climate change.

“There are always a few of you, asking why we should care about the temperature rising, or questioning the science of climate change,” the actor wrote. “I want you to know that I hear you,” Schwarzenegger added. “Even those of you who say renewable energy is a conspiracy. Even those who say climate change is a hoax. Even those of you who use four letter words.”

A long time champion of renewable energy, and star of films such as the “Terminator” and “Kindergarten Cop,” Schwarzenegger couched his arguments on the health detriments of pollution created from burning fossil fuels.

“(Do) you believe it is acceptable that 7 million people die every year from pollution,” he asked his followers, referring to a WHO study from September finding that pollution killed millions of people in 2012. That number eclipses murders and suicides, combined, Schwarzenegger wrote.

He added:“Every day, 19,000 people die from pollution from fossil fuels. Do you accept those deaths? Do you accept that children all over the world have to grow up breathing with inhalers?”

Schwarzenegger ended his post with a question, asking his anti-renewable energy Facebook followers to consider shutting themselves in a room with a gasoline-fueled car, engine running at full-blast. “There are two doors. Behind Door Number One is a completely sealed room, with a regular, gasoline-fueled car. Behind Door Number Two is an identical, completely sealed room, with an electric car. Both engines are running full blast,” the Terminator star wrote.

Read the whole post here

Follow Chris on Facebook and Twitter.

Click here for reuse options! Copyright 2015 Daily Caller News Foundation

Content created by The Daily Caller News Foundation is available without charge to any eligible news publisher that can provide a large audience. For licensing opportunities of our original content, please contact licensing@dailycallernewsfoundation.org.