It has become obvious to even the most casual cultural observer that conservative groupie Stacey Dash has about as much depth as a sidewalk puddle. The actress, who languishes in utter obscurity when she’s not making banal and moronic statements, was blasted by another black conservative for foolishly saying that all black people in Louisiana were “uneducated” and felt “worthless” under the President Obama’s leadership and Obamacare.

Appearing on the “Sean Hannity” show, Fox News contributor Dash called all black people in Louisiana listless government freeloaders who subsist on charity and handouts.

Sean Hannity asked the “Clueless” actress — and she is indeed clueless — some leading and loaded questions and Dash walked right into it like a sheep led to a slaughter: “Has voting with Obama 95 percent of the time and Obamacare, has that helped the minority community in Louisiana?” Hannity asked disingenuously.

“No, not at all,” Dash said. “It still keeps them stuck. They’re getting money for free. They feel worthless. They’re uneducated. I mean, as long as you are that way, they can keep you under their control …”

“They have a plantation mentality,” Dash continued. “As long as they give you this much money, you’ll stay right there. You don’t need to know too much because if you do, you might start thinking for yourself.”

Even other black conservatives were shocked and appalled by Dash’s nonsensical and irrational perspective.

Conservative Black Chick blog founder Crystal Wright, in particular, torched Dash for her sheer ignorance in an editorial piece for CNN:

“I think Stacey Dash needs to get out more, perhaps visit Louisiana and the rest of America and see that all blacks, myself included, certainly don’t feel “worthless” under President Barack Obama’s administration.

“Whether Democratic or Republican, scores of black people — Oprah Winfrey, Allen West, Condoleezza Rice, Ben Carson, Shelby Steele, Bill Cosby, Robin Roberts, and many many others — are highly educated, gainfully employed, paying their bills and frankly doing quite well. Dash is one of them.

“Many black people may want Obama to provide more productive policies, but to suggest, as Dash does, that blacks are largely “uneducated” and “getting money for free” is a racist narrative that conservatives need to stop perpetuating. That kind of talk is an offensive nonstarter in getting blacks to consider voting Republican. So is the often repeated meme by some black conservatives that blacks “have a plantation mentality.

“Whether you’re white or black, it’s never cool to invoke metaphors of slavery, which was a gruesome, painful institution protected by Democrats in America that went on way too long. Conservatives should remind Americans of the history of slavery and how the Democratic Party perpetuates policies of paternalism that don’t benefit blacks.”

To read the commentary in its entirety, click here: