In his Aug. 2, guest opinion, (" Anti-growth ballot initiatives are bad for Boulder"), Will Toor, co-founder and co-chair of the pro-development group "Better Boulder," fired off a rhetorical shot-gun blast at the two citizens' initiatives that will appear on the city of Boulder ballot this fall. One would allow registered voters in any residential neighborhood demarcated by the city to decide by a majority vote — after the submission of a petition signed by 10 percent of those voters — whether proposed changes to the city's land use regulations increasing occupancy limits, or in other ways adding to density there, would become the law. (Contrary to a recent myth, this initiative would not apply to individual development proposals unless they involved spot re-zoning, which is generally illegal). The other would require new developments to fully pay for, or otherwise mitigate, their impacts on city services and facilities — costs which are now in large part absorbed by all of the taxpayers.

These measures are both eminently moderate and reasonable. As Mr. Toor's piece acknowledges, the Boulder Valley Comprehensive Plan (the principal planning document guiding development in our area) for over 40 years has provided that new development should pay for its fair share of impacts on city facilities. The rub, however, is that the Boulder City Council has never quite managed to get around to enacting that principle into law, so it is now only an aspiration.

Advertisement

So what is not to like about Development Shall Pay Its Own Way? It seems obvious that new development should pay for the costs that it imposes on roads, police and fire protection, parks, libraries, etc., etc.. But, of course, developers and their allies don't like it, because it would cost them more money — money that otherwise we general taxpayers would pay.

In his attack on this initiative, Mr. Toor resorted to some magical thinking. He argued that more employees and more residents in the city will not really cost anything more because our needed civic improvements "aren't driven by new growth." Well, I'm sorry, but more people using city facilities like libraries, parks and roads will simply require more city staff members and more city infrastructure to serve them. We cannot wish that reality away.

Alternately, Mr. Toor contended that more employees and more residents will increase general sales and use tax revenues, which will pay for these additional services and facilities. But that is only partially true. Tax revenues will go up some, but never enough to pay for the impact of the additional residents and employees. That is why services and facilities degrade in expanding municipalities and/or they keep hiking up taxes.

Mr. Toor also fails to acknowledge that the proposed measure would require the city, when calculating the fair cost of the impacts of new development, to include consideration of the additional tax revenues it would generate. So his objection has already been resolved by the initiative itself.

Mr. Toor complained that the Neighborhoods' Right To Vote initiative would allow people to vote on land use regulation changes affecting the quality of life in the places where they live. For over a year and a half, the city, as part of its misbegotten "Comprehensive Housing Strategy," has been seriously considering "up-zoning" all of our residential neighborhoods to jam more residents, dwelling units and cars into them by eliminating or reducing occupancy limits, allowing up to four-plexes on a single lot in a single-family neighborhood, and enacting similar schemes. (City planners seem to labor under the misconception that greater density will reduce housing costs; but in a frenzied market like Boulder's the prices will continue to rise to meet the insatiable demand. Just look at the astounding rents charged for the new units in Boulder Junction.)

As for me, I would like a say if the City Council voted to change the land use regulations in those ways in my neighborhood. I think most of my fellow citizens would agree.

Contrary to Mr. Toor's contentions, these measures would substantially enhance Boulder's environment. Development Shall Pay Its Own Way would offset the increase in auto traffic, which would otherwise be generated by new development by compelling it to offer car and van pooling, Eco-Passes and similar techniques. By moderating Boulder's stupefying job growth, it would ease the pressure on our housing market that has sent prices skyrocketing. Moreover, the measure, by requiring new development to pay for its full impact on affordable housing, would greatly augment the funding for that program.

So let's pass these highly beneficial initiatives!

Alan Boles collected some of the 5,600 signatures on each of the two Livable Boulder initiative petitions.