Pastors at Resurrection Fellowship Church introduced the church's new "projection mapping" technology in its Theater One room on Sunday. The presentation included views of underwater sea life, space, cityscapes and Biblical cartoons. ( Jessica Benes / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

The 10 commandments on a set of stone tablets.

The Gutenberg printing press.

Christian radio and television.

Slide projectors.

These are examples of technology used for faith purposes through the ages, according to a presentation Sunday morning at Resurrection Fellowship church.

So what comes next?

The new "projection mapping" technology in the Theater One room demonstrates what the church pastors agree is the next step in making Bible stories even more real to children, said youth pastor Sethry Connor.

The children's room was a built-in permanent jungle theme until Connor and Senior Pastor Jonathan Wiggins started exploring other creative and interactive ways to make use of the room.

Now, white walls and eight projectors can transform Theater One into whatever theme the people occupying the room require.

In several demonstrations Sunday morning at the church, the room "filled with water" through projections on the walls and immersed the visitors in an underwater landscape of plants and fish. A huge boat roared overhead and the scene changed to the theme music from "Star Wars" before giving a breathtaking view of Earth from space.

"Before, we could project onto a flat screen," Connor said. "Now we can individualize the experience. We can make one wall look one way and another wall look another way. We can project one image across the whole thing."

Advertisement

Connor said that teachers can talk about Noah and the Ark and show the water rising up the walls. Or they can take a walk in the desert with images of dry sand.

Tammy Hiatt Monaco, a church regular who attended the 12:15 p.m. demonstration, likened it to an IMAX theater show.

"You don't expect this at church but whatever brings kids in is great," she said.

Her son, 10-year-old Giovanni, described one of his children's church classes in the room. "They did this whole background thing of the Cave of Wonders (from Aladdin) but it was the cave of I-Wonders. One screen was some puddles, and the rest was rocks and crystals, and then there was the Adventure Kids symbol spinning," he said.

The $1.2 million renovations to the room included removing the island jungle theme and installing white walls, carpet, projectors and lights in the room. Church staff members worked with the city to update fire code elements of the room. The sound system and air conditioning unit is also new.

This now allows the theater room to be used for weddings, meetings and other purposes besides a children's room. The walls can look like stain-glass windows and images of happy couples for a wedding or exhibit spinning logos and charts for a business conference.

The overhead lights that focus on the middle of the room change depending on the wall scenery. As the projectors show a watery landscape, the audience is bathed in aquamarine blue. As the image changes to starry night, the room goes black so that visitors better experience the view of outer space.

"It is important to our pastor (Jonathan Wiggins) that our kids have a first-class experience," Connor said. "There's a verse where Jesus says, 'Let the children come to him because the kingdom of God belongs to them.' Our church should be a place where kids have a ton of fun."

He's hoping that the technology will keep children excited to come back, instead of their parents having to drag them back.

He added that the technology is cutting edge and there are only a few other churches in the country using it, and those are mostly for adult services rather than for children.

The room will be used for weekend children's services as well as several other meetings that take place throughout the week.

"We want the kids to have an experience that they can't get anywhere else; that's fun and immersive," Connor said. "This room is unprecedented in how cool it is. We have an awesome opportunity to use this room and bring lots of kids in here and help them understand what the gospel is and how much Jesus loves them."

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Jessica Benes at 970-669-5050 ext. 530 or jbenes@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter at twitter.com/jessicabenes.