Variety is reporting that Martin Milner died Sunday night at the age of 83, several years after he suffered a stroke. His was an estimable career that spanned 50 years and included Alexander Mackendrick’s 1957 immortal adaptation of The Sweet Smell of Success, in which he played jazz guitarist Steve Dallas opposite gossip-mongers Sidney Falco (Tony Curtis) and J.J. Hunsecker (Burt Lancaster). Of course, Milner’s best known as Officer Pete Malloy on Adam-12.

But before he played a Los Angeles cop, he was hepcat drifter Tod Stiles, who, with pal Buz Murdock (George Maharis), zoomed cross-country in a convertible Corvette in search of The Meaning of Life and women … usually, in their case, the same thing. But as The New York Times noted in 2012, when the series was finally released in a boxed set, it was also something bigger than just another prime-time escape along the black-and-white road to nowhere. Wrote Neil Genzlinger, back in 1960, when Route 66 debuted, television “could still aspire to be literature. That made for some clunkiness. Writers hadn’t fully grasped that television shows were not stage plays. But even at its most awkward, Route 66 reached high.

By way of proof he points to one of three Route 66 episodes shot entirely in Dallas: “Aren’t You Surprised To See Me?,” which aired in Season 2. (The whole series was shot on location, which provides us with close to three hours’ worth of glimpses of pre-JFK Dallas — including Dallas Love Field, the recently opened Dallas Trade Mart and the old Wyatt’s cafeteria in Preston Center — and copious references to The Dallas News and Dallas Times Herald.) You can watch the whole episode here; that’s the intro above.

As The Times reminds, “Aren’t You Surprised to See Me?” is about “a religious nut [who] takes Buz hostage in Dallas and threatens to kill him if the city’s population fails to follow the Ten Commandments for the next 24 hours. The man (played by David Wayne) explains himself in a dizzying monologue that foreshadows both the anti-establishment mood of the Vietnam era and the current laments of the religious right.”

“Drop the scales from your eyes,” the man tells Buz while they’re parked on Commerce and St. Paul, awaiting the morning edition of the Times Herald. “Consider the present society of the world. Are we still individuals, or are we prisoners of bureaucracy? Insects in vast, grinding systems, carrying out ant-like, apparently rational actions with no human idea of the ends they serve? Ours is no longer a guilt culture in which control of wrongdoing is self-imposed by conscience. Instead we have a shame culture, one in which acts are judged good or evil solely on the basis of whether one is caught or not, in which the worst punishment is public humiliation, not private guilt. Ours is a world, Murdock, in which conscious morality is treated with derision and reason with scorn. This is an age which no longer waits patiently through this lifetime for the rewards in the next, but instead mills anxiously about overindulging, driven to cheat, driven to crime. So I have killed six men.

“Well, let me tell you that each time, I died with them. Each time I killed myself, too. So what is that insignificant sacrifice against the gigantic moral collapse of the world?”

(Beatle Bob also does a pretty nifty job tying two Dallas-shot episodes to the Kennedy assassination. Dig in. But, beware: It gets deep. There’s another take here.)

The two other locally shot episodes are also available: “Love is a Skinny Kid” (shot mostly in Lewisville and Seagoville and featuring Tuesday Weld, Cloris Leachman and, in the scene below, Burt Reynolds …

… and the Mesquite-made “A Long Piece of Mischief” (with Ben Johnson, Slim Pickens and Denver Pyle). As my father reminds me once a week, or thereabouts, this was the episode filmed at my grandfather’s old brickyard next to the Mesquite Rodeo. Which reminds me: If you ever find any discarded Builders bricks, lemme know? Thanks.