ECONOMY

Hiring surges in October

Shutterstock/Kritchanut

US hiring roared back in October after two weak months, with employers adding a robust 271,000 jobs, the most since December, and increasing the likelihood that the Federal Reserve will raise interest rates at its December policy meeting. The burst of hiring across a range of industries came as companies shrugged off slower overseas growth and a weak US manufacturing sector. Big job gains occurred in construction, health care, and retail, supported by health consumer spending, the Labor Department reported. The unemployment rate dipped to a fresh seven-year low of 5 percent. Robust hiring also raised wages 9 cents to $25.20. That is 2.5 percent higher than 12 months ago, the largest year-over-year gain since July 2009.

REAL ESTATE

Big South End development

David L Ryan/Globe Staff One of the largest residential projects in the city is being proposed for a block between Albany Street and Harrison Avenue in the South End.

A stretch of the South End that has seen a flood of big development in recent years is about to see its biggest development yet. Real estate company Leggat McCall filed preliminary plans with the city Thursday to build about 700 apartments in two buildings on a block between Harrison Ave. and Albany Street near Boston Medical Center. If approved, it will be the latest in a string of projects that are transforming an industrial stretch of the city into one of Boston’s hottest housing markets. Leggat’s letter of intent lays out plans to turn most of a block of parking lots and small office buildings into a pair of apartment towers reaching as high as 19 stories, with a pocket park and retail along the street. A few blocks from the Leggat project are Ink Block and Troy, apartment and condo buildings that recently opened.

BIOTECHNOLOGY

Shire buys Burlington’s Dyax Corp.

Suzanne Plunkett/Reuters/File

Advertisement

A year ago, when Shire PLC’s deal to be bought by AbbVie Inc. for $55 billion collapsed, chief executive Flemming Ornskov vowed to hunt for acquisitions of his own. It wasn’t just talk by Shire, a Dublin-based company run out of Lexington. On Monday, Shire unveiled a $5.9 billion agreement to buy Burlington’s Dyax Corp., which is developing a promising drug to treat a rare disease called hereditary angioendema. It’s the latest in a string of takeovers and buyout bids. Shire snapped up NPS Pharmaceuticals Inc. for $5.2 billion last January, and agreed to pay $300 million for Foresight Therapeutics Inc. in August before mounting a $30 billion bid for Baxalta Inc., an Illinois company that recently opened a research-and-development center in Cambridge.

TECHNOLOGY

Endurance to buy Constant Contact

Website hosting company Endurance International Group Holdings Inc. of Burlington will pay $1.1 billion for Constant Contact. The deal will help Endurance offer a broader spectrum of online services to millions of mom-and-pop businesses. Endurance will pay $32 in cash for each of Constant Contact’s 32 million outstanding shares, a 22.6 percent premium compared with last Friday’s closing price for the stock. Constant Contact, founded in 1995, is a leader in e-mail marketing campaigns for small businesses, with about 650,000 customers. Clients use Constant Contact to send advertising materials and newsletters to customers who have asked to receive them. Endurance has marketed Constant Contact’s e-mail services to its clients for about a year.

RETAIL

New CEO at L.L. Bean

Alan Boutot/L.L. Bean via AP New L.L. Bean chief executive Stephen Smith.

L.L. Bean has gone outside its ranks for the first time to pick a chief executive, naming veteran retailer Stephen Smith to lead the 103-year-old company. The Freeport, Maine, retailer has always filled the top job from within the company or founding family. Smith joins L.L. Bean from Yihaodian, an online grocer in China, where he was a chief merchandising and marketing officer. Smith will inherit a growing company that can’t keep up with demand for its signature rubber-toe boots. There is currently a backlog of more than 10,000 orders for Bean Boots. Company revenues hit $1.6 billion last year, up 3.2 percent from 2013.

RETAIL

City Sports to shutter all stores

Jessica Rinaldi/Globe Staff

City Sports, the Boston athletic retailer that filed for bankruptcy in October, plans to hold going-out-of-business sales after failing to find a buyer willing to keep its 26 stores open. Eve Bould, spokeswoman for City Sports Inc., said the sales would begin on Friday. City Sports has locations from Vermont to Virginia, including nine in Massachusetts. The company’s assets will be sold to Hilco Merchant Resources LLC, a unit of Hilco Global of Northbrook, Ill., and Gordon Brothers Retail Partners LLC of Boston, which won an auction overseen by a bankruptcy court in Delaware with a roughly $17 million offer. Creditors are owed $39.6 million.

HEALTH CARE

Big jump in Connector insurance plan rates

Premiums for the most popular plan on the Massachusetts Health Connector — the exchange designed to give consumers access to affordable health insurance — will rise at least 15 percent next year, sticking members with hundreds of dollars in additional costs. The jump, more than double the average increase for all Connector plans, will would affect about 8,000 people who get unsubsidized insurance through the state-run marketplace. The plan is offered by Harvard Pilgrim Health Care, the state’s second-biggest commercial insurer.

UTILITIES

National Grid seeks rate increase

Advertisement

National Grid has requested an increase in its rate for delivering electricity that would boost bills of residential customers by about $9 a month. The utility, which serves around 1.3 million electric customers in Massachusetts, said the higher rates are needed to offset rising prices for expenses such as wooden poles, transformers, and employee salaries. If the measure is approved, the average National Grid household that uses 600 kilowatt-hours of electricity a month would pay 7 percent more, while increases for businesses would vary. Distribution expenses, which make up about a quarter of household electric bills, are different from the costs utilities incur buying electricity from power plants. Those rates are adjusted every six months. Last winter National Grid reported its power costs were 37 percent higher, but the utility estimated they would be lower this winter.

REAL ESTATE

Scientologists sell building

Wendy Maeda/Globe Staff/File The Hotel Alexandra has long needed repair.

After years of delay, the Boston branch of the Church of Scientology will list for sale the decaying but historic building in the South End that it once hoped to convert into a new headquarters. The church had previously declined to sell the five-story Hotel Alexandra, at the corner of Washington Street and Massachusetts Avenue, until it found another site for a new headquarters. But spokesman Kevin Hall said the church decided to put the property up for sale while the real estate market is still strong. Though it is in poor condition, developers have been clamoring to bid on the Alexandra, which was built in 1875.

RETAIL

Owner of Redbox buys Gazelle

Gazelle Inc., the struggling Boston company that resells mobile phones, has been scooped up by the same company that owns DVD rental service Redbox, but it’s not clear the new owner can keep its cellphone resale business alive amid competition from Apple Inc. and wireless carriers. Outerwall Inc., a Seattle-area company that operates several brands of retail kiosks, including Redbox and Coinstar, said in a regulatory filing that it paid $18 million for Gazelle, which had collected about $65 million from investors since its founding in 2006.