Reported concussions dropped for the second consecutive NFL regular season, implying rule changes, cultural shifts and heightened awareness about head injuries have impacted the league.

According to Concussion Watch data of “Frontline” on PBS, players suffered 115 regular-season concussions, compared with 152 in 2013 and 171 in 2012. The Broncos listed six players with concussions on regular-season injury reports.

Receiver Wes Welker and running back C.J. Anderson suffered concussions in the preseason, and safety David Bruton and left guard Orlando Franklin are currently in the concussion protocol leading to the Jan. 11 playoff game at Sports Authority Field at Mile High.

Multiple concussed Broncos agreed that the protocol represented progress even as issues surfaced around the league with players remaining in games after suffering concussions.

Per rules, players diagnosed with concussions must go through a mandatory return-to-play process involving observation, comparison to preseason baseline cognitive testing and physical exertion. Before resuming practice, a player must be cleared by the team doctor and an independent neurological consultant.

All Broncos interviewed said a third party is advantageous in the process.

“They take a lot more precaution on it now. For sure, it helps (with an outside doctor). It’s a conflict,” Welker said. “I feel like it’s a lot easier to be more honest.”

Welker, 33, left in the second quarter Aug. 23 after absorbing a hit to the head from Houston Texans defensive back D.J. Swearinger, who drew a 15-yard penalty but was not fined. It represented Welker’s third concussion in 10 months. He continues to wear a protective helmet with additional padding, which is available to all players.

Welker joined Anderson, who suffered his concussion Aug. 7 against the Seattle Seahawks. The injury “scared” Anderson. He felt grateful that he took his preseason baseline testing seriously.

“The protocol is on the right path. As a player you have to do something to help yourself too. I tried to do my best on the test to make it even harder to get back on the field,” said Anderson, who also made another change to help himself after getting his concussion. “I changed my helmet to a more padded one. When I get hit, I might get another one, but I feel a lot better with this helmet.”

Broncos receiver Emmanuel Sanders chose not to change his headgear after a vicious shoulder-to-helmet hit by St. Louis Rams safety Joe McLeod on Nov. 16. Sanders admitted he would have likely returned to that game if not for the protocol.

“Obviously you don’t want to go back out there not thinking you are OK,” Sanders said. “As annoying as it is, it is beneficial to the training staff and the player. The player knows, ‘I went through all this stuff and I know I am secure.’ It’s better than just going out there and saying, ‘Am I doing the right thing? Am I just doing this because of the love of the game?’ It takes everything out of the training staff’s hands and the player’s hands and puts it in the hands of the doctor, and that’s how it’s supposed to be.”

“More care can be given”

The league received criticism of its handling of concussions after the Broncos-San Diego Chargers game Oct. 23. In a memo obtained by Fox Sports and other media outlets, four top doctors connected to the NFL and NFL Players Association instructed team doctors that they could improve in their following of the concussion guidelines.

“We have generally been pleased with the care provided to players who have suffered concussions in both the preseason and during the first part of the regular season,” the memo from the doctors read. “That said, there remain occasional examples of where more care can be given to adhering to the relevant protocols. Each concussion is a serious injury and must be treated conservatively. All concussion symptoms must be taken seriously by medical staffs and players alike.”

The doctors wrote the memo after an uneasy scene involving San Diego safety Jahleel Addae. Addae tackled Sanders hard, falling to the turf. He was diagnosed with a stinger and returned to the game. He then appeared disoriented following a shoulder hit on Broncos running back Juwan Thompson.

He was later diagnosed with a concussion. According to “Frontline,” the NFL and NFLPA conducted an investigation and identified no problems with the guidelines or the Chargers’ medical staff. The issue, the probe determined, was that a press box spotter — a mandatory athletic trainer jointly hired by the league and union who has access to multiple video views and replay to aid in recognition of an injury — overlooked Addae’s troubling physical reaction to the hit on Thompson.

Unknowing victims



In a competitive environment where playing time and contracts remain at stake, it’s not hard to see why a player might attempt to hide a concussion. Or in tight end Virgil Green’s case — he suffered a concussion at Seattle in the regular season — why he didn’t believe he had one.

“I felt like I could fight through it. Greek (Broncos trainer Steve Antonopulos) and his staff wanted me to sit. To me, unless you are drilling on yourself it’s not a concussion. That’s how my brain processes things. Greek was like, ‘No, no, you are done. Start doing the protocol tests,’ ” Green explained. “I didn’t think it was enough to see a doctor. That’s just me. They stopped me.”

Green and Broncos rookie receiver Cody Latimer called the protocol difficult. Green compared the cognitive testing to “studying for the SAT” in college. Green currently uses Lumosity and Elevate each morning, brain-training games to improve his memory and focus. Latimer missed two games because of a concussion suffered during a practice rep.

“I got through the whole practice and went through meetings and the next day doing drills, I was like, ‘Nah, this isn’t feeling right,’ ” Latimer said. “It was tough to get back out there. I thought I had passed the tests easily. But they were cautious and looking out for me. I came back feeling amazing, so what they did was right.”

Troy E. Renck: trenck@denverpost.com or twitter.com/troyrenck

Concussion data

Six Broncos suffered concussions during the regular season. Two more suffered them in the preseason, and David Bruton and Orlando Franklin are currently in the concussion protocol for the postseason. A look at those affected and time missed, according to data from “Frontline” Concussion Watch and The Denver Post:



(Denver player || Date || Games missed)



RB C.J. Anderson Aug. 7 0



WR Wes Welker Aug. 23 0 *



TE Virgil Green Sept. 21 0



S Omar Bolden Oct. 19 1



LB Lamin Barrow Oct. 23 0



WR Emmanuel Sanders Nov. 16 0



LB Brandon Marshall Nov. 23 0



WR Cody Latimer Dec. 3 2



G Orlando Franklin Dec. 28 In concussion protocol



S David Bruton Dec. 28 In concussion protocol

* Was suspended first two games for violating NFL’s PED policy