It’s not all in your head — Sarasota is a tough place to live if you suffer from spring allergies.

Sarasota ranked 86th in the country on a list of the 100 worst places for spring allergy sufferers in 2015, compiled by the Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America.

Florida had nine cities on the list, with Miami and Jacksonville leading as the worst places in the state, and 28th and 30th in the nation, respectively. Jackson, Mississippi, was the worst city in the country for spring allergies, followed by Louisville, Kentucky, and Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.

The cities were ranked based on the amount of pollen in each cubic meter of air daily, the amount of allergy medication used by each patient in the city and the number of certified allergists per 10,000 patients.

So far this year, local doctors have not seen an outsized number of allergy patients at urgent care clinics and emergency rooms. And local pollen levels are typical for this period, said Dr. Mary Jelks, a retired allergist who counts pollen daily in Sarasota.

For the most part, said Dr. Brad Hoover, medical director of the emergency department at Doctors Hospital in Sarasota, patients can treat themselves with overthe- counter antihistamines such as Zyrtec or Claritin, and even escalate to the over-the-counter nasal steroids Flonase and Nasonex.

“In most cases, spring allergies are just unpleasant,” Hoover said.

However, seasonal allergies can aggravate existing conditions, especially asthma.“If you find that you can’t get a deep breath, and the allergy symptoms are causing wheezing, that’s when allergies can take a dangerous turn,” Hoover said.

Another sign that allergies are out of control could be a fever, said Dr. Arno Loeffler, an urgent care physician at the Sarasota Memorial urgent care centers at University Parkway and Heritage Harbor.

“The biggest things to watch for are symptoms like fever, or worsening shortness of breath,” Loeffler said. “Sometimes the allergies can lead to sinus infections, which can present as progressively worsening face or teeth pain that does not go away.”

More than 45 million Americans suffer from some form of seasonal allergies, according to researchers from the Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America.

The leading culprit making Sarasota residents miserable is oak pollen, Jelks said. Grass pollen and ragweed levels are low, according to the latest local pollen forecasts.

Still, anyone working outside and coming into contact with grass clippings and pollen should wear a mask to shield themselves from the full effects of the pollen, Hoover advised.

Pollen levels in the air are also typically higher justafter sunrise and just beforesunset, Loeffler said, so if you know you’re having trouble with pollen allergies, stay inside at those times of day.

“If you’re suffering from pollen allergies, don’t take a walk first thing in the morning or at sunset,” Loeffler said. “Also, if you’re opening windows at night, make sure to shut them before the sun comes up so you keep the pollen outside of the house.”

There is some good news on the horizon, however. The worst of the spring allergies will be over by the end of April, Loeffler said.