Please consider disabling it for our site, or supporting our work in one of these ways

Alex Brandon/Associated Press Is there a story that better illustrates the arbitrary and capricious nature of our criminal justice systems today than the story of George Zimmerman's just-ended online art auction? Some men kill and go to prison-- sentenced to life or death. Some men go to prison even if they haven't killed-- for life and sometimes for death. And then some men kill, don't go to prison, and then somehow become celebrities who sell their paintings for over $100,000. Indeed, the randomness in this case is most telling because it exists on the macro and not on the micro scale. Zimmerman was acquitted in July of murdering young Trayvon Martin not because of some error in the application of the law but by virtue of the jury's faithful application of it. Zimmerman simply benefited from Florida's dubious judgment that some of its residents ought to be allowed more freedom to kill some of its other residents.

The arbitrariness of the Zimmerman story doesn't end there. For the state that ensured that his killing of the unarmed Martin would be "justified" and thus not punishable under law is the same state that is contorting itself these days in an effort to kill a man named Freddy Lee Hall, an intellectually disabled inmate who ought to be protected from execution by the United States Supreme Court's ruling in Atkins v. Virginia. We want to spare from punishment men, like Zimmerman, who knowingly kill, Florida said in 2013, but we will not spare from lethal injection men, like Hall, whose mental disabilities preclude them from understanding the nature of capital punishment. And yet it is Zimmerman who is hailed in many places as a hero and it is Hall whose story is buried. This is the context in which this weekend's travesty upon justice occurred. As reported by the Orlando Sentinel: George Zimmerman earned a new title Saturday — professional artist — when eBay bidding ended in six figures on his oil painting. The winning bid: $100,099.99. It wasn't immediately known who bought Zimmerman's original oil painting showing part of an American flag washed in blue with the words "God," "one nation" and "with liberty and justice for all" printed in the flag stripes. The painting had received 96 bids from 24 bidders since the auction started Monday, said eBay, which doesn't disclose bidders' names online. Bidding ended at 12:55 p.m. Saturday. "Whoever wins within the Continental United States, will receive this painting delivered by me personally. Your friend," Zimmerman said on eBay. Some killers go to prison. Other killers get paid six figures to be "your friend." How does America make this impossible distinction? Well, it depends first upon who you are and who you kill. If you are white and kill someone who is black you are more likely to have the chance to deliver in person the art you have sold online than if you are black and kill someone who is white. Racial disparity in murder cases extends broadly from the prosecutor's charging discretion, to the selection of juries, to cross-racial eyewitness identification and to the sentences imposed by judges.