Photo of Sutter Health CEO, Pat Fry, from Sutter Health News

After a 30-plus-year career with Northern California's nonprofit giants Sutter Health, President and CEO Pat Fry announced Tuesday that he will retire in January.

Chief Operating Officer Sarah Krevans will replace him as CEO, the first female to lead the organization since it was created in 1981.

Krevans, 56, has been Sutter Health's chief operating officer since 2012 and a Sutter Health executive for 16 years.

In 2011 Northern California's Women Healthcare Executives named her Woman of the Year.

Fry, 57, became president and CEO in 2005. He originally joined Sutter Health as an administrative resident at Sacramento's Sutter General Hospital. In 10 years, he rose to the position of CEO of Sutter General and Memorial hospitals. He went on to hold region and division executive leadership positions, assuming the position of Sutter Health's chief operating officer in 2000.

[Also: Sutter posts $402 million in operating income for 2014]

During Fry's tenure, Sutter Health's annual revenues grew from $6.7 billion to more than $10 billion.

Over the past decade, Sutter Health’s investment in charity care and community benefit exceeded $6 billion.

He led Sutter Health during the building or replacement of more than a dozen acute care hospitals and major outpatient facilities and the establishment of numerous new physician care centers around Northern California.

Like Healthcare Finance on Facebook

Fry’s tenure includes the creation of the Sutter Medical Network uniting Sutter's 5,000 aligned and affiliated physicians around common quality commitments; My Health Online, which provides more than 1 million Northern Californians with anytime online access to their personal health records; and the growing Sutter Health Plus health plan.

"Pat leaves an incredible legacy of achievement and decisive strategies to improve quality, access and affordability," said Sutter Health Board Chair Todd Smith, MD, in a statement. "Under Pat's leadership, Sutter Health became a national leader in clinical quality and greatly expanded community access to healthcare in big cities and small towns throughout Northern California."

Twitter: @SusanMorseHFN