Have you read the Affordable Care Act from end to end? Congress didn’t. Congressional Democrats, famously, had to pass it to find out what was in it. To this day, it’s doubtful that any member of Congress has read Obamacare from start to finish.

So what a gift it is that President Obama has afforded the American public the opportunity to read his administration’s latest legislative pride and joy: the Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement. It’s only twice as lengthy as the Obamacare bill that Congress couldn’t be bothered to read. As Sen. Jeff Sessions (R-Ala.) observed in a tweet earlier this week, the stacked TTP document is roughly 3 feet tall — almost tall enough to go on roller coasters.

Should bills and laws be available and easily accessible to the people whom those laws both govern and (ostensibly) protect? Yes.

Should a law’s biggest partisan supporter claim a moral victory by hoarding away the key to its availability — and then begging praise when he unlocks the door? You tell us. “Barack Obama” himself introduces the TPP on the website the White House established for its public release. There’s even a little picture of him out beside his name … almost like this is all just a silly post on Instagram.

Aside from being 5,554 pages long, the TPP — like most other word jumbles that pass as laws these days — is jam-packed with acronyms, jargon and convoluted legal expressions that are meaningless to anyone who isn’t getting paid (read: lawyers) to write, interpret and exploit it.

Here’s a completely random sample from a TPP section on how we’re all going to handle trading in encryption-capable electronic goods. Printed out, it’s about one page in length. When you’re done reading this, you can smile with the satisfaction of knowing that there are only 5,553 pages standing between Barack Obama’s transparency and your enlightened gratitude:

Section A: Information and Communication Technology (ICT) Products that Use Cryptography This section applies to information and communication technology (ICT) products that use cryptography. For greater certainty, for purposes of this section, a “product” is a good and does not include financial instruments. For the purposes of this section: cryptography means the principles, means or methods for the transformation of data in order to hide its information content, prevent its undetected modification or prevent its unauthorized use; and is limited to the transformation of information using one or more secret parameters (e.g., crypto variables) or associated key management; encryption means the conversion of data (plaintext) into a form that cannot be easily understood without subsequent re-conversion (ciphertext) through the use of a cryptographic algorithm; cryptographic algorithm or cipher means a mathematical procedure or formula for combining a key with plaintext to create a ciphertext; and key means a parameter used in conjunction with a cryptographic algorithm that determines its operation in such a way that an entity with knowledge of the key can reproduce or reverse the operation, while an entity without knowledge of the key cannot. With respect to a product that uses cryptography and is designed for commercial applications, no Party may impose or maintain a technical regulation or conformity assessment procedure that requires a manufacturer or supplier of the product, as a condition of the manufacture, sale, distribution, import or use of the product, to: (a) transfer or provide access to a particular technology, production process, or other information (such as a private key or other secret parameter, algorithm specification or other design detail), that is proprietary to the manufacturer or supplier and relates to the cryptography in the product, to the Party or a person in the Party’s territory; (b) partner with a person in its territory; or (c) use or integrate a particular cryptographic algorithm or cipher, other than where the manufacture, sale, distribution, import or use of the product is by or for the government of the Party. Paragraph 3 shall not apply to: (a) requirements that a Party adopts or maintains relating to access to networks that are owned or controlled by the government, including those of central banks; or (b) measures taken pursuant to supervisory, investigatory or examination authority relating to financial institutions or markets. For greater certainty, nothing in this Section shall be construed to prevent law enforcement authorities from requiring service suppliers using encryption they control from providing, pursuant to legal procedures, unencrypted communications.

Documents like this one are keys to the kingdom. If you’re among the political class with a stake in writing it, explaining it, benefiting from it, or knowing where its lapses lie, you’re in. You’re a shareholder in an exclusive and self-enriching club. By design, everyone else is out. Their only role in a law like this one is to buy stuff and, for the relative handful who still have jobs, to make and move the stuff.

As Bob Livingston said:

As various GOP presidential candidates have pointed out, the TPP doesn’t have to look like this. The U.S. tax code doesn’t have to look like this. The Constitution on which our nation is founded doesn’t look like this. Perhaps that’s one small reason why people who read and understand it can take justifiable civic pride in its power: It was written to serve the citizens, for any educated person to understand. Almost any sentient person — even a foreigner who reads our founding documents and dreams of becoming an American — can be a shareholder.

But to put a document like this one in front of people, under the moral aegis of being open and honest, is to be so confident in its impenetrable, lengthy and loophole-laden verbiage that it amounts to hiding the truth in plain sight.