It has been a challenge for many Americans -- and many people watching from overseas -- to understand the Tea Party's willingness to cause the country so much harm in its zeal to repeal a law designed to extend access to health care and comprehensive health insurance to all Americans. No doubt many books will be written on the subject, but for now, Dr. Lawrence Rosenthal has offered a concise history and analysis in "The Tea Party, the government shutdown, and Obamacare," a policy brief published by The Foundation for Law, Justice and Society at Oxford. Rosenthal is the executive director of the Center for Right Wing Studies at the University of California, Berkeley and the co-editor of Steep: The Precipitous Rise of the Tea Party, which was published by the University of California last year.

In just half a dozen pages, Rosenthal puts into historical and legal perspective the Tea Partiers' recent rampage. "Tea Party politicians and activists speak openly of this as a 'last chance to save America.' This is the context in which bringing economic ruin to the country can be contemplated."

He reminds us that the Tea Party first built a head of steam by sending people to disrupt congressional town hall meetings on health care reform "with aggressive tactics that left many Congresspeople intimidated and shaken." That approach, he says, "was, in effect, extra-parliamentary: it was attempting to prevent a legislative outcome that national elections did not sustain."

Rosenthal argues that Tea Partiers bring to a reading of the Constitution the same approach that Christian fundamentalists bring to reading the Bible, resisting any interpretation that clashes with what they believe is the inerrant word. And he writes that the Tea Party blends populism with the free-market absolutism of the Koch Brothers, ideological descendants of those who objected to the New Deal.

What makes the Tea Party unique in the march of modern American conservatism is that the passions of the populist right, the uncompromising, expressive side of American conservatism, were brought to bear in the name of the doctrines of the fiscal absolutists. Suddenly, the zeal and the vitriol usually reserved for opposing abortion or the 'gay agenda' were being directed against Keynesian stimulus legislation, cap and trade climate legislation, economic regulation, taxation, and, above all, expansion of health insurance coverage to tens of millions of uninsured Americans.

Rosenthal traces the Tea Party's fierce hostility to Obamacare to zero-sum thinking in American conservatism, not only for benefits from government (e.g. Obamacare must hurt people now on Medicare) but for liberty itself. As an example of that thinking he cites Robert Bork's position that the Civil Rights Act reflected "unsurpassed ugliness" because it treated the black person's right to be served as superior to the restaurant owner's right to deny service. (We certainly see this zero-sum approach to liberty reflected in the insistence of Religious Right leaders that LGBT equality and religious liberty are inherently incompatible.) Rosenthal sees this zero-sum attitude -- "the Tea Party's feeling that Obamacare means that something of theirs is being taken away and given to others" as "the defining element of a Tea Party constitutionalism."

And it is the principle that translates the virulence, the fierce resistance of the Tea Party, into a legal theory. It is a principle that rationalizes the Tea Party's willingness to threaten national financial ruin in the form of a government shutdown and a potential debt default if Obamacare, now being implemented as the law of the land, is not stopped.

Note: The Center for Right Wing Studies at the University of California Berkeley is now home to People For the American Way's library of original source materials on the history of the Religious Right, where it is accessible to researchers and journalists.

Follow Peter Montgomery on Twitter: www.twitter.com/petemont