Topics: 1 percent, Capital gains taxes, Class warfare, Eric Bernstein, Inequality, Joseph Stiglitz, Lee-Rubio, Marco Rubio, Mike Lee, Roosevelt Institute, Tax reform, trickle down, News, Politics News

If you’re a close observer of American politics — and if you’re reading this piece, the chances are pretty good that you are — then you’re quite likely aware of the supposedly extant and burgeoning “reformicon movement.” The movement, of which this author is a definite skeptic, bills itself as a group of policy wonks and policy-minded politicians who are interested in “reforming” American conservatism by shifting the GOP’s focus from cutting taxes on the 1 percent to using the tax code to support middle-class families. And because much of what ails America today would be mitigated if the Republican Party were less fanatic in its hatred of taxes, the reformicons have gotten some liberal commentators very, very excited.

Only time will tell if the reformicons have the policy substance to back-up the media’s hype. Sadly, the recent release of a new tax plan from Sens. Marco Rubio and Mike Lee, who are both seen as at least reformicon-friendly, is not a good sign. In keeping with their stated desire to support middle-class earners with children, the two senators claimed in an op-ed for the Wall Street Journal earlier this month, that their reforms would “end the unfair treatment of our ultimate investor class: America’s moms and dads.” But when Eric Harris Bernstein of the liberal Roosevelt Institute took a close look at the plan’s specifics, he found that while it did much to increase the income of the wealthy and corporations, the Lee-Rubio framework was much less concerned with giving workers more than lip service.

Recently, Salon communicated with Bernstein via email to talk about the Lee-Rubio tax plan, and whether it helped show that the reformicon movement was more than an attempt to rebrand conservatism for America’s inequality-anxious elites. Our correspondence is below and has been lightly edited for clarity.

What were you keeping your eye out for when you read the plan for the first time in terms of judging the sincerity of the “reform” claims? And what did you find?



Well, first it is important to note that, although Rubio has consulted reformocons and credited their ideas, neither he nor this plan befit that label; his ideas – as exemplified by this plan – are still very much Reagan-era. The rhetoric might be different, but these are essentially the same policies conservatives have been selling for the past 30 years. They may have replaced “trickle-down” with more populist phrasing, but the policies are the same.

In one way they do depart significantly from classic conservative doctrine: By cutting all capital gains taxes, Republicans would add trillions to the national debt. In the sense that conservatives profess to abhor debt, this represents an enormous break from Republican policies.

Is there anything in the plan that’s new that you’d consider a step in the right direction?



Let’s be clear — there is very little in this plan that helps anyone other than the wealthiest Americans. Five years ago, in the midst of post-crisis upheaval, few would have dared propose such an enormous tax break for the wealthy. Now Rubio and Lee think they have found an opening to twist the inequality debate into an opportunity to push extreme, regressive tax proposals.