Brombeere Blackberry Gose from Odell Brewing Co. in Fort Collins, Colo., is 4.8% ABV. (Photo: Todd Haefer, The (Appleton, Wis.) Post-Crescent)

Beer Man is a weekly profile of beers from across the country and around the world.

This week: Brombeere Blackberry Gose

Odell Brewing Co., Fort Collins, Colo.

http://odellbrewing.com

I just realized the nation’s breweries are no different from Hollywood, where if one studio hears another is making a Christopher Columbus movie, they have to make one too. If there’s a “Jaws,” it is soon followed by “Piranha” and “Orca.”

About three years ago, black India pale ales proliferated on the store shelves — in less than a year, there were more than 1,000 of them being offered. Then it was sour beers. This year, gose beers are appearing left and right. Like all trends, there are highlights and lowlights.

The gose style has a centuries-old tradition in the Germanic regions, with records of it being made in Goslar by the Gose River and then in Leipzig. It traditionally contains more wheat malt than barley, is soured with lactic bacteria and contains salt and coriander. I find it similar to the Berliner Weiss style.

Many of the goses I have tried are essentially carbonated vinegar with no real presence of salt, coriander or malt. They lack the complexity of their European counterparts.

With Brombeere Blackberry Gose, it’s good to see Odell come out with a gose variation that is tasty and refreshing, hitting all the right notes, with the addition of blackberry for something to latch onto besides the sour.

Brombeere started out with a light blackberry aroma — I didn’t catch much more than that. Its head died fairly quickly, but that was no indication of the carbonation of the ale. The blackberry flavor is prominent, with a slight tang from the salt and a bit of citrus from the coriander. There also were background notes of light malt.

The sour aspect is more of a tartness than vinegary, and there is little sugar, so this is not a half-and-half sweet-sour beer such as Duchesse de Bourgogne.

What makes the 4.8% ABV beer so refreshing, however, is the carbonation. When I took a big swig, it was like a hundred little pinpricks on my tongue and palate. Between the cold liquid, the blackberry flavor and the carbonation, it was a nice tasting.

The only downside is that the beer only lasted about five minutes — I couldn’t just sip it.

Odell beers are available in 11 states (Colorado and surrounding states) and a Beer Finder page is available here.

Many beers are available only regionally. Check the brewer's website, which often contains information on product availability by mail. Contact Todd Haefer at beerman@postcrescent.com. To read previous Beer Man columns, click here.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1MQ5wvY