Photo of News On 6 reporter Allison Harris at her desk in the newsroom.

We're introducing you to another member of the News On 6 team today. We've started this new feature on NewsOn6.com so you can get to know the people who bring you the news every day.

Next up is reporter Allison Harris. Allison has been a part of the News On 6 team for only a short time, but has already covered a wide variety of stories in Green Country and fallen in love with Tulsa.

1. What was your first job in television news?

My very first on-air experience was anchoring my high school's "Bronco News Network" show that aired at lunchtime! My friends told me I talked too loudly. In college, I was an anchor, reporter and producer for OU Nightly, the University of Oklahoma's student-run newscast. Two weeks after graduation, I started working as a reporter at KXII in Sherman, Texas, in which I got to cover both North Texas and Southern Oklahoma. A viewer there described me as "the goofy blonde that always talks with her hands" … spot on!

2. You have 15 minutes of free time, what do you do?

Watch Dateline or 48 Hours. I'm obsessed, and also a bit embarrassed to admit that. I would be doing that, or shopping. Nordstrom Rack opened in Tulsa within weeks of me moving up here. I think that's a sign.

I also LOVE trying new restaurants. That's my family's favorite past time!

3. What's in the console of your car?

Clothes, clothes and more clothes. I have three blazers that need dry cleaning: navy blue polka-dots, baby blue and black. I have two bags of clothes for consignment. And I have water bottles – probably three or four. Those things just collect in cars!

4. What's your hidden talent?

Gah, that question always gets me. I want to say "competing in triathlons" or "running marathons", but really, I'm a pretty ordinary girl. I will say, I have always loved being a leader and maximizing organizations I'm a part of. During my freshman year of college, I co-founded a nonprofit to bring motivational speakers into the high schools in my hometown. I love leadership development and have always been highly involved in my community (class president, captain of the debate team, sorority president, etc.). Type A, first-born-child, anyone?

I'm especially good at making lists, organizing, planning my dream wardrobe on Pinterest and making itineraries for trips. I'm pretty sure half of my college study abroad group despised me because I would turn a weekend trip to Paris into an excursion to Versailles and a day of relaxation into a visit to Tate Modern, Millennium Bridge and St. Peter's Cathedral (I also love museums).

I think my hidden talent has become my public profession. I am genuinely passionate about storytelling and believe in the power of good journalism. I chose a career that connects me with inspirational people and allows me to craft their stories to, hopefully, inform and encourage others. It can also be quite the adrenaline rush, too!

5. What was your high school mascot?

McKinney Boyd Broncos! Let ‘em run! If you haven't visited McKinney, Texas, you should! My parents still live in the house I grew up in, and the city's downtown is just dreamy! My parents always joke that our family was a whole football game: my brother, John, played football, my brother, Steven, in the band, and me, the cheerleader.

6. How would you describe Tulsa to someone who's never been here?

It's the perfect size – not too big, not too small. The retail is great. The restaurants, delicious. I love that Tulsans love all things local – farmer's markets, craft beer, coffee, local bands. My favorite areas are Brookside and the Brady Arts District. On any given weekend, you have the option of attending a Drillers' game, listening to live music at Guthrie Green, going to a festival, brunching, running Riverside, going to the Tulsa Ballet, doing an art crawl… the list goes on! The people here are the BEST!

Follow Allison on Facebook and Twitter.

7/1/2014: Related Story: 6 Things You Didn't Know About News On 6 Reporter Emory Bryan

6/26/2014: Related Story: 6 Things You Didn't Know About News On 6 Reporter Tess Maune

6/23/2014: Related Story: 6 Things You Didn't Know About News On 6 Anchor Chera Kimiko

6/20/2014: Related Story: 6 Things You Didn't Know About News On 6 Anchor Jennifer Loren