Sophomore Zach Vittetoe, 15, works on placing wheels on wooden trains Thursday at Berthoud High School. Robb Sommerfeld's pre-engineering and construction class has been working on building toy trains that will be donated to children in area hospitals for Christmas. ( Lilia Munoz )

The students in two of Robb Sommerfeld's classes are elves of sorts, cutting, sanding and building toy trains to give to children in area hospitals.

"At first, it was hard to get them to do it, because they wanted to work on their own projects," said Sommerfeld, chairman of the industrial technology and pre-engineering department at Berthoud High School.

Sommerfeld persuaded the students in his construction 2 classes to mass produce 50 trains by telling them, "You're doing this for a bunch of little kids who are sick," he said. "Let's crank these out."

Now, the students are excited about the project, which is funded through a 2013-14 Creativity Grant from the Thompson Education Foundation called the "Toy Train Project for Kids in Hospitals." The trains will be distributed to children during the holidays.

Senior Marla Hanford, 17, works on sanding wooden train pieces on Thursday at Berthoud High School. The pre-engineering and construction class has finished over 30 toy trains so far, and they hope to make 50 sets they can donate to children in area hospitals. ( Lilia Munoz )

"They actually care about the craftsmanship going into it, because they know it will go to somebody who will appreciate it," Sommerfeld said.

Sommerfeld wrote the grant to encourage girls to take the construction and pre-engineering classes offered at the school. There are four girls taking construction 2 and two girls taking pre-engineering this year, he said.

The pre-engineering students designed the train engines, using three-dimensional parametric modeling software.

Construction 2 students used the preliminary designs to build the trains out of pine and poplar, using an assembly line process.

They cut out the basic shape for the engine, sanded the wood and added a cylindrical piece for the steam engine, using vegetable oil to seal the wood. They used shaker pegs to make the smokestack and wheels that were pre-ordered to save time and money, Sommerfeld said.

"I'm basically making them so there's no pointy edges at all, just rounding them a little bit," said Marla Hanford, a 12th-grader in Sommerfeld's construction 2 class, about sanding the engine blocks.

Hanford is one of 80 students who worked on the project.

"I like that other kids can play with them," Sommerfeld said.

Tenth-grader Zach Vittetoe likes that he can improve his work with each engine he makes.

"It's always about improving myself," the 15-year-old said. "I can always do better."

Tenth-grader Jonathan Brown likes that the trains are simple to make and will benefit children, he said.

"Usually, they're not having the best of time in their life in the hospital. This gives them a little happiness," he said.

Sommerfeld put calls out to area hospitals and plans to deliver the finished train engines on Wednesday, he said.

His project came in under budget, which was $850, so he will continue it next year and get sponsors for the trains, he said.

"Part of the train project is to show this is a fun thing for girls to get involved in," Sommerfeld said.

Shelley Widhalm can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 531, or swidhalm@

reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @ShelleyWidhalm. Read her blog: shelleywidhalm.wordpress.com.