Working mothers who are earning six-figure salaries may be denied access to the Abbott government's much-vaunted paid parental leave (PPL) scheme as it looks to review the policy over the summer.

The revelation comes as a new poll shows the Coalition continues to trail behind the Opposition on a two-party preferred basis.

On Sunday, Mr Abbott fronted media after mounting speculation he would dump the policy that would see women earning up to $150,000 receiving six months' pay - a scheme he touted in the lead up to last year's election.

Scroll down for video

Working mothers will reportedly be denied access to the Abbott government's paid parental leave scheme

Mr Abbott said in the coming months he and his colleagues would be looking at the Productivity Commission's report into childcare to deliver a more 'holistic' scheme.

'We will be better targeting our parental leave scheme so that we can not only deliver [one] that really helps out families but we can deliver a more available and more affordable childcare,' he told reporters.

Mr Abbott would not be drawn into a discussion about whether or not there would be an adjustment to the threshold for the scheme but did say it would still include superannuation and advantage small business who will benefit for the first time from a policy like this.

'This is our time to get it right, this is our time to do the right thing by the families of Australia and to do it in a way which is fair, which is reasonable, and particularly helps small business,' he said.

Tony Abbott is so keen to get his paid parental leave scheme into law he's bowed to voter pressure and is working on a plan that will deny it to women earning more than $150,000 a year

The government's proposed scheme provides working mums with six months leave on full pay and super

As it stands right now, Mr Abbott's scheme - which is to be funded by a 1.5 per cent impost on big business - would see the current payout cap of $50,000 lowered, a new means test and the redirection of money to childcare.

This means those who use carers working in the family home, such as nannies and family daycare workers, would be eligible for the 50 per cent rebate.

'More affordable childcare helps with the cost of living; and flexibility and accessibility in the system will make life so much easier for many families,' Mr Abbott told the Sunday Telegraph on Saturday.

Recommendations from the Productivity Commission to redirect funds from the PPL into childcare are believed to be behind the prime minister's change of heart - together with the need to win over a hostile Senate.

The existing parental leave scheme, introduced by Labor, offers 18 weeks pay at minimum wage and does not include superannuation.

The government's proposed scheme provides working mothers with six months leave on full pay and includes super.

Prime minister believes the combination of PPL and affordable childcare could get more women into workforce

The policy back flip comes as a new Galaxy poll shows the Coalition has experienced a four-point drop in popularity since October, the Sunday Telegraph reported.

Labor is ten points ahead of the government based on a two-party preferred basis on 55 per cent.

It comes more than a week after Health Minister Peter Dutton confirmed the government was abandoning another key budget policy, the $7 general practitioner co-payment.

Last Friday, Mr Dutton told the ABC the government was looking at 'different options', but he would not say what these were.

He added: 'We are determined to send a price signal to make Medicare sustainable.'

But it is not just opposition from rival parties that the government faces in relation to the controversial co-payment.

It has also been criticised by Coalition backbenchers.

Queensland senator Ian McDonald previously said he would not throw his support behind the policy.