Porches and patios unite a house with a yard and provide a portal from an interior to an exterior. Colorado’s climate, with its sprinkling of 70-degree days in December and cool summer evenings — make these outdoor areas near-year-round living rooms.

And when a porch or patio is all you have for outdoor space, it can be an extra challenge to make those rooms garden spaces.

“More and more, we’re seeing new homes being built with front porches to help neighbors create a stronger sense of community,” said Annie Huston, an owner of Birdsall & Co. and Columbine Design.

Porches are covered, walled and often partially enclosed. Old-fashioned porches once brought to mind senior citizens in rocking chairs, but anyone can enjoy a porch.

Whether soothing a baby to sleep in a porch swing, reading on a chaise lounge, or entertaining guests, a porch offers a sheltered experience of the outdoors.

Ceilings and walls make a porch an enclosed space. On a patio, you have the option of walls if you want — and not if you don’t. Some patios create walls with hedges or vine-clad fences, or get shelter from an overhanging roof.

Patios, on the other hand, are often open to the capricious sky. If yours is, and you crave a sense of enclosure, let a tree provide a leafy canopy. Market umbrellas, pergolas or awnings can also grant protection from the elements.

“The patio can become a second living room,” said Laurie Jekel, owner of The Last Detail design shop. “The patio should be an extension of the house, very homey, decorated much as you would an interior.”

And whether it’s a porch or a patio, gardening in containers will add color and life.

For a sequestered patio that she designed for a historic house in central Denver, Jekel planted large ceramic containers with plants that can cope with spring cold, even snow.

“The containers are woodsy and natural to go with the storybook style of the house,” Jekel said. “The house doesn’t have a back yard, so the patio is their outdoor living space.”

The homeowners enjoy their stately terrace for coffee in the morning, wine in the evening, family dinners and parties for friends. Complete with flagstone underfoot, a large stone fireplace and plenty of comfortable furniture, the patio is a tranquil courtyard.

Gardens, including those confined to containers, should engage the five senses, Jekel said: “You want to see it, feel it, smell it, taste it and hear it. I like water features on a porch or patio. They’re soothing, and that’s what we all need.”

In her outdoor-room designs for porches, Huston considers two primary factors: traffic — whether it’s foot or cars — and orientation to the sun.

“Eastern exposure is perfect for morning coffee,” she said. “Western exposure is great for sundowner cocktails.”

A beautiful porch can promote community — or provide privacy.

“If you’re designing a space for privacy, think about using planted containers to create a green room,” said Huston. “If you plan on chatting with passers-by and people-watching, keep the space open,” she advised, and use the planted containers on the path that leads up to the porch.

Gardening on a porch can lengthen Colorado’s short growing season.

“A microclimate is created because of the protection afforded by the walls and roof,” said Huston. “Plants will be able to withstand cold temperatures on a porch longer than those planted in your garden.”

Colleen Smith is a regular contributor to Grow and reviews concerts for heyreverb.com.

Planning a porch or patio garden

• Consider how you use it. Outdoor kitchen/dining? A place to sit and read? Do you crave privacy, or community?

• Measure. Using the dimensions of an outdoor space, draw a plan. “This will prevent the mistake of buying outsized furniture or cluttering your porch,” said Annie Huston.

• Furnish. Both Huston and Laurie Jekel add furniture first. “Work with the style of your house,” Jekel said. Huston recommends teak as an option that can stay outside all year.

“Invest in timeless furniture as the backbone of your porch,” Huston said. “Complement the style and color of your home’s facade and the closest door to avoid clashing colors.”

• Accessorize. In addition to cushions and pillows, add confort with seasonal accessories. “Consider an outdoor heater, mosquito screens and WiFi to make your space as functional as your living room or den,” Huston said.

Jekel adds bowls of seashells, coasters, a mirror and architectural pieces. “Plaques are wonderful, anything iron, anything antique,” she said. “Antique iron gates mounted on a wall give another dimension.”

• Light. Illuminate your patio with solar lights, candles, lanterns and chandeliers. “I love those faux candles on timers,” Jekel said. “They look real, but there’s no fire hazard.”

• Container plants. “Porch garden plants are seen, touched and smelled up-close,” Huston said. “Consider veined, bicolor and double blooms, variegated leaves, fragrant plants, herbs and edible flowers.”

Jekel is big on dwarf trees in large pots. “They add interest, even in winter,” she said. Jekel pots dwarf Japanese maples, evergreens and hydrangea, as well as Meyer lemons, noting that citrus trees must overwinter inside.

• View. “It’s always nice to have something beautiful or interesting to look at from the porch,” Huston said.