According to the report, the informant gave Jenkins $2,300 of supposed stolen money two weeks ago, but that money has not been turned into any TPD property room.

A Tulsa Police officer was arrested Monday for conspiracy to sell cocaine. According to the arrest report, it was a criminal informant that helped cops catch one of their own.

Tyrone Jenkins was booked into the Tulsa County jail Monday afternoon, but bonded out just a little more than an hour later. Tulsa police aren't saying much, but the arrest and booking report indicates Jenkins was using a criminal informant for his own personal gain.

It wasn't too long ago News On 6 featured Jenkins in a story, as he and some fellow officers brought Christmas presents to 50 needy families back in 2012.

12/19/2012 Related Story: Tulsa Police Deliver Presents To Kids Santa May Have Missed

"Officers who work throughout this community might recognize a family and know that they're going through hard times," Jenkins said at the time.

Now, fast forward to this February; the arrest report says that's when an informant first reached out to Jenkins to tell him about an apartment that was left with a large sum of money after two people were arrested.

The informant offered to get the money, but needed an address first. The report says Jenkins used TPD computers and software to run tag numbers to find the address.

According to the report, the informant gave Jenkins $2,300 of supposed stolen money two weeks ago, but that money has not been turned into any TPD property room. The report also says Jenkins met with the informant again Monday. This time the informant had $800 and 34 grams of cocaine that were also supposed to be from that apartment, but the report shows cops gave the drugs and money to the informant.

The report says Jenkins took the money, but not the cocaine. Instead of taking the drugs, according to the report, Jenkins told the informant he would need to sell them, so he made a phone call and asked the informant to talk with a man about selling the cocaine.

Chief Chuck Jordan isn't releasing any more information at this time, including Jenkins' future with the department.