Slidell Police Chief Randy Smith unseated longtime incumbent Jack Strain in Saturday's (Nov. 21) St. Tammany Parish Sheriff's race, culminating an aggressive campaign that portrayed the north shore's largest law enforcement agency as one mired in complacency and in dire need of new leadership.

Smith, who finished 8 percentage points behind the five-term incumbent in the Oct. 24 primary, sought to turn Strain's long tenure against him in the runoff and stepped up his media campaign over the past few weeks. His come-from-behind victory means that St. Tammany will have a new sheriff for the first time since 1996.

"From the beginning, our campaign has felt incredible momentum," said Smith, celebrating his victory at the Slidell auditorium. "Challenging an entrenched incumbent took courage, not just for me but for the thousands of supporters who were ready for a change. We're obviously ecstatic at this outcome and look forward to the transition leading up to the oath of office on July 1."

Strain said he is proud of the service the Sheriff's Office provided to the community during his tenure and promised to work toward a smooth transition to the new administration.

"We did the job the public wanted us to do," Strain told WVUE Fox 8 News. "We'll spend the next seven months making sure the agency is ready for the transition."

In the four-candidate primary, Strain collected 45 percent of the vote, Smith 37 percent. Former federal agent Scott Illing finished third with 14 percent, and retired Navy Chief Petty Officer Jennifer "Hap" Werther took 3 percent. Illing announced that he was voting for Strain in the runoff, but he stopped short of a full endorsement. Werther threw her support behind Smith.

Strain ran on his record, highlighting statistics that he said point to a declining crime rate since he took office in 1996. Strain said that almost every category of crime decreased despite a population boom. His campaign literature said that 94 percent of all violent crimes in St. Tammany are solved and 61 percent of non-violent crimes are solved, which is almost triple the national average.

The longtime sheriff's campaign sought to distance him from former District Attorney Walter Reed and former Coroner Peter Galvan, two other longtime St. Tammany office holders who were indicted on corruption charges in the past two years. In television commercials and campaign literature, Strain portrayed himself as a trustworthy sheriff and said he was "outraged to see elected leaders abuse their office and hurt our parish." While he didn't mention Reed or Galvan by name, he touted his own integrity, proclaiming, "It's what you deserve. It's what I stand for."

Smith, a deputy sheriff for 24 years before being elected Slidell police chief in 2010, charged that politics was running rampant in the Sheriff's Office under Strain's leadership, an allegation the incumbent denied. If elected, Smith vowed to cut wasteful spending, mentioning a rarely used Sheriff's Office helicopter and a new $10 million crime laboratory as examples of questionable expenditures. Cutting the waste could allow the Sheriff's Office to bolster salaries of deputies, he said.