Stefanik continues to chart own course on key issues Congresswoman finds ways to honor GOP, local electorate









Photo: Connor Radnovich Image 1 of / 3 Caption Close Image 1 of 3 Buy photo U.S. Rep. Elise Stefanik during a House Armed Services Committee hearing, Jan. 28, 2015, in Washington, DC. (Connor Radnovich/Times Union archive) U.S. Rep. Elise Stefanik during a House Armed Services Committee hearing, Jan. 28, 2015, in Washington, DC. (Connor Radnovich/Times Union archive) Photo: Connor Radnovich Buy this photo Image 2 of 3 Buy photo U.S. Rep. Elise Stefanik listens during a House Armed Services Committee hearing, Jan. 28, 2015, in Washington, DC. (Connor Radnovich/Times Union archive) U.S. Rep. Elise Stefanik listens during a House Armed Services Committee hearing, Jan. 28, 2015, in Washington, DC. (Connor Radnovich/Times Union archive) Photo: Connor Radnovich Buy this photo Image 3 of 3 Buy photo U.S. Rep. Elise Stefanik speaks during a House Armed Services Committee hearing, Jan. 28, 2015, in Washington, DC. (Connor Radnovich/Times Union archive) U.S. Rep. Elise Stefanik speaks during a House Armed Services Committee hearing, Jan. 28, 2015, in Washington, DC. (Connor Radnovich/Times Union archive) Photo: Connor Radnovich Buy this photo Stefanik continues to chart own course on key issues 1 / 3 Back to Gallery

Washington

After seven months in office, freshman Republican U.S. Rep. Elise Stefanik is in line with her stated goal of serving as a "big-tent, independent-minded'' conservative not afraid to go her own way in the face of GOP orthodoxy.

The latest examples: Stefanik introduced legislation last month to ease rules on Pell grants and expand them in the face of Republican congressional efforts in recent years to trim the government's main source of funding for college education.

And Stefanik's "Be Open Act,'' also introduced last month, would relieve businesses of the need to auto-enroll new employees in a health plan under the Affordable Care Act — Obamacare. The controversial law's employer mandate is on hold, but Stefanik's measure is notable for its political subtext: a call to fix President Barack Obama's signature health plan around the edges rather than "repeal and replace'' it, as Republican House leaders have urged in repeated votes.

Stefanik, who represents the 21st Congressional District, herself voted for repeal the last time it came to the House floor in February.

More Information

"I don't think the Affordable Care Act is the right direction for the country,'' Stefanik said in an interview. "But in the interim we ought to be fixing it.''

She acknowledged that many conservative House colleagues "don't want to make changes; they want all or nothing.'' But in the wake of two Supreme Court rulings that uphold the law's basics, repeal efforts are doomed "until we have a new president'' after the 2016 election, she said.

"Families are struggling with it,'' she said. "Common-sense fixes are important to the economy.''

The House in another trimming effort voted in June to repeal the medical device tax, a key source of funding for Obamacare. Stefanik had campaigned last year against the tax, based on the preponderance of medical device companies in the "Catheter Valley'' area of Glens Falls.

Stefanik's Pell legislation would expand the $33.7 billion grant program for students who take summer courses or compress their schedules to graduate early.

Republicans in recent budget cycles have sought to control growth of Pell grants, citing the need to fight the deficit and bring federal spending under control. Republicans have argued they are trying to prioritize grant awards to the most needy, but Democrats and Pell advocates say the efforts were thinly disguised cuts.

Stefanik, a member of the House Education and Workforce Committee, brushed aside past controversy, insisting in the interview "I don't support cuts to Pell. I'm a believer in Pell.'' She said the idea for her bill grew out of education roundtables she held in her district, and also from the urging of Carole McCoy, president of Jefferson Community College in Watertown.

Pell advocates who have tangled with Republicans in the past praised Stefanik's idea.

"This is an enlightened and reasonable policy, a step in the right direction,'' said Barmak Nassirian, director of policy analysis for the American Association of State Colleges and Universities. "Pell is a fundamental building block to college affordability. We need to do something about college costs, absolutely, but it's fantasy to believe federal government can save money without costs to future generations.'' Student debt in the United States totals $1.3 trillion, he said.

In her short career on Capitol Hill, Stefanik, 31, has done cameos in this movie before. Just weeks after being sworn in, she voted with the Republican caucus to codify an existing ban on federal dollars for abortion — but not before helping to scuttle a separate GOP proposal to ban abortions after 20 weeks of pregnancy, with narrow exceptions.

In February, Republicans held up a Department of Homeland Security funding bill in order to squelch Obama's controversial executive order on immigration. Representing a region with miles and miles of sparsely populated border country protected by Homeland Security agents, Stefanik put home district concerns ahead of the Republican party line.

Republicans ultimately gave in legislatively but courts so far have tied up the Obama policy, which would allow up to 5 million illegal immigrants who are parents of U.S.-born children (or children who otherwise have legal status) to come out of the shadows and avoid deportation.

Politics may well be more of an art than a science and, if so, juggling party loyalty with constituent needs is an integral part of the mix.

"Party leaders understand that legislators must be concerned about the folks back home in the districts,'' said Harvey Schantz, a political scientist at SUNY Plattsburgh. "Ultimately, the voters, not the party leaders, have the power to hire and fire members of Congress. Party leaders also understand that individual reelections are necessary for winning party majorities.''

dan@hearstdc.com