Willard Ashton's Horseshoe Ranch was located immediately west of U.S. 34 where it swings around Horseshoe Park. In 1908, it would become the site of Horseshoe Inn. ( Bobbie Heisterkamp postcard collection )

With its vast meadows, it is only logical that ranching was the first commercial activity in what would become Rocky Mountain National Park.

In 1874, Abner and Alberta Sprague homesteaded on the north side of Moraine Park. The couple built a homestead cabin next to a small spring and with the help of other family members, increased their holdings to 640 acres.

They raised cattle and cut the native hay. Abner Sprague also operated a sawmill in Moraine Park.

The Spragues fell into the tourist business as demands were placed on them for food and lodging by passing visitors. They soon discovered that the risks were less in the tourist business and constructed a simple row of cabins.

Albert and Alberta Sprague homesteaded in Moraine Park during the 1870s. Ranching was their original objective and native hay was cut for cattle feed. (Rocky Mountain National Park collection)

Their success in tourism led to the construction of a large, log hotel located below the present-day Moraine Park Museum. By 1890, they had all but abandoned ranching.

Willard Ashton homesteaded in Little Horseshoe Park during the 1890s, and much like the Spragues, used the open meadows to raise cattle. He also fell into the tourist business and in 1908, constructed the Horseshoe Inn next to his ranch house. The site is located on the west side of U.S. 34 where it swings across Horseshoe Park.

Dan and Minnie March homesteaded farther up the Fall River.

Their land was swampy and choked with brush forcing them to dig drainage ditches before they could erect their barn. They built a modest log home on the north side of the road.

Advertisement

In 1911, the March family constructed a rental cabin near today's Lawn Lake trailhead. In 1915, they constructed the three-story Fall River Lodge a short distance west of the present-day Lawn Lake trailhead.

In 1875, the Hupp family settled in the lower part of Beaver Meadows near the present-day park entrance.

A large landowner, Lord Dunraven, sent his agent to inform them that they were on his land. The following year, the Hupps and their seven children moved to Upper Beaver Meadows about two miles farther west.

After John Hupp died, the family filed on 160 homesteads and brought their holdings up to 640 acres.

Beside the ranch house, there was a stable, corral, fruit cellar and chicken house. It was located north of the present-day Upper Beaver Meadows Road and about 0.2 miles west of its junction with U.S. 36.

In 1963, descendants placed a polished headstone over the graves of the Hupp family near the site of the ranch house. Its installation required special permission by the National Park Service.

At the end of the present-day Beaver Meadows Road, Pieter Hondius established the Hondius Ranch.

He came from The Netherlands at the age of 27 to seek relief from asthma and took over the operation of the Elkhorn Lodge. He used his profits to purchase land in the Estes Park area including about 2,000 acres in Beaver Meadows.

In 1900, Hondius built a small ranch house and barn. He raised cattle and cut the native hay for Elkhorn Lodge.

All that remains today is a water diversion structure used to supply water to a development that Hondius started along High Drive.

There were other early ranches within Rocky Mountain National Park on the west side of the Continental Divide along the Colorado River.

Much like those on the east side, they were eventually converted into dude ranches appealing to tourists.

The majority of the structures associated with these ranches were removed during the 1960s in favor of returning the park to its nature state.

A 1911 photograph shows the Dan and Minnie March homestead. What would become Fall River Road passes between their homestead cabin on the right and the barn on the left. (Rocky Mountain National Park collection)

Kenneth Jessen has been a Loveland resident since 1965. He is an author of 20 books and more than 1,600 articles. He served on several Loveland boards and was an engineer for Hewlett-Packard for 33 years.