A new board game teaches players that unless you're the IRS, Obamacare is a losing proposition. Jack LeFeber, an entrepreneur from Bloomfield, Ky., came up with the game and told Examiner.com Thursday that he is one-quarter of the way to getting the game funded on Kickstarter.

According to LeFeber, the game is a satire of the law, but is based on the actual taxes and fees individuals and small businesses will face once the law is fully in place. Only a few of the penalties in the game are not based on Obama's signature piece of legislation.

"You'll love the creative insanity that only a government bureaucracy can cobble together. It's fun, educational and a little scary, all at the same time," LeFeber said.

"Playing the game now is a lot more fun than what life will really be like under Obamacare," he told Examiner.

CNS News said players can choose to be Democrats, Republicans, or members of the Tea Party, Green Party, Occupy Wall Street, or the IRS.

"Each player starts out on the 'Buy Insurance' square as a small business owner (except for the Occupy Wall Streeters, who begin the game unemployed). Along the way, players are taxed, troubled, hospitalized, or may even fall victim to a death panel as they make their way across the board," CNS added.

LeFeber told Examiner that the game "enrages hard-core liberals," while half of conservatives aren't quite sure what to think.

Even players who haven't read the entire law, or the more than 10,000 pages of new regulations the law has spawned, can enjoy the game, he added.

Some say the game resembles Monopoly, since it has a board, play money, player tokens, dice and penalty cards. But LeFeber says it's quite different.

"For example," he explained, "the Tea Party and GOP move counterclockwise of start. Occupy Wall Street, on the other hand, move clockwise the way normal games go."

Eventually, as the game's tag says, "You're either broke or you're dead -- or you have no life."

When asked why he chose to fund the game on Kickstarter, LeFeber said the small amount he's looking for -- $12,500 -- is actually harder to raise than a large sum, and he gets to maintain control of the game's production.

Once funded, he says, the game will be manufactured in Louisville.

We'd love to explain more, but as LeFeber said, "You’ll have to play it to see what’s in it!"

Related:

----------------------------------------------------------------

If you like this article, you can follow Joe on Twitter @jnewby1956, visit and like his Facebook page, or subscribe to receive email updates when a new article is published.

For hard-hitting conservative commentary, please visit Joe's blog, the Conservative Firing Line. You can also find Joe's articles at Right News Now, Tea Party Tribune, Newsbusters, Liberty Unyielding and PolitiCollision.

Be sure to listen to "Grit and Grace" every Thursday from 6-8 p.m. Pacific Time on Blog Talk Radio, where you can hear Joe discuss current events.