Big companies are pushing back against proposed rules involving medical plans and transgender people.

The concern from large companies is that the proposed federal rules would require medical plans to cover "gender transition," which may or may not include hormone therapy, sexual reassignment surgery, or other procedures.

According to The Associated Press, a group representing big employers says its members have no particular qualms about gender transition. However, large employers do object to what they see as an overreach by the Obama administration, as their health plans don't receive financial assistance from the federal government.

"There are two major concerns I would say we have about the steps that are being taken by the Obama administration," says Peter Sprigg, senior fellow for policy studies at the Family Research Council. "Perhaps the most fundamental, on a legal level, is that this is not authorized by the text of the Affordable Care Act."

According to Sprigg, FRC has issues with the Affordable Care Act and strongly opposed its passage, but he says even a Democrat-led Congress wouldn't have passed a law mandating private health insurers pay for gender-reassignment surgery.

"But the Obama administration is attempting to interpret this law and implement it using regulations that would have the effect of requiring that," the FRC fellow says. "So that's one fundamental concern: that they are going beyond the actual text of the statute."

On the level of actual principle, Sprigg says FRC believes it is wrong to mandate health insurance coverage for gender-reassignment surgeries or hormone therapies and so forth because these are basically elective cosmetic surgeries and therefore should not be treated as necessary medical care.

FRC, along with several other organizations, submitted a comment back in November, expressing opposition to the proposed rule.

In a statement to The Associated Press, Jocelyn Samuels, head of the HHS civil rights office, said the agency is reviewing feedback on its proposal. "This is another example of this administration's commitment to giving every American access to the healthcare they deserve," Samuels said.

But on that note, Sprigg tells OneNewsNow this isn't healthcare properly defined.

"In fact, you could argue that this violates medical ethics – some of the procedures that are done in the course of gender-reassignment surgery – because it involves either amputating or disabling perfectly healthy body parts to serve an entirely psychological desire," Sprigg explains.

"The first principle of medical ethics is 'do no harm' – and yet, I think gender-reassignment surgery inherently causes harm. But they are adopting this ... theory that this is necessary medical treatment."