A planned $150 billion deal between Pfizer and Allergan would create the largest drug company in the world, and move Pfizer's headquarters to Dublin, The Wall Street Journal reports. What does combining the makers of Viagra and Botox mean? asks Ed Silverman at STAT.

When Ben Carson, MD, speaks, doctors are never sure whether they'll be hearing from a gifted neurosurgeon, or a conservative politician (New York Times).

In California and Oregon, women will soon be able to obtain birth control from pharmacists without a prescription (New York Times).

"Are Good Doctors Bad For Your Health?" asks Ezekiel Emanuel, MD, in The New York Times, riffing on a study of cardiologists that appeared last December.

The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services is considering implementing adequacy standards for healthcare provider networks in the Affordable Care Act's insurance exchanges.

John Henning Schumann, MD, wonders at NPR whether he should keep wearing a white coat. Find out what MedPage Today readers thought when we asked the same question this summer.

When an ENT heard a basketball coach speak, she was so concerned about his raspy voice that she offered him a nasoendoscopy (New York Times).

A 2013 Texas law may lead more women to attempt self-abortion, according to a new study (Reuters).

Nevada has issued guidelines for cryotherapy following the death of a spa employee (AP via The New York Times).

Indoor plants: Good for you, or not? asks The New York Times.

Music: Good for surgical recovery, or not? (Reuters Health)

Gratitude: Good for the heart, or not? (NPR)

Pets in the bedroom: Good for sleep, or not? asks Reuters Health. Meanwhile, sleeping in may feel good, but may not be so good for you, says The New York Times.

Where do incident reports go? asks Skeptical Scalpel.

Smokeless tobacco users are exposed to higher levels of nicotine than cigarette smokers, according to a new study (Reuters Health).

"Direct primary care is a social movement," says James Breen, MD, "and it faces the same challenges." (KevinMD)

The glycemic index of a given food varies from person to person, according to a new study (Washington Post).

States are being urged to review mega-mergers between health insurers, reports The New York Times, with consumer advocates and antitrust experts concerned about loss of choice for consumers.

Health officials have confirmed three new cases of Ebola in a family in Liberia (New York Times), as a global expert panel calls the WHO's response to last year's outbreak an "egregious failure" (Reuters).

A government forum on drug costs, featuring acting Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services director Andy Slavitt, drew hundreds, The Washington Post reports. Meanwhile, Jane Brody tries to navigate drug sticker shock (New York Times).

Do patients at unlicensed addiction clinics ever really wean themselves from buprenorphine? NPR takes a look.

What effect has Medicare's decision to reimburse for end-of-life decisions had? asks The New York Times.

There may be a link between fertility and hookworm infection, reports The Washington Post.

The seven habits of highly effective patient care programs, courtesy of The Commonwealth Fund.

Find out whether your medical app will need to be regulated, from Michael Cohen.

The combination of dabrafenib (Tafinlar) and trametinib (Mekinist), conditionally approved by the FDA last year for melanoma, has been formally approved (Reuters).

Celldex's Ritenga (rindopepimut) seems to extend life in patients with brain tumors when combined with Avastin (bevacizumab), the company reports (Reuters). And NovoCure's Optune device seemed to do the same thing.

Morning Break is a daily guide to what's new and interesting on the Web for healthcare professionals, powered by the MedPage Today community. Got a tip? Send it to us: MPT_editorial@everydayhealthinc.com.