By Elizabeth Fechter

Murphy News Service

Sara Kloepper was gardening at her home in Edina this past May when her husband rushed outside after receiving an alarming phone call from their granddaughter, Emily.

The person on the other end of the phone claimed she was Emily and was being held in Canadian custody after being charged with driving under the influence. The caller also said she was suffering from a broken nose sustained in a traffic accident, and that she needed $700 sent via MoneyGram as soon as possible to be released from jail.

“It pushed all my emotional buttons,” Kloepper said. “I didn’t question it in the least.”

Kloepper and her husband rushed to the nearest Walmart to obtain a money order to send to “Emily.”

Moments after returning home, they received another phone call, asking for an additional $800. Kloepper then called her daughter, Emily’s mother, only to be told that they had been victims of the “grandparent scam.”

The grandparent scam began around 2008 and targets seniors. The grandparent will receive a phone call from someone posing as his or her grandchild, claiming to be in a foreign country and in dire need of money assistance. Circumstances described in the fraudulent call vary, but more often than not the grandparent is begged not to tell the child’s parents, according to FBI information on the scam. Instead of posing as a grandchild, the person on the phone sometimes poses as a police officer, lawyer, doctor or other family member.

The Edina Police Department offers four tips to protect yourself from scams: be wary, verify identity, think twice and trust your instincts.

“The best thing to do is to prevent it before it happens and pay attention to the red flags,” said Edina Crime Prevention Specialist Molly Anderson.

Anderson added they do not hear about too many scams in the area, but every year there are at least three or four reports of the grandparent scam.

“Any phone call that involves an emotional component, emotional plea for money, you really need to independently verify,” Anderson said. “Contact whomever is asking for money by a number you have found yourself.”

The FBI suggests people resist the pressure to act quickly to avoid being a victim of a scam. It also advises people to “never wire money based on a request made over the phone or in an email, especially overseas.”

Top 10 Scams of 2013

The Better Business Bureau releases an annual list of the top 10 scams. Scams in 2013 included:

1. Medical alert: Seniors and caretakers are led to believe that a close acquaintance purchased a medical alert system for them, but the victim has to hand over personal information in order to receive the system and pay a monthly fee.

2. Auction reseller: Victims send popular devices through sites such as Craigslist or eBay, and never receive money in return.

3. Arrest warrant: Victims are told they have a warrant out for their arrest, and can avoid any further trouble if a fee is paid.

4. Invisible home improvement: Scam artists call victims urging them to repair a part of their home that is hard to see, such as the inside of the chimney. The Better Business Bureau calls this the hardest scam to detect.

5. Casting call: Scam artists target aspiring performers and offer services, such as acting lessons, to help them reach their goals. Fees for services, as well as identify theft, may occur as a result.

6. Foreign currency: Scam artists propose a “high return, low risk” investment in foreign currency.

7. Scam texts: Phony texts appear as though they have been sent from your bank, asking victims to provide personal information and PIN numbers.

8. Do Not Call list: Scam artists call and lead victims to believe they must pay a fee in order to stay on the National Do Not Call Registry, which is free.

9. Fake friend: Social media users fall victim when they friend someone online who is actually a scam artist, and their profile information may be stolen in order to create a fake online identity. This can also lead to the victim downloading malware, a software program that damages computer systems.

10. Affordable Care Act: Users of the Affordable Care Act are led to believe they need to provide personal information in order to receive a new insurance card. BBB says this was the “scam of the year.”

Elizabeth Fechter is studying journalism at the University of Minnesota.