David Letterman fans wait in long line for tickets to the final ‘Late Show.’ Two sets of brothers and diehard Letterman fans, the Walter brothers, Robert, left, and David, second from left, and twin brothers Bruce and Barry Schwartz, were among a group of superfans who gathered outside the Ed Sullivan Theater in Manhattan on Wednesday. Cassandra Giraldo for The Wall Street Journal

As teenagers in San Jose, Calif., David and Robert Walter used to defy their parents and secretly stay up to watch David Letterman on TV, promising each other that one day they’d go to New York to see him tape the “Late Show” live.

On Wednesday, the brothers were set to fulfill that dream, at the last possible opportunity.

The Walter brothers were among about 200 super-fans who gathered outside the Ed Sullivan Theater in Manhattan Wednesday to collect tickets for the taping of Mr. Letterman’s farewell show that afternoon. The 68-year-old late-night host is retiring after more than three decades on air.

The Walter brothers flew in from San Jose to see the final show. It was something they had to do, Robert Walter said.

“We’re going to come. There’s no ifs, ands, or buts about it,” he said. “We’ll be there. Done.”

The brothers said they’ll remember Mr. Letterman for his raw and unfiltered approach not only to comedy, but also to more serious issues. David Walter said he remembers turning to the “Late Show” after Sept. 11, 2001, to hear Mr. Letterman speak about the terrorist attacks.

“That’s the thing about Dave. People look to him for comedy, but he could be serious,” said Robert Walter. “He wore his emotions on his sleeve.”

“When something big happened, he was the one you tuned in to,” said David Walter.

David Letterman fans begin lining up in front of Ed Sullivan Theater in the hopes of grabbing tickets to Mr. Letterman’s final show. Cassandra Giraldo for The Wall Street Journal

The Walter brothers traded memories of favorite “Late Show” skits — “Monkey Cam,” “Know Your Cuts of Meat” — with another pair of brothers waiting outside the theater: Bruce and Barry Schwartz.

Related: Bill Murray Jumps Out of a Cake; Bob Dylan Performs on David Letterman’s Second-to-Last ‘Late Show’

The 63-year-old twins said they felt like they grew up with Mr. Letterman. “We age along with Dave,” said Barry Schwartz, the older twin by six minutes. He said he has seen the “Late Show” in person a half-dozen times.

Michael Tidwell, a 59-year-old attorney who took a 4 a.m. train from Silver Spring, M.D., Wednesday, said he has seen the show about a dozen times live, scoring tickets to special tapings in London and Washington, D.C., by writing personal letters and, in one case, sending in 800 postcards to a ticket lottery.

Mr. Tidwell said he liked Mr. Letterman’s wit and “irreverence,” his “willingness to mock the genre” of late-night television.

Despite his love for the show, Mr. Tidwell was philosophical about seeing Mr. Letterman’s tenure come to an end.

“It’s life,” he said. “Things come and go.”

“I’m going to miss him,” artist Tom Barlow, 50, said of Mr. Letterman. Mr. Barlow stood on the sidewalk by the theater, next to an easel holding his recently completed streetscape painting of the “Late Show” marquee.

“He’s earned a place in American culture.”