WASHINGTON — Janet Yellen’s Federal Reserve is rethinking how far it can let unemployment fall before inflation kicks in. It’s a call fraught with risk, and history offers few guideposts.

Millions of workers on the sidelines and shifting demographics make it harder to tell just how low the jobless rate can sink before labor supply gets tight enough to stoke wage and price pressures.

It’s a key issue for Fed officials debating when to lift interest rates. Policymakers indicated last month that they see room for more improvement in the job market. They marked down their projection of long-term unemployment to as low as 5 percent from the 5.2 percent to 5.5 percent range they saw in December.

Now some economists are asking whether the Fed has overshot, while others wonder whether policymakers should aim to get unemployment even lower.

“The goal posts are moving on their own, and the Fed is trying to figure out where they are,” said Michael Hanson, senior U.S. economist at Bank of America Merrill Lynch in New York. Because policy works with a lag, he said, officials are forced to rely on today’s projections as they shape tomorrow’s outcomes. “They’re trying to drive a car looking in the rearview mirror.”

Disagreement abounds, and the stakes for predicting long-run unemployment are high.

“Nobody really knows that number with any precision,” former Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke said at a recent conference in Washington. “The Fed will continue to grope to find out what the right number is.”

If the Fed is overly ambitious about how low unemployment can sink, policymakers could wait too long to increase interest rates and let inflation heat up more than they intend, repeating missteps from the 1970s. If they raise rates too soon or too high, they could needlessly put a lid on the U.S. expansion.

The Fed monitors labor and inflation data to predict one policy guidepost, known as the non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment. The NAIRU is roughly synonymous with the natural rate of unemployment: the joblessness that exists even in a healthy economy, as industries evolve, creating some jobs and wiping out others. Pushing unemployment below that equilibrium rate tightens the labor market past a tipping point, prompting employers to offer higher wages. That boosts prices.

After the onset of the 2007-09 recession, economists expected that the natural rate had probably shifted higher: Many Americans had been out of work for months or years, long enough for their skills to atrophy and leave them permanently jobless. Technology seemed to be causing an unprecedented skills mismatch.

What’s more, demographics could be expected to push natural unemployment higher. People in the large baby boom generation are aging out of their prime working years and into retirement. That means the bulk of the labor force is shifting toward the even-larger millennial generation, born after 1981. Because younger workers tend to have fewer work skills and higher unemployment, their workforce dominance could push up overall jobless levels.

Amid such structural changes, the Fed’s forecast of long-term unemployment rose to a range of 5.2 percent to 6 percent in 2012 and 2013.

With fewer experienced, skilled workers in the labor force, a drop in headline unemployment would be expected to force employers to offer higher wages to attract qualified applicants.

That’s not what happened, though. As unemployment has fallen, hitting an almost seven-year low of 5.5 percent in February, wage gains are modest and inflation is nowhere to be found. That suggests the natural unemployment rate could be lower, something the Federal Open Market Committee acknowledged when it shifted its projections down last month.

Chicago Fed President Charles Evans said last month that he thinks the natural unemployment rate might be around 5 percent, and the Atlanta Fed’s Dennis Lockhart said he’s “certainly sympathetic” with the idea that the rate has moved lower.

“The Fed is moving it down based simply on the notion that we aren’t seeing wage growth,” said Stephen Stanley, chief economist at Amherst Pierpont Securities in Stamford, Conn., and a former Richmond Fed researcher. “It’s like groping in the dark.”

Monetary policy takes time to affect the economy, Stanley said. That means inflation could sneak up on policymakers if they wait to see “the whites of the eyes” before raising rates, Stanley said — and they might not be nimble enough to counteract it.

Jeanna Smialek,

Bloomberg News