Tragedy struck a Golden Gate Estates family less than two weeks before Christmas.

James Cecil Riner II and his wife Jessica, both 33, were driving to a Christmas party Saturday evening when a driver suspected of being impaired caused a crash on Golden Gate Boulevard.

Cecil died from his injuries, leaving behind his wife and four sons.

His family and friends said Sunday he also left behind a community that loved him.

A visibly bruised Jessica, nursing a broken hand, left the hospital to break the news to their children. She said she remembers everything about the crash.

"He told me he loved me and he told me to take care of our bears and he told me he was gonna die, and that was pretty much it. I got to tell him goodbye," she said.

Jessica said they were headed to a Christmas party when her world was forever changed.

"Now I don't have a husband, and my kids don't have a father, and I hear it was caused by a drunk driver and that just breaks my heart."

"That makes me mad because they shouldn't have been out there drinking and driving," said Jimmy Riner, Cecil's father. "I was supposed to go before them; that's just the way it's supposed to be. I know accidents happen, but..."

Out of all the holidays, the Riner family loves Christmas the most, especially trimming the tree.

"We decorated it all and he got to see it before he left and he said it looked awesome. There's his ornament right there, his nickname was Big Thunder," Jessica said.

The community has quickly stepped up to help, setting up a GoFundMe account to raise money, as well as dropping by with food and lending emotional support. The GoFundMe account had raised nearly $14,000 just 12 hours after being established.

"He was one of a kind. When I'm reading all the posts on Facebook, he was loved by a lot of people," Jessica said.

His kids are left with fond memories of a hard worker, a family man, and much more.

"Now my family has to pay the ultimate price. We have four boys together, I get to look at them, they all look just like him. And I know we'll get through it. I have a great bunch of family and friends."

The Florida Highway Patrol said that the driver who caused the crash, Rene Miles, 40, was under the influence when he hit the back of another car, causing that driver to lose control and cross into the path of the Riners' vehicle, colliding head-on.

Miles wasn't injured in the crash and faces several charges, including DUI manslaughter and leaving the scene of a fatal crash. The driver of the other vehicle suffered serious injuries. Her 13-year-old passenger was uninjured.