Used to be that an idea was only as good as its execution.

Now that modern life has caffeinated everything, an idea is only as good as its execution, and its technology, and its team dynamic, and its ability to spur innovation faster than anyone else, and its network of industry players, and 10 other factors that can overwhelm even the best idea before it sees the light of a venture capitalist’s office.

This is particularly true in the labyrinthine world of health care, according to a small group of Princeton-based venture capitalists who aim to change all that.

The group, TigerLabs, will hold the first of its Digital Health Boot Camps beginning tomorrow with an intensive, four-week, project-based program for entrepreneurs. The sessions will be conducted at the TigerLabs offices on Nassau Street in Princeton and through online subscriptions.

Those who put down a few hundred dollars and commit to the sessions will come away with a business plan that just may qualify for an extra sit-down with company executives, who are in the business, after all, of investing in promising start-ups.

TigerLabs aims to be the epicenter of the entrepreneurial spirit in Princeton, its founders said during an interview last week. The boot camp is simply one of its opening salvos.

“There’s been a great history of entrepreneurship in the Princeton community, but there’s never really been one thing to aggregate that community,” said James Smits, one of TigerLabs’ partners and its program director. “TigerLabs is an entrepreneurial epicenter. In terms of the ideal participant for the boot camp, it’s really open to anyone and everyone — people who want to learn more about digital health care, people who want to be entrepreneurs, someone who wants to start their own digital app.”

Bill Zeruld, a health-care consultant who will be running the boot camp, said there are up to 97,000 apps on different technology platforms in the health-care space alone.

The possibilities for an engaged, spirited entrepreneur are wide open. But, Zeruld added, health care is a complex landscape that entrepreneurs need to learn how to navigate before they can consider the worth of a new product or application.

The boot camp will offer a broad survey of the health-care industry, including the roles of payers, providers, pharmaceutical companies, government agencies, consumers and other stakeholders in the digital health-care world.

The latter half of the sessions will focus on what it takes to launch a business. Participants will have direct access to veteran health-care entrepreneurs, operators and investors to learn how to build a dynamic team, product development considerations, technology and legal issues, and how to take a product to market, among other subjects.

The fee for a general participant is $500. Full-time students will pay $200.

TigerLabs CEO and founding partner Bert Navarrete said that although the company may expand its interests beyond health care, it is focusing on that industry with its start-up investments right now. In part this is because of the large number of industry players located in and around Mercer County, he said.

The other reason, of course, is opportunity.

“We’re very excited about the rapid innovation in health care, and that the industry is recognizing that there are new ways to deliver both their primary product as well as gain direct access to consumers,” Navarrete said.

For example, a new direction for health care goes by the term “remote monitoring,” and involves the collection of personal health data by consumers for analysis by a variety of health care providers.

“Whether it’s counting calories or how they’re sleeping, we’re going to see a big demand in that area,” Zeruld said.

With all that data comes the need to crunch it effectively. Therefore, TigerLabs executives said, there will be a demand in ways to process and analyze information. Apps for doing that will proliferate.

In addition, the Affordable Care Act has ushered in a new age of comparison shopping, something that consumers were not sufficiently motivated to pursue in the past.

“I think transparency is going to be a huge piece, an opportunity to look at providers and compare them based on how effective their outcomes are as well as their costs,” said Zeruld. “Now we’re going to see patients more accountable for their own payment, so they’re going to be looking for increasing levels of transparency.”

Navarrete has been a venture capitalist for his entire post-graduate career. He has been involved primarily in investing in software companies, first with Merrill Lynch, and later with Mitsui & Co, one of the world’s largest trading, investment and service companies, based in Tokyo. TigerLabs also works closely with Princeton University’s prestigious Keller Center of Innovation.

“TigerLabs has contributed greatly to entrepreneurship in the Princeton area,” said the Keller Center’s director Sanjeev Kulkarni. “The Keller Center interacts with TigerLabs in various ways, and they are a terrific partner in helping to build the entrepreneurial ecosystem in and around Princeton.”

More information on the TigerLabs Digital Health Boot Camp, which runs tomorrow through March 3, is available through the business website at www.tigerlabs.co.

On mobile or desktop:

• Like Times of Trenton on Facebook

• Follow @TimesofTrenton on Twitter