Paul Boyd is one of many young people with disabilities who are living in nursing homes across the U.S. Ashley Cleek/Al Jazeera America

Paul Boyd has two lives.

In one life, Boyd is a graduate student in counseling at the University of Montevallo, a small liberal-arts school about 30 minutes from where he lives. After class he sometimes sits on the porch of a coffee shop talking with a group of locals and college students.

In his other life, the 37-year-old Boyd is a resident of Chandler Health and Rehab, a nursing home in Alabaster, Ala. He drives the hallways in his sip-and-puff wheelchair, chatting with older residents like Thelma, who clutches a plastic baby doll to her chest.

Boyd is a tetraplegic. Because of an accident when he was 19, he cannot move his body below his collarbone. But mentally, he is healthy, with a sharp sense of humor and a love of trivia. For nearly five years, he has been fighting to leave the nursing home where he lives and move back to Montevallo, his hometown.

The problem is that Boyd cannot care for himself alone. He needs someone to feed him, to bathe him, to stretch his legs and arms in the mornings to prevent muscle atrophy. He lived at home for 10 years after his accident, and when his family members spoke about putting him in a nursing home, Boyd had two stipulations.

“One, that there are other people in there like me — i.e. younger, competent, in their right mind. And, two, that I approve of it before they put me in.”

They met neither requirement, Boyd said.

According to data from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid, one out of seven residents in nursing homes is under 65. Since 2003, the population of younger residents has grown by 22 percent, and many of them want to go home. While states provide programs to finance care for elderly and disabled individuals at home, waiting lists are long — stretching to 3,500 in Alabama — and sometimes it can be difficult to meet the requirements of housing and care. Nursing homes, therefore, have become the default caregivers for young disabled individuals who need medical care and have few other options.

Gavin Ball, an administrator at a nursing home outside Birmingham, Ala., said residents under 40, including one woman who moved into the home at 18, occupy 10 of their 103 beds. People in the industry predict more young people will begin to enter nursing homes, specifically young veterans of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.

“That’s something that will be coming home in the next five years. There’s going to be a demand (for care),” Ball said. “Some of these guys and ladies have been through a lot physically and mentally. They're going to have a lot of care on the way.”

In order to make younger residents feel more at home, Ball has purchased laptops and installed Wi-Fi; his staff reworked the menu to serve pizza and hamburgers to younger residents. While nursing home administrators say they are seeking ways to better accommodate this new population, the federal government is aggressively promoting funding for programs to move nursing home residents back home.