Peter L. Gosline, president and CEO of Monadnock Community Hospital, was at a crossroads in 2009. The 25-bed critical access hospital faced a huge deficit as a direct result of an unexpected ice-storm that hit the state of New Hampshire in December 2008, causing a two-week power outage. The hospital was in crisis.

"I had to pull a rabbit out of a hat," recalled Gosline (pictured right) in an exclusive interview with FierceHealthcare shortly before he retired this month as head of the Petersborough-based hospital. "And I didn't want to do a layoff."

Fortunately for the hospital and the region, he decided to look into other options. The hospital's lab department had some success following a lean Six Sigma model, so Gosline and his team pursued the strategy hospital-wide.

Gosline highlighted the success of the hospital's five-year "lean" journey during the American College of Healthcare Executive's 2014 Congress in Chicago, a model that he estimates has saved the organization $1 million a year.

"We created a level of motivation that surpassed my expectations," he said. "We have had significant savings and we improved our processes and the patient experience."

The business management strategy addresses process flow and waste issues, while focusing on variation and design to promote business and operational excellence. The hospital worked with an outside firm to identify what the organization wanted to achieve, provided selected managers with "lean training" and then created five hospital "work out" teams that met five times over a 120-day period.

The teams asked every manager to come up with two ideas every 30 days for three months, to improve processes and reduce waste. Those ideas in the first 120-day period generated estimated savings of $800,000, according to Gosline. "It seems so simple, to ask people who know the processes to bring ideas to the table and then act on those ideas, but it works," he said.

Each team reports monthly results and celebrated successes during meetings. "One of the keys is the recognition component. Everyone likes to excel and being recognized for it," he said. "The teams looked forward to the meetings, and in between, people helped each other and supported each other. It really built up morale."