Hal Fuller: ‘Dr. Greenspoon Is An Outstanding Surgeon’

By Space Coast Medicine & Active Living Magazine // September 22, 2014

Loading the player ...

ABOVE VIDEO: Hal Fuller of Cocoa, Florida, talks about his two knee replacements performed by Dr. Jeff Greenspoon of Viera Sports Medicine & Orthopedic Center in Viera.

BREVARD COUNTY, FLORIDA – For Cocoa resident Hal Fuller, Dr. Jeffrey Greenspoon of Viera Sports Medicine & Orthopedic Center is an outstanding surgeon.

“Dr. Greenspoon is a first-class surgeon and a great guy,” said Fuller.” He is conservative and highly professional. I am very satisfied with the treatment that I received from him and from Viera Hospital.”

A retired consultant to the government, Fuller, 70, has an active lifestyle with his wife Raelene maintaining their numerous rental properties along with his son.

“We stay very busy and my two knee replacements now enable me to continue my active lifestyle at a good level.” In his younger years, Fuller was a college football player with the University of Arkansas Razorbacks and has always enjoyed his mobility. Fuller held many high-level positions including Vice President of First Support Services, which operated and maintained government buildings and provided support services for people world-wide.

Dr. Greenspoon was recommended to Fuller by a friend.

“Dr.Greenspoon first took care of my shoulder surgery and then both my knees,” said Fuller. “I wanted both knees replaced at the same time but Dr.Greenspoon thought it best that we do each separately. He replaced my right knee in March of this year and then the left knee in late June. The Viera Hospital was very professional and the staff were great.”

Greenspoon used the On-Q Painbuster Post-Op Pain Relief System to administer pain medication to Fuller after the surgery.

“The On-Q System was great and was a big help with my second knee replacement,” said Fuller.

Fuller was able to get up and move unassisted within hours after his surgery, thanks to Greenspoon’s surgical experience and expertise.

Fuller is now back at it, remodeling his rental properties, sometimes eight hours a day, five to six days a week, doing electrical work, hanging drywall and doing fence work to keep his tenants comfortable.

“Thanks to Dr. Greenspoon, I have no plan to slow down – and look forward to staying active for many years to come.”

For more information call 321-434-9200 or log on to VieraOrthopedics.com

Click here to contribute your news or announcements Free