Published: Monday, 11/10/2014



Five Things You Might Have Missed: 11-10 Top articles from this weekend's editions of The Blade



THE BLADE/AMY E. VOIGT Enlarge | Buy This Image Chad Albert, assistant store manager, moves the big cheese in the cold storage area in the Andersons on Talmadge.

1. Follow the Cheese to The Andersons for renewal of holiday tradition

Can you feel the excitement? The countdown is on. Only six more days.

We’ve been waiting for this since August, when the announcement was first made that The Blade and The Andersons were planning a special event for Nov. 15: the ceremonial slicing of a 3,200-pound wheel of cheddar, portions of which will then be available for sale to be enjoyed throughout the holiday season.

Tiedtke’s Department Store, beloved in the city before it closed in 1973, used to do this each year. It was an annual treat to say, “Let’s go down to Tiedtke’s” to see the store’s holiday cheese and to buy a slice of the two-ton behemoth.

And now, this tradition is being revived. Everything old is new again. READ MORE

RELATED CONTENT: Tiedtke’s lives on in memories with Tiedtke Tales



THE BLADE/KATIE RAUSCH Enlarge | Buy This Image Executive Director Vicki Obee shows the hoop house at Bittersweet Farms, a day and residential facility in Whitehouse for people with autism.

2. Federal rule change could be costly, change mission of autism program

In January, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, or CMS, issued changes to its Home and Community-Based Services program, which provides waivers to Medicaid-eligible people with disabilities to live at home or in the community rather than in facilities the government deems institutional. The goal is to keep people out of settings with isolating qualities that keep them away from the broader community.

The rule states that waiver money cannot be given for programs in settings that aren’t considered “home and community based” or are institutional or isolating. It has the potential to affect the nearly 6,000 facilities in Ohio that offer waiver services. These institutional settings include nursing facilities, hospitals, and intermediate care facilities. Settings in the same building or “adjacent to” institutional-like settings are also not eligible for HCBS waivers.

Well-intentioned as it is, the rule has left care providers across Ohio wondering what it means for their programming. READ MORE



THE BLADE/ANDY MORRISON Enlarge | Buy This Image The first of two roundabouts under construction as one heads north on Cherry Street.

3. Two traffic circles to open in Toledo this week

They’re the hottest thing in traffic engineering, and love ’em or hate ’em, it’s quite clear there are going to be more of ’em.

They’re modern roundabouts, and they’re popping up everywhere as alternatives to four-way stops and even replacing traffic lights, as is about to happen with the former “Thousand Islands” intersections of Central, Detroit, and Berdan avenues and Collingwood and Manhattan boulevards in Toledo.

When Toledo’s two new circles open later this fall, they’ll be the first of their kind within the city limits and also the metropolitan area’s first multi-lane roundabouts. READ MORE



THE BLADE/JETTA FRASER Enlarge | Buy This Image Andrea Vasquez, left, a health-care navigator for Toledo-Lucas County CareNet, helps a customer at the Dental Center of Northwest Ohio.

4. Health-care consumers get many new choices, some higher prices

Toledo-area residents will face an explosion of insurance plan choices and higher costs for some insurance premiums as the second enrollment period for the Affordable Care Act’s health-care marketplace begins this Saturday.

The number of insurance companies offering plans in the Toledo area on the health-care exchange has risen from seven to 11, and the number of health-plan options to choose from has mushroomed from 66 last year to nearly 450 this year.

Also new on the exchange will be a separate section of the Web site where small business owners, those with 50 or fewer employees, can purchase health insurance.

Those already covered with insurance can renew or change their policies over the next three months. READ MORE



ASSOCIATED PRESS Enlarge Miranda Lambert accepts the single of the year award for “Automatic” on stage at the 48th annual CMA Awards.

5. Miranda Lambert is coming to Toledo

Miranda Lambert announced a Toledo date on her Certified Platinum Tour.

The wildly popular country singer, along with special guests Justin Moore, RaeLynn, and Jukebox Mafia, will perform at 7:30 p.m. Feb. 19 at Huntington Center in downtown Toledo.

READ MORE