Buy Photo Dr. Bob Finney, Tom Oney and Ben Stevens are recipients of the 2014 Community Health Center Hero Award, given by the Center Street Community Health Center at a Marion Area Rotary Club luncheon Tuesday. (Photo: James Miller/The Marion Star )Buy Photo

Center Street Community Heath Center honored its heroes on Wednesday, and acknowledged Marion’s state-leading effort to enroll newly eligible Medicaid clients.

Center Street Community Health Center director Cliff Edwards honored Dr. Bob Finney, Tom Oney and Ben Stevens for their contributions to the clinic in 2014 while hosting the Marion Area Rotary Club luncheon on Wednesday.

Finney, a local dentist and former CSCHC board member, was honored for donating a Panorex panoramic dental X-ray machine to the clinic from his private practice. The equipment, worth about $70,000, provides wide-angle images of teeth and surrounding tissue using relatively low radiation. The CSCHC serviced 1,328 dental patients in 2013, a 27 percent increase over 2012.

“Dr. Finney has been a contributor to the center ever since we opened up two years ago,” Edwards said. “He also has organized our annual golf outing for the last three years, which is a major fundraiser for us.”

Marion General Hospital director of ancillary services Tom Oney was honored for facilitating a project to share electronic lab results, X-rays and patient records between the hospital and CSCHC.

“Tom was also an advocate of retaining on-site patient lab services records here at CSCHC,” he said. “The hospital still processes the results, but our patients don’t have to leave the building.”

Ben Stevens of Stevens Construction was recognized for his ongoing support of the renovated building at 276 W. Center St. that houses the CSCHC offices.

“Ben was our lead design-build project manager for the rehab of the building, and has been very responsive to our needs, as far as repairs are concerned,” Edwards said. “He’s stayed involved with the center long after the initial work was completed, and helped us get the right people to solve problems.”

Center Street Community Health Center also was cited by Dr. Ted Wymslo of the Ohio Association of Community Health Centers for achieving a Person-Centered Medical Home Level II quality certification. The certification measures patient care, preventive care and patient outcomes against national standards. The CSCHC is one of two health facilities in Marion County that have received certification, Edwards said. The other is the pediatric center at OhioHealth Marion Area Physicians, formerly Smith Clinic.

Perhaps the biggest impact to health care access locally was acknowledged by Julie DiRossi-King of the Ohio Association of Community Health Centers when she lauded Marion’s efforts to enroll low-income people for Medicaid coverage expanded under the federal Affordable Health Care Act.

The Medicaid expansion was part of an effort to get health insurance coverage for the working poor, and enacted in Ohio by Gov. John Kasich by bypassing a reluctant Republican-controlled legislature by winning approval of the state’s controlling board, effective Jan. 1, 2014.

Roxane Somerlot, director of Marion County Job and Family Services, helped lead the local efforts to boost enrollment.

“The Affordable Health Care Act intended to expand coverage to more of the working poor, and the projections for Marion County was that another 4,000 people would be eligible for Medicaid,” Somerlot said. “We’ve enrolled 85 percent of that number since the first of the year, which leads the state.”

The new guidelines allow states to extend coverage to households where the annual income is 138 percent of the poverty level or lower.

Somerlot credits the new online Medicaid application process for helping people get covered, as well as the efforts of other social service agencies to spread the word, including the county’s department of adult probation, family court, drug court and Marion Area Counseling Center, where eligible clients who need medical, mental health or substance abuse services receive assistance in applying for Medicaid coverage.

“Interestingly, many of these people were receiving care in emergency rooms or at the health center without paying, but many of these people have chronic issues requiring ongoing treatment,” Somerlot said. “Now those providing treatment have the ability to get paid, which helps facilities like (Center Street Community) Health Center bring in more resources.”

In 2013, 45 percent of the health center’s 4,323 patients were uninsured, while about 37 percent were covered by Medicaid, according to figures provided to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Resources.

The number of uninsured patients treated at CSCHC for the month of August was down to 32 percent, even with an increase of patient visits, according to Edwards, who has added a fourth doctor as a result of increased demand for services and the added revenue provided by insured clients.

“We are just starting to see the beginning of the impact of broader insurance coverage,” said Edwards, who also credits the Marion Community Foundation, United Way of Marion County, Marion General Hospital and the Marion General Hospital Foundation for making expanded services possible.

Which is good news to Somerlot, who sees the struggles of uninsured families every day.

“The need is high, but I think what you saw at today’s Rotary meeting that there’s a high degree of interest in getting people access to health care in this community,” she said. “We have people in Marion that want to tackle the problem.”

jsmiller@gannett.com

twitter @motionblur56

Read or Share this story: http://ohne.ws/1s1TtWh