Most Americans would probably agree that Congress is not above the law, though in fact, Congress puts itself above – or outside – the law all the time. Congress is exempt from various occupational health and safety laws, employment discrimination rules and the like. Some of this makes sense. It would hardly be fair, after all, to cite a Republican lawmaker for refusing to hire Democratic staffers. And it should be noted that lawmakers face restrictions on outside income and a loss of privacy most of us don’t endure in our own jobs. How many of us, for example, are required to make public our personal finances, including our investments, debts and personal retirement savings?

Still, the special treatment (whether it’s harsher or more lax) Congress experiences tends to go toward matters that are, well, special to Congress. We demand more disclosure of lawmakers’ personal finances because we want to be assured they do not have vested financial conflicts of interest when making policy that affects the rest of us. We don’t expect them to adhere to certain workplace laws because Congress and the Capitol are not normal workplaces. But then it comes to health care, Congress is giving itself a special treatment unwarranted by the peculiar nature of the institution.



[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on Obamacare]

When the Affordable Care Act was being written, annoyed Republicans who opposed the law inserted language presumably meant to appeal to voters and to punish Democrats who wanted the bill: They made special rules for Congress and its employees. The public relations spin on the language is that it forced Congress to live under “Obamacare” by requiring congressional employees to get insurance through the health care exchanges. This is a misnomer; Obamacare is not an HMO. It’s a sweeping law requiring everyone to have insurance so the insured won’t be paying for the uninsured, and it allows for federal subsidies for people who can’t afford it.

Significantly, the law requires businesses that employ 50 or more people to provide coverage for their workers. Lawmakers and staff had already been receiving health coverage through their employer (the U.S. government), and were not going to ever be “exempt” from Obamacare, since everyone is subject to the Affordable Care Act. It’s just not that impactful on someone already getting employer-subsidized insurance.

Congress clearly comes under the 50-or-more category, but the special language – far from imposing a burden on Congress – in fact relieves the institution of the burden of providing coverage for the staff. The problem for congressional Republicans is that they forgot a small detail: They never changed the law that says Congress and its staff get a federal contribution for their health care. So all the allegedly punishing language did was add another layer of bureaucracy to the process.



[SEE: Political Cartoons on Congress]