Four Campbellsville firefighters were injured when a ladder got too close to a power line. ASSOCIATED PRESS A Campbellsville Fire Department truck with the ladder extended remained at the scene where two firefighters were injured during an ice bucket challenge during a fundraiser for ALS on Thursday, Aug. 21, 2014, in Campbellsville, Ky. Officials say the ladder got too close to a power line and electricity traveled to the ladder, electrocuting the firefighters. (AP Photo/Dylan Lovan) (Photo: Dylan Lovan, ASSOCIATED PRESS)

A Central Kentucky firefighter injured in an "ice bucket challenge" died Saturday, a month after a power line shocked him and another man.

Capt. Tony Grider, 41, who was airlifted to University of Louisville Hospital after the accident, was honored by Louisville emergency crews along Broadway.

He died at noon Saturday, said Kyle Smith, Campbellsville's fire chief.

"His family would like to sincerely thank all of those who have been there for them following this tragic accident," Smith said.

Grider and firefighter Simon Quinn, 22, were on the fire truck's ladder Aug. 21 when it got too close to a power line after dumping water on Campbellsville University's marching band in the charity stunt to raise awareness for the disease ALS.

Both were taken to U of L Hospital, and Quinn was released Monday.

Two other firefighters were injured, but were released from the hospital.

Campbellsville Police Chief Tim Hazlette has said the power line was never touched, but it carried such a high voltage that it was able to energize the ladder truck, shocking the firefighters.

Most of the students had already left the area and no students were hurt.

The ice bucket challenge has been sweeping social media websites. The ALS Association said it has raised more than $41 million.

Campbellsville University, a private college, is about 65 miles south of Louisville.

EARLIER COVERAGE: Firefighters hurt in 'ice bucket challenge'

Copyright 2014 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1uoyfOQ