Eddie Cibrian and Brandi Glanville ended their marriage after nine years when Glanville discovered her husband, the father of her two sons, Mason and Jake, had been cheating on her with multiple women. During an interview with William Shatner on Ora TV’s Brown Bag Wine Tasting, via a report by Us Weekly on June 12, Glanville opened up about Eddie Cibrian and his “extra girlfriends,” including Scheana Marie of Vanderpump Rules and country singer LeAnn Rimes, whom he later married.

“I guess you can say. He had some ladies on the side.”

Although Glanville says she tried to forgive Eddie Cibrian for his infidelities, she failed to do so once she discovered there was more than just a couple other ladies involved.

Eddie Cibrian and Rimes began their relationship on the set of Lifetime’s Northern Lights and were eventually exposed when a magazine printed photos of the pair kissing at a restaurant near the set. At the time, Rimes was married, as well, and her husband, Dean Shermet, was just as shocked as Glanville when he was made aware of his wife’s affair.

“It took me about a year to figure out that it had nothing to do with me, but it took a while… I was wondering how I could be any better than I was. Was I not tall enough? Skinny enough? Are my boobs not big enough? Should I have blue eyes? It was all of that. It made me a better person to go through that, and to figure out that it had nothing to do with me.”

As the Inquisitr previously reported, Eddie Cibrian’s ex-wife, Glanville, also spoke to Ross Matthews recently, denying she’s been fired from The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills and claiming she will only participate in one more season with the show. On Matthews’ Podcast, via Reality Tea, Glanville revealed why she’s gotten so much backlash for her role on the show and explained her future with Bravo.

“I am outspoken, and that tends to get me in trouble, especially with the ladies that are sitting around pretending to be perfect. I say what is on my mind.”

As for season six of The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills, Glanville said the network has yet to make any decisions.

“They wait. I think they do it partly as a negotiation so nobody will ask for more money. I would like to do it one more time, then hopefully go onto something a little healthier.”

Eddie Cibrian starred in a reality show with wife LeAnn Rimes, but the series was canceled after just one season.

[Photo via Twitter]