Prost Pennsylvania! It's time to toast with today's Political Pint.

Since we're deep into Octoberfest season, we'll start with a Teutonic tidbit. It looks like Germany is poised to re-elect Chancellor Angela Merkel to a third term. NPR says 'ze Germans' don't love Frau Merkel, but they respect her immensely.





The Pint pines for such attitudes to be exported to the States like so many Audi's, BMW's, or steins of weissbier.

Meanwhile, nearly all of today's American political news focuses on a showdown in Washington over a possible government shutdown.

The House is set to vote on a spending resolution today, but is expected to include a provision to defund the Affordable Care Act. The Hill says it will pass, but Obamacare funding will be restored by the Senate, and then it'll be back on the House.

The Pint knows Tag remains a popular children's game, but [in full Groucho Marx] this is ridiculous!

Conventional wisdom has it that there are enough moderate R's in the House to get that version passed. However, The Washington Post reports that the Republican political base has been pushing to defund Obamacare and seems cool with a shutdown if that gets Congress closer to it.

That leads us to the curious case of freshman firebrand U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz.

Politico notes that the Texas tea party Republican, and wouldbe 2016 presidential candidate, has somewhat opportunistically positioned himself smack dab in the middle of the Obamacare / government shutdown debate.

Cruz has done so by vowing to filibuster the Senate's spending resolution if there's no defund for Obamacare in it.

Given that 2016 Republican presidential nomination rival U.S. Sen. Rand Paul elevated his presidential profile through a filibuster, The Pint thinks this is just a case of senator-see-senator-do.



But Senate procedures won't likely give Cruz the center stage spotlight for said attention-grabbing filibuster.

Better luck next time TC.

In other less attention-grabbing news, the House voted yesterday to make deep cuts in Food Stamps. The Los Angeles Times says the cut would reduce or eliminate benefits for nearly 4 million Americans.

The Pint recognizes the goal of self-sufficiency and individual responsibility, but doubts that literally taking food from poor people's mouths is the best way to inspire poor people's confidence in that particular political ideology.

Another government service millions of voters have become accustomed to is the subject of a report in The Guardian. There, the postmaster general is worried Congress won't keep the postal service funded.

That would severely undercut The Pint's dream of carving out a mail order empire through the distribution of "Beer Snob Magazine."



The [partially paywalled] New York Times carries a report on Iraqis who helped the U.S. during the Iraq War now finding it difficult to immigrate to America.

The Pint knows that out of sight is out of mind, but [once again in full Groucho] this is ridiculous!

Sure there's violence in war, but any politico worth their salt know Congress is still where to find real fighting.





And in addition to the partisan bickering on display there over just about every major issue, The Huffington Post reports that House Speaker John Boehner has drawn an anti-war, anti-immigration reform primary challenger.

It's bewildering to The Pint how some folks think replacing a representative in the leadership with a rookie that has no seniority is better for their interests. Not withstanding legitimate policy beefs voters may have with their elected officials, replacing George Patton with Beetle Bailey is simply not a strategy for victory.

And in news sure to get the immediate attention of U.S. Sen. Pat Toomey years ahead of his 2016 re-election here in Pennsylvania, Roll Call says Senate Democrats continue to out fundraise Senate Republicans. And Toomey's running in a presidential election year. Yikes!

Speaking of fundraising, USA Today reports that the money-laundering conviction of former House Majority Leader Tom DeLay has been thrown out of court. Despite having won his name cleared, DeLay said he “probably” won't stage a return to elected office, but you never know.

Lastly, U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder – a favorite boogieman for folks on the right – is adding to his scary, The Hill reports.

Citing an inordinate prosecution of poor people and people of color, Holder has decided to go light on mandatory drug sentences despite the sentences being mandatory.

The Pint appreciates the AG's intent in prosecuting the perpetrators of most drug crimes – not just the easiest to arrest – but his job is to execute the law, not subjectively choose how to execute it.

Cheers PA!