Many rural hospitals in Texas struggle financially to stay afloat, and some have resorted to closure.

Cuero Community Hospital officials are assuring the public the DeWitt County institution of 45 years is financially stable.

Still, the public hospital is looking at ways to avoid making tough decisions in the future.

At a meeting Tuesday, its board of directors discussed the possibility of becoming affiliated with Methodist Healthcare.

"We haven't made any decision at this point, and we invite public input," said Board Vice Chairwoman Cindy Sheppard.

A subcommittee of the board is considering whether contracting with Methodist would make management of physician recruiting services, billing and strategic planning more affordable.

Under the proposed affiliation, members of the taxing district would still elect board members who make decisions about the hospital.

She said there's been misinformation about what an affiliation with the San Antonio-based healthcare system would be like.

Sheppard said Cuero Community Hospital is not on the verge of closing, and rumors of large layoffs are untrue.

The board plans to schedule a town hall meeting soon.

The hospital is still looking at details of the agreement, but a contract would likely involve CEO Skip Gjolberg becoming a Methodist Healthcare employee.

The rest of the hospital's staff would remain employed by Cuero Community Hospital, she said.

"These kinds of affiliations can take a lot of different forms," she said. "But a buyout? We would never let that happen."

The current health care environment has meant real threats to the survival of small rural hospitals.

"The reason we started looking at this is we're facing a very challenging time in health care, especially in Texas," she said.

After the Affordable Care Act was passed, the idea was that hospitals would take cuts to Medicare payments and, in return, would spend less on indigent care because most patients would have health insurance.

Because the state's Republican leadership has opposed expanding Medicaid to low-income adults, hospital operators said they are forced to make do with less funding and paying for savings they didn't receive.

Texas is also the state with the highest percentage of people without health insurance.

Gjolberg agreed the hospital is in a sound financial position and not at risk of being sold.

Should Cuero reach an agreement with Methodist, the hospital would have access to discounts on purchases that are usually only available to larger hospitals.

"Cuero hospital is doing well," he said. "We've had to be real proactive and smart because rural hospitals are struggling right now."

SHARE