Abortion is the only medical procedure that has ever been banned from Medicaid coverage. (All photos courtesy NARAL)



Though abortion became legal with the Supreme Court’s ruling on Roe v. Wade in 1973, in 1976 Congress passed the Hyde Amendment, banning Medicaid coverage of abortion.

Now, almost 40 years later, Reps. Barbara Lee (D-CA), Jan Schakowsky (D-IL) and Diana DeGette (D-CO) are working to change that with the introduction of the Equal Access to Abortion Coverage in Health Insurance (EACH) Woman Act.

Medicaid is a program jointly run by the federal government and the states to provide free or low-cost health insurance for families and individuals of low income and limited resources; thus, the Hyde Amendment essentially bans the poorest Americans from being able to access abortion care. The Hyde Amendment also blocks abortion access for federal employees, U.S. servicewoman, Peace Corps volunteers, low-income women in Washington, D.C. and those insured through the Indian Health Service, among others.



Related: The Horrifying Reality of Abortion Before It Was Legal in America



To be clear, abortion is the only medical procedure that has ever been banned from Medicaid coverage.

But last night, more than 170,000 signatures were delivered to Congress by NARAL Pro-Choice America, CREDO Action, Daily Kos, National Organization for Women, Center for Reproductive Rights, Planned Parenthood Federation of America, The Nation, Left Action, Lady Parts Justice, People for the American Way, Crooks & Liars, Silver Linings Action and Deluge, calling on lawmakers to repeal the Hyde Amendment restrictions currently preventing millions of women from accessing all of their reproductive health care options.

In a statement, Lizz Winstead, the Co-Founder of Lady Parts Justice and the Co-Creator of The Daily Show, told Yahoo Health, “The range of healthcare a person needs should never be denied because of income. The Hyde amendment denies abortion access to poor women, burdening and further stigmatizing those who are already struggling.”

“Every day, the rights of women are under attack and it’s past time to push back,” said Rep. Barbara Lee in a statement yesterday. “Politicians should not be interfering with a women’s personal healthcare decisions because of how much she earns, where she lives or how she’s insured. The EACH Woman Act would finally end this practice.”

The EACH Woman Act would instill the federal government as the standard-bearer for women’s healthcare, ensuring that every woman who receives either care or insurance through the federal government has access to and coverage of abortion services. Should it be made law, the EACH Woman Act would restore abortion coverage to those enrolled in a government health insurance plan such as Medicaid and Medicare, including those who live in the District of Columbia; those enrolled in a government-managed health insurance program (such as TRICARE, the insurance program for active military personnel and their families) due to an employment relationship; and those who receive healthcare from a government provider or program (including Indian Health Services, the Federal Bureau of Prisons and the Veterans Administration, or VA).

Read More