Photo

PÉRIGUEUX, France — Vincenzo Nibali, who had won four stages of this year’s Tour de France, did not add its first and last time trial to his list on Saturday. The win went to Tony Martin, a German who is the current world champion in racing against the clock.

But Nibali’s fourth-place finish, 1 minute 58 seconds behind Martin, had no effect on his hold on the yellow jersey as the race leader, and he will carry it into the final stage in Paris on Sunday. With that stage little more than a parade until its final sprint on the Champs-Élysées, the race organizers had no problem with introducing Nibali as “the winner of the 2014 Tour de France” at a news conference.

For the French, the time trial brought a long-awaited result. For the first time in 30 years, two French riders, Jean-Christophe Péraud in second and Thibaut Pinot in third, will step onto the podium in Paris. This Tour showcased a renewal of French cycling after a slump that followed the 1998 drug raids on the race by the police. The last time a French rider placed in the top three was 1997. It was Richard Virenque, the now disgraced leader of the Festina team that set off the police action a year later.

The two French podium holders swapped their overall positions after the time trial. Péraud’s upward move was all the more impressive given that about 18.5 miles into the race, his rear tire flattened. He gave it a confirming poke after dismounting and waiting for a mechanic to dash over with a spare bike.

As was the case when the Tour started three weeks earlier in Britain, large crowds lined the route of the 33.5-mile time trial, which took place in the Dordogne, an area where, perhaps appropriately, many Britons own summer homes or take vacations. The routes featured four climbs that were not even vaguely of Alpine scale but were nevertheless substantial in a high-speed race against the clock.

Martin, his white rear disc wheel encircled with the rainbow stripes of a cycling world champion, took every advantage, even sitting on his frame to increase his speed on descents. Dripping with sweat from a rare hot day in this Tour, Martin, who has been the discipline’s world champion for three years in a row, averaged about 30 miles an hour.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The American rider Tejay van Garderen of BMC, who had hoped to use the time trial to step onto the podium until he was banged up by crashes and developed bronchitis, moved up one place to fifth over all after finishing sixth on Saturday, 2:08 after Martin.