Big title insurers defended their spending millions of dollars on meals and sporting events, as regulators grilled them about whether home buyers are wrongly being stuck with the entertainment costs.

At a New York Department of Financial Services hearing Tuesday, executives representing units of Fidelity National Financial and First American Financial described the entertainment as a necessary marketing expense, largely spent to inform real-estate attorneys about their services.

Property buyers obtain title insurance to guarantee clear ownership of real estate, paying hundreds or even thousands of dollars for the protection depending on the property’s value. Many rely on the recommendation of a lawyer, real-estate agent or mortgage broker.

The executives said expenses don’t cross over into an improper effort to buy business that is paid for through excessive insurance premiums.

“You market your product so you have a fair shot at getting the business,” said Joseph DeSalvo, a senior legal counsel representing First American at the hearing set up by New York’s top financial-services watchdog, Benjamin Lawsky. “It’s not a quid pro quo,” he said.

“If not entertainment, we’d have to market in some other fashion,” he said.

The New York regulators pressed the two big insurers on whether their sales people actually talked business during the course of a sporting event, and whether the insurers’ sales people always accompanied the real estate lawyers to the events–or if tickets qualified as a gift.

The insurers said it is their practice for sales people to be in attendance and played down the value of the transactions.

“A lot of these are $20 lunches,” not something extravagant, said Steven Day, an executive with Fidelity National.

New York DFS associate counsel Ellen Buxbaum asked First American if its entertainment budget included “taking clients to gentlemen’s clubs.” Mr. DeSalvo responded, “not under the present administration.”

Ms. Buxbaum said the department had received information from its recent information requests of the insurers indicating such an expenditure.

In a subsequent interview, Mr. DeSalvo added: “All I know is that this type of expense isn’t authorized by the company.” He said: “I can’t say if it occurred.”

Mr. Lawsky’s staff has been analyzing information hauled in from subpoenas served on dozens of agents who sell title insurance, as well as information requests dispatched to insurers, as the department seeks to determine if rates are reasonable to consumers.

Typically, title insurers pay little in claims costs because the agents and insurers typically catch problems in advance. The industry says much of the premium goes to cover the upfront title search.

In most states, agents carry out the title searches for the insurers because local public records to be searched—deeds, mortgages, wills, court judgments. The agents retain the bulk of the premium paid by the consumer.