DETROIT, MI -- Turnout in Tuesday's primary election isn't expected to be high, but that doesn't mean the races aren't compelling and impactful toward the way state and federal government will be run.

Some lawmakers are clinging to their seats against stiff challenges from members of the same party.

In other races, candidates swarmed to fill seats left open lawmakers who moved on to seek new offices.

Big names

Two races in particular involve numerous formidable, recognizable candidates all vying for the same seat.

A mayor, a state representative and a former congressman are all aiming for the U.S. House seat being left behind by Rep. Gary Peters (D-Bloomfield Twp.), who is running for the U.S. Senate seat held by the retiring Carl Levin.

Former U.S. Rep. Hansen Clarke, Southfield Mayor Brenda Lawrence and state Rep. Rudy Hobbs are all battling -- and fighting hard -- for the nod from Democratic voters.

All three, plus candidate Burgess Foster of Detroit, responded to a bevy of questions on their pursuit of a congressional seat for MLive’s voter guide.

More information about them, their reasons for running and their views on various topics are available here.

Familiar names

Wayne County Executive Bob Ficano is seeking re-election and is being challenged by a local mayor, the son of a former Detroit mayor, the son of his own predecessor and a popular former sheriff.

State Rep. Phil Cavanagh -- son of former Detroit Mayor Jerome Cavanagh, former Wayne County Sheriff and Detroit Police Chief Warren Evans, County Commissioner Kevin McNamara -- the son of former Wayne County Executive Edward McNamara and Westland Mayor William Wild are all gunning to replace Ficano, whose held the top county position since 2003.

Other Democratic candidates on the ballot in the county executive race include Adam Salam Adamski of Wayne, Cindy Darrah of Detroit, Russell George Leviska of Westland, Bettie Cook Scott of Detroit, Sigmunt John Szczepkowski, Jr. of Detroit and Christopher Wojtowicz of Hamtramck.

Find out more on the candidates here.

Michigan congressional delegation

Tuesday’s election involves a number of races that will determine what type of politicians represent Michigan in Washington.

11th District:

U.S. Rep. Kerry Bentivolio (R-Milford) won his seat as a political newcomer in 2012 after the abrupt exit of former Congressman Thaddeus McCotter, who resigned amid a petition signature fraud scandal.

He’s a staunch conservative with Tea Party support who’s expressed a desire to see the president impeached and introduced a federal website security bill that he hoped would undermine Obamacare.

His opponent David Trott is widely viewed as a more mainstream Republican who's campaign has raised millions more than Bentivolio.

The massive fundraising difference -- $3.4 million to $515,475 at the end of June -- indicates a major advantage for Trott, but a stunning primary upset in Virginia earlier this year showed money isn’t everything.

Virginia Republican David Brat, a relative unknown with grassroots conservative support, in June defeated House Majority Leader Eric Cantor after raising just $392,316 against the incumbent’s $5.8 million.

Four Democrats are also running for the seat.

They include Bobby McKenzie of Canton Township, who has worked for the U.S. State Department and the CIA in counter-terrorism, Anil Kumar, a urologist of Farmington, Nancy Skinner, an environmentalist and progressive radio personality of Birmingham and Bill Roberts, a political organizer from Livonia.

13th District:

U.S. Rep. John Conyers (D-Detroit), wants to be sent to Washington for a 26th term at 84 years old and is facing a challenge from Rev. Horace Sheffield III of Detroit.

Conyers, as did Evans in the county executive race, survived a court challenge questioning his eligibility based on filing technicalities that nearly kept him off the ballot.

8th and 12th districts

U.S. Rep Mike Rogers (R-Howell) is leaving politics for a radio show and the longest serving congressman ever Rep. John Dingell (D-Dearborn) is retiring.

Two well-known Republicans have emerged to seek Rogers’ seat: Former Senate Majority Leader Mike Bishop and State Rep. Tom McMillin. More on that race from MLive Lansing here.

And two Democrats, Dingell’s wife Debbie Dingell and Ypsilanti attorney Ray Mullins, are battling for the 12th District nomination. More on that race from MLive Ann Arbor here.

State lawmakers battle

There are also races for seats in the state legislature in which there are no incumbents, leaving newcomers to battle it out, and others in which current lawmakers are trying to oust each other.

4th Senate District:

State Sen. Virgil Smith wants to stick around, but so does state Rep. Rashida Tlaib, who can’t run for another term in the House and is seeking Smith’s spot in the Senate.

Tlaib was popular in her House district, where she ran a neighborhood service center and fought hard for southwest Detroit residents on environmental issues and matters related to construction of a new bridge to Canada.

But she’s up against an incumbent who’s spent more time in the legislature, having represented Detroit in both chambers, and has the backing of the Detroit Regional Chamber.

Voters on Tuesday will decide which Democrat to send to the November election and which to send packing.

6th House District:

Meanwhile, the House seat being left behind by Tlaib is being sought by a slew of fresh-faced community activists.

They are: Tyrone Carter, Stephanie Chang, Eze Ejelonu, Elena Herrada and Verl Jean Pittman, all of Detroit, and Patrick O'Connell and Casondria Walker Keith, both of Ecorse.

More

Several other Senate races include multiple current and former House members seeking seats in the opposite chamber.

State Rep. John Olumba (D-Detroit) is challenging state Sen. Bert Johnson (D-Detroit) in the 2nd District. Georgia Lemmons of Detroit and Taras Nykoriak of Hamtramck are also seeking the Democratic nomination.

Reps. Thomas Stallworth (D- Detroit), David Knezek (D-Dearborn Heights) and David Nathan (D-Detroit), former state Rep. Shanelle Jackson and Frank Tomcsik of Redford Township are all running to replace the term-limited Sen. Tupac Hunter in the 5th District.

In Oakland County, State Reps. Ellen Cogen Lipton (D-Huntington Woods) and Vicki Barnett (D-Farmington Hills) are both challenging 11th District Sen. Vincent Gregory (D-Lathrup Village).

And Former Republican state Reps. Marty Knollenberg, Chuck Moss and Andrew “Rocky” Raczkowski, along with attorney Ethan Baker and Al Gui of Royal Oak are all vying to replace term-limited Sen. John Pappageorge in the 13th District.

Preview what your ballot looks like and learn more about the candidates through MLive’s Voter Guide here.