There are numerous acronyms used when discussing non-traditional health benefits options. Two popular "account"-based options are HSAs (Health Savings Accounts) and HRAs (Health Reimbursement Arrangements). Even though they both have the same basic idea, there are a few key differences how HSAs and HRAs work in 2014, and beyond.

If you have an HSA and/or HRA, or you are considering offering one to your employees, consider the following.

HRAs vs HSAs: HRAs are owned by the employer, HSAs are owned by the individual

HRAs are employer-sponsored plans. An employer sets allowances for employees who can then use that money to be reimbursed for medical expenses.

HSAs are individual accounts that employers sometimes choose to contribute to. While HSAs are often part of an employer's benefit package, they are really more like IRAs in that individuals can set them up and contribute to them on their own.

HRAs vs HSAs: HSAs are actual accounts, HRAs are notional

When money is put into an HSA, it belongs to the account holder. If an employer contributes to an employee's HSA, the employee controls that money immediately, even if they leave the company.

When money is added to an HRA, it belongs to the employer until a qualified medical expense is incurred. If an employee leaves a company without spending all the money in the HRA, the employee generally loses access to that money.

HRAs vs HSAs: Reimbursable medical expenses

With an HRA, the employer specifies exactly which categories of medical expenses an HRA will cover (within the parameters set by the IRS in Publication 502). If an employer wants to cover doctor's visits and pharmacy, but not dental or vision, the HRA can be designed in that way. It is also common with HRAs paired with a group health plan ("Integrated HRAs") to only cover deductible expenses. This allows the employer control over the cost and usage of the HRA.

Because HSAs are owned by the individual, the employer doesn't have anything to do with what can be reimbursed. Employees can use HSA funds for any IRS-qualified medical expense.

HRAs vs HSAs: HSAs require compatible plans

In order to contribute to an HSA an individual must have a high-deductible plan (see the 2014 HSA rules here).

With an HRA, the employer sets the eligibility criteria for participation. For example, with an Integrated HRA the employee needs to enroll in the company-sponsored group health coverage.

HRAs and HSAs can be used together

HRAs and HSAs are not mutually exclusive. Employees can have both type of "accounts" at the same time.

However, the employer needs to set up the HRA with an HSA-compatible platform, as there are ordering and deductible rules with an HSA. See this FAQ: Can I have an HRA and an HSA at the same time?