Scott, Gordon, Talton share rich Colorado hoops history

The Buffs' Josh Scott, left, Wesley Gordon, right, and Xavier Talton, not pictured, often crossed paths on the Colorado prep scene. ( Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer )

On the court, Josh Scott has been trying to shake Wesley Gordon since the pair barely were teenagers.

Off the court, it seems Scott will find Gordon even more difficult to shake. Not even a forced divorce sometime in March, when their time together with the University of Colorado men's basketball team comes to an end, will do the trick.

"I'm still going to see him a lot after this year," Gordon said. "That's my guy. That's my brother. We're really close friends."

The 2015-16 men's basketball season marks the final year together for Scott, Gordon, and guard Xavier Talton, all Colorado natives who arrived at CU in the fall of 2012 for coach Tad Boyle's third season at the helm at a time when homegrown Colorado talent was a rarity on the Buffs' roster.

When that trio arrived, the only native Colorado players on the roster were Monarch alum Sabatino Chen and Fairview walk-on Beau Gamble, both of whom transferred in from other programs. In the preceding decade, the best seasons enjoyed at CU by a Colorado native were the 12-plus points averaged by Westminster High grad Blair Wilson in 2002-03 and '03-04, though honorable mention could go to the 11.7 points averaged by Arapahoe grad Levi Knutson during his senior season of 2010-11.

Before CU, the trio of Scott, Gordon, and Talton dominated the Colorado prep scene, often crossing paths on the state's biggest stages. Gordon's Sierra Stallions edged Scott's Lewis-Palmer club in the semifinals before winning the 2010 4A state title. Scott's squad eliminated Talton and his Sterling teammates in the quarterfinals.

Advertisement

Talton took center stage in 2011, defeating Scott and Lewis-Palmer by one point in the 4A semifinals before claiming the state crown. Scott and Gordon famously previewed their collegiate careers in the 2012 4A final at the Coors Events Center, with Scott finally getting his state crown by pouring in 25 points to lead a one-point win against Gordon and Sierra.

Theirs is a shared history. Which makes the forthcoming final season together at CU all the more precious.

"We just want to make it special, especially for Josh and Talton because I've been with them for four years," said Gordon, who took a redshirt season as a true freshman and has one more year of eligibility. "I want to make sure they don't go out like last year went out."

"It's been great. I make (Scott) better and he makes me better just because we've been playing with each other so much. We most likely always know what each other is going to do. He's worked on his body, obviously, and his jump shot and ball-handling ability. He can take people off the drive a lot better now. That's made him an elite player."

Scott, of course, once again will be the focal point for the Buffs at both ends of the floor. Fully recovered from the back issues that limited him a year ago, the 6-foot-10 forward should continue to ascend on a number of CU's all-time charts.

Talton has been a steady if not spectacular contributor throughout his tenure, and will once again give Boyle a dependable option at guard. Gordon's contributions this season could prove the most critical of the trio. Already a defensive force in the paint, having Gordon improve on a 6.6 scoring average from a year ago could help offset the loss of Xavier Johnson, who is out indefinitely due to a torn Achilles tendon.

"These guys are some of the best guys you can meet," Talton said. "Knowing each other and getting better from high school basketball until now, the camaraderie that we've built is great."

Pat Rooney: rooneyp@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/prooney07