By Andrew Bair

The National Right to Life Convention rolls into New Orleans in six days! This three-day conference (July 9-11th) will bring together grassroots activists and pro-life leaders from across the country and center around the theme: “Be a Voice for the Voiceless.” The pro-life newcomer will be inspired and empowered to get more involved and the seasoned activist will receive greater education and new tools to take their efforts to the next level.

Kicking off the convention will be Dr. George Delgado, a pro-life doctor who pioneered a method of reversing the effects of the abortion pill.

At a press conference earlier this year, the American Association of Pro-Life Obstetricians and Gynecologists reported that as of the end of 2014, 78 babies have been born after abortion reversal treatment, with 45 women still pregnant, a 57% success rate out of 223 attempted reversals. Dr. Delgado’s work is having a huge impact! As a result, several states have now passed legislation requiring abortion clinics to inform women that this new technique exists and could be an option if she changes her mind halfway through a chemical abortion.

Later the same day in a session emceed by Republican political strategist Mary Matalin, author and TV personality Rachel Campos-Duffy will discuss the so-called “war on women” and the real victims in the abortion debate. The 2014 elections saw pro-abortion candidates go down in defeat when they relied too heavily on the bogus “war on women” narrative. (Mark “Uterus” Udall, anyone?)

But amidst the political rhetoric, abortion does result in real victims: defenseless unborn babies. Campos-Duffy will provide her insights into how the pro-life movement can combat such attacks in the future and shift the focus of the debate to the real victims.

Just like the state in which they live, the pro-life movement in Louisiana is vibrant and spirited. Louisiana Right to Life will treat convention-goers to an evening of culture, comedy, music, food and dancing called “The Festival of Life: A Taste of Louisiana.” The guest of honor and keynote speaker will be none other than Louisiana Governor Bobby Jindal. In addition, attendees will be entertained by State Senator and comedian Jonathan Perry and music from the Soul Heirs Brass Band.

With the 2016 elections just around the corner, on Friday the tenth, the convention will host presidential candidates Dr. Ben Carson, Gov. Rick Perry, Sen. Marco Rubio, and Sen. Rick Santorum for a pro-life forum. The forum will discuss the role of the abortion debate in 2016 and strategies for winning in 2016.

Many Americans have heard about the abortion-expanding elements of Obamacare but few know about the other threat to life it contains, namely, health care rationing. A general session will make the case that America can find solutions that deliver health care without rationing or deficits.

Burke J. Balch, J.D., and Jennifer Popik, J.D., will present National Right to Life’s pro-life alternative to Obamacare. Recently elected Sen. Bill Cassidy of Louisiana, who is also a physician, will be a special guest at this session.

A&E’s hit reality show Duck Dynasty has carved out a unique corner of American popular culture for the entire state of Louisiana. Three of the show’s stars, Alan, Lisa, and Miss Kay Robertson, will headline the Prayer Breakfast to be held on the final day of the convention. Lisa Robertson recently opened up about tragedies in her past, which included sexual abuse as a young girl and an abortion at age 17. Lisa told US Magazine that she tells her story in hopes of helping others who have been hurt by abortion. The Robertsons will discuss their journey, the importance of family and the value of life at every stage. Also in attendance will be Sen. David Vitter of Louisiana, who has been a tireless advocate for the unborn in the U.S. Senate.

John McCormack of the Weekly Standard will keynote the closing banquet. McCormack will offer his perspective on being a voice for the voiceless in the media. Unfortunately, few journalists are willing to ask pro-abortion leaders the hard questions.

In his reporting, McCormack has worked to ensure they are not given a free pass by the media. Following the Gosnell trial, McCormack pressed House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi to explain the difference between what Gosnell did to babies and what other late-term abortionists do every day. She ultimately uttered that abortion, even late abortion, is “sacred ground” for her. Louisiana Congressman John Fleming will also be a special guest at the banquet.

Other topics to be discussed during the 2015 National Right to Life Convention include doctor-prescribed suicide, post-abortion healing, grassroots organizing, fundraising for pro-life groups, Planned Parenthood, understanding abortion polling, pro-life battles at the United Nations, denial of life-saving medical treatment, media outreach techniques, social media, webcam abortions, prenatal testing, dismemberment abortions, adoption, effective lobbying, stem cell research, safe haven laws and strategies for electoral success.

There really is something for everyone!

It’s not too late to register. More information including a full schedule and list of speakers can be found at www.nrlconvention.com. Laissez les bons temps rouler!