Entertainment

Andrew Denton: 'Why put yourself through all this potential rejection on an hourly basis?' Photo: Tim Bauer

When comedian Louis C. K. appeared on Conan last year and explained why he wasn't going to buy his kids a phone, I sensed nervousness in the talk-show audience's laughter.

''These things are toxic,'' he said. ''You need to build an ability to just be yourself and not be doing something.''

He went on to explain how listening to Springsteen in his car had brought forth a well of existential sadness. His immediate instinct was to message 50 people to get a little cyber-salve, when, instead, he thought: ''You know what? Don't. Just be sad. Stand in the way of it and let it hit you like a truck.''

So he did. He let it come, got swept up in the poetry of his own sadness and then swept away by the counter-rush of happiness that followed.

Advertisement

''The thing is, because we don't want that first bit of sad, we push it away with a little phone. You never feel completely sad or completely happy, you just feel kind of … satisfied with your products. And then you die.''

Maybe I was imagining it, but it seemed to me the audience laughter was the kind when people start to realise: ''Wait a minute, this joke's about me. And it's true.''

As a television producer I worked with two of Australia's best comic minds. Both were early and skilful adopters of Twitter and, even as I admired their ability to harness it as a marketing tool, I was struck by how easily their moods would plummet if a joke wasn't re-tweeted as often as they had hoped. It's hard enough being a comedian, I thought, why put yourself through all this potential rejection on an hourly basis?

Of course, if you're good at it, being out there is good for business. And, just like a live show, there's the buzz of people loving your material. But the response to a live audience is in the room and finite. Performing to a Twitter audience is everywhere and endless. And it's what that does to your life, and your simple ability to enjoy it, that interests me.

What these two intelligent and respected men were dealing with was FOMO - Fear of Missing Out.

According to Dr Natasha Dwyer, a senior lecturer in digital media at Melbourne's Victoria University, FOMO is a ''fear of one's social standing or how one is perceived among peers, and a need to constantly know what is happening and what others are doing''.

The very thing that makes social media so intoxicating - being able to know, and comment on, what everyone else is up to - can also be a stark reminder that you may not measure up. Cue anxiety, stress, depression - and an inability to look away from the dark mirror.

Now, before you write this off as another anti-social-media rave from some out-of-touch guy who's never tweeted or Facebooked in his life, in the interests of disclosure I should point out that I have never tweeted or Facebooked in my life, but that I think it's as pointless ranting against social media - what Ricky Gervais recently called ''the common consciousness'' - as it is complaining about gravity.

I get why people are into it. It's exciting. Convenient. Follow the right people and you can learn a lot. As the Arab Spring showed us, it's the place to be when news is breaking.

The hive mind can also be a lovely thing. A few years ago Greenpeace tagged a group of whales in the South Pacific to keep them from being poached by the Japanese. They then held an online poll to name the animals. Beating out such worthy finalists as Kaimana (Hawaiian for ''power of the ocean'') and Shanti (Sanskrit for ''tranquillity''), the winning name, courtesy of a Reddit campaign, was ''Mr Splashy Pants''.

So why did I choose not to opt in? Partly a weird - even to me - Unabomber-type suspicion of leaving too many electronic footprints (ridiculous, I realise, in an age where the PRISM program knows both my thoughts). Partly because I am not, by nature, a social creature (hello ''unsubscribe'').

But mostly because … I. Just. Don't. Want.The. Noise.

I believe in daydreaming; for me, the most fertile creative state. The simple act of allowing your brain to freewheel can lead to connections and solutions previously hidden in plain sight. In our second-screen lives, daydreaming barely rates a mention. But it should be on the curriculum of every school and university and encouraged in every workplace.

To daydream properly you have to actively seek silence. For most of us, that takes a real force of will. Think of your life right now.

Is your phone's face the last thing you see before sleep? Your first friend in the morning? You may be interested to know that every message ping you get, your brain gives you a tiny squirt of dopamine as a reward - exactly the same as it gives gamblers when they bet on 23 black. The cumulative effect, as Chinese scientists have recently discovered, is that the brains of internet addicts come to resemble those of drug and gambling addicts.

I am not immune to this, having the same Pavlovian twitch as everyone else when my phone buzzes. But then I think of what cricketer Keith Miller's dad once said to him: ''Son, life will afford you many opportunities to say nothing. My advice is to take all of them.'' So I have tried to carve out some thinking time by bypassing the endless conversation-come-popularity-contest that social media demands.

This is JOMO - Joy of Missing Out - a cheerful disengagement from the twin universes of Facebook and Twitter; one that gives me active pleasure in not minding that I haven't seen, or been seen to respond to, the latest post, meme or snark.

Does this make me better than you? No, though perhaps a little calmer and happier.

Does it mean I actually miss out? Not if I don't want to.

I spend a lot of time online, searching for goodies. If I want, I can do the same to see what Mark Colvin or Steve Martin are tweeting about. I can choose to make the world as noisy or as quiet as I like.

But the point is, I can choose. I am not being constantly drawn back to the device in my hand to find out what my score is.

Remember that old saying ''what you don't know won't hurt you''? It's true. Go for a walk and don't take your phone. Tell yourself, ''It's OK to be alone with my thoughts''. It's surprisingly calming.

British filmmaker Adam Curtis argues in his documentary series All Watched Over by Machines of Loving Grace that we have become enslaved by our technology. He says of our narcissistic age: ''Why don't we have big ideas or dreams any more? Because now that there's nothing more important than you, how can you ever lose yourself in a grander idea?''

Step away from the device. You are not an algorithm. You are you. If you are willing to assert yourself over a desire to please strangers, you'll be amazed at the great, liberating joy to be had in missing out.

Andrew Denton will speak about JOMO at the Semi-Permanent festival, Carriageworks, Eveleigh, May 22-24.