DENVER – Of all the arguments put forth against everything from the Affordable Care Act to social safety net programs, the "I don't want to pay for X" argument from the right has to be the most asinine. The upcoming decision on the Supreme Court's King vs. Burwell case – which could yank subsidies out from under anyone using the federal health care exchange – is a prime example.

As Robert Schlesinger has pointed out, the lawsuit's proponents are relying on a known falsehood about the intent of the law because they don't want taxpayer support going to people who otherwise couldn't afford health insurance. It's "I Don't Wanna" as a Supreme Court test case.

Newsflash to the right: I don't want to pay for a lot of things either, starting with Exxon subsidies, Bush's wars and the millions we paid to sociopaths to come up with torture techniques for the CIA. Who the hell gave you a monopoly on morality when it comes to spending public dollars? Do you think you're the only ones who object to where our tax dollars go? Because if we only have to pay for the things of which we approve, I've got a long veto list.

[READ: The Republicans' King v. Burwell Problem]

The I Don't Wanna Caucus is willfully oblivious to the fact that a whole lot of people pay for them, too. Texas is more than happy to accept Federal Emergency Management Agency money – they actually got more than any other state in 2011 and 2012 – at the same time Texas Gov. Greg Abbott deploys the state guard against an imaginary Obama takeover and sues the federal government over the environment and health care.

Here in Colorado, as the Colorado Springs Gazette has reported about its home of El Paso County, "The county is more dependent on federal money than most other places in Colorado and the nation … Federal spending accounts for one-third of the local economy." Yet Colorado Springs would rather have its parks go brown and its streetlights fade than increase taxes locally to pay for them.

The I Don't Wanna Caucus is not only ideologically hypocritical, it's also irresponsible. The I Don't Wanna Caucus of Colorado Senate Republicans killed our highly-successful program that slashed the teen birth and abortion rate by providing free long-acting reversible contraceptives to low-income women. Every $1 invested in the program saved the state $5.85 in Medicaid costs. The Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment estimates that the program could have saved Colorado $49 million to $111 million in Medicaid dollars per year in birth-related costs.





[SEE: Political Cartoons on Obamacare]

Likewise, insurance is cheaper than no insurance. People without insurance end up in the emergency room, where they have to be treated and where the cost shifts onto someone else. Guess who pays for that? People with insurance. But now, thanks to the Affordable Care Act, hospitals saved at least $7.4 billion in 2014, according to the Department of Health and Human Services.

All of us have someone else paying for us in some form or another, through paved roads and clean drinking water and home mortgage tax deductions. Those of us without kids subsidize schools and teachers for other people's children. Living in a civilized society means we all share in the cost and responsibility. Living in a civilized society also means we all pay for things we find morally objectionable – conservatives and liberals alike.