Could this be the start of something new? The Associated Press

Pay attention America. Something interesting is happening in Kansas. I’m going to make a bold conjecture here. We are watching the beginning of the end of traditional politics in America. Kansas could be the loose thread that turns into a major political unraveling.

If you haven’t followed the Kansas Senate race, here is the relevant background. Until recently, the Kansas race was a three-way contest between incumbent Republican Pat Roberts, Democrat Chad Taylor and independent Greg Orman, a self-styled pragmatic centrist. Then something unusual happened. The Democratic candidate abandoned the race, leaving Orman with a serious shot of knocking off a three-term, Republican incumbent.

Orman is an energy entrepreneur who describes himself as a problem solver fed up with the extremism and partisanship in both political parties. He is a co-founder of the Common Sense Coalition, which, as the name would suggest, is committed to generating pragmatic solutions for serious national challenges.

Roberts is the 78-year-old, three-term incumbent who struggled in the Republican primary against a tea party challenger and won with only 48 percent of the vote.

[GALLERY: Cartoons on the 2014 Congressional Elections]

Let’s pause for a moment for some important disclosures. I have contributed to Orman’s campaign. The Centrist Project, a group that I lead, has endorsed Orman in this race. The reason I support him is that he has embraced the "Centrist Principles" that I first laid out in this column. Read those principles here.

Please do not let that obscure the larger message coming out of Kansas: We've entered a stretch in which an increasing number of credible independent candidates are going to take advantage of public antipathy toward both parties. Many of these candidates will lose; some will win, or at least run strong races. The success stories will breed yet more credible challenges from outside the political status quo.

In fact, let’s call this my “I told you so” moment. The very first post I wrote for U.S. News & World Report declared:

America has two tired, intellectually insipid political parties, each more than 100 years old. And they are producing a shoddy product. The two parties see only each other as the potential competition. Sure, voters can describe themselves as "independent," but when an election rolls around, the only real choice on the ballot is Republican or Democrat. We need the Toyota of American politics. There can be something better, if we have the imagination and political will to embrace it.



Like Orman in Kansas. (Read that introductory column in full here.) Polls now show that Orman can beat Roberts in a head-to-head match-up. If that were to happen, Orman would join Angus King of Maine as the second independent U.S. senator. (Sen. Bernie Sanders of Vermont is technically independent, but as a self-described socialist, he is clearly not part of the political middle.)

[SEE: Cartoons about the Republican Party]

Two independent senators may not sound like a lot, but in the current climate, it’s a huge number because it could leave the Senate divided 49-49-2. And in that scenario, it’s the two who will determine how the body runs when it comes to things such as picking the majority leader.

Will Orman win? I don’t know. He’s an attractive candidate and Roberts is running a lousy campaign. Orman leads in the polls now, but Republicans are rushing resources to Kansas to try and rescue the seat. Also, the Kansas secretary of state has ruled that Democratic challenger Taylor must stay on the November ballot, even though he has dropped out of the race.

I know one thing for certain: The pundits are missing the big picture here. They seem pathologically unable to view this development through any other lens than the two-party prism. Nate Silver’s FiveThirtyEight blog posted 18 paragraphs on the Kansas development, almost all of which were focused on how this would affect the battle between Republicans and Democrats for control of the Senate.

Politico reported, “[Orman] could be a decisive vote for whichever party ends up controlling the Senate.” All this analysis seems to miss the possibility that we could be entering an era in which neither party controls the Senate. And that’s how sane, moderate, pragmatic Americans will reinsert themselves into the political process.

[SEE: Cartoons on the Democratic Party]

Every poll shows America is increasingly fed up with politics as usual. The approval rating for Congress is 16 percent, the lowest for a midterm election since Gallup began asking the question in 1974. (See the full poll results here.) Voters typically like their own incumbent better than they like Congress as a whole, but that number is falling too. Remember Eric Cantor?

A less appreciated fact is that our winner-take-all elections are hospitable to moderate, third-party candidates who need only 34 percent of the vote to win a three-way race. And, as noted above, only a few independent senators could deny either party a majority.

Orman obviously caught a break when the Democratic candidate dropped out, but there is nothing unique about the broader dynamic in the Kansas Senate race. Roberts faced a tough primary challenge that exposed him to assault from the right. Meanwhile, Orman could pick off moderate Republicans and Democrats who realize that their candidate has little or no chance of winning. (Orman was gaining traction even before his Democratic opponent quit the race.)

[ MORE: Cartoons about Congress]

The “inside the Beltway” crowd is obsessed about whether Orman would caucus with the Republicans or the Democrats. That, too, totally misses the point. The mere fact that Orman, like King, could caucus with either party is what makes them distinct. They do not have to kowtow to the party base. They do not have to fight off primary challengers from the extreme left or the extreme right. They do not have to view either party as the “enemy.” Being independent makes them fundamentally different, regardless of whether they lean slightly right or slightly left.