Awareness and concern is rising amongst neighbors in northwest Lafayette following the recent Camera article detailing Lafayette's intention to annex property near U.S. 287 and Arapahoe Road for the construction of an ultra-high-density subdivision. The proposed HeartEye Village would include the first apartments built in the neighborhood and is projected to have a net density at build-out of 11 dwellings per acre. This would be in sharp contrast to nearby existing ultra-low-density neighborhoods such as Spring Creek, North Indian Peaks and White Hawk Ranch. And, up to an additional 2,000 vehicles could be added to the neighborhood's traffic.

Neighbors believe that this property lies within Lafayette's sphere of influence and that annexation is inevitable; however, the development plans for this parcel seem to indicate a significant shift in the wind for northwest Lafayette.

Current residents are concerned that Lafayette is planning to slowly ratchet up allowable density in the remaining developable land in this corner of the city to the detriment of those that purchased properties in the area with the understanding that dwelling density in adjacent neighborhoods would remain low.

Advertisement

Historically, the Super IGA of 2003 bound the county and cities within Boulder County to a plan which was based on mutual respect for each other's boundaries while also preserving rural open spaces from development. This agreement dissolved with Erie's premature withdrawal from the coalition in 2013, and no consensus emerged to resurrect the pact. As part of the IGA, Lafayette originally agreed to preserve the northern half of the property in question as an undeveloped "Rural Preservation Area." This would preserve the open feel of the gateway to the county through the stone pillars at Ninemile Corner (287 and Arapahoe).

Following the dissolution of the IGA, Lafayette quietly reworked its comprehensive plan such that this designated open space became ripe for development. The entire property was then placed into the medium density residential category. Now nearby residents find that the proposed density is even higher and also includes multi-unit dwellings and even commercial development.

Neighbors who have reviewed Lafayette's Plan Review of Oct. 21 read that the developer is asking for variances from city building codes including reduced front yard setbacks from streets and walkways, reduced side setbacks from adjacent dwellings and open spaces, reduced rear yard setbacks, increased allowable building heights, reduced lot sizes and an increase in maximum lot coverage from 30 percent up to 100 percent lot coverage in some areas. Parking is also said to be inadequate.

Although Lafayette spokeswoman Debbie Wilmont was quoted in the recent Camera article as saying "the HeartEye plan is receiving positive feedback," concerned neighbors know of nearly 100 individuals who have written to the Planning Commission strongly voicing their concerns about the scope of the project. Unfortunately, the momentum pushing for development at any cost and a whitewash of any negative feedback is formidable.

Just as concerning is the effect on traffic on Arapahoe. The main entrance for the development would be located just two-tenths of a mile west of 287. A traffic light with a pedestrian crossing at this intersection would stack west-bound traffic on Arapahoe back to 287, probably blocking the entire intersection. The addition of up to 2,000 vehicles to the area would result in gridlock on Arapahoe and would block egress from properties on Arapahoe west of 287 all the way to Boulder during rush hour.

Boulder has a big problem — too many jobs and not enough housing. This problem has now affected the surrounding towns in the entire county. The outlying towns can't solve Boulder's problem since Boulder has no intention of limiting the growth of new business. Unfortunately, the surrounding cities have fallen under the influence of mega-developers, who realize a cash-cow when they see it.

Sue Weems' neighbors salute some of her efforts such as proposing the construction of zero-energy dwellings, a community garden, and the inclusion of a few housing units for seniors, but remain concerned that ultra-high-density development is still new, unproven in the long haul, and out of character for this corner of Lafayette.

Your neighbors recommend that letters in support of a reassessment of the Comprehensive Plan for Northwest Lafayette be addressed to Lafayette City Council and the Lafayette Planning Commission.

Bill Howland lives in Lafayette.