FOXBOROUGH, Mass. – The snap was perfect but the wind was tricky. Britton Colquitt took the snap for granted and may have been thinking a bit too much about how to play the wind.

“I’ve got to do a better job with ball security and get a clean ball off, get good hang time and give our guys a better chance,” Colquitt said.

The Broncos’ punter dropped the snap, then rushed his punt a tad and didn’t get his usual air under it.

But still he booted it 53 yards. And shouldn’t a delay from a dropped snap help the punt coverage?

Apparently not. There was something counterintuitive about the 84-yard touchdown punt return by New England’s Julian Edelman in the second quarter. Even with the Broncos’ coverage team getting an extra second or two to get downfield, Edelman fielded it with plenty of room to run. Edeleman ran right, past rookie linebacker Corey Nelson, who was blocked either on the side by Tim Wright (as the referee or saw it) or illegally from behind (as the ref didn’t see it), then zigged back left across the field where he outraced Colquitt to complete his touchdown that put the Patriots up 20-7.

“I thought he got me a little bit from behind,” Nelson said. “But that’s football. Nobody’s perfect. Got to stop him, anyway. It shouldn’t have happened.”

PHOTOS: Best images from Broncos-Patriots

It was Edelman’s fourth career punt return for a touchdown, a franchise record.

“Edelman’s a great returner,” Colquitt said. “We had one with him last year where our guys were there … It was nothing against our guys, it’s just a great player making a great play.”

It was the first time the Broncos had allowed a touchdown off a punt return since Buffalo’s Leodis McKelvin went 80 yards in a Christmas Eve 2011 game at Buffalo.

Colquitt knew the breakdown started with him.

“The wind was doing its thing and I’m probably instead of thinking of the basics … you’ve got to pay more attention to details and I obviously didn’t,” Colquitt said.

Mike Klis: mklis@denverpost.com; Twitter: @mikeklis