Senior shows plenty of promise beyond his accomplishments

In the course of four years, Loveland's John Freismuth transformed himself into one of the most physically gifted atheltes in the area, earning him the distinction of the Reporter-Herald Male Athlete of the Year. (Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

A couple of fathers sat in the stands and just gushed.

Down below them on the track was Loveland senior John Freismuth, and they were amazed. He was tall and lean, but strong. Yet he was so fast. And he could jump.

Consider it a wow moment, but it was one Indians' track coach Paul Quere never really experienced. Definitely, Freismuth didn't look like that as a freshman, but there was never any sudden moment, just a continuous transformation that took place over time.

"I think it's remarkable when you see those kids," Quere said. "Last year, people noticed him at track meets. Until then, not so much really. But he kept getting bigger and stronger and faster.

"It wasn't like all the sudden he was great. He just kept getting better. There was never this all the sudden you looked and it was holy cow. It was just kind of a little bit of a time through all four years."

Now standing 6-foot-4 and weighing 205 pounds and physical gifts abound, Freismuth was definitely a standout on the football field and on the track for the Indians, earning the distinction of the Reporter-Herald Male Athlete of the Year.

It is an award his brother Dan earned back in 2007, making them the first siblings to win the award in its 26-year history.

But what really has his high school coaches amazed is they are convinced they have yet to see the best of him. He was one of Colorado State's first commitments to the football program last year, with head coach Jim McElwain seeing all he needed during the Rams' summer football camps.

Advertisement

"When he came to our camp we recognized he was a big, athletic guy who not only excelled on the football field, but in track and field," McElwain said. "He's a multi-sport guy who also takes care of business in the classroom. John is the kind of student-athlete we look for in our program. He answers all of the questions that you talk about in recruiting; a quality person and a quality athlete."

If a coach stays in the game long enough, they will see athletes come and go, some who worked so hard they overcame their physical limitations, others who cruised on what physical gifts they possessed, thus, never reaching their full potential.

Really, Freismuth was neither type of athlete. It was hard work which created those physical gifts he displayed as an Indian, and each year he continued to push his boundaries. That's why both Quere and LHS football coach Wayne McGinn are more excited to see the final product.

More astonishing to them both, neither can envision what that is, exactly.

"He hasn't reached the limits of what he can do," McGinn said. "I'm excited to watch him up at CSU and see how far he can go.

John Freismuth follows in the footsteps of his older brother Dan, who was named the RH Male Athlete of the Year in 2007. Both shined in football and track. (Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

"That's those special ones that go play Division I, and if they're good enough, go play from there. It takes a very special person; not too many people get there."

Freismuth generally reached the point he wanted to on the football field, scoring 12 touchdowns on just 32 plays from the line of scrimmage. His six carries went for 87 yards, his 26 receptions good for another 675 — an average of 25.9 yards per catch. Defensively, he roamed the secondary as the free safety, producing 85 tackles on the season with one interception and a fumble recovery.

In a day and age when many players are limited to one side of the ball or the other, McGinn said he had no choice but to keep Freismuth on the field.

"I'd do it again all over. The only thing different I might do is get him the ball more," the coach said. "He was definitely a kid you had to have on the field as much as possible."

On the track, he sits second all-time in school history with a high jump of 6-7, and Quere said Freismuth could have made a bigger impact at the state meet as an individual, but sacrificed some personal glory for the sake of beefing up relays and helping three more of his teammates experience the meet.

For Quere, that was just another aspect of Freismuth being a rare breed in this day and age. Over the course of four years, he's seen the young man grow and become better in everything he did, all the while putting team first in his pursuit of reaching his own brand of excellence.

"I have not seen a ceiling for him yet. I have not seen a plateau from him," Quere said. "He just keeps getting better.

" There were some you knew would work so hard you knew they would continue to get better and better. Certainly there were some who hit their ceiling in high school. I don't want to jinx him by answering that, but there have been very few, a couple handful of kids you knew were going to get way better in college. I can't wait to watch."

Contact Sports Editor Mike Brohard at 970-635-3633 or mbrohard@reporter-herald.com and at twitter.com/RHpreps