Wisconsin quarterback Joel Stave rolls out looking for a receiver during the first quarter against Maryland. Credit: Mark Hoffman

SHARE Video Loading... Postgame Video Loading... Badgers Chat Monday, Oct. 27

UW FOOTBALL

Jeff Potrykus, beat writer

Read Transcript

By of the

Madison — Who says Wisconsin's wide receivers can't stretch a defense vertically?

UW entered its Big Ten game on Saturday against Maryland with 13 pass plays of 20 yards or more — seven by tight ends, four by wide receivers and two by tailbacks.

Alex Erickson had all four of the catches of 20 yards or more by a receiver but none longer than 25.

Joel Stave and Erickson changed that picture by connecting for 43 and 47 yards in UW's 52-7 victory over the Terrapins.

Erickson hauled in a 43-yard catch to the Maryland 6 on UW's third offensive play to set up a touchdown.

He added a 47-yard touchdown catch to help UW build its lead to 31-0 with 8 minutes 45 seconds left in the third quarter.

Erickson finished with five catches for 121 yards.

"It did get old," Erickson said, referring to the weekly questions about the inability of the wide receivers to make plays down the field. "Because we knew what we could do.

"It was just a matter of proving that on Saturday."

Stave sensed after Melvin Gordon gained a combined 16 yards on two runs to put the ball at the Maryland 49 on UW's first series that offensive coordinator Andy Ludwig might go for a big hit with a play-action pass.

He was right.

Stave ran the fake to Gordon, rolled to his right and fired a bullet to Erickson, who went up over cornerback William Likely to make the catch.

"We had a couple of play-action shots ready to go depending on the situation," Stave said. "That is one I really like getting on the move and getting Alex one-on-one in space and letting him have an opportunity to make a play.

"I knew after the first two good runs...I'm thinking we're getting something fun called here. I was happy to see what it was."

Two-headed QB monster: UW coach Gary Andersen said one more time that he plans to continue using Stave and Tanner McEvoy at quarterback to give defenses different looks.

Saturday was the second time this season UW went into the game planning to use both and both players performed well.

"I was proud of both of them," Andersen said. "The way those two young men handle it is impressive....

"The kids on the team handle it well and I have no reservations at all saying that we are going to move forward and have the ability to play both of those young men."

Stave completed 9 of 15 passes for 155 yards and two touchdowns. He led the offense to three scores (17) on UW's first three drives and to five scores on nine possessions overall.

McEvoy guided an 11-play, 65-yard touchdown drive on his first series and guided UW to three scores on four full possessions. UW's final possession was one play, a 16-yard run by third-string tailback Dare Ogunbowale. McEvoy completed 5 of 7 passes for 44 yards, scored on a 60-yard run and finished with 84 rushing yards on four carries.

"The two-quarterback system seems to be working, and today we put up good numbers," McEvoy said.

McEvoy noted he was alerted to get ready one series before he first entered the game.

"You've got to stay focused the whole game," he said. "I got the warning and I got my arm loose. I was ready to go."

Special day: UW's specialists won a decisive victory over Maryland's units, and the work of kicker Andrew Endicott was part of the reason.

Endicott recorded four touchbacks on nine kicks, all with a wind of 8 mph at his back.

Maryland's Stefon Diggs entered the day leading the Big Ten in kickoff returns with a 24.1-yard average. He finished at 27.6 yards per return but that was bolstered by 41-yard return late in the third quarter with UW leading, 38-0.

Endicott recorded nine touchbacks on 57 kickoff last season. He has 14 touchbacks on 46 kickoffs this season.

Jean gets nod again: Peniel Jean started at safety in place of Lubern Figaro (ankle) for the second consecutive game. Jean played most of the game and recorded five tackles, tied for the No. 3 mark on the team.

Figaro entered the game on Maryland's ninth offensive play and was in as a deep safety for a handful of plays. He did not record a tackle.

"P.J. has played well and Lubern is still a little gimpy," Andersen said. "This game is a great game for P.J. P.J. loves to tackle you. He loves to get up on you and get in your face and get physical with football and he's very, very good at that."

Extra points: Fullback Derek Watt returned for the first time since suffering a broken right foot in the opener. "I really didn't notice it that much," said Watt, who was in for about 20 plays. "It felt pretty solid."...

Jordan Griffin, a 6-foot-1, 215-pound linebacker from Seffner, Fla., announced via Twitter on Saturday he has given UW an oral commitment for the 2015 class. Zack Baun, a dual-threat quarterback from Brown Deer who could play multiple positions in college, tweeted Saturday he has committed to UW. He is expected to be a grayshirt, however, and join the program in the spring of 2016. ...

Kenzel Doe had a 15-yard punt return Saturday, his seventh of the season of at least 15 yards. It led to UW's third touchdown....

UW won its eighth consecutive game coming off a bye, dating to the 2008 season.