Topics: Beyonce, Instagram, Justin Bieber, kourtney kardashian, Meek Mill, Music, Nicki Minaj, pop music, selena gomez, Social Media, Twitter, Entertainment News

Selena Gomez’s “Revival” dropped this year on October 6, a little over a month before Justin Bieber’s fourth studio album “Purpose” came out on November 13. For both Selena and Justin, these albums signaled to the world their “comebacks.” Justin was back to deliver himself from the evil of bratty deposition videos, throwing eggs at a neighbor’s house, and screwing with ex-girlfriend Selena’s heart. Selena’s comeback, also signaling the beginning of her contract with new label Interscope, was framed as more of a restart. It signaled her transformation into a full-on grown adult woman who has found confidence on the inside as well as the outside, after finally having moved on from the heartbreak she endured from her famously tumultuous relationship with “bad boy” Bieber.

Justin and Selena were rumored to have started dating under contract, but regardless of the couple’s origins, the two dated publically on and off for five years. Anyone who has spent time on gossip blogs between now and 2009 knows the two have serious history. In the promotional interviews for their albums, both Selena and Justin openly acknowledged their relationship with one another. Watch Seacrest ask Selena about Justin, read Justin’s Complex cover story, which reads a lot like a confessional, and they both answer insightfully about one another, either at length or emphatically. In the last couple of months, Justin posted throwback photo after throwback photo of him and Selena during happier times, leaving all of us to wonder hungrily, What is currently going on between the two of them, really?

The biggest pop stars of 2015 have participated in what I have decided to refer to as the “soap opera-fication” of themselves, or the capitalization on their relationship narratives for clicks and hits. We have seen soap-operafication everywhere this year. Meek Mill’s first single off his debut LP “Dreams Worth More than Money,” “All Eyes On You,” was released in June and featured his rap star girlfriend Nicki on the track and in the video. October’s One Direction single “Perfect” off their fourth LP is a suspiciously deliberate response to Swift’s “Style,” which came out as a single in February and was very publically regarded as being about 1D frontman Harry Styles. Kylie Jenner popped up in Tyga’s two pretty forgettable music videos released this year, and Tyga popped up often on Kylie’s snapchat and on her holiday gift guide. Newcomer and rapper Lil Durk put out “My Beyoncé,” a love song about his rumored girlfriend, DeJ Loaf, featuring said rumored girlfriend — and soon after it was released, the pair was photographed PDA-ing hard. Looking back at 2015, the “it” move was not to just publicly address the relationship you were in, but to drum up interest in the idiosyncrasies of it with everybody watching in real time.

There are obvious advantages of publicly associating with your famous significant other, especially if this person is more famous than you, or just has wider reach. “All Eyes on You” is not a good representation of the kind of rapping Meek Mill is capable of, but it did make him well-known for being Minaj’s boyfriend, and she’s a household name.

Focusing heavily on the relationship drama of pop stars during promotional seasons to assist with record releases is not a new concept, of course — Justin Timberlake’s song “Cry Me a River,” released in 2002, was famously rumored to be about ex-girlfriend and tabloid staple Britney Spears. But Justin himself did not publicly confirm this until 2011, nine years after the record was released. The tiny nugget of a rumor that the song might be about Britney was leaked to gossip mags around the time the song was announced as a single, and gossip mags spun it however they wanted to. Beyoncé went public with her relationship with Jay Z as part of the strategy to launch her solo career in ’03. They were seen together in music videos and on red carpets, but in interviews the pair remained famously private about their relationship over the last decade and were rarely mentioned in gossip rags. Flash forward to 2015, though, and you can go to Beyoncé’s Tumblr for personal photos of her life with her husband Jay Z — or you can wait until gossip blogs write about them, rehashing content that Beyoncé has already offered up herself. The Beyoncé content that makes the news is what she posts to her Instagram or Tumblr: idyllic family scenes of Jay and Blue Ivy on vacation in Italy or the family at a Halloween party. Whatever happened in the elevator between Jay and Solange in 2014 became old news fast, but only because Beyoncé quickly and publicly dismissed it — if that had happened 10 years ago, when Beyoncé had no direct platforms from which to do damage control, the rumors would have lingered on.