A Maryland-based mobile clinic that provided free medical and dental care for about 1,300 people in Harrisburg last year says it needs more Harrisburg-area supporters.

But for now, nonprofit Mission of Mercy will celebrate a move to a new location Thursday.

Mission of Mercy, which conducts medical appointments in a converted RV, moved its base to Harrisburg Brethren in Christ Church at 2217 Derry St. The threat of crime and violence drove it away from its former base at St. Francis of Assisi's Catholic Church in Allison Hill.

Mission of Mercy has been coming to Harrisburg twice a month since 2002. Jennifer Charlton, the executive director, said it costs about $200,000 per year. The organization recently received a $75,000 donation from the Donald B. and Dorothy L. Stabler Foundation. But it remains about $100,000 short of what it needs for the fiscal year that ends in June, she said.

Charlton believes the organization can reach long-term sustainability if it can increase its local donor base to 250 people, up from about 45. And if it can build sufficient support, it will consider adding two more Harrisburg area visits per month, with the additional ones taking place at a suburban location, she said. The additional visits would decrease waiting times, she said.

Emmitsburg-based Mission of Mercy, which has existed since 1994, is staffed by volunteer doctors and dentists and other health care providers. It exists on donations from churches, businesses, foundations and individuals.

In addition to the Harrisburg visits, Mission of Mercy makes regular stops in Gettysburg and in Frederick, Brunswick, Taneytown and Reistertown in Maryland.

During stops in Gettysburg in 2002, the staff realized some people seeking care were from Harrisburg, and decided to make Harrisburg a regular stop.

Services were eventually expanded to include a portable dental clinic which is set up inside the host church.

Since 2002, Mission of Mercy has served 3,477 patients and conducted 16,669 appointments, according to Diane DeMarco, a spokeswoman. It typically sees 50 or more patients per visit.

Mission of Mercy collaborates with Holy Spirit Health System, which donates imaging and lab services, and PinnacleHealth System, which provides a diabetes educator.

Patients pay nothing. They are asked if they have insurance. Those who do are asked to use their coverage to obtain care elsewhere, rather than use free care, DeMarco said.

But no one is asked to prove their financial status. "We don't ask them to prove their poverty, because our mission is to restore dignity and healing through love, and that's God's love. If you ask people how poor they are, you are not restoring dignity," she said.

Charlton said most are "working poor." They come from Dauphin, Cumberland and Perry counties. Seventy percent have a chronic medical condition such as diabetes or high blood pressure, she said.

Health care coverage expansion related to the Affordable Care Act is increasing the number of people who have health insurance. But rising co-pays and deductibles are preventing some people from using their insurance, and driving them to Mission of Mercy, Charlton said.

Mission of Mercy provides medications for patients using donated medications or pairing patients with programs that serve the poor.

Still, it is looking for assorted volunteer specialists in the Harrisburg area, including dentists, a physical therapist, a cardiologist and an oral surgeon.

People who need a medical appointment should call Mission of Mercy's appointment line at 717-561-2170.

Medical professionals who want to volunteer should call Dr. Michael Sullivan, the medical director, at 717-642-9062, or email him at msullivan@aMissionofMercy.org.

For more information about donating to Mission of Mercy, call 707-642-9062 or go to www.aMissionofMercy.org/maryland-pennsylvania.