Page two of IRS form 1040 asks tax payers to verify their health care coverage by simply checking a box. For the second year in a row, tax preparer scams related to Affordable Care Act penalties and subsidies made the IRS Dirty Dozen List. (Photo: www.irs.gov)

If you thought the Affordable Care Act was confusing when it was launched, wait until you file your taxes. And if you're confused, you're vulnerable, experts including the IRS say.

A case in point is a filer who was charged $30 by a local preparer to verify that she had health insurance. The woman, who carried an insurance ID card from her employer, couldn't understand why she'd be charged for that, and neither could Blue Ridge Legal Services, which filed a complaint with the IRS, said BRLS staffer Dan Sullivan, who's also a tax preparer.

It turns out that all you have to do this year to show you had health insurance in 2014 — and avoid paying a penalty for not having it — is to check the box on Page 2 of IRS Form 1040. The word "verification" is misleading, since the IRS is relying on your honesty this tax season.

Nonprofit Enroll Virginia reports some tax preparers are taking advantage of confusion about the tax penalty among undocumented immigrants. This group doesn't qualify for the ACA's tax subsidies, regardless of income, and is exempt from the requirement to have health insurance.

But some preparers are telling them they owe a fine, according to an internal memo obtained by The News Leader.

"Unfortunately, there have been more and more reports of tax preparers scamming people in relation to the penalty for not having health insurance in 2014," Hispanic Outreach and Education Specialist Amber Poron wrote in a Feb. 25 memo to Enroll Virginia staff.

"Particularly the Hispanic community is being targeted as many undocumented immigrants are being told they must pay the penalty, when they are exempt," Poron's email said.

Concerns about ACA subsidy scams began as soon as the first season of health care marketplace enrollments opened in October 2013.

Under the health care law, anyone with income between 100 and 400 percent of the federal poverty level could enter an income figure on the marketplace website and instantly qualify for tax credits without having to verify the income amount until tax time.

Recently the IRS warned of taxpayer incomes being over-reported in order to claim the tax credits. Someone earning $10,000 a year, for instance — not enough to qualify for a health care subsidy – could embellish the amount.

"Scam artists don't miss a trick, and they can entice taxpayers to falsely inflate income on returns to claim tax credits they are not entitled to receive," IRS Commissioner John Koskinen said in a recent IRS news release.

Tax fraud can be reported using Form 14157, Complaint: Tax Return Preparer.

The form can be downloaded online, or obtained by calling 800-TAX FORM (800-829-3676).

Read or Share this story: http://www.newsleader.com/story/news/local/2015/03/12/aca-subsidies-source-of-tax-scams/70165680/