Animal welfare officials remove 65 dogs from a Norman home and more than a week later, the woman who had them is telling her side of the story.

Animal welfare officials remove 65 dogs from a Norman home and more than a week later, the woman who had them is telling her side of the story.

For about the past year, she had 65 dogs in her home when an anonymous tip to the city put an end to it.

“This is the little guy I fought for,” Roxanne Hines said. “I had to surrender all the other dogs.”

All 65 of them, but she got to keep one.

“In here is where I had the mommas and the babies,” she said.

In all there were 45 adult dogs and 20 puppies. Hines said she wasn't running a puppy mill, but she rescued the dogs from a puppy mill.

What happens if Hines can’t get rid of all of the animals?

“I haven’t come to that point yet,” she said. “I don’t know.”

Animal welfare did and took all 65 animals.

9/14/15 Related Story: Animal Welfare Officers Rescue 65 Dogs From Norman Home

“It was overwhelming,” she said. “That’s why I kept calling for rescue groups to come help me.”

Seven of them were her personal dogs which she wants back, but she was close to all of them.

“I slept with 14 dogs,” Hines said.

City officials say a place is considered a puppy mill when someone doesn't have a kennel license and breeds animals. Four of the dogs were pregnant, but Roxanne says there was a pretty good reason why.

“The females are coming in heat,” she said. “And I’m having a hard time keeping him away.”

Except for times like that, the more than five dozen dogs mostly stayed outside according to Hines.

“Some of them were back here, but like I said I left the back door open where they came in and out, in and out all day,” she said. “They went into the kennels at night because of the coyotes. They had blankets, food and water at night.”

They were taken care of she said even if at her expense.

“I basically went without,” Hines said.

Police say they have turned charges over to the DA for consideration. There will be an adoption event for the adult dogs that will be announced at a later date, and the puppies have been fostered out until they are old enough to adopt.