Photo

Gustavo Santaolalla

CAMINO

In 1998, the Argentine musician Gustavo Santaolalla detoured from his career as a Latin rocker and producer to release “Ronroco,” a gentle, folky instrumental album featuring his ronroco, a 10-stringed Andean mini-guitar. The modest delicacy of its melodies led to commissions for film scores, including the Oscar-winning “Brokeback Mountain” and “Babel.” His new album, “Camino” (Masterworks), is the sequel to “Ronroco.” Mr. Santaolalla overdubs most instruments, nearly all of them acoustic, and once again, the music is virtually transparent. The melodies are plucked ever so lightly over accompaniments that are often skeletal counterpoint, exquisitely understated. The tunes are waltzes, lullabies, elegies, glimpses of suspense or tentative questions, and they move just far enough into the foreground to separate them from his film music. They don’t overstay; the 13 tracks add up to 36 minutes. “Camino” is not as unworldly as “Ronroco” was — two tracks have been heard in commercials — but the modesty remains.

Photo

Alison May

LOVED/DARK

Folk rock guitars wash over Alison May’s voice throughout her album “Loved/Dark” (Misery Loves Company): picked, strummed, twanged, ringing, floating, crisply acoustic or glimmering with reverb. Intricate and enveloping, they’re often on the verge of inundating her gauzy, unemphatic voice — but just on the verge. The music parallels the way the narrators in her cryptic songs find themselves swallowed up in overwhelming situations, facing regrets, separations, irreparable losses and sometimes imminent death: “I cannot be followed/I’m going to the other side now,” she sings in “Jon,” possibly after being struck by lightning. She’s a humble figure in a larger landscape — but the landscape is her creation, too, and she holds her place within it.

PS I Love You

FOR THOSE WHO STAY

On its third album, “For Those Who Stay” (Paper Bag), PS I Love You gets blunt in a song called “Advice”: “You’re never gonna win/Keep trying is all you can do,” Paul Saulnier sings, quavery yet certain, in a storm cloud of distortion over a Crazy Horse stomp. Futility and falling short are home turf for this two-man Canadian band. With Mr. Saulnier on guitar and Benjamin Nelson on drums, PS I Love You takes the frazzled, fuzzed-out example of indie-rockers like Dinosaur Jr., the Replacements and especially Pavement and cranks it up. Not limited by the band’s lineup, Mr. Saulnier slathers on multiple guitar and vocal parts in the studio. The album starts with a hurtling apology — “I’m sorry I forgot about that thing that I was supposed to do/Last week” — and later explores the sinking feeling of being told he can be “Friends Forever” or warning how easy it is to end up stuck with “More of the Same.” Low expectations, high volume and melody amid the din; the combination is a throwback, but a potent one.

Photo

Mestre Cupijó e Seu Ritmo

SIRIÁ

Escaped slaves in Brazil founded their own settlements, called quilombos, on the Amazon, where their music mingled with indigenous styles. Mestre Cupijó (1936-2012) was born in the northern Brazilian state of Pará, and to steep himself in the music, he spent time living in quilombos before he started his Jazz Orquestra os Azes do Ritmo. Making music that would eventually transform local carnival traditions, he forged a big-band version of Amazonian rhythms like siriá, topping the sway and strut of samba with a crosscurrent of rhythm guitar; he also soaked up mambo and cumbia from abroad. The songs on “Siriá” (Analog Africa), a compilation of his local recordings, are low-fi but alive. They go bounding along with saxophones and brass and a carnival parade in the percussion. Often, the singers are extolling the pleasures of the music. They’re right.

Photo

Beck and Others

SONG READER

It had to happen sooner or later. When Beck released his “Song Reader” (McSweeney’s) in 2012 as a collection of sheet music, it was a high-concept coup. It was also a tease for nonmusicians, though soon enough there were performances of the songs online. Now it’s time for some anointed pros. On the audio version of “Song Reader” (Capitol), Beck and 19 other acts perform the songs, often taking considerable liberties with the written melodies, as Beck does himself in “Heaven’s Ladder,” rewriting both words and music into a “Magical Mystery Tour"-flavored production. Some take their cues from the vintage-style graphics of the sheet music, like Loudon Wainwright III giving “Do We? We Do” an old-timey bounce, Swamp Dogg making “America, Here’s My Boy” a desolate parlor song and David Johansen growling through “Rough on Rats” with a saxophone-pumped jump-blues combo. Others make the songs an extension of their own personality, like Laura Marling staying folky and depressive in “Sorry,” Jack White pushing the countryish “I’m Down” into distortion, and Juanes translating “Don’t Act Like Your Heart Isn’t Hard” into Spanish-language pop. What comes through all the different voices and styles is that these songs hold some of Beck’s canniest wordplay, and that his initial concept remains telling: Melodies, chords and lyrics only begin to define a song.