Apparently, yesterday’s Benghazi hearing wasn’t landing enough blows against Hillary Clinton. So Fox dropped the actual news in order to do the hatchet job it longed for.

Much of the reason Benghazi became Benghazi is because of Fox News. It’s the network that made just about any and every news story about Benghazi. Charlie Hebdo, Ferguson, even the missing Malaysian airliner all made Fox News pundits just happen to think of Benghazi. According to Media Matters, Fox ran nearly 1,100 segments about Benghazi in the first 20 months after the tragedy. But on the day that Hillary Clinton – the target of both Fox News and the Benghazi hearings – actually testified, Fox was the first network to drop its coverage of the hearing.

From Mediaite:

CNN, MSNBC, and Fox had all covered the the (sic) first two segments of the hearing live. After a second short break, the committee reconvened at 5 pm. CNN and MSNBC went back to covering it live. Fox News showed video of the committee getting back to business, but the audio was muted as the hosts of The Five provided their analysis of the hearing thus far.

What Mediaite calls “analysis” of the hearing, anybody who’s neither a Fox fan nor looking for a Murdoch buyout would call “promoting Republican talking points.” “Why did she [Clinton] lie? Because she was trying to save her own skin,” cohost Greg Gutfeld “analysed.” He followed up with, “The constant refrain from this hearing was that [Ambassador] Chris Stevens chose his destiny. When [Rep.] Adam Smith says he chose to go to Benghazi, it’s the political version of saying, ‘He shouldn’t have gone out dressed like that. He should have worn a bra.’ I mean, he’s basically saying that he had it coming.’” Cohost Kimberly Guilfoyle could be heard agreeing off camera.

Clearly, as Erik Wemple pointed out, the hearing was going nowhere. He wrote, “It’s just a little precious that this network, the Benghazi network, made the call to move away. Just goes to show that the ideology of Fox News may appear to be Benghazi and Kill Obamacare, but it’s really ratings.”

Wemple may be right about the ratings. But Fox’s decision shows something else: when the actual news isn’t going Fox's way, they ditch it in order to make up their own version.

Watch The Five do that, below, from the October 22 show.