Lions fueld by Cooney, Offerman and Stewart

COLORADO SPRINGS — Running isn't fun, especially when you're training for or competing in a serious race.

The bigger the stakes, the more pain there seems to be — and it doesn't get much bigger than the state championship.

That's what makes the payoff that much better.

Saturday at Norris-Penrose Event Center, the Mountain View girls cross country team earned the ultimate reward by winning the 4A state title.

It was the team's third state championship, the first since 2004. The Mountain Lions had come close recently, placing in the top five in two of the past three years. Those close calls certainly hurt, but they also provided the necessary motivation to get over the top in 2014.

"We were so close last year, and we walked away so disappointed. We just came back with that fire and that passion. We knew we could do it," senior Riley Cooney said. "It feels so awesome. We've just been so close so many times, and to finally do it means so much.

"I'm speechless to be honest. ... I'm speechless because of how much it all paid off."

Sophomore Lauren Offerman paced the Lions with a fourth-place finish, with Cooney not far behind in sixth. But the biggest surprise was senior Abby Stewart's 14th-place performance, which combined with top-60 runs by Katie Benner and Allison Peters pushed Mountain View 12 points ahead of crosstown rival and runner-up Thompson Valley.

Advertisement

With the Lions' usual No. 3 Rachel Franklin fighting through a high ankle sprain (the junior still competed but finished 87th), the run turned in by Stewart was critical to the team's final outcome.

Stewart also has been far from 100 percent this year, but she sure looked like it Saturday despite not even being able to run as recently as the team's conference meet.

"I've actually had two seizures this season. Honestly that's just been the hardest thing," Stewart said. "So this day I promised my team I'm going to do everything I can to do my best for them. It was for them. Everything was for them."

The championship was the first as a head coach for Kevin Clark, who before the race began really wasn't sure how his team would fare considering the status of Stewart and Franklin.

"To put it together today was just awesome," Clark said. "Every team has their struggles through the year and faces adversity. The adversity we have faced this year with injuries and illness, I didn't know if we 'd be able to overcome it. So hats off to the girls today."

Last year's champs, Thompson Valley, didn't fall far. With all five point scorers in the top 45 — Kendra Larson (19th), Kacie Kaufman (27), Ellie Colpitts (33), Izze Johnson (36) and Emily Leidig (54) — the Eagles came away with their eighth top-five finish in the past 10 years by outscoring third-place Palmer Ridge by five points (139-144).

TVHS coach Matt Norton said he liked where his team was at with about 1,000 meters to go, but the Mountain Lions were just able to finish a bit stronger this time.

"All the credit in the world goes to Mountain View," Norton said. "They've been close a bunch of times. I know how much this means to Kevin and his girls, and they were able to come up with just a half-gear more than we were the last 3 minutes of the race."

Naturally the Eagles wanted to repeat, but taking home the silver trophy wasn't a bad consolation prize. And if they were to give up the title to anyone in the state, it was nice to keep it within city limits.

"It's a unique connection between Thompson Valley and Mountain View, because we're two of the best teams in state, so we're obviously competitive and we want to beat each other. But at the end of the race we're friends, and we appreciate the competition," Larson said.

"We had our sights set on winning, but as runners we recognize the fact that we could be No. 1 in the state one day and fifth in the state the next day. We gave it our all; there's no way we didn't leave everything out there, so we're happy with the result."

Berthoud's Kiah Leonard wrapped up quite the successful cross country career with a bittersweet finish, placing 11th, just outside of earning yet another state medal. It didn't come without maximum effort, though.

"Wish she was top 10 but she left everything on the course and you can't ask for more than your best," BHS coach Kristi Leonard said.

5A Girls

Abnormally high temperatures and the state's toughest course made things difficult for everyone Saturday. But the Loveland girls were still able to come away proud and thankful for the experience, as the Indians placed 20th as a team.

Junior Kristina Ritschard led the team with a 48th-place finish in 21:13, while junior Ashlyn Brent finished 60th in a field dominated again by Fort Collins' Lauren Gregory.

After a tough go here last year, Ritschard was particularly pleased to come away with her personal-best finish at state, thanks to some teamwork with Brent.

"I'm pretty proud of how I did because I wanted to improve from my freshman year, and I did. So I'm proud of that," Ritschard said. "I had Ashlyn out there with me, so it helps when you have someone to work together with. We agreed that we'd work together on the course today, and that always helps pull me through."

2A Girls

Resurrection Christian's Hannah Hart was the Cougars' lone female participant, and the junior represented the Cougars well by finishing 20th in 22:26.

Sean Star: 970-669-5050 ext. 512, sstar@reporter-herald.com or twitter.com/rhpreps