Saturday was an especially painful night for Colorado quarterback Sefo Liufau.

Following a 41-24 loss to Oregon, Liufau skipped the post-game press conference so he could get treatment from doctors.

Head coach Mike MacIntyre confirmed after the game that Liufau was injured, but said he didn't know the extent of the injury.

"I'll find out," MacIntyre said. "I'm going to go down and get with Adam (Holliday), our trainer, and find out some things there."

Liufau was sacked on the Buffs' final offensive snap of the night and was slow to get off the ground after that play.

It was another up and down night for Liufau. He threw for a season-high 231 yards and a touchdown, but he was sacked a season high five times and also threw an interception.

Liufau's interception, which came early in the first quarter, was his first since the opener at Hawaii on Sept. 3. He went 107 passes in between interceptions, the fourth-longest streak in CU history.

Joel Klatt holds the CU record, with 139 passes in between interceptions during the 2005 season.

Mac fired up

Early in the third quarter, CU safeties coach Joe Tumpkin was flagged for yelling at officials after he disagreed with a call. The official threw the flag for unsportsmanlike conduct against Tumpkin, costing the Buffs 15 yards on what turned out to be a go-ahead touchdown drive for Oregon.

MacIntyre was livid and immediately ran up to Tumpkin and yelled at him for several moments.

Advertisement

"He gave us a 15-yard penalty," MacIntyre said of why he yelled at Tumpkin. "He can't be doing that. Not one of my assistant coaches can do that. That's completely uncalled for."

Asked about it afterwards, Tumpkin said, "Part of the game."

Thin at tailback

For the second game in a row, the Buffs played without two of their top four tailbacks.

Junior Michael Adkins II and freshman Patrick Carr both missed the game with injuries. Both were injured early in CU's 27-24 win against Colorado State on Sept. 19.

Linebacker Addison Gillam missed his third consecutive game with a knee injury.

Three other players - defensive linemen Jase Franke and Leo Jackson III and defensive end Derek McCartney - all returned to the field after missing the Sept. 26 win against Nicholls with injuries.

Buffs, Ducks honor victims

Prior to the National Anthem on Saturday, there was a moment of silence in honor of those who died in Thursday's deadly shooting at Umpqua Community College in Roseburg, Ore.

Both teams wore a decal - a ribbon with "UCC" across it - on the back of their helmets in honor of the nine people who were killed.

Ralphie sits

With rain and lightning in the area pushing the start time back almost an hour, CU's famed mascot, Ralphie V, did not do her usual run onto the field.

It's just the second time since 2002 that Ralphie did not lead the Buffs onto the field for a home game. The only other time came on Sept. 7, 2013, when the Buffs hosted Central Arkansas.

Notable

Freshman Nick Fisher (cornerback) and sophomore Timothy Coleman (defensive end) got starts on defense against the Ducks. It was Fisher's first-ever start, while Coleman started for the second game in a row. Colorado's captains on Saturday were: Chidobe Awuzie, Sefo Liufau, Kenneth Olugbode and Nelson Spruce. Saturday's contest was the 42nd night game (5 p.m. or later kickoff) in CU history at Folsom Field. The Buffs are now 24-16-2 in home night games Saturday marked the first time it rained during a game at Folsom since Oct. 14, 2006, against Texas Tech.

Contact staff writer Brian Howell at howellb@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/BrianHowell33.