Fans of “value investing” have been rewarded handsomely in recent years.

While the FTSE 100 has turned £1,000 into £1,258 since the start of 2012, “value” stocks would have grown your money to £1,717, as the chart, above, shows.

The difference in returns is startling, and has certainly worked for the remarkable investor Irving Kahn, aged 108, during a very long lifetime of investing.

For those who want to follow the discipline, specialist website Stockopedia has created a portfolio of such stocks.

They are chosen based on a series of “screens” – the stocks that are strongest across a range of measures.

These include comparing price with earnings and with “book value” – the estimated value of a company and its assets if it were wound up today – as well as taking into account yield and other measures.

Using these scores, Stockopedia ranks stocks and concludes the 10 (below) to be the cheapest on the FTSE All-Share today. [Stockopedia FTSE All-Share Value Screen]

We have included today’s income yield on each stock, although it is worth noting that investors are buying these stocks because the price is good value, not for the income which could fall.

Quite often these are bombed out stocks. Tesco is the highest profile example, buffeted by a price battle with bigger rivals and discounters.

Argos-owner Home Retail also makes the list with concerns about its business model and shares in TUI Travel, owner of First Choice and Thomson, are also unloved.

One strong theme is the proliferation of insurance companies – Amlin and Catlin – and life insurers – Phoenix, Legal & General and Friends Life.

The life sector, has been battered by bad news, in particular Treasury plans to improve access to pensions.

This raises a crucial point. Namely that the “value” test does not detect changes going on in the real world. So while a company could be making decent profits today, a change in its fortunes could be around the corner, and may be the reason other investors are steering clear.

It should also be noted that value stocks can have spells of underperformance, as also happens with income and growth stocks. This year, for instance, Stockopedia's value index has underperformed the FTSE All-Share.

Ed Page Croft, chief executive of Stockopedia.com, said: “Warren Buffett said 'Price is what you pay. Value is what you get.’

“Value investors have to learn to go against the crowd and venture into contrarian and often unpopular sectors in order to generate outperformance. But they do have to beware of 'value traps’.”

• Stockopedia FTSE All-Share Value Screen

• A list of the cheapest “value” Aim stocks

• Investment tips every week by email – sign up here