VITA launches '14 tax service

Photo: Kin Man Hui, San Antonio Express-News Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 Volunteer Income Tax Assistance Program, or VITA, has raised its household gross income cap to $60,000 this year.

Volunteer Income Tax Assistance Program, or VITA, has raised its household gross income cap to $60,000 this year. Photo: Kin Man Hui, San Antonio Express-News VITA launches '14 tax service 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

SAN ANTONIO — The Volunteer Income Tax Assistance program, VITA, officially kicked off this year's federal tax preparation season Wednesday with a new household gross income cap for its free service — $60,000.

The previous year's cap was $55,000, but it was raised because the Earned Income Tax Credit's limits have risen.

VITA periodically resets its household income cap to stay slightly above the EITC cutoff, said Richard Keith, interim assistant director of the city's Department of Human Services.

In addition, individuals visiting VITA sites for tax-filing assistance this year can find volunteers for other services, including help with finding and buying health care insurance under the federal Affordable Care Act.

Enroll SA, also a coalition-backed organization, plans to have certified volunteers at each of VITA's 20 sites to help individuals with the federal health insurance marketplace, said Enroll SA organizers Ramon Chapa Jr. and José Ibarra.

Enroll SA has about 100 certified volunteers who can help people select a health insurance plan before the March 31 enrollment deadline, Chapa and Ibarra said. Fifty-eight different health insurance plans are available in Bexar County, they said.

Taxpayers also can sign up for the SaveUSA San Antonio program at VITA sites. Eligible taxpayers who set aside $200 or more of their tax refund in a savings account for about a year can earn a 50 percent match up to $500.

The city, United Way of San Antonio and Bexar County, and Catholic Charities head a broad coalition of VITA sponsors that have organized about 400 volunteers who will staff 20 locations around San Antonio through the income-tax filing deadline of April 15.

An additional 100 volunteers are still needed, Keith said. Sixteen-hour training sessions still are being conducted for volunteers, who must commit to both the training and between three and five hours a week spent helping taxpayers with their forms.

People wishing to volunteer can call Catholic Charities at 210-222-2975, Keith said.

Last year, VITA volunteers assisted more than 34,000 households at or under the $55,000 income limit, achieving refunds of $56.2 million. Of that amount, nearly $23 million came in the form of the EITC. An additional $9 million in child credits also were refunded, Keith said.

“The Earned Income Tax Credit is the largest poverty-reduction program in the U.S.,” Keith said. “It's for the taxpayer.”

More Information Using VITA Taxpayers can find the nearest VITA site and operating hours by calling 211 or going online to www.vitasa.org. If you go, the IRS requires the following documents: Valid photo ID Social Security card or Individual Tax Identification Number for all family members All W-2 forms If filing jointly, both spouses must be present Copy of prior-year tax return, if applicable 1099 forms, if applicable Source: Volunteer Income Tax Assistance program

The Internal Revenue Service started VITA-like collaborative efforts around the country decades ago because the agency noticed large numbers of tax filings that were eligible to claim the EITC and child credits but were not doing so, Keith said.

Last year, the VITA program also saved San Antonio households an estimated $7.8 million in paid-preparer fees, a figure that assumes $250 per return, Keith said.

The VITA statistics could go up this year because of the higher household income cap, Bill Gold, vice president and general manager for Enterprise Holdings Inc., said at a VITA news conference, held at the Neighborhood Place, 3014 Rivas St.

“We can help even more people this year,” said Gold, chairman of the United Way Strengthening Families Issue Council.

VITA can help a large portion of San Antonio households because the city's median income is slightly more than $51,000, said City Council member Rebecca Viagran.

Stephanie Sierra, a wife and mother of two children, said during the news conference that VITA tax assistance “has been a blessing to the family.” Sierra said the assistance helped the family achieve a $1,000 refund, which will be used for college expenses.

“This is a program that has so much heart,” said state Rep. Mike Villarreal, D-San Antonio.

dhendricks

@express-news.net