Topics: capital punishment, Clarence Thomas, Death Penalty, death row stories, Glenn Ford, News, Politics News

This week, Glenn Ford, one of the nation’s longest serving death-row prisoners, was released from a Louisiana prison. In reviewing the stunning exoneration, the New Orleans Times-Picayune noted that Ford “was ill-served at nearly every point in his laborious and terrifying trip through the Louisiana criminal justice system” and that prosecutors “chose to go after someone who they had a pretty good idea didn’t” commit the crime in question. If old evidence hadn’t been suppressed and if new evidence hadn’t come to light, an innocent man might have been executed.

Such a harrowing fact is a reminder that, in an era defined by institutional crises, few of those involve the life-and-death consequences as the crisis now plaguing the institution of capital punishment.

For the last two decades, each of us has examined the criminal justice system in our own work. And so with the political debate over capital punishment once again intensifying, we came together this past year to explore the human dramas inside this institution – from cases resulting in exonerations to those still in limbo to those involving indisputable guilt. In the process, we discovered disturbing patterns that reveal systemic problems. These include:

Arbitrariness: A convict’s chances of ending up on death row today depend as much on the crime as on the convict’s race and geographic location. This was most recently documented by a University of Maryland study of Harris County, Texas. This one area in greater Houston has executed more people than any other state in the country. County data showed African American defendants were three times more likely to face the death penalty than similarly situated white defendants. Additionally, African Americans were more than twice as likely as similarly situated whites to receive death sentences from juries.

Similar data have been compiled in other states. A case in Colorado brought to our attention that all three death row inmates in that state hail from the same county and, in fact, attended the same high school. As a landmark legal study there showed, the system is so arbitrary it is likely unconstitutional.

Law enforcement misconduct: Cases of suppressed evidence often exemplify how the quest for death penalty convictions can foster a culture of unaccountable lawlessness inside the justice system. And as we discovered in our investigation of the John Thompson case in New Orleans, such a culture can become almost impossible to curtail.

In that saga, Thompson’s conviction was overturned when private investigators working on his appeal discovered that prosecutors had intentionally withheld exculpatory evidence. While Thompson was freed, the U.S. Supreme Court later ruled that law enforcement officials could not be held liable for such deliberate misconduct, thus giving prosecutors a license to execute innocent people without fear of consequence. That’s not only immoral, it harms victims’ families who need to trust that the system is focused on apprehending the real perpetrators, and not looking to execute someone so that bureaucrats can claim, with grim finality, that justice was served.