Woonsocket police say Melissa Esconmilha struck a school bus and left the scene.

WOONSOCKET, R.I. (WPRI) — A Woonsocket woman is facing several charges after police say she assaulted a police officer after taking off from the scene of a school bus accident Thursday morning.

Police said Melissa Escomilha, 29, is charged with leaving the scene of an accident, driving on a suspended license, simple assault, and obstructing.

The crash happened just after 8:30 a.m. on Willow Street. According to police, the Valley Transportation bus was carrying 31 children, ranging in ages from 7 to 11 years old, when it collided with a vehicle driven by Escomilha.

Five of the students on the bus were taken to Landmark Medical Center with minor injuries.

According to a police report, Officer Zachary J. Bienkiewicz was responding to the bus crash when he noticed a woman with bruises to her facing walking down Willow Street with a child. He said he tried to approach the woman, but he instead continued to the accident scene after the woman grabbed the child and ran away.

Once he arrived on scene, Bienkiewicz said he quickly realized the woman walking down the road was the driver of one of the vehicles involved in the crash.

Bienkiewicz said the woman, later identified as Escomilha, tried to run again when he approached her for a second time. However, this time he was able to stop her.

Bienkiewicz said Escomilha, who was badly bruised, admitted to being the driver of the car.

“She immediately began to yell, ‘that bus ran the stop sign,'” Bienkiewicz said in the report. “She was adamant that she ‘can’t go back to jail.'”

While police initially said the two children in Escomilha’s car were injured, Bienkiewicz’s report stated they were evaluated by emergency personnel and released to their father.

Escomilha was taken to Landmark Medical Center for neck, head and back injuries when police said she became belligerent with officers, even throwing her neck brace at them and yelling obscenities at police, hospital staff and the children injured in the crash.

Once Escomilha was released from the hospital, Bienkiewicz said she began fighting officers as they tried transporting her to the police station, even “mule kicking” him in his upper thigh.

There was no immediate word to which school the children were heading.

This slideshow requires JavaScript.