The Asbury Park boardwalk on Tuesday, January 27, 2015. Surging waves from the storm threatened to eat away at beaches up and down the Jersey Shore. (Photo: Russ Zimmer)

Much like the storm itself, coastal erosion attributed to the winter weather event was hit or miss.

Beach towns up and down the Jersey Shore were keeping an eye their beaches to see what kind of bite the forecasted blizzard would take out of their shorelines. Wide beaches and tall dunes provide some of the best protection against coastal flooding.

Those natural protections, reinforced by a $24 million steel curtain, may have saved Mantoloking from some damage overnight.

Mayor George Nebel said that the borough's beaches fared very well, helped in part by the steel wall on the beachfront that was recently completed by the state. The steel wall was exposed in a couple of spots, he said.

"We may have had breaches if it was not for that sheet pile revetment they put in," Nebel said.

While the snow totals from the storm didn't live up to the hype, the wave action the nor'easter created was still significant.

Higher than normal

Preliminary readings show the water level at the Sandy Hook National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration station at about 2 feet higher than a typical high tide. At the NOAA station in Atlantic City, water levels at high tide this morning were slightly lower than that.

Both stations were flagged by the NOAA as having "high water conditions." For comparison, the final verified reading from the night superstorm Sandy made landfall was 5 feet higher at Sandy Hook than Tuesday's measurement.

Sea Bright, which regularly cedes some of its low-lying areas to the Shrewsbury River during strong storms, experienced what Mayor Dina Long described as mild "by Sea Bright standards" tidal flooding as result of the storm.

There was "noticeable erosion" in certain areas of the beach, Long said, but the dune line appeared to be intact.

Ortley Beach worries

In Toms River's Ortley Beach section, resident Kathy Barisciano expressed concern about the fact that water had reached and eroded the bottom of the dune line during the storm. Ortley Beach residents have frequently expressed concern about the vulnerability of the neighborhood, which was devastated by coastal flooding during Sandy.

Toms River recently placed more than 7,000 cubic yards of sand on the beach at Ortley as well as in the northern beach sections of the township. The sand cost about $400,000, and Township Engineer Bob Chankalian said he will meet tomorrow with the township's contractor to discuss whether additional sand needs to be purchased to shore up the beaches.

On the Bayshore, early reports noted some typical full-moon tidal flooding, but nothing out of the ordinary and no coastal damage.

Union Beach Mayor Paul Smith said early Tuesday afternoon that he had yet to see the beach after the storm, but that he had not received any calls reporting coastal flooding issues.

There were no "significant issues" regarding flooding or the coast in Highlands, according to borough administrator Tim Hill.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1JZ1MWd