A majority of healthcare providers surveyed by the Kaiser Family Foundation and The Commonwealth Fund report no overall change in quality of care or patient satisfaction since January 2014.

A comprehensive new survey by the Kaiser Family Foundation and The Commonwealth Fund finds most primary care doctors, nurse practitioners, and physician assistants saw an increase in Medicaid or newly insured patients since the Affordable Care Act’s major coverage provisions took effect, yet there was little change reported in their ability to provide high-quality care.

According to a news release from The Commonwealth Fund, 59 percent of physicians and 64 percent of nurse practitioners and physician assistants say that since January 2014, they have seen a higher number of patients who were previously uninsured and now have coverage or are currently covered by Medicaid. Providers working in community clinics and those in states that expanded their Medicaid programs are more likely to report such increases. Nearly half of physicians (44 percent) and more than half of nurse practitioners and physician assistants (54 percent) report an increase in the total number of patients they see.

The 2015 National Survey of Primary Care Providers provides a detailed assessment of frontline providers’ experiences with, and views of, the Affordable Care Act and other changes occurring in healthcare delivery and payment, as well as their perspectives on the future of primary care. This report is the first in a series about the survey.

“Millions of Americans have gained coverage since the Affordable Care Act took effect, and previous surveys have shown that most have been able to find doctors and get the healthcare they need,” said Commonwealth Fund President David Blumenthal, M.D. “This study provides evidence that primary care providers have been able to maintain quality of care for all of their patients, including those with Medicaid and new coverage.”

The survey finds that one year into the Affordable Care Act coverage expansions, most providers do not report any overall change in quality of care or patient satisfaction. This is true even among those who reported increases in newly insured or Medicaid patients.

Most doctors (59 percent) and nurse practitioners and physician assistants (63 percent) report no change in their ability to provide high-quality care to all patients since January 2014. About one in five in each group says care has improved and similar shares say it has gotten worse, according to the news release. Most doctors (61 percent) and other practitioners (63 percent) also say their patients’ satisfaction and care experiences have not changed since January 2014. Equal shares of doctors say satisfaction has improved and gotten worse, while nurse practitioners and physician assistants are somewhat more likely to say it improved.

The survey also finds primary care providers nearly evenly divided in their overall view of the Affordable Care Act. Among physicians, 52 percent express an unfavorable view of the law and 48 percent a favorable one.

“Physicians are highly trained professionals, but when it comes to the Affordable Care Act, they turn into partisans, the same way the general public does,” Kaiser Family Foundation President and CEO Drew Altman said. “The survey finds that physicians who are Republicans are much more likely to perceive negative effects from the law, while those who are Democrats are far more likely to see positive ones.”

The survey finds that a large majority of primary care providers, regardless of party affiliation, say they are satisfied with their medical practice. Satisfaction levels among physicians have increased from 68 percent in 2012 to 83 percent in 2015. Still, a sense of pessimism exists among physicians; with nearly half (49 percent) saying they would not advise a young person to pursue a career in primary care. Nurse practitioners and physician assistants are more optimistic; with the vast majority (85 percent) saying they would make such a recommendation.

Follow ACA on Twitter @ACAIntl or Facebook for news and event updates. ACA’s LinkedIn Group includes news updates, member discussions, event promotions, jobs and more. Visit the group page and request to join today.