The Obama Administration has handed down a mandate, extending overtime protections to millions of American workers. These new rules, finalized this week, prevent companies from denying pay based on salary.

Supporters say this is about leveling the playing field and enforcing fair compensation, but others say they're worried about the impact on small businesses. Critics say this could add pressure on companies in a skittish economy, and ironically end up hurting workers.

Michael Cassidy, president and CEO of the Commonwealth Institute for Fiscal Analysis, has praised this measure. He says new overtime protections mean about 120,000 Virginia workers will directly see a boost in how much they make.

"A 40-hour work week and time-and-a-half for overtime are cornerstones of a fair and strong economy in this country. Unfortunately, over the last 40 years, the overtime protections have been allowed to wither on the vine,” said Cassidy.

The new rule means salaried, white collar employees who earn less than $47,476 annually will be guaranteed overtime when they put in more than 40 hours during a work week. That's a major change as the threshold for overtime protection has been at $23,660.

“It used to be that 60% of salaried workers in this country were covered by overtime protections, which meant if they were working more than 40 hours a week, they were getting time and a half. That declined from 60% 40 years ago to just 8% now,” said Cassidy.

While Cassidy says this empowers working families, small business associations are concerned about the bottom line.

"If you have a business, and you know retail and restaurant industry in particular, I think are going to be hit hard and it's where you might see some job loss," said Nicole Riley, the National Federation of Independent Businesses Virginia state director.

Riley says companies have already taken on more responsibility through Obamacare and minimum wage increases. She's concerned that for some businesses, this could be a tipping point.

"It definitely is sort of that death by a thousand cuts," said Riley.

Riley expects businesses will try to do everything they can to avoid cutting staff, but she says these sweeping changes could backfire for workers. Riley says businesses might be forced to drop certain benefits they're offering, or halt raises and bonuses. Opponents of the mandate also suspect consumers could see the price of some services go up.

Changes take effect December 1.