Sarah Palin Credit: D Dipasupil/Getty Images

It’s been a hard year for Sarah Palin. The former Republican vice presidential candidate suffered a cancer scare that she discovered thanks to her eldest daughter, Bristol Palin.

"Bristol said, 'Mom, you need to go into the doctor and get that thing checked,'" the former Alaska governor, 51, recalled to CBN News. "She insisted and I resisted so I finally went in to a doctor and got something checked, came back, biopsy — a cancer."

Saying it was “something like” melanoma, Palin added, “A surgeon dug it out and everything was okay. In the grand scheme of things, especially compared to other people going through great challenges, it was not a big deal. All this stuff within a few weeks' time, it was one of those years. It's like, 'Okay God, what are you preparing us for this time?'"



Some of her other “stuff” included being fired from her contributor role at Fox News in June.

"Some things happened that I haven't talked about publicly, things like getting canned from a job I really liked, sort of out of the blue, because I called somebody out," she said. "Next morning I got word, 'Oh, we no longer need you anymore.’ Yeah, it was a shock, but more power to Fox News. I have a great relationship with them. It was just kind of a little bit of a shocker of knowing that the haters are going to love this one."

In her final appearance, Palin slammed the media for reporting on Josh Duggar’s sexual molestation scandal.

But her dismissal hasn’t kept her from voicing her opinions about the 2016 presidential race. Though Palin wouldn’t officially endorse GOP candidate Donald Trump, she did praise the billionaire.



Alex Wong/Getty Images

"I'm so thankful that he's running," she said. "He's obviously not bought and sold in the traditional sense in politics because he's self-funding his campaign. He's not going to do them any favors. That's part of that status quo that's got to go."



She added that Trump, 69, "calls it like it he sees it. To me that's refreshing. He's a fighter, a competitor. We need a fighter that can put our nation first."

Want stories like these delivered straight to your inbox? Sign up now for the Us Weekly newsletter!