As a budget deadline looms, U.S. Rep. Mike Coffman of Aurora joined most other House Republicans last week to support doomed legislation that would unravel Obamacare and defund Planned Parenthood for a year.

Rep. Ken Buck of Windsor, a member of the staunchly conservative Freedom Caucus, was one of seven House Republicans who voted against the bill, because it did not completely repeal the Affordable Care Act.

Coffman said Planned Parenthood’s abortion practices “fly in the face of human decency.” Buck has said Planned Parenthood showed “reckless disregard for the most vulnerable members of our community,” offering a petition on his campaign website that says he’s committed to removing all taxpayer money from the agency.

Instead the bill, which represents the 61st GOP attempt to undermine the president’s signature healthcare bill, would remove the requirement for each American to obtain health insurance.

Democrats have been taking Coffman to task for months over his Planned Parenthood positions, after he used an ad touting the women’s healthcare provider’s support in a campaign last year, but has since voted repeatedly to defund it this year.

“I strongly support funding traditional women’s health services, like broad access to birth control and contraception especially to poor and underserved communities, through community health centers and other medical partnerships that act and operate in good faith every day,” Coffman said in a statement to The Denver Post Saturday.

He has joined with anti-abortion Republicans in Washington who said they were outraged by undercover videos released by an anti-abortion group this summer that appeared to show Planned Parenthood executives suggesting an illegal sale of fetal tissue for medical research. Planned Parenthood has vehemently denied wrongdoing and said the videos were edited to be misleading.

“Many longtime supporters of Planned Parenthood are not only shocked by what’s been revealed, but also by Planned Parenthood’s arrogant response,” Coffman said. “Until they clean up their act, we should fund critical women’s services through the many other community health partners that operate across my district, the state and all across this country in a way that doesn’t fly in the face of human decency.”

Though the budget bill needs only a simple majority of 51 votes in the Senate, where there are 54 Republicans, it has a tough road ahead. Some Senate conservatives — including presidential candidates Sens. Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio — also want an all-out repeal of Obamacare — while a handful of moderates oppose defunding Planned Parenthood.

Even if the bill passes the House and Senate, it would face a certain veto when it lands on the president’s desk. If Congress does not pass a budget that raises the federal $18.1 trillion debt ceiling by Nov. 3, the Treasury Department has said the government will run out of money to pay its bills. Some economists say that could help throw the economy into a tailspin by putting the nation’s credit-worthiness in doubt.

“Republicans made a promise to America that we would use reconciliation to fully repeal Obamacare, but the legislation we voted on today doesn’t do that,” Buck said on his Twitter account Friday. “That’s why I voted against the reconciliation bill. We can’t remove a few parts of Obamacare but leave the expensive spending provisions in place. Let’s send a full repeal to the Senate and the President.”

Coffman’s Democratic opponent in next year’s race in Congressional District 6, state Sen. Morgan Carroll of Aurora, was quick to criticize him for the latest Planned Parenthood vote.

“It is appalling to see people playing political games with women’s lives, bodies and personal freedoms,” Carroll said in a statement Friday.