On Media Blog Archives Select Date… December, 2015 November, 2015 October, 2015 September, 2015 August, 2015 July, 2015 June, 2015 May, 2015 April, 2015 March, 2015 February, 2015 January, 2015

Bloomberg hires Joseph Weisenthal

Business Insider Executive Editor Joseph Weisenthal is joining Bloomberg to build an economics and markets site and to host a television show on the topic, Bloomberg announced on Tuesday.

Weisenthal has been with Business Insider for six years, rising from junior writer on the site's finance section to being named executive editor last year. He's a former investment firm analyst and a popular and prolific figure on social media.

"I love BI and I never thought of leaving. But Josh Tyrangiel at Bloomberg put together an offer that no journalist could pass up," Weisenthal told Business Insider.

Weisenthal's title will be managing editor of Bloomberg.com's markets and finance coverage. He will join the company on Nov. 10, with the site and show launching sometime early next year.

“Joe’s dedication to breaking news and beating the competition is legendary,” Bloomberg Media CEO Justin Smith said in a statement. “Bringing a multi-talented, digital leader like Joe to Bloomberg is a statement about what we are building here: a portfolio of high metabolism digital brands that live across TV, web, mobile, print, radio and live events — and comprehensively serve the global business and finance audience.”

Weisenthal joins an increasingly long list of big-name hires for Bloomberg over the past year. The company famously hired "Game Change" authors Mark Halperin and John Heilemann for a reported $1 million apiece in May to run Bloomberg Politics and host a daily show. Other notable recent hires include Dave Weigel from Slate, Mike Nizza from Esquire, John Homans from New York Magazine, Claudia Milne from the BBC, Tom Johnson from ABC, Pat King from "The Daily Show," and Joshua Topolsky, co-founder of The Verge.

This post has been updated.

Hadas Gold is a reporter at Politico.

Authors: