OKLAHOMA CITY — Danilo Gallinari didn’t pull any punches about how the Nuggets played Sunday night.

Denver was overmatched from the start against Oklahoma City, but then its defense fell apart along with its intensity.

The red-hot Thunder controlled nearly every facet of the game in a 119-94 rout of the Nuggets at Chesapeake Energy Arena.

“We didn’t play good defense, especially from the beginning, so they were able to do whatever they wanted to do with any offensive game plan they had,” Nuggets forward Gallinari said. “They were able to play freely with no pressure. We didn’t play any defense for the whole game.”

The Nuggets’ (20-35) have lost two straight games after the all-star break and trade of Arron Afflalo and Alonzo Gee. They’ve also lost eight of their last nine games.

They get a chance to rebound Monday night at home against the Brooklyn Nets.

Oklahoma City (31-25) led by as many as 33 points in the second half and didn’t play most of its main rotation of players in the fourth quarter.

Nuggets Mailbag: Pose a question for Christopher Dempsey

The Thunder played without reigning MVP Kevin Durant after he underwent a second surgery on his right foot Sunday to alleviate increasing soreness stemming from the fracture he suffered in October.

That didn’t save the Nuggets from all-star Russell Westbrook, who finished just shy of a triple-double with 21 points, 17 assists and eight rebounds. Forward Serge Ibaka and center Enes Kanter each scored 20 points, and the team shot 52.2 percent overall.

“They weren’t running anything super tricky on us on the offensive end, but they were just doing everything more crisp than we were, and they were going after the balls harder than we were,” Nuggets coach Brian Shaw said of the Thunder. “They were just running harder to the other end faster than we were getting back, and that’s a collective effort from everybody that we have to have.”

Gallinari, who scored 16 points, said getting better effort has to start with the team coming together.

“There was no intensity from us tonight,” he said, “but it was from them for sure. They were looking like the team that wants to go to the playoffs.”

A few bright spots for the Nuggets including the return of point guard Ty Lawson from his one-game suspension. He led the team with 17 points.

“We lost by I don’t know how much, so I’ll be more happy if I play like this and then we win a game,” Gallinari said.

Shaw also got a chance to play new guys such as Will Barton and Joffrey Lauvergne, who combined for 16 points and six rebounds.

Their effort impressed both Shaw and Gallinari. It’s just getting more effort from everybody else that’s the trick.

“That’s the best thing about this, is we get to turn around and try again (Monday) night and try to put this one behind us,” Shaw said. “We’ll have our work cut out for us again. We have to get a win at home and get that good feeling and try to build off that.”

BROOKLYN AT DENVER



7 p.m. Monday, ALT; 950 AM

Spotlight on Brook Lopez: In the end, Lopez still toils for the Nets. It wasn’t always supposed to be that way for the veteran center. But the NBA’s trade deadline came and went, and Brooklyn rebuffed all offers — including the Nuggets’ — for the offensive-minded 7-footer. There is a chance the Nuggets could make another run at him if they wanted; Lopez has a player option at the end of this season. He can opt out of the last year of his contract and become an unrestricted free agent. Until then, he’s a player the Nuggets must find a way to stop.