Topics: Africa, Books, Denis Johnson, Editor's Picks, Fiction, The Laughing Monsters, Thrillers, Entertainment News

Critics have never entirely gotten over “Jesus’ Son,” Denis Johnson’s spare yet hallucinatory 1992 short story collection about a series of addicts and drifters (who might or might not be the same young man), meandering through an underworld of dead-end jobs and petty crime. It’s a perfect book, and much of Johnson’s later work — particularly “Already Dead,” the “California gothic” that followed it six years later — has suffered by comparison. Wistful references to “Jesus’ Son” crop up in reviews of Johnson’s work as reliably as Alfred Hitchcock cameos in Hitchcock films. You’re always looking for them.

Most of Johnson’s fiction since “Already Dead” has leaned toward the maximalist, the intricate and the paranoid; you could call “Tree of Smoke” a “Vietnam gothic.” Even though that novel won the National Book Award in 2007, there remained a lingering wistfulness to much of the praise it earned. Johnson has further confounded expectations by writing shorter books about a grieving, but solidly bourgeoise widower (“The Name of the World”); a hard-boiled crime novel set in Bakersfield (“Nobody Move”) and a historical novella about a backwoods hermit in Idaho (“Train Dreams”). He seems unlikely to revisit the style and subject matter of “Jesus’ Son” any time soon.

Besides, perfection — always easier to achieve within strictly limited parameters — is overrated. The truth is, Johnson’s later work, while less exquisite and heart-rending than “Jesus’ Son,” is in many respects more interesting than his earlier high-MFA-style short stories. It’s certainly more fun. Some novelists, like Thomas Pynchon, produce complex fictions packed with ideas and themes and incidents that often don’t seem to add up to anything human. Others, like David Mitchell, craft elaborate and inventive narrative contraptions to convey what amount to rather trite sentiments. Johnson can execute all of that tricky stuff — the plotting of “Already Dead” is a marvel — without getting lost in a book’s conceits and devices. His fiction always has a pulse, the kind with real blood in it.

Johnson’s latest, “The Laughing Monsters,” is a case in point. Ostensibly, it’s a gritty thriller set in Sierre Leone, Uganda and Congo. Underneath that, it’s about the inability of men of a certain type to lead honorable lives. Africa is infested with such men, decommissioned or semi-commissioned soldiers and spooks sniffing around for dirty jobs and promising scams. The narrator of “The Laughing Monsters” — half Danish, half American and employed by NATO intelligence — is sent by his bosses to Sierre Leone to reconnect with an old buddy, Michael Adriko, a Congolese orphan and child of war turned international special-forces soldier. The two of them made a bundle during the civil war on a shady operation involving diamonds.

The narrator’s name is Roland Nair, and some allusion to Browning’s Childe Roland seems likely, since Nair has been directed by liars to journey across a poisoned landscape and ends up under a tree inhabited by a mad god. In the meantime, though, Nair will revisit his infatuation with Michael — even if he can’t quite admit to himself, at least not at first, that an infatuation is what it is. Michael is magnetic and unpredictable, capable of great violence, cunning and irrepressible hope. “Always laughing, never finished talking,” full of plans and mysteries. He wants Roland to join him in his latest scheme. “You’ll live like a king,” he promises. “A compound by the beach. Fifty men with AKs to guard you. The villagers come to you for everything” –The “everything” includes handing over their virginal daughters — “Nair, no AIDS from these girls.” This, Michael insists, is what they both want, “and you know it’s here. There’s no place else on earth where we can have it.”