Broncos first-round draft choice Bradley Roby opted not to play for Ohio State in the Orange Bowl against Clemson, saying his leg did not feel well. But I think the biggest problem was Roby knew he would have to cover wide receiver Sammy Watkins, who became the No. 4 overall choice in the NFL draft. My point is not to tear Roby apart, but to say his ego will have to be kept in control by the Broncos — or he will hurt the team more than help.

Art, Ohio State alum

Kiz: Who cares if Roby played hooky from the Orange Bowl? That is The Ohio State University’s problem, not ours. But if Roby is getting burned by former CU star Paul Richardson in September, when the Broncos visit Seattle, we will wonder how excited John Elway is that this “cover” corner fell to No. 31 in the first round.

Most valuable Peyton. Kiz, I saw your column on how the Broncos can’t be so reliant on quarterback Peyton Manning to win the Super Bowl. Found it to be a great read, but do you truly believe the Broncos would be lucky to win six games if you took Manning off the Broncos?

Jerrett, has faith in team depth

Kiz: OK, it drives Denver offensive coordinator Adam Gase crazy when I say this, but … I will be shocked if Brock Osweiler is ever the starting quarterback for a winning NFL team. Pleasantly surprised. But shocked nonetheless.

Team player can’t get tossed. How can Rockies shortstop Troy Tulowitzki call himself a team player when he gets himself thrown out of a game against Kansas City while arguing about a strike?

Noel, tough as Nails

Kiz: I love Tulo. His passion is a large part of what makes him great. At the same time, here’s one of my golden rules of sports: You can’t help the team win from the bench. Yes, manager Walt Weiss should do the arguing on his players’ behalf. And, yes, umpires can sometimes be thin-skinned. But this one’s on Tulowitzki. Shut up. And keep playing.

Rotating rotation. Kiz, you are right about the Rockies needing to acquire another starting pitcher. If Franklin Morales doesn’t get his control together, where does Colorado turn between now and whenever Brett Anderson or Tyler Chatwood comes off the disabled list? But don’t trade prospect Jon Gray. What about Colorado taking a run at left-hander Drew Smyly of Detroit? I say go bold and use Michael Cuddyer as trade bait.

Michael, area code 970

Kiz: Kickin’ It Headquarters has been bullish about the Rockies being a winning team in 2014. But if a team with 29-year-old shortstop Troy Tulowitzki, 33-year-old first baseman Justin Morneau, 35-year-old outfielder Cuddyer and 41-year-old closer LaTroy Hawkins isn’t built to win now, it’s poorly built. We hear the screams to keep Gray. Fine. Then let him or hotshot prospect Eddie Butler pitch the seventh inning for a bullpen that needs help now.

Read it and weep. And today’s parting shot is a shout-out of appreciation for the story of 65-year-old American Indian Brian Miller driving thousands of miles to watch his grandson play lacrosse for the University of Denver.

I have been reading the sports pages of The Denver Post for more than 55 years, and do not recall reading an article that was more touching than your column on DU lacrosse star Zach Miller and his grandfather. I cried all the way through the column, which captured the best of what sports is about for me.

Dave, knows the score

Kick it with Kiz by writing mkiszla@denverpost.com. Or join him 9-11 a.m. weekdays on 94.1 FM and denverpost.com/pressbox.