The Nelson Dam was significantly damaged in the September flood

A thick slab of wood — damp, slightly discolored but intact — saw sunlight for the first time in more than 130 years on Friday after crews rebuilding Nelson Dam pulled it to the surface.

After that, a bent, square nail that had been lodged in the wood was handed off to Gary Gerrard, a board member of the Consolidated Home Supply Ditch and Reservoir Co., which owns the historic stone-arch dam.

"This is one of just a few of these structures that are left in Colorado," Gerrard said. "We have a lot of technology today, but this was really an art."

Built to last

Until last September's flood, the dam that's located below North County Road 29 at the Big Thompson River had needed virtually no repairs, Gerrard said. That's a testament to the crafstmanship of John Nelson, who built an original log dam with wooden sluices (channels that carry water) in 1881 and came back and built a permanent stone dam after a flood a decade later.

He's also the dam's namesake, although it's sometimes also called the 'Big Dam' or the 'Home Supply Dam' after the company that hired Nelson to build it.

But the diversion structure — responsible for getting drinking water to an estimated 100,000 people in Loveland, Johnstown and surrounding areas and raw water to 20,000 acres of farmland — sustained significant damage in the most recent Big Thompson flood. Water knocked off the crest of the dam and it wasn't until October that crews were able to get in and fully assess the damage.

Advertisement

Now, the effort to rebuild the concrete abutments that hold the arch in place and make the dam functional again is underway.

A simple project, it is not.

"We're working under a live river; we just can't stop it," Gerrard said. "We've had to move the river back and forth to do the work."

Unearthing History

Using riprap to divert the river, crews have moved it three times now for aspects of the project. The city of Loveland's intake is located on the north side of the river and the Home Supply system is to the south.

Gary Gerrard holds a square nail and a chunk of wood that crews uncovered Friday while working at the historic Nelson Dam west of Loveland. The wood was used in part to build the original dam in the late 19th century. (Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

Concrete has been poured for the abutment on the city's side, and crews worked Friday on the Home Supply side, which is older and as such, more complicated.

After crews found the original wooden sluices that had been covered up by concrete in 1915, project engineer Glen Church of Deere & Ault Consultants Inc. compared the project to an archeological dig.

"This side is a little different because we're uncovering stuff that was done 100 years ago," he said.

Gerrard plans to bring some of the salvaged wood to the Loveland Museum/Gallery, as the original sluices need to be removed at the abutment before concrete can be poured.

"We're working on a very ancient structure in terms of Colorado," Gerrard said.

Beating the Clock

Crews working on the project are up against a tight deadline for two reasons: farmers will soon need the water and the river level is expected to rise with spring runoff.

"The goal is April 15th," Gerrard said. "By then, the river should be too high for us to work in it."

Both the city of Loveland and Home Supply currently have full reservoirs they're using, but because they'll need the water by spring, Gerrard said there's a backup plan in case the work isn't complete by spring runoff. If they have to, they'll use riprap to divert water into each system, he said.

The intake structures on both sides were not seriously damaged.

Because the structure is critical to the city to Home Supply, the city is splitting the cost of repairs with the ditch company. The first phase of repair is expected to cost about $800,000.

While this first phase of work focuses on getting the dam up and running, the next phase aims to restore the face of the dam with the same stone from Arkins Park Stone quarry, which is where the existing stone came from.

"That work is more cosmetic; we want to preserve the historic value of this dam," Gerrard said. "Our hope is that it looks the same as it did before the flood."

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Jessica Maher at maherj@reporter-herald.com. Follow her at twitter.com/JessicaMaherRH.