I am all about a car that can drive itself - enter the 2015 Lexus RX 350. Already no stranger to luxury, but for 2015 the RX 350 has added a seven-inch display screen, rearview camera and optional LED headlights and fog lights to add to

As are all Lexus models, the RX 350 is quiet and comfortable inside with the competition in this luxury crossover market, including a “best of” roundup from the 2015 Acura MDX to the Infiniti QX60 or the Volkswagen Toureg.

The 2015 Lexus RX 350 comes with several trims, the standard or the F Sport, both sexy choices for the driver on the market for dazzle and driveability.

The standard trim comes with 18-inch alloy wheels, automatic headlamps, fog lamps, LED running lamps, heated mirrors, auto-dimming rearview mirror and camera, power lift gate, keyless ignition and entry, dual-zone climate control, eight-way power front seats, leather-wrapped and power tilt-and-telescope steering wheel and a seat that both slides and reclines in the rear as well as the aforementioned seven-inch display screen, Safety Connect emergency communications and for the audio guru a Bluetooth phone, audio connect with 12 speakers, satellite radio and iPod/USB audio with iPhone 4S or 5 model user also having the luxury of a voice-operated Siri Eyes Free feature.

There are a few optional packages on the standard trim with the premium package being perfect for those little, oft necessary additions like a sunroof, power-folding and auto-dimming mirrors, roof rails and more comfortable leather upholstery.

The luxury package offers the premium package goodies and adds to that 19-inch alloy wheels, headlight washers, heated steering wheel, power driver seat cushion, even better leather upholstery, a household-style power outlet and a smog-sensing auto climate recirculation mechanism.

Adding onto the premium or luxury package and there is the comfort package that gives you automatic wipers, xenon headlamps and heated and air-conditioned front seats.

On the even more exceptional F Sport RX 350, complete with all-wheel drive, you get all the premium and comfort package features and 19-inch wheels, sport-tuned suspension, eight-speed automatic transmission and special exterior along with sexy interior and upgraded leather upholstery. You can also add onto the luxury package with the addition of a blind-spot monitoring system.

You might also consider the navigation package that can be added onto either the premium or luxury package and includes a high-end nav system, voice control, remote-touch controller and the Lexus Enform app with safety-connect security and accident-mitigation.

Individual options are also available matched up with the various add-on packages and include LED headlamps, front and rear parking sensors, dual-screen rear entertainment and a high-end 15-speaker audio system.

Under the hood the 2015 Lexus RX 350 has a 3.5-liter V6 engine that cranks out 270 horsepower and 248 pound-feet of torque with a six-speed automatic transmission. Front-wheel drive is the general standard, but all-wheel drive is available, but the F Sport model comes only in the all-wheel version with an eight-speed automatic.

For safety, the 2015 Lexus RX 350 is well-equipped with anti-lock brakes, stability and traction control, front, rear side, side curtain and front knee airbags, a rear-view camera and the Safety Connect emergency communications system that gives peace of mind by offering automatic collision notification, an emergency assist and stolen vehicle location service. There are also the optional safety add-ons like the blind-spot monitoring system, frontal pre-collision warning and a brake-priming system.

While the 2015 Lexus RS 350 looks good on the outside, the interior is just as stunning since after all, Lexus does have a reputation to uphold. It’s high-quality all the way and no matter if you are touching or just looking its comfort and style with more than outstanding attention to detail.

For the picky driver who has to have the seat just right, take heart since there is an adjustment that is perfect for you a la the multi-adjustable driver seat options and even in the backseat there will nary be a complaint since there is plenty of room and the seats recline and slide as needed.

There is a 40/20/40 split so you can carry more cargo and fewer passengers if needed and there is an easy 40 cubic-feet when you drop the rear seats, perfect for your hauling needs.

Finally, behind the wheel, it’s all good there too. In fact, I just wanted to keep driving – coming up with excuses to jump behind the wheel and take a drive. Comfortable, yes; good sound system, indeed; acceleration, no complaints at all; it’s your own little luxurious world and devoid of outside noise too. Getting on the highway is easy and you can own the road in this Lexus inside or outside; just take it easy and drive.

Should You Need to Know: A nice size SUV either way, however the 2015 Lexus RX 350 only comes in a five-person option with no additional third-row seat possibilities. It does, however, offer towing up to 3,500 pounds.

MPG: The 2015 Lexus RX 350 I drove had 18 MPG in the city and 24 MPG on the highway.

Cost: The 2015 Lexus RX 350 with the comfort package had a price tag of $55,099.

For more auto tips and information follow Rita @RitaCook13.