My Turn: It’s not just Arizonans receiving coverage who are seeing benefits.

Suzanne Pfister, president and CEO of St. Luke's Health Initiatives (Photo: handout)

The Supreme Court ruling upholding subsidies for health insurance coverage means a great deal to as many as 150,000 Arizonans. For them, the ruling keeps coverage affordable.

For the state as a whole, the ruling has important benefit as well.

Arizona needs healthy people to succeed. A healthy workforce translates into productivity and lower costs for employers, ultimately benefiting us all.

Arizona needs affordable health coverage to keep its workforce productive. Luckily, AHCCCS — Arizona’s health care program for low-income and disabled individuals — is a national leader in providing cost-effective, quality care while also controlling costs.

Still, the debate continues over the Affordable Care Act, and whether to continue to restore and expand Medicaid coverage for thousands of Arizonans who lost it during the Great Recession.

With all this debate, it is easy to lose sight of how increased access to affordable health coverage is helping our state. Consider the following:

-- Over 470,000 Arizonans, nearly seven times the population of Flagstaff, have gained coverage since 2014 through AHCCCS or the Affordable Care Act marketplace.

-- Arizona hospitals are seeing a decline in uncompensated care. Since costs associated with unpaid bills are shifted to those who have insurance, this benefits us all.

-- We are beginning to see improvements in people seeking and obtaining needed, preventive health care nationally. In the long run, this should translate into a healthier (and less costly) population.

-- Restoration and expansion of AHCCCS coverage has helped leverage millions of federal dollars for the state, boosting our state’s overall economic health as we continue our still slow economic recovery.

St. Luke’s Health Initiatives has seen this state come together like never before to help realize these coverage gains. Our foundation has helped convene Cover Arizona, a coalition comprised of more than 900 individuals representing health providers, businesses, faith-based organizations and community members to help people connect to coverage.

Arizonans are seeing the benefits in nearly every community in this state. Coalition members talk about how health coverage is making a difference in the lives of individuals and families, from allowing a mother to purchase her child’s medications to enabling a sole proprietor to get the health care he needs to stay employed.

As Arizona weathers the insurance coverage controversies, let’s not lose sight of the fact that access to affordable health coverage matters, both to our citizenry and to Arizona’s overall health.

Suzanne Pfister is CEO of St. Luke's Health Initiatives.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1S67Gya