They provide jobs while filling in the edges of consumer needs.

Businessman and pastor Ennis Fant at his office in Greenville, S.C. Small businesses have been one of the backbones of economic growth since the end of slavery, starting in places like "Black Wall Street" in Oklahoma and Harlem. (Photo: Chris Keane for USA TODAY) Story Highlights Ennis Fant is a pastor as well as a businessman

Hard work, long hours is the key to his success

An Internet presence is critical today, he says

GREENVILLE, S.C. — Ennis Fant is a busy man.

He talks fast and works even faster. But he always seems to know where he's going, and why.

Though trained as a chemical engineer, Fant prefers to run his own show as owner of an insurance firm and a real estate company, serving low- to modest-income people of the Upstate region of his native South Carolina.

In addition, he is pastor of Pleasant View Missionary Baptist Church in Powdersville, S.C. And last year, Fant, a former member of the South Carolina House of Representatives, found time to run for the state Senate.

"Seventy-hour work weeks," he says when asked to describe life as an entrepreneur for the past 25 years.

Small businesses have been the backbone of economic growth in the African-American community ever since the end of slavery, starting in such places as the "Black Wall Street" area of Tulsa and New York City's Harlem.

In the post-Great Recession, Internet-enhanced era, black entrepreneurs such as Fant are creating jobs and providing services that people in his target demographic might have difficulty finding otherwise. They've embraced the Internet and social media for reaching out to potential new customers and keeping up with existing ones.

"You have to have an Internet presence to survive and to be competitive," Fant says. "You've got to have websites. You've got to interact."

That applies to a wide range of black-owned businesses, says Jil Littlejohn, CEO of the Urban League of the Upstate.

"There are hair salons, barbershops, places where young people out of high school can go straight into a career that is almost recession-proof," she says.

Most of the successful ones use technology to get ahead, she says. "And for those that have not, I think they're starting to see the benefit from some of the social media and tech age moving forward."

Fant, a broker for health insurance plans offered through the Affordable Care Act — also known as Obamacare — used his Facebook page to get the word out about how he could help people find the plan best suited for them.

"Gave a lady health insurance for the 1st time in her life yesterday and she is 60," he posted one day in December. "I was in tears listening to her years of struggle with medical bills. Not even having money for medicine. Yes, don't listen to the haters; Obamacare is working!"

He uses Craigslist to recruit employees; he has 34 agents working for Carolina Financial Resources, his insurance business. "And those are jobs that people wouldn't have otherwise, at least making the kind of money they can make doing insurance," he says.

His real estate company, Redcliffe Realty, does most of its business with first-time homebuyers, Fant says.

Fant doesn't see race as an issue in being an entrepreneur.

"Whether you're black or white or Asian, you've got to work 70-hour weeks," he says. "You get a tremendous amount of freedom being an entrepreneur, but it also has a great deal of dedication and commitment that comes along with that, and discipline."

--

Barnett also reports for The Greenville (S.C.) News

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1eJNDvG