Recently, The Week magazine ran a story wondering about the ultimate political doozy right now: A Donald Trump-Bernie Sanders presidential matchup in 2016.

Obviously, these two men are about as far apart on the political spectrum as can be, and that’s why they wrote this fantastical what-if.

Except for one minor detail. They’re not that far apart on a handful of important matters.

In fact, on several issues, they dovetail. One guy is so far-right, the other so far-left, they end up intersecting in places I’m sure they don’t even recognize. It’s like running into your third grade teacher at a S&M bar in Cambodia. Like, “Hey! What are you doing here?!”

Advertisement

It’s weird these two guys, so outside the lines on opposite ends, find common ground. Almost makes you wish they were one person. Berald Trumders. Or Donernie Sandump. Either way.

First though, let’s get the non-alike parts of them out of the way, which are many and important (and most of the following comes from pbs.org). Sanders wants to raise taxes on the wealthy, on corporations, on anyone in rarefied financial air. Trump wants to cut taxes everywhere for everyone. They also don’t agree on climate change. Trump thinks it’s a hoax, and Sanders thinks global warming might do us all in and wants to charge companies for their carbon emissions.

And as for immigration, well … Sanders supports a path to citizenship. Trump wants to create a moat around the United States and fill it with alligators and demons and militias.

But where they agree …

Blow up the Trans-Pacific Partnership: Sanders calls it a “disastrous” trade agreement, Trump calls it a “bad deal,” both think it will hurt American businesses and American workers. This potential partnership was initiated by President George W. Bush and continued by President Barack Obama. Wide support on both sides of the aisle.

Social Security, Medicaid, other entitlements: Trump doesn’t want to cut these entitlement programs. Neither does Sanders.

Guns: Sanders doesn’t think there should be a federal waiting period for handguns and he wants to ban assault weapons. Trump agrees on assault weapons, but thinks a small waiting period is OK for handguns.

Healthcare: Sanders wants to go to a single payer system, much like Canada’s. Trump? Hard to say exactly where he stands now — he does want to get rid of Obamacare — but in his book “The America We Deserve” he wrote we should have a universal healthcare system much like the one in … Canada.

Campaign finance: Sanders wants to limit corporate donations, Trump told RealClearPolitics that “The problem with this country is, no politician makes a legitimate decision because they’re controlled by their donors and by their super PACs, and also they’re controlled by lobbyists.”

Let’s tally it up so far: They both think American jobs should stay in America, they both think entitlement programs for America’s seniors should be preserved, they both agree on guns, they both seem to agree on healthcare, and they both think the political system is broken because of corporate influence.

I mean, dudes: Find some common ground on immigration and taxes, let the scientists deal with global warming, and I’ll tell you what: You guys might win the election if you ran as a third party.

From SmartBrief: Only 38 percent of Americans support the Trans-Pacific Partnership.

From Gallup: Over 75 percent of Americans worry about Social Security.

From Gallup: Nearly 75 percent of Americans believe they have a right to a handgun, and over 60 percent want to ban assault weapons.

From Gallup: Half the nation wants all federal elections to be government-funded only. No private money at all.

Now listen: I’m not saying Trump and Sanders are cut from the same ideological cloth. Clearly, they’re not. But the fact they agree on so much does point to the possibility that a third party candidate — with the right messages, and on the right side of the polls — could actually, maybe, win.

I’m sure I’m not the only person who realizes this. I’m reasonably sure we might find this little theory put to the test in 2016.

Jeff Edelstein is a columnist for The Trentonian. He can be reached at jedelstein@trentonian.com, facebook.com/jeffreyedelstein and @jeffedelstein on Twitter.