Minister for Medical Education and Raichur In-charge Dr. Sharan Prakash Patil, on Sunday, visited the spot in Yapaladinni vilalge in Raichur district, where newly built water tank had collapsed and killed five people

Minister for Medical Education and Raichur In-charge Dr. Sharan Prakash Patil, on Sunday, visited the spot in Yapaladinni vilalge in Raichur district, where newly built water tank had collapsed and killed five people.

Minister of State for Medical Education and Raichur in-charge Sharanprakash R Patil instructed the Deputy Commissioner and in-charge Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of Zilla Panchayat Sasikanth S Senthil to conduct a detailed survey on the conditions of water tanks across the district. This came a day after a newly built water tank collapsed at Yapaladinni village in Raichur district, killing five pilgrims on spot and injuring three more people.

Speaking to mediapersons here on Sunday after visiting the Yapaladinni tragedy site and then the injured persons at the teaching hospital of Raichur Institute of Medical Science (RIMS), Dr. Patil said, "The Yapaladinni incident is being taken seriously. Criminal cases have been booked against six people responsible for the incident. Two government servants have been placed under suspension. I have instructed the Deputy Commissioner to conduct a detailed survey of all water tanks in the districts so that old and crumbling tanks could be replaced with new ones, quality of under-construction tanks could be supervised in a better way."

Earlier, the minister handed over compensation cheques worth Rs. 50,000 each to the families of injured and Rs. 1 lakh each to the families of deceased from the Chief Minister Relief Fund. He assured them that he would discuss with Chief Minister and Minister for Rural Development and Panchayat Raj and explore the possibilities for additional compensation.

Loses temper

But the Minister lost his cool when presspersons asked why he had not taken the same interest to book cases against the contractors and government servants responsible for the breach of 9A Distributory canal of Narayanpur Right Bank Canal even over a month after it destroyed standing crops on nearly 300 acres, and why the compensation had not been paid to the farmers who lost corps. His only response was, “Wait and watch.”

MLC N S Boseraju, MLAs Hampanagowda Badarli and Pratapgowda Patil, Chairman of Tungabhadra Command Area Development Authority A Vasanth Kumar, Deputy Commissioner Sasikanth S Senthil, Superintendent of Police M N Nagaraj and others were present.