No easy answers

Democratic U.S. Sen. Michael Bennet shares the same concern about disproportionately high health care costs in rural Colorado as the state General Assembly.

But Bennet has taken a lot of heat for not having answers as to why, while state lawmakers are given credit for a bipartisan push to study what’s driving those skyrocketing costs.

In other words, the Legislature has no answers either. But they’re not being excoriated by conservative news outlets and political bloggers. Bennet is up for re-election and critics are lined up to make his support of Obamacare a central campaign issue. They’ve seized on a recent Sentinel headline to cast Bennet in an undeserved bad light.

Bennet met with The Sentinel’s editorial board on May 6. During a short conversation, he offered a brief but comprehensive overview of the complexities of the health care market and mentioned several factors driving costs not necessarily related to the cost-curve of the Affordable Care Act.

The act has worked at lowering inflation of health-care costs nationally, but there are no clear answers as to why places like Grand Junction, Garfield County and resort towns have “some of the most expensive health care on the planet,” as Bennet said.

That doesn’t mean Bennet doesn’t have some ideas to address the problem — he just can’t point to a single cause and effect. Neither could the Legislature, which is why lawmakers directed the state’s insurance commissioner to study how to make rates more equitable. Bill sponsors said premiums for residents in the mountainous areas of the state saw a 26 percent rise in health care costs this year, at a time when the average cost increase statewide was only 9.8 percent.

An ambiguous Sentinel headline, “Sen. Bennet knows our issues, has no answers,” suggested Bennet is either clueless or uncaring about our cost dilemma. While it’s very difficult to make tweaks to the ACA given its polarizing effect on the health care debate, the moderate and pragmatic Bennet is still exploring solutions. One addresses cost-shift brought on by swollen Medicaid rolls by incentivizing a care-coordinated market for the sickest and most expensive patients. He’s also working on a bill to make grants available to states that have double-digit health care increases. Insurance divisions could use the grants for tax credits or to create high-risk pools.

He told the editorial board that “opacity” or lack of cost transparency contributes to the problem of spiraling costs, but so do regional monopolies and a scarcity of doctors serving rural areas. Contrary to what our headline may have suggested, Bennet is well aware of a confluence of factors that defy the ACA’s aim to control costs.

None of this is to be taken as an endorsement of Bennet, who will be asked to defend his record in the Senate as we draw closer to the election. However, we recognize that we did the senator no favors by supplying his critics with fodder too easily taken out of context.

From what we’ve heard, Bennet understands the rural health-care market well enough to know there are no easy answers.

Let’s not forget, too, that Republicans in the state Senate have opposed the state’s hospital provider fee in general, which is used to match federal dollars to pay for Medicaid services so that taxpayers don’t have to. They blocked converting the fee to an enterprise fund, which may limit what the state can seek in matching federal funds and, therefore, diminish our capacity to deal with the cost-shift burden.