Former director at LASP passed away Oct. 14

Charles Barth

Undergraduate students at the University of Colorado are able to design, build and operate spacecrafts - that, in part, is thanks to Charles Barth.

"He was really the driving force to get us into operating spacecrafts," said Bill Possel, director of mission operations and data systems at CU's Laboratory of Atmospheric and Space Physics. "He was the one that convinced NASA that a university could actually operate spacecrafts."

Now, because of Barth, hundreds of students can add that experience to their résumés, Possel said.

Barth died at his home Oct. 14. He was 84 .

Starting in 1965, Barth was the director of LASP for 27 years and a professor in the astrophysical and planetary sciences department at CU. Since 2002, he was a professor emeritus both at the laboratory and in the department.

Between 1962 and 2002, Barth served as the principal investigator for eleven missions and experiments studying Earth and other planets.

"He was a pioneer, truly a pioneer, in space research," said Dan Baker, Barth's successor as director of LASP. "He was one of the giants of the field."

Barth grew up in Philadelphia and went to college in Bethlehem, Pa. After serving in the Air Force, he earned a doctorate in California and then completed postdoctoral work in Germany before starting a career in space physics as a research physicist at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif.

His specialty in research was the study of planetary atmospheres and ultraviolet spectroscopy.

Possel started working at LASP in 2006 but said Barth was still active and committed to the lab even though he had retired years earlier.

"He was very much an innovator and leader and scientist," Possel said. "Finding those qualities in a leader, for a lab like us, is pretty rare."

Being a leader is something that Barth was good at, even outside of his work, said son-in-law Charles Brock.

"He was always an organizer," Brock said. "Whenever the family had anything to do, he would get everyone organized. He was very impressive in terms of his abilities to get people to come to agreement, organize and move forward on a project."

Barth and his wife, Louise, met in Los Angeles during his doctorate studies and moved to Boulder in 1965. The couple enjoyed the outdoors together.

"He and his wife would travel all over Colorado with a camper trailer and travel all over the state," Brock said. "He loved hiking in the mountains."

When his sons were Boy Scouts, Barth took them for a 10-day hiking trip in the Flat Tops Wilderness.

Barth also shared his love of technology and science with his children. Together, they would build television sets, radios and garage openers.

"Technology and the outdoors were his two great loves," Brock said.

In lieu of flowers, donations may be made to the Charles A. Barth Scholarship in Space Research at the University of Colorado.

Charlie Brennan: 303-473-1327, brennanc@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/chasbrennan