A few weeks ago, I met an impressive young man named Oscar during a visit to the Intertech Plastics manufacturing factory in Denver in the run-up to this week’s Clinton Global Initiative’s annual CGI America conference.

Oscar grew up in the old South Lincoln Homes, a Denver housing project where unemployment was sky high. Nine out of 10 kids there dropped out of school. His single mom did all she could to make sure that wouldn’t happen to him, but the odds were stacked against Oscar from the start.

That’s where the Colorado I Have a Dream Foundation came in. The foundation’s team and one of its co-founders, Intertech CEO Noel Ginsburg, began mentoring Oscar when he was just 8 years old. Oscar started accompanying Noel to Intertech’s factory. Eventually, he began a formal internship there and then went on to serve our country in the Navy and earn a college degree. He came home to a good job in the same factory. Today, he is the father of three boys and oversees manufacturing operations at a Denver printing company.

Noel and Intertech understood that the vitality of their business was tied to the vitality of their community. As we say at the Clinton Foundation, “We’re all in this together.”

Stories like Oscar’s are at the heart of the basic bargain of America: No matter who you are or where you come from, if you work hard and play by the rules, you should have the opportunity to build a good life.

Unfortunately, for too many families in America today, that’s not the way it works. Instead of getting ahead, they are finding it harder than ever to keep their footing in our changing economy. The dream of upward mobility that made this country a model for the world feels out of reach.

I’m particularly concerned about the nearly 6 million young Americans who are out of school and out of work. We are counting on the Millennial generation to become the backbone of our 21st century economy, yet many of them are struggling to break into a tough job market.

For those who haven’t graduated from college or even high school, most doors just won’t open, no matter how hard they knock. Nearly one in five young Americans who have dropped out of high school are unemployed — more than three times the national unemployment rate. And for young people of color, the road is even harder. Nearly one in four young African-Americans are unemployed.

Economists say this youth unemployment crisis could cost America more than $20 billion in lost earnings over the next decade alone. In our first jobs, we learn skills, build networks, gain confidence, and experience the dignity of work and responsibility. When young people can’t find work, they miss out on that crucial period of personal and professional growth.

This week in Denver, the Clinton Foundation has brought together educators, community leaders, and businesses large and small from across the country to begin a broad effort to connect young people, workforce training programs, and employers looking to hire. We’re calling it “Job One,” because there’s nothing more important than helping our young people get off to a good start.

At CGI America, employers from a wide range of industries are committing to help young people find pathways to jobs through training, hiring, and mentoring opportunities, and explaining why investing in the workforce of tomorrow is not just the right thing to do, but also a smart investment. We are working with nonprofits like the Small Business Majority in Colorado that are putting together clusters of businesses dedicated to the same goal.

We want to do for other young people in Denver and across America what Colorado I Have a Dream Foundation and Intertech did for Oscar: give them the opportunity to lift themselves up and pursue their God-given potential.

Hillary Rodham Clinton is a former U.S. secretary of state. Her husband, President Bill Clinton, formed Clinton Global Initiative America, which is meeting in Denver this week.