Boulder's National Center for Atmospheric Research during its construction phase. ( Joseph Bassi / Courtesy photo )

If you go What: "Boulder Startup History Crash Course: The Federal Labs Story" When: 5:30-7 p.m. Thursday, Oct. 29 (reception follows) Where: University of Colorado Law School, Wittemyer Courtroom, Room 101, 2450 Kittredge Loop Drive, Boulder Tickets: $20, but free to CU faculty, staff, students and Museum of Boulder members Info: siliconflatirons.com/events.php What: Author Joseph Bassi discusses and signs his book "A Scientific Peak: How Boulder Became a World Center for Space and Atmospheric Science" When: 7:30 p.m. Monday, Nov. 16 Where: Boulder Book Store, 1107 Pearl St., Boulder Tickets: $5, which is good for a $5 in-store credit the day of the event Info: 303-447-2074 or boulderbookstore.net What: Author Joseph Bassi offers a slide presentation and signs his book "A Scientific Peak: How Boulder Became a World Center for Space and Atmospheric Science" When: Noon-1:15 p.m. Tuesday, Nov. 17 Where: Museum of Boulder, 2205 Broadway, Boulder Tickets: $5, but free to museum members Info: boulderhistory.org or 303-449-3464

It's difficult to fathom a time when Boulder wasn't a scientific powerhouse. But as the late National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration scientist Alan Shapley said, Boulder once was considered a "scientific Siberia."

Upcoming events will help explain the building blocks to the science wonderland that Boulder is today.

An Oct. 29 program co-sponsored by the Boulder History Museum/Museum of Boulder and the Silicon Flatirons Center will explore the history of Boulder's federal laboratories.

A new book, going to press as I write this column, fills a scientific void in the local history genre. "A Scientific Peak: How Boulder Became a World Center for Space and Atmospheric Science," by Joseph P. Bassi, is being published by the American Meteorological Society.

Bassi comes to town to discuss and sign his book, Nov. 16 at the Boulder Bookstore and Nov. 17 at the Museum of Boulder.

"Boulder is a sun-earth city," Bassi responded when asked about the history of science in Boulder.

His book shares the unlikely stories of how this came to be.

In his second career after serving 26 years in the U.S. Air Force, Bassi earned a Ph.D. in history from the University of California-Santa Barbara in 2009. He's currently assistant professor of Arts and Sciences at Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University Worldwide.

In the 1980s, the Air Force sent Bassi to graduate school at the University of Colorado-Boulder to study space weather. He earned a master's degree in astrophysics and discovered the topic for a future Ph.D. thesis and book.

It was a natural fit.

"I love history and I love science," Bassi, a San Diego resident, said with enthusiasm.

Now a specialist in 20th century U.S. science history, Bassi researched his thesis topic at multiple archives. While a Guggenheim Fellow at the National Air and Space Museum, he sifted through 80 boxes of Shapley's unprocessed papers at the Library of Congress.

The Boulder science story begins in the 1940s with Walter Orr Roberts, of Harvard University, and the High Altitude Observatory in Climax, Colo., according to Bassi.

In the 1950s, during the Cold War, the U.S. government was looking to move some facilities out of Washington, D.C., because of the threat of nuclear attack.

The Boulder Chamber of Commerce and Boulder citizens were certainly boosters for bringing the National Bureau of Standards' Central Radio Propagation Lab to Boulder. But Bassi discovered documents that showed formidable Democratic Colorado Gov. and U.S. Senator Edwin "Big Ed" Johnson claimed credit for bringing the NBS to Boulder.

The influence of Janet Roberts, wife of Walter Orr, shouldn't be overlooked. Roberts and his young family had moved to Boulder after Harvard teamed with the University of Colorado on the High Altitude Observatory, and Roberts began teaching at CU.

Later, he was appointed the first director of the National Center for Atmospheric Research. While locations were being discussed for the new facility, Janet Roberts let her husband know she preferred to stay in Boulder. Eventually NCAR was built here.

The history of Boulder science becomes more than a tale of pure scientific inquiry, thanks to personal drama, wheeling and dealing, political dynamics and unconventional funding sources.

Former CU presidents Robert Stearns, Ward Darley and Quigg Newton were instrumental in building Boulder's scientific community, Bassi says.

They took full advantage of opportunities for expanding scientific research programs after World War II.

Other prominent scientific cities came with strong military connections and were centrally planned by the government, Bassi says.

His book suggests that Boulder's development as a science center had a very different dynamic. Less classified information led to more communication and sharing among scientists, he explains.

With the influx of hundreds of high-level scientists and their open and questioning minds, Boulder was forever changed.

Through the lens of Boulder, Bassi says, you can see how science developed in the United States from the 1930s to the 1960s:

"It's the story of how science moved West."

Carol Taylor and Silvia Pettem write about history for the Daily Camera. Email Carol at boulderhistorylibrarian@gmail.com, Silvia at pettem@earthlink.net or write to the Daily Camera, 2500 55th St., Suite 210, Boulder, 80301.