Sarah Gonzalez-McLinn, the 19-year-old Topeka native who has been charged with first-degree murder in the brutal death of local pizza restaurant owner Hal Sasko in January at his Lawrence home, was booked into the Douglas County Jail on Saturday morning.

Douglas County officials in Lawrence said McLinn’s bond had been set at $1 million.

McLinn was booked into jail around 9 a.m., jail officials said. She had waived extradition in Florida before being returned to Kansas.

McLinn is to make her first appearance in Douglas County District Court before Judge Paula Martin on Monday afternoon.

She is being represented by defense attorney Carl Cornwell.

Douglas County authorities have said they believe McLinn acted alone in Sasko’s death.

The case has attracted widespread media attention, including from outlets as far away as New York City.

McLinn was reported missing from the Lawrence home she shared with the 52-year-old Sasko, her former boss, on Jan. 17. Both she and Sasko had last been seen Jan. 14.

Lawrence police officers were asked to check on McLinn by family members in Topeka on Jan. 17. Police went to Sasko’s home at 2905 W. 26th in Lawrence late that night. Officers weren’t able to locate McLinn or Sasko’s Nissan Altima at the residence, but they did find Sasko’s body inside the home.

Sasko was reported to have died as a result of “traumatic injuries” and that a “bladed object” had been used to kill him.

Douglas County officials later said Sasko was unconscious at the time he was killed.

An intense search for McLinn, which lasted a week, came to an end the night of Jan. 25 when she was found sleeping in the back seat of Sasko’s car in the visitor’s center parking lot at Everglades National Park in south Florida.

During the weeklong search, McLinn wasn’t listed in public reports as a suspect in Sasko’s death. However, after she was taken into custody and questioned by Douglas County authorities, she was charged with first-degree murder.

Officials have said McLinn was in possession of two knives, two guns, an ax and hashish at the time she was taken into custody in Everglades National Park. Officials said a knife believed to have been used to kill Sasko was recovered.

McLinn was in federal and later state custody in Florida from late the night of Jan. 25 until she waived extradition Thursday in Miami-Dade court, allowing her to be returned to Kansas.

McLinn, a 2012 graduate of Topeka High School, had worked for Sasko at one of the three CiCi’s pizza restaurants he owned. Two of the restaurants were in Topeka and the other in Lawrence.

Douglas County authorities haven’t stated the nature of the relationship between Sasko and McLinn. However, Sasko’s relatives have said he let McLinn move into his Lawrence home in 2012 while she was having personal problems.