In an industry known for unpleasant odors, Robert Wilson smelled opportunity.

In just five years, that nose for business has helped him transform a small trash-hauling company into the metro area’s largest locally owned disposal and recycling firm: Precision Waste Services Inc.

“We’re not trying to dominate the market,” Wilson says. “It’s just, we’re good at what we do.”

Under the tech-savvy 32-year-old entrepreneur’s leadership, Thomson-based Precision Waste went from a struggling 2,000-customer residential garbage hauler in McDuffie County to a full-service solid-waste company with an expanding portfolio of municipal contracts and a list of commercial and industrial clients stretching from Augusta to Sandersville, Ga.

The company has made a big splash in Columbia County, where it has amassed a 65 percent share of the subscription-based garbage market since its Jan. 1 purchase of Augusta-based Columbia Waste – Wilson’s fourth acquisition.

That’s no small feat in an area with entrenched local competitors such as Evans-based Augusta Disposal and Recycling and national solid-waste giants such as Houston-based Waste Management and Jacksonville, Fla.’s Advanced Disposal Services.

Wilson’s rapid rise to the top of the local trash heap is no fluke. For one, he grew up in a business family – his parents own Thomson’s Pine Top Farm equestrian center – and he studied the waste industry for three years before he bought his first garbage truck.

After graduating with a business degree from Emory University in 2005, Wilson went to work as an analyst for GMAC Commercial Finance and, later, as an associate for Roark Capital Group, an Atlanta-based private equity firm.

Wilson was part of the Roark team that invested $100 million in Waste Pro USA Inc., a privately held, multistate waste company based outside Orlando, Fla.

The months he spent working closely with Waste Pro Chairman and CEO John Jennings awakened his entrepreneurial side.

“I thought I was going to stay in the world of high finance,” Wilson recalled. “That was my training, that was what I wanted to do, and I enjoyed it. But there was always that guy on my shoulder or in my head who kept saying, ‘You need to be an entrepreneur.’”

Jennings recalled that Wilson possessed “an insatiable appetite to absorb everything he observed” and quickly realized that success in the waste industry is more tied to passionate employees than shiny new trucks.

“He recognized almost immediately that although this was a capital-intensive business, the ability to attract and motivate the right people was the key to success,” he said. “I believe Robert has all the tools to be a true leader in this industry.”

But first, Wilson had to make the actual decision to get down and dirty.

The young executive had a ­lucrative job and was living happily in a tony Atlanta neighborhood with his wife, Virginia – an Augusta native he met during a holiday party in Thomson – but the itch to get into the waste business wouldn’t go away.

He finally took the plunge in 2010 after his father told him about a struggling hometown hauler, McGahee Sanitation, that was on the verge of going out of business.

“I came up with the crazy idea of ‘Let’s move back to Thomson and start a garbage business,’ ” Wilson recalled with a laugh. “She (Virginia) was not too keen on that at first.”

But the Wilson family’s investment in new equipment and its focus on improving McGahee’s business processes helped turn the company around fairly quickly, and by January 2011 it had officially become Precision Waste.

The big turning point came in late 2012 when the fled­gling company won its first municipal contract: a solid-waste agreement to serve 850 homes in Warrenton, Ga.

“It really was a watershed event for us because it was the first time a government has said, “We trust you guys to do what you say you’re going to do,’ ” he said. “We proved ourselves and went on from there.”

Other city- and county-bid jobs would follow, including Wrens, Dearing, Lincolnton, Sandersville and Stapleton. The contracts have helped fuel the company’s 75 percent annualized growth rate.

Wilson said his vision from the get-go was to provide high-quality, low-cost service by maximizing the number of customers per route mile. One way he has achieved “route density” is through acquisitions: Southern Waste Disposal in 2013, ACRO Waste Manage­ment in 2015 and Columbia Waste this year.

The other is through tech­nology. All 30 Precision Waste trucks are GPS-tracked and linked to the central office through a cloud-based route-management system that drivers can access via iPads.

The wireless system, which also features live-streaming, cab-mounted cameras, ensures that his trucks are getting the most revenue per mile possible during the 50,000 “service events” they perform each week. It also enables truck drivers to make notes, take work orders and even snap photographs of anything they see along a route that might need to be discussed later.

Precision Waste operates from two locations: its main office on Mesena Road in Thomson – formerly the headquarters of Thomson Oak Flooring – and the former Columbia Waste offices on Franke Industrial Drive in Augusta. Unlike most waste companies that rely on truck dealers to perform repairs and maintenance, Wilson’s company takes care of his own vehicle servicing, which he says substantially reduces their downtime.

About 20 percent of the company’s routes are hand­led by trucks outfitted with driver-controlled, automated pickup systems that eliminate the need for a second crew member. Even Precision Waste’s waste bins are high-tech – each blue household bin is embedded with a radio frequency identification chip.

“You wouldn’t realize it, but for some reason garbage carts are hot commodities,” Wilson said of the 96-gallon containers, each of which represent a $53 expense. “If you’ve got 30,000 on the street and you lose 500 a year, that can add up to serious money.”

Wilson says the other ingredient to his “secret sauce” is not skimping on personnel. He provides full health insurance coverage to all 44 employees even though the company falls under the Affordable Care Act’s 50-employee threshold.

“I’m a firm believer in driving down operating costs, but you can’t do it through labor because labor is what’s delivering the service,” he said.

Wilson says the company is set up to rapidly respond to customer-service issues, and often communicates with customers real-time through social media channels such as Facebook.

He mentioned a recent incident in which one of his trucks knocked over a customer’s mailbox; the damage was fixed that day and the crew left an apology note and box of chocolates on the customer’s doorstep.

“We’re going to make mistakes, no question about it, but we’re going to fix it,” Wilson said.

Being locally owned has a way of keeping the company on its toes, said Ryan Mahoney, Wilson’s longtime friend and marketing adviser.

“When Robert goes to church or when his operations guys go to T-ball, they have to drive past all of these cans that either got picked up or didn’t, and they have to run into their customers who either have complaints or praises,” said Mahoney, a partner in Parlay Marketing Partners. “It gets real personal compared with the national company side, where you don’t have to interface as much with your community.”

Wilson estimates 85 percent of his company’s expenses are made locally. His trucks burn fuel from Boswell Oil Co. in Thomson. They wear out tires from Jim Whitehead Tire and Auto in Evans.

The steel roll-off containers they haul are fabricated by Lewis Steel Works in Wrens. Georgia Bank & Trust in Augusta helps him finance it all. And Thomson’s Watson & Knox insurance firm helps him protect the investment against a loss.

“If we can deal with local vendors, that’s what we’ll do,” he said. “When we have an ox in the ditch, they help us get it out.”

Given his background in high finance and the constant merger-and-acquisition activity in his industry, its natural to assume Wilson is building up the business with the intent to sell out to a larger national company. He says he isn’t. He’s in it for the long haul, he says.

“I’m building this to provide a good living for my family and my employees,” said Wilson, whose daughters, Charlotte and Georgia, are ages 4 and 2. “If there’s customers we can take care of at a price they want to have, then we want to do it. So instead of having 25 percent of the market, why don’t we over the next five years try to have 50 percent?”