While Autocam Corp. will be acquired by a Tennessee-based public company in a deal that was announced in July, the automotive supplier does not expect the sale to have much impact on its West Michigan operations.

Nor does founder and CEO John Kennedy plan to drop his lawsuit against the federal government over mandates in Obamacare that he supply his employees with birth control.

In a deal announced Monday, Grand Rapids-based Autocam Corp. will be acquired by NN Inc. of Johnson City, Tenn. for $244.5 million in cash, $25 million in stock and the assumption of $30.5 million in debt, according to a statement.

The deal, which is expected to close in the third quarter and is subject to regulatory approval, does not include the Autocam Medical division, which will remain under Kennedy’s ownership.

He told MiBiz that he plans to shift his day-to-day focus to that side of the business after the completion of the deal with NN Inc. (Nasdaq: NNBR).

Autocam is also expected to continue its employee training programs, which aim to develop a skilled workforce for the company, he said. Through Autocam’s Advanced Manufacturing Partnership program with Grand Rapids Community College, the company pays for employees’ education while they continue to work for the manufacturer. Kennedy said he believes those programs will continue under the new ownership, since many of NN’s talent development needs are similar to Autocam’s.

“(NN) was very intrigued by what we were doing, and I wouldn’t see any reason why they would curtail any of that,” Kennedy said. “If anything, they would look at what they can do to bring that to their own businesses. … The same type of talent development that we do are all best practices they can use. I think that was one of the attractions to them of the Autocam business.”

A supplier of components for fuel systems, engines, transmissions, power steering and electric motors, Autocam said it expected to generate $250 million in sales this year and employs more than 2,100 people at 15 plants in the U.S., Europe, South America and Asia. The company also hoped to realize $42 million in revenue via a Chinese joint venture.

NN Inc. is a manufacturer of high precision metal bearing components, industrial plastic and rubber products and precision metal components for a variety global industries. The company has 14 plants in the U.S., Europe and China and has sales of $373 million last year.

“This acquisition is the next step in our ongoing strategy to aggressively grow our business through strategic, profitable acquisitions that provide complementary resources and lines of business,” President and CEO Richard Holder said of the “transformative” deal for NN Inc.

The Autocam brand will continue on after the transaction.

Autocam founder and CEO Kennedy will become a “significant shareholder” of NN Inc. and will be considered for a seat on the company’s board of directors, according to a statement.

Kennedy said in an interview with MiBiz that there should be no significant changes for Autocam’s West Michigan operations in the foreseeable future. The company has continued to invest in the region. Last month, it opened a new $10 million, 50,000-square-foot facility in Marshall that’s expected to employ 85 people by 2018. The facility could employ as many as 170 people once fully utilized.

Autocam was also in the news of late for the company’s challenge to the Affordable Care Act. Kennedy has an ongoing lawsuit before the Supreme Court over a section of the ACA that requires employers to provide birth control coverage, which he opposes on religious grounds.

He told MiBiz that he plans to drop Autocam Corp. from the lawsuit due to its soon-to-be status as a public company. However, he will continue the suit with Autocam Medical because of the recent Supreme Court ruling in the Hobby Lobby case that stated “closely-held” corporations were exempt from the mandate.

Describing the acquisition as a “compelling strategic transaction,” Kennedy said he expected it would create “enormous opportunity” for the combined company, which is expected “to outgrow its end markets by taking advantage of global market trends in fuel efficient technologies.”

“We are even more bullish with NN as a partner and their access to capital,” he said. “We will be able to manage and grow the business.”