Patients vulnerable to potentially fatal blood clots who take blood-thinners have a 17-fold higher risk of serious bleeding after undergoing surgery if given short-acting anticoagulants around procedures, according to a Kaiser Permanente study published Tuesday.

Patients with a history of blood clots — either deep-vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism, when a clot breaks free and enters the arteries of the lungs — are commonly prescribed warfarin, an anticoagulant.

Clinicians stop the use of warfarin to reduce the risk of serious bleeding when patients undergo invasive procedures, including colonoscopies, orthopedic surgeries and pacemaker implantations. But these interruptions in the medication expose patients to increased risk of blood clots three to five days before and three to five days after procedures.

Physicians have relied on a “bridge therapy” to lessen the risk of blood clots — treatment with a faster-acting, shorter-lived anticoagulant during the gap in warfarin use. However, the Kaiser Permanente study published Tuesday in JAMA Internal Medicine finds bridging, part of standard therapy for many years, might create more risks than benefits for patients with low to moderate risk for blood clots.

“The increased risk of bleeding coupled with the low risk of VTE (venous thromboembolism) recurrence for these patients indicate this therapy may be unnecessary and potentially harmful for that patient population,” said lead author Nathan Clark, a clinical pharmacy supervisor with Kaiser Permanente Colorado, in a statement.

More than 900,000 cases of VTE occur each year in the United States, making it the third-most common cardiovascular illness behind heart attack and stroke, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Before the study, limited data were available on rates of bleeding and clot recurrence, Kaiser Permanente researchers said. From January 2006 to March 2012, they examined the medical records of 1,178 patients with VTE who had 1,812 invasive diagnostic or surgical procedures, for which warfarin treatment was discontinued.

A total of 555 patients received bridging anticoagulant therapy, and 1,257 did not. Bridge therapy resulted in a 17-fold higher risk of bleeding without a significant difference in the rate of blood clot formation, compared with the patients who didn’t receive bridge therapy, the study found.

The study was conducted in partnership with the University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Denver Health Medical Center, University of Utah College of Pharmacy and others.

Electa Draper: 303-954-1276, edraper@denverpost.com or twitter.com/electadraper