A group of small business owners in Fayette County are sharing common interests through networking, educating and advocating to foster personal and professional growth in the local community.

The Small Business Resource Council was created this year by the Fayette Chamber of Commerce based on input from an annual survey.

“The council will be a forum for small business advocacy and for the exchange of ideas and information vital to growing small businesses,” said Muriel Nuttall, chamber executive director. “This will be accomplished through education, sharing of experiences and solutions, networking and connection-building.”

The fledgling group held its first meeting in February and is comprised of about 25 small business owners and employees that meet monthly to discuss various topics.

Wanda Anker and Michelle Schrock each serve as the group’s co-chairs.

According to Nuttall, the chamber administered a survey in November to members that included questions on needs, goals and available resources in the small business community.

Those that responded suggested developing a group that could focus on ways to help small business succeed in the county.

According to Nuttall, the chamber defines a small business as having less than 50 employees, which represent about 80 percent of its 600 members.

As the backbone of the group, the chamber will work to develop informational sessions for meetings focused on small business issues like health insurance, human resources, marketing, etc.

The group will plan for cooperative marketing opportunities, events and other activities.

“The Be Local Network and the Small Business Resource Council share the common goal of creating a forum where locally-owned businesses can come together to exchange ideas and share beneficial experiences that will help to grow their businesses and enable our local communities to prosper,” said Clint Rhodes, Be Local coordinator.

In April, David Hughes of Sprouse Insurance in Uniontown discussed the status of the Affordable Care Act.

Upcoming meetings planned for May and June will focus on small business accounting Quickbooks and web design and social media respectively.

Other topics that will be presented include cloud-based technology for small businesses, a guide to government procurement, employee handbooks and hospitality training/customer service that will be held in conjunction with Fayette County Tourism Alliance.

“An important aspect of the chamber is to advocate and organize (events) for the business community to learn what support pieces are out there for each other,” said Nuttall.

In doing so, the chamber continues to partner with many local businesses and organizations to promote the community and strengthen the local economy.

Those interested in joining the Be Local Network can contact Clint Rhodes at 724-439-7518 or by email at crhodes@heraldstandard.com. Discount cards are available at the Herald-Standard, 8 East Church St., Uniontown, and at the Greene County Messenger, 82 W. High St., Waynesburg.