Dr. Donald May said he filed paperwork Wednesday to run for office. May issued the following statement regarding his candidacy for Congress to represent the 19th District of Texas.

I am running for the United States House of Representatives because I am alarmed by how very rapidly Obama has greatly damaged our nation by weakening our national security, destroying our jobs, and undermining our prosperity.

Our national security must be rapidly restored, especially our military preparedness.

Our border must be rapidly and completely secured by our military and a combination of federal, state, and local police agencies. We need to know who and what is entering and leaving our nation.

Agriculture production and the economic prosperity of our farms is a vital part of our national security. Without the increased domestic production of food and natural fibers, our nation cannot be secure or prosperous.

Oil, natural gas, coal, and electricity production are foundational to our national security and our future prosperity.

Our national debt has spiraled out of control, the outrageous rate of growth in the size of our federal government has increased, and ObamaCare has destroyed our Liberty and greatly increased the cost of our healthcare.

I will represent you by actively addressing the problems that threaten our nation. I will bring West Texas values and common sense to Washington.

I will speak from the floor of the House as often as possible. I will update you and the news media every day. I will spend my time in Washington doing important work and not seeking to be important.

I will write bills intended to incrementally take apart ObamaCare, the EPA, the IRS, the Department of Energy, the Department of Education, and the bloated welfare system. This money and power must be returned to the people and to the individual states where the Tenth Amendment tells us it belongs in the first place.

You and I believe that Liberty is the answer, with each man and woman able to make decisions for themselves and their families. Our Constitution protects you and me from our government, from politicians, from bureaucrats, from tyrants, and from elitist busy bodies.

Washington is broken, and both parties are to blame. Much of the Republican Party has not had the courage to confront Obama and the Far Left.

That is why I am running for the Texas 19th Congressional District House seat. We need accountability in Washington. We need leaders who are not afraid to fight for our Conservative values.

America¹s best days are always before us when We the People stand up to fight for those values that built our great nation.

(Statement from Dr. Donald May)