Topics: 2016 Democratic primary, 2016 Elections, aol_on, Barack Obama, Bernie Sanders, Dave Weigel, Democratic Party, economic fairness, economic inequality, Hillary Clinton, West Virginia, White voters, white working class, Elections News, Politics News

Dave Weigel had an interesting piece at the Washington Post on Monday examining the opportunity Bernie Sanders has to win white working-class voters over Hillary Clinton in the upcoming Democratic primaries. Weigel reported from West Virginia, where in 2008, 69 percent of the white Democratic voters chose Clinton over Barack Obama. (Weigel’s piece doesn’t touch on one obvious possible reason for such a large victory margin, but it still might be an issue in 2016 for reasons we’ll get into.)

Basically, the theory goes like this: Sanders’s argument for economic justice and equality might just resonate loudly enough with rural working-class whites that they will be willing to overlook areas where they disagree with the Vermont socialist, such as on climate change and gay marriage. That West Virginia voters might go for such a leftist message is especially surprising in a state that elected Democrat Joe Manchin to the Senate in 2010 largely on the basis of his conservative positions on gun rights, Obamacare, and promising to (literally) put a bullet in the cap-and-trade legislation then being debated in Congress, a particularly popular message in the coal-happy state.

The reasons for this shift are varied. For one, Sanders is strongly pro-union, an important benchmark for West Virginia’s numerous coal miners. For another, they are receptive to his calls for a living wage, for protecting Social Security and miners’ pensions, and for restricting the size of the big banks. His position on gun rights, meanwhile, is much more moderate to conservative than Clinton and could help him in rural states.

At least one voter Weigel spoke to made clear that Clinton hurt herself with voters with “all that secretive stuff,” i.e. the ongoing controversy over her emails. And given the antipathy towards Barack Obama, particularly over his environmental regulations that have given Republicans a handy “War on Coal” talking point, her close association with his administration probably hurts Clinton as well.

Finally, there is this: the Democratic Party of Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton is a more diverse, non-white party than it was eight years ago. African-Americans voted for Obama at a rate of around 95 percent in 2008 and 2012. Latinos have more political power than ten years ago, particularly with the issue of illegal immigration looming large with the electorate. With some of the fearmongering conservatives have done around the issue of police violence and the Black Lives Matter movement, there is a significant number of white voters who will stay away from any candidate associated closely with the Democratic Party over the same old bogeyman of race and law and order. And a significant number of non-white voters looking for a candidate who will be a vocal champion for more fairness in policing and racial equality, among other issues.