Some small businesses offer medical screenings, walking programs, weight-loss plans to staff to improve health and lower health care costs.

Jean Bourgeois, right, CEO of Excelsas, walks with employee Cyndi Takacs as part of the company walking program. The program encourages health in her employees through walking. (Photo: Michael McElroy) Story Highlights Small business have found creative, inexpensive ways to offer wellness programs

The Affordable Care Act offers extra incentives to companies for wellness programs

One company lets employees earn extra paid time off by walking more

Cyndi Takacs went the extra miles last year to earn additional paid time off, and she plans to do the same this year.

She and other employees at Excelas, a medical consulting firm with 44 staffers in Cleveland, get one extra hour of paid time off for every 33,000 steps they take during the first three months of the year, for up to three extra days of paid leave.

To meet the goal last year, she did laps around the parking lot at lunch, and she took the dogs out for an extra walk at night. "Earning time off with pay is a great motivator to get me moving," says Takacs, the company's office coordinator. Excelas also makes charitable donations based on the employees' walking milestones.

The walking program is part of the company's wellness initiative, which also includes nutrition and stress-reduction programs. "The immediate objective is to improve the health of the staff," says Jean Bourgeois, the company's president and founder. "If our programs lead to a reduction in our health care costs over time, as we believe they will, that's the end game that benefits our company as a whole."

Many small businesses such as Excelas have come up with creative ways to encourage their employees to become healthier.

The Affordable Care Act creates new incentives to promote employer wellness programs and encourage employers to take more opportunities to support healthier workplaces.

The law reinforces an employer's ability to provide wellness incentives so people are motivated to get healthier to lower their insurance costs, says Den Bishop, president of Holmes Murphy and Associates, an insurance brokerage firm in Dallas, and author of The Book on Healthcare Reform.

"Health care costs have become such a large part of the expense pie for companies that offering cost-effective wellness programs to employees make a lot of sense," says Tim Church, director of preventive medicine research at the Pennington Biomedical Research Center in Baton Rouge. He also works for ACAP Health, which helps employers get employees healthier.

STORY: Small businesses wrestle with ACA's cost

STORY: SHOP for health care is help for small businesses

STORY: Small businesses can save with health care tax credit

Many companies offer screening programs to identify people at risk for chronic diseases such as type 2 diabetes, heart disease and obesity, and most are interested in helping their employees lose weight and become more active, he says. "If you can prevent these health conditions or identify and treat them early and aggressively, you are going to have a happier, healthier employee, and in the long run, it will save you money."

Formal wellness programs have traditionally been more common in larger companies than smaller ones, he says.

About half of U.S. employers with 50 or more employees offer workplace wellness programs, with larger employers more likely to have more complex programs, according to research conducted in 2012 by the Rand Corp., a non-profit research group.

The study showed that participation in a wellness program over five years reduced annual health care costs by an estimated $157 per person, which is about the same amount the company typically spends on the wellness program.

"People are getting healthier if they participate," says the study's lead researcher Soeren Mattke, senior scientist for Rand. "You get health improvement at no extra cost, but these wellness programs are not big money savers."

The health and financial payoffs may come later on, but this research didn't examine that, he says.

Mattke says that small businesses usually are more "creative" with their wellness programs than larger companies. They tend to use free and inexpensive resources in their communities, such as local programs to help people quit smoking, lose weight or become more active, he says.

Many small employers are struggling with both the cost of health insurance and the cost of wellness programs, and some companies are banding together to cut their costs on both, says Wally Gomaa, senior vice president of Holmes Murphy and Associates.

He says it used to be that mostly big companies were willing to self insure; now, some smaller businesses are pooling their resources to form new private self-insurance pools.

To join some of these pools, employers have to "agree to do all the things that we know will work to make employees healthier and reduce claim costs," he says.

"If the employer doesn't do the things they are responsible for doing, then the employer could get kicked out of the pool," Gomaa says. "It's all about swimming in a cleaner risk pool. Bigger is not always better — better is better — and small employers can realize lower insurance premiums by linking themselves to a better-performing small group of employers."

Bourgeois of Excelas says she believes if employees have medical screenings, get their flu shots, reach a healthier weight and are more active, it's bound to pay off in a number of ways.

She has been creative when it comes to classes. One day, her employees met at a grocery store and worked in teams to try to select healthy foods for a day's meals and snacks. Then their shopping carts were evaluated by a nutrition professional to see who made the most nutritious choices. The winning team members got gift cards to the grocery store, Bourgeois says.

At the company's holiday party last week, she gave everyone on the staff inexpensive activity-monitor bands to track their activity.

And she has done all this on a shoestring budget. She gives small gifts to speakers who come to the company to talk about health, nutrition, fitness and stress reduction, and she received a small local grant to fund some of the wellness activities,

"What I care about is the well-being of our team," Bourgeois says. "I believe healthy, happy employees will allow us to do our best work."

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1bAPkK7