Young men did have fashion fads in my generation even if we thought underwear stayed under street clothes. There was the Elvis pompadour and sideburns, then a Beatle cut like a bowl on your noggin, and then my personal favorite: a full-on natural non-haircut that briefly made traditional Indian hair fashionable. Being Cherokee, I had a decision to make about shaving the front and I decided life was too short for all the explaining.

Young women had their own fads. The braless look held the advantage of being quickly reversible in case of a job interview. The Brazilian took over so completely that a generation of young men came of age innocent of the fact that women start out with pubic hair. One theory about how that one spread was porn movies, where hairy women got indexed under “fetishes.”

The latest thing is dyeing armpit hair, which is as much a political statement as a fashion statement. The dye comes in bright colors and some young women call it a movement.

Video of free your pits

“A movement?” My cousin Ray Sixkiller was nonplussed. “I get demanding the right to vote, equal pay, and even breastfeeding babies whenever they get hungry. But armpit hair?”

He piped down pretty quickly when I asked if he would like to shave his.

Chinese Internet censors have their priorities, and the most important things to keep tamped down are words like “Tiananmen Square Massacre” or “tank guy” or “democracy” or “Falun Gong.” So-called pornography sits in the back of the censorship bus, well behind politics.

Understanding that might excuse the censors for allowing a sex video to go viral this week when two anonymous citizens managed to selfie themselves making the beast with two backs in a fitting room of Uniqlo, a Japanese clothing store.

According to The New York Times, The Cyberspace Administration of China was calling the bosses of the two leading Chinese Internet companies, Sina and Tencent, on the carpet.

Sina owns Weibo, the Chinese analog to Facebook and Twitter, and they blocked 35 Weibo accounts in the first few hours of the on line sex scandal, but I guess they call it “viral” for a reason.

Cousin Ray, no fan of censorship, asked me whether ICTMN could be accessed from China.

“As far as I know. We don’t cover much Chinese politics.”

“I can fix that,” Ray snickered, and then summoned his most stentorian tone: “Xi Jinping is ugly,” Cousin Ray declaimed, “and his mama dresses him funny.”

China may hack the U.S. government and Russian gangsters may hack major banks, but now it’s gotten serious. This week, hackers struck Ashley Madison, the website that profits from arranging adultery and runs under the slogan, “Life is short—have an affair.”

Ashley Madison claims 37 million members, and the hackers purportedly got user emails, passwords, zip codes, and….sexual preferences. CNN Money reported that the Ashley Madison hack replicates a similar feat against Adult FriendFinder in March that netted the fetishes and sexual secrets of 3.5 million people.

Speaking of exotic sex, Lucasfilm’s Star Wars Twitter account took GQ to task for “inappropriate use of our characters,” probably referring to a photo of Amy Schumer in an apparent ménage à trois with R2-D2 and C-3PO. Cousin Ray speculated that GQ would have gotten in even more trouble “if they had used those photos of her with Chewbacca.”

This next item also involves sex, but takes a while to get there.

I’ve criticized Arizona Sen. John McCain for trying to apply the brakes to the new GI Bill. I was all over him for his part in the gifting of an Apache sacred site to a foreign mining corporation. I didn’t care for his cutesy “bomb bomb bomb, bomb bomb Iran.”

I’m not in the tank for Sen. McCain. However, the rumor fest attributed to Karl Rove in the South Carolina primary of 2000---that he fathered a child with a black prostitute, that his wife was a drug addict, that his time as a POW had rendered him too mentally unstable to be POTUS—was despicable.

Comes now The Donald Trump complaining of McCain’s record as a Vietnam War POW while campaigning in Iowa: “He’s not a war hero. He’s a war hero because he was captured. I like people who weren’t captured.”

The Vietnamese never captured Trump because the U.S. military never captured him. Trump always claimed he did not serve because of a high number in the draft lottery, and it’s true that he drew a safe 356. That begs the question why the would-be commander in chief did not join. Shooting holes in Trump’s story, The Smoking Gun posted documents that appeared to show that Trump received four student deferments and a medical deferment before the draft lottery even happened.

Back in the present, Frank Bruni published a hilarious op-ed in The New York Times comparing The Donald with Italy’s Silvio Berlusconi in a sort of Narcissism smackdown. I’m disqualified by sexual orientation from opining on the sex appeal of either billionaire blowhard, but they are happy to save me the trouble.

Trump:

All of the women on “The Apprentice” flirted with me, consciously or unconsciously. That’s to be expected. * * * Oftentimes when I was sleeping with one of the top women in the world I would say to myself … “Can you believe what I’m getting?”