How to eat right. How to work out more efficiently. How to manage money better. How to deal with the media in the modern age. In short, how to be a better pro.

Those are most of the lessons being administered by Avalanche staff this week at the team’s development camp to many recent draft choices. Conner Bleackley, the Avs’ first-round draft pick of a couple weeks ago, was one of more than two dozen players getting to know one another in a process that stresses the off-ice aspects of pro life.

“It’s a little bit different,” Bleackley said. “They keep the schedule kind of secret, but they’ve got a lot of fun activities planned, it looks like, so it’s exciting.”

There are no on-ice activities at the camp, which runs through Friday. The Avs, like many NHL teams, feel it’s important for new prospects to get a taste of what to expect if they are to successfully navigate their way to being regular NHL players. It’s not all just classroom lectures, though; in the past, activities such as an outing at a bowling alley have been scheduled. Some teams give cooking classes to players so they can learn to eat better on their own rather than making trips to McDonald’s every day.

For some, it is their first trips to Denver and some have rarely been to the United States. In that sense, the Avs want to give such prospects a better look at the culture of life here.

“Hopefully, we can all be teammates one day. We know not all of us are going to play for the Avs, but it’s good,” Bleackley said.

The Avs will hold a rookie training camp starting Sept. 8, and most of the prospects on hand this week will take part, at that time on skates. Regular training camp will start not long after that, though a date hasn’t been announced.

Bleackley, a native of High River, Alberta, a suburb of Calgary, will be geeked to skate with new Avs free-agent acquisition Jarome Iginla.

“Growing up, he was a hero of mine,” Bleackley said. “It will be surreal.”

Iginla was in Denver on Monday with his family, looking at houses.

Adrian Dater: adater@denverpost.com or twitter.com/adater