Texas poised to seek more stringent rules for Obamacare navigators than for those enrolling people for other social benefits

Photo: AP Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 State Sen. Kirk Watson said he did not expect the “good faith” clause in his bill to be used as “a political tool.” State Sen. Kirk Watson said he did not expect the “good faith” clause in his bill to be used as “a political tool.” Photo: AP Texas poised to seek more stringent rules for Obamacare navigators than for those enrolling people for other social benefits 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

AUSTIN — A state insurance regulator appointed by Gov. Rick Perry, a vocal critic of President Barack Obama's signature health care law, is proposing strict new rules for Obamacare navigators that go far beyond what is required of navigators for other federal benefits, analysts say.

“It's a remarkable difference,” said Stacey Pogue, a senior policy analyst at the non-partisan Center for Public Policy Priorities, an advocate for low- and moderate-income Texans.

The proposed rules being developed by Texas Department of Insurance Commissioner Julia Rathgeber would require navigators, people hired to help consumers sign up for coverage on the federal insurance exchange, to receive an additional 40 hours of training on top of the 20 to 30 hours required by federal law. Democrats say the requirement could make it more difficult for Texans to sign up for coverage plans under the federal Affordable Care Act.

The TDI 's proposed rules would require navigators hired by local organizations through a federal grant to take an additional 40 hours of training on Medicaid rules, ethics and privacy.

Navigators would also pay training fees up to $800, an additional $120 would be tacked on for six hours of continued education.

Navigators would also have to pay the agency a $50 registration fee, undergo a criminal background check and a fingerprinting process that could cost up to $62, prove their U.S. citizenship, and provide documentation of their educational credentials.

Comparatively, TDI-certified counselors under the Health Insurance Advocacy and Counseling Program — which provides enrollment assistance on Medicare benefits — have more relaxed standards. Counselors in that program are required to complete only 25 hours of training.

Navigators with the Community Partner Program — operated in partnership with the Texas Health and Human Services Commission to help citizens enroll in Medicaid, the Children's Health Insurance Program, the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program and Temporary Assistance for Needy Families — are required to take only four hours of training.

Counselors working in those programs do not have to pay fees for training or continuing education. They also do not have to submit to fingerprinting or criminal background checks.

Pogue said Obamacare navigators perform most of the same tasks as their counterparts working in the Community Partner and Health Insurance Advocacy and Counseling programs. He questioned why TDI has yet to justify why Obamacare navigators would have higher training requirements than their counterparts in the other two programs.

“There's no reason for the discrepancy,” Pogue said.

The rules came after Perry and Attorney General Greg Abbott expressed concerns about navigators' access to private information.

“Because of the nature of navigators' work and because they will be collecting confidential information, including birth dates, social security numbers and financial information, it is imperative that Texas train navigators on the collection and security of such data,” Perry said in a September letter to Rathgeber.

But navigators don't keep applicants' private information on file, Pogue said.

That information is plugged into federal Healthcare.gov website, she said, which navigators cannot access without applicants present.

Rathgeber has yet to publicly state the agency's reasoning behind the 40-hour training requirement and related fees.

State Rep. Lon Burnam, D-Fort Worth, a member of the House Criminal Jurisprudence Committee, said he has seen internal agency documents that show the requirements were created arbitrarily and resulted from political influence.

Burnam said he was told by the agency not to release them to the public.

John Greeley, a TDI spokesman, said the agency released information to Burnam under legislative privilege, which may not be intended for public release. He said some of the documents the agency provided to Burnam contained personally identifiable information for agency employees such as Social Security numbers, preventing their release.

Greeley said the agency could not comment on allegations that the proposed rules were formed with political motivations.

Under the federal healthcare law, states are allowed to create their own guidelines and standards for navigators.

Texas guidelines were included in a bill by state Sen. Kirk Watson, D-Austin, passed last year.

The bill prohibited navigators from engaging in conflicts of interest and favoring specific insurance plans. It allowed the agency to write additional rules in a “good faith” effort where it saw fit. Perry requested that the agency use its authority under the bill to write rules.

Watson said he did not anticipate the “good faith” clause in the bill to be used as “a political tool in a political battle over the Affordable Care Act,” but that's not an argument against the bill.

If legislators were to not file “legislation that tries to make things better because you can't trust Rick Perry and his appointees to operate in good faith, I worry we would never file legislation and the people of this state would suffer greatly,” Watson said.

The rules proposed by Rathgeber would take effect March 1, one month before the open enrollment period ends.

That timing could spell trouble for navigator organizations in Texas counties if their navigators are out completing additional training.

Martha Spinks, director at the Bexar County Area Agency on Aging, said she anticipates greater demand for assistance services as the deadline approaches.

“If navigators are in training or still waiting for training in order to help people, then that effectively means navigators won't be available for people,” Spinks said.

That would mean citizens of Bexar County and 21 counties in the South Texas region that the organization is providing service to would not have access to its 18 navigators, Spinks said.

Paying for those training sessions — which have not been formed — means finding other sources of revenue or dipping into funds that would be better used by serving applicants, said Benjamin Hernandez, deputy assistant director for the Houston Department of Health and Human Services.

“We need these people out there serving in the community, not sitting in a classroom,” Hernandez said.

jfechter@express-news.net

Twitter: @JFreports