Only one candidate will have a second act in politics. Coakley, Baker out for redemption

Martha Coakley is one weekend away from permanent infamy as a political choke artist or an electoral redemption that would be considered a mild surprise.

On Tuesday, the Massachusetts Democratic gubernatorial nominee faces Republican rival Charlie Baker, who, like Coakley, lost a winnable race four years ago when he was defeated by Democratic Gov. Deval Patrick. Both candidates last week said that if they lose this time, they’ll never run for office again.

Story Continued Below

It’s added a personal dimension to the race as the clock winds down: Only one candidate will have a second act in politics.

( POLITICO's polling center)

“America loves redemption, so the redemption story in politics is an easy one to write,” said Jane Swift, a Republican who served as interim governor of Massachusetts from 2001 to 2003. “Only one of them is going to be redeemed.”

Coakley’s loss to Republican Scott Brown in a January 2010 special Senate election, which cost Democrats a supermajority in the chamber early in President Barack Obama’s first term, turned her into a political pariah and the butt of “Saturday Night Live” sketches. She’s worked quietly since to rebuild her brand, and operatives on both sides of the aisle say they see an improved campaigner with a competitive zeal that she lacked against Brown.

“This campaign has been a good campaign for Martha Coakley,” said William Weld, a former Republican governor who led the state in the 1990s and appointed Baker to senior positions. “She’s, in my opinion, definitely picked up her game in the last month.”

( POLITICO's 2014 race ratings)

But it may not be enough. Baker has led in recent polls — telephone surveys from the Boston Globe and Western New England College out on Friday showed the Republican up mid-single digits — and the race is expected to be close.

“There’s been a heavier burden for Martha to carry. Some Democrats still won’t forgive her for having lost Ted Kennedy’s seat. The media keeps reinforcing that,” said Phil Johnston, former chairman of the Massachusetts Democratic Party.

Yet Baker, too, is seeking to overcome a negative narrative and revive his reputation after losing to Patrick in 2010, a banner year for Republicans around the country. Democrats savaged Baker at the time as a wealthy, out-of-touch health insurance executive with thin skin.

“He was widely criticized last time for appearing to be without empathy for vulnerable people.” Johnston said.

Weld, Baker’s political mentor, said his protege can barely conceal how badly he wants to win and reverse that perception. He’s been campaigning in minority communities and closing the gap in Boston by appealing to moderate Democrats, hallmarks of previous victorious Republican campaigns.

“His closing ad all but says, ‘I want it; I want it; I want it,’” Weld said. “I think this race means more to Charlie personally than it does to [Coakley]. She’s had two terms in statewide office as the attorney general. She’s had a fair amount of glory. Charlie, he’s a page still waiting to be writ.”

For his part, Baker downplays significance of a second failed bid for the governorship.

“If we win, that’s a dream come true, an opportunity to do something I really want to do for the people of Massachusetts, who I have great affection for,” he said in a phone interview. “Massachusetts has been really good to me and my family. I want other people to have the same kind of opportunities I had.

And if he loses? “I’ve been there before,” he said. “I’ll get a job, and life goes on.”

Coakley’s camp didn’t respond to a request for comment.

Some political operatives see personality politics taking on outsize importance in this race, in part, because Massachusetts is largely insulated from the crises afflicting the nation. The overwhelmingly Democratic state has seen modest economic progress and largely approves of the job of Patrick, Obama and other elected leaders are doing. Unemployment is relatively low, and its Obamacare-style health care system predated the national health law and is still popular.

That’s led to a somewhat aimless governor’s race, with no single issue driving the debate and a heavy focus on each candidate’s resume and personality. In the last two debates, voters learned that Baker considers himself a “book nerd” and that Coakley can name the backup quarterback for the New England Patriots. She thinks Liam Neeson would play Baker in a movie, and both say they’d rather win the election than the Mega Millions jackpot.

Baker, who’s been accused of being wooden and numbers-driven, cried openly in the closing minutes of the last debate as he recounted the story of a fisherman he met who fell on hard times, a moment that got more attention than the substance of the debate. Democrats have since criticized Baker’s emotional outburst as contrived, noting that his exchange with the fisherman occurred in 2010, during his last run for office.

“I actually burst out laughing because I said, ‘This is just so over the top it’s beyond belief,’” Johnston said. “He metamorphosed into someone who cries like John Boehner.”

Steven Baddour, a former Democratic state senator who has worked closely with Coakley and Baker, said he’s surprised the candidates aren’t swinging even harder at each other, given the personal stakes.

“I think both of them have been extremely cautious in terms of not making mistakes, not sort of throwing it all out there,” said Baddour, now an attorney in Boston. “They’re being carefully guarded, carefully handled.”

But Mary Anne Marsh, a Democratic consultant, said the duo’s most recent debates showcased sharper exchanges and proof that the contest is likely to be a photo finish.

“These are two people who know this is it for them,” Marsh said. “They know they have to take some risks if they’re going to win. They don’t want to say, ‘I coulda; I shoulda; I woulda.”

Swift, the former Republican governor, said even if the candidates didn’t commit themselves to giving up elective politics if they lose, their political careers would probably be cooked.

“Whether fair or unfair, the public generally believes that if you’ve lost twice, you’re done,” she said. “Money follows that; support follows that. I think, realistically, … whichever one of them loses next Tuesday is likely out of electoral politics.”