By Joshua Molina

The city of Ventura has moved a step toward exploring new revenue to fund existing and new libraries.

The Ventura Library Advisory Commission made a request at Monday night’s City Council meeting.

Commission members and Ventura residents requested that the city find ways to fund libraries, including building a $6 million eastside branch library, which would cost about $714,000 a year to run.

“We have a number of people approaching the commission and asking for eastside services,” said Patrick Squires, Library Advisory Commission chairman.

Squires said, however, that the commission needs support and direction from the City Council.

“We have kind of hit a wall here,” Squires said. “Without a commitment from the city to move forward here, we’ve hit a roadblock.”

In addition, the E.P. Foster Library downtown needs a new heating and air-conditioning system, estimated to cost $1 million, and the Avenue Library will need more money from the city’s general fund next year.

After some haggling over wording, the council voted unanimously to direct the city staff to, among other things:

Study whether a council liaison should be appointed to interface with the commission, county leadership and library staff.

Decide whether libraries are considered by the council to be an important service.

Include a library stakeholder on any future committee exploring new revenue.

Consider allocating future revenue increases toward increased library services.

Much of the debate Monday night centered on whether a new library is needed in east Ventura.

Councilman Carl Morehouse wondered whether there’s a long-term need for a new library building. He said he doesn’t use the library anymore. He just uses his smartphone.

“The fact of the matter is: Who are we building a new facility for?” Morehouse asked. “There’s still a lot of unanswered questions for me. There’s things going on technologically. Who are we designing this for?”

Morehouse said young people don’t go to libraries because they “live and die” with their smartphones.

A speaker, Ventura resident Jeannette Sanchez, said technology and libraries go hand-in-hand.

“While many have questioned the fundamental need for libraries, one thing that remains constant about libraries is that they provide access for those who cannot afford to buy books, those who can’t afford to have computers, DVDs, or the Internet at home,” Sanchez said. “Libraries can provide that.”

Councilman Mike Tracy said libraries are important but not essential city programs.

“I don’t think it is an essential service or a core service,” Tracy said. “It is an important service. We could close another fire station so we can open a library, but I don’t think that will work.”

Correction: An earlier version of this story contained an error. The council agreed to explore new revenue for new and existing libraries.