Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

TUSCALOOSA, Ala. (AP) — Nick Saban’s coaching legacy extends well beyond the Southeastern Conference and national championships and NFL draft picks. It sometimes stretches all the way to the opposing sidelines, in fact.

No. 2 Alabama’s 64-year-old coach now has former underlings leading three SEC East schools and, coincidentally, the Crimson Tide’s semifinal opponent, No. 3 Michigan State. Another, Florida State’s Jimbo Fisher, won a national title in 2013.

Longtime Tide defensive coordinator Kirby Smart recently joined the club after taking over alma mater Georgia a day after the SEC championship game win over Florida and ex-Alabama offensive chief Jim McElwain.

“I think the growth you get from working at a place like Alabama and with a program under Nick Saban, it helps me immensely,” said Smart, who’s running Alabama’s defense through the playoffs. “A lot of people have said why not take a smaller school head job? I honestly feel my growth was better being in a large program, being around coach Saban and learning how to manage a lot of the tough situations you deal with in the media.”

Clearly there are benefits to working for the demanding Saban, beyond even the big salaries. Smart was making $1.5 million a year.

The same day he was introduced, South Carolina trotted out its new hire, former Saban assistant Will Muschamp. The two erstwhile defensive coordinators are each making more than $3 million annually.

Working for Saban clearly can pay off bigtime for his top assistants. McElwain was SEC coach of the year in his debut season at Florida, winning the East after returning to the league following a stint as Colorado State head coach. He was offensive coordinator of two Tide national championship teams.

Saban hired Muschamp away from Division II Valdosta State at LSU in 2001, and the ex-Florida coach is on his second stint as an SEC East head man. Muschamp was Auburn’s defensive coordinator last season, facing his former boss in the regular season finale.

“I wouldn’t be standing here if it weren’t for the opportunities he gave me a long time ago at LSU,” Muschamp said before the Iron Bowl.

Saban also hired Mark Dantonio at Michigan State, where the Spartans head man worked as his secondary coach from 1995-99. Now, the two will face off with a national championship shot on the line.

Saban, who has lavished praise on Dantonio’s performance leading that program, is careful not to take too much credit when asked if he takes pride when his assistants land head coaching jobs.

“I’m happy for them. I’m happy for their families,” Saban said. “I’m happy and have a tremendous amount of respect for the great job that they did for long time in helping our program be successful. One of the reasons they’ve worked is because of the goals and aspirations that they had, so you’re very, very proud for them that they now have an opportunity that they worked so hard for.”

Dallas Cowboys coach Jason Garrett worked under Saban for two seasons with the Miami Dolphins. Garrett likens working for a successful coach to learning under a top heart surgeon or a leader in any field.