DERRY, N.H. — On the eve of the final Republican presidential primary debate before Tuesday's vote, Marco Rubio’s campaign moved its Debate Countdown Rally from the cafeteria to the auditorium of Hood Middle School to accommodate a larger-than-expected crowd.

Before Rubio stepped on stage with his wife and four children, local community members took turns telling the crowd why they support Rubio. Some of these speakers have lived in Derry for more than 30 years. But some of the strongest support for Rubio came from the Florida millennials who traveled to follow the presidential hopeful around the Granite State.

His hour-long speech touched on topics he has addressed at past events: immigration reform, national security, his proposed repeal of Obamacare, and, of course, the American dream. While pumping up the crowd before the event started, Tim Scott, the U.S. senator from South Carolina and a recent Rubio endorser, cited Rubio’s ability to appeal to younger voters.

“He inspires a new generation of voters, but he does so by holding onto our conservative principles,” Scott said.

Rubio mentioned a recent poll of millennial Americans that asked whether they thought the American dream was alive or dead. “50 percent of millennials said they think it’s dead. That’s a disaster," he said. "If the future thinks that the American dream is dead, then we’re in trouble.”

In a contrast with the poll results, a group of students from the University of South Florida traveled to New Hampshire with their “Road to the White House” class to follow candidates during the primaries. David Thompson, a USF freshman studying political science with a minor in environmental studies, considers himself a Democrat but said he will likely vote for Rubio.

Thompson said he not only agrees with Rubio’s stance on certain issues, like environmental policy, but he sees himself in Rubio in many ways.

“Both my parents are teachers and immigrants from Jamaica, so I really like Rubio’s education policy and immigration policy,” Thompson said. “I identify with what he went through with Cuban parents because my parents came to the U.S. from Jamaica without jobs.”

Classmate Miranda Latima said she believes in Rubio’s immigration policy. “My uncle lives in the Philipines and it’s difficult for him to fly back and forth to visit. I like that Rubio’s immigration policy is secure yet easy for immigrants to enter the country.”

Latima said she likes Rubio’s efforts on behalf of veterans, especially since her late father was a veteran.

“Before my dad died three years ago, he was a vet receiving family benefits but they expired when I started high school," she said. "The benefits should have continued through college, since I know if my dad were alive he would’ve supported me past high school.”

As a Floridian, Thompson said he cares about consumerism issues in the state, citing Florida's sales tax. “Since he’s from Florida he understands that and he can take it the national level,” Thompson said.

Although both former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush and Rubio are running for the Republican presidential nomination, Thompson and Latima said they favor Rubio.

“Jeb Bush did a lot of good things for Florida, but he has no backbone against other strong leaders. I couldn’t see him standing up against someone like Vladmir Putin,” Latima said.

While Thompson said he would like the Republican candidates to talk more about minority issues, specifically police brutality, he said he believes in Rubio as the 2016 president.

“Rubio can stand up and represent what the people want,” Thompson said. “He has a mastery of the issues that no one else understands.”