Republican presidential candidate Carly Fiorina got into a heated exchange Friday morning with CNN’s Chris Cuomo after he tied her past criticism of Planned Parenthood to the recent shooting at a clinic in Colorado Springs that claimed three lives.

“Do you feel any sense of regret about how you characterized what was going on at Planned Parenthood after the attack in Colorado?” Mr. Cuomo asked the former Hewlett-Packard CEO, adding that shooter Robert Lewis Dear Jr. “seems as though he was influenced by some of the rhetoric that was coming out of you and others that painted a very ugly picture, an unfair one, about Planned Parenthood?”

“Oh, please, really, Chris?” Ms. Fiorina snapped, Newsbusters reported. “Look, what happened in Colorado — what happened in Colorado is a terrible thing. This guy is a deranged murderer and I hope he is put away for life. It may be that we should be classifying that as domestic terrorism as well. But that has nothing to do with the truth of what is going on in Planned Parenthood. And this is a typical left-wing tactic, to try and shut down the truth by silencing people. This has happened over and over and over again.

“I don’t recall anybody in the pro-life community celebrating this tragedy. I don’t recall any of that happening,” she added, accusing Mr. Cuomo of buying “the Planned Parenthood line, hook, line and sinker.”

“No, what I’m saying is,” Mr. Cuomo explained, “I’m asking you if you feel that coming out of Colorado, it gave you any new sense of the power of rhetoric and what it can do, especially when it’s playing on a sensitive issue like abortion. Because of what we just saw, as we agree, this deranged man who went out and killed in the name of saving the baby parts.”

Ms. Fiorina responded, “OK, so in other words, you would also accept that President Obama’s rhetoric might incite people when he is standing in the Philippines saying that anyone who opposes any of his policies — whether it’s the Iran deal or stopping Syrian refugees — when he says that some of us, like me, like other Republicans are as bad as the Iranian hard-liners shouting ‘Death to America!’ Or that we are as bad — we’re giving ISIS recruitment tools. You would say that that rhetoric is a problem as well?”

“I mean, it is unconscionable,” she continued, “to deride people who are conservative, their rhetoric, but not to acknowledge that the left uses incendiary rhetoric all the time. It is not objective to say that the left-wing does not try and shut down conversation that they don’t want to have by accusing people of inciting others. This has happened in election cycle after election cycle. Remember Sarah Palin? Sarah Palin was somehow responsible for the murder — the attack on Gabby Giffords. It turned out that wasn’t true either.”

Ms. Fiorina went on to say that she does not regret her past remarks against Planned Parenthood.

“I stand by the facts. And I think Planned Parenthood has done an excellent job of pulling the wool over lots of people’s eyes,” she said. “Do you not acknowledge that the left-wing uses incendiary rhetoric over and over and over again to silence messages that they don’t want to deal with? When Hillary Clinton stands on a debate stage and says the enemy she is most proud of are Republicans, does that help our political dialogue? I don’t think so.”

“I would agree with you,” Mr. Cuomo responded. “I think that what we have seen out of both parties is disgusting. I think it’s cheapened the process, I think it’s turned people off, and I think it’s fed an anger that now is almost out of control. And I think that the job of all of us is to try to bring the system back into conformity with what it was supposed to be about, which is people with different ideas going at it, not scaring people, not pushing people to violence.”

Ms. Fiorina said that’s where they both can agree.

“And so what I’m going to continue to do is talk about the facts, talk about the truth, talk about what’s really happening, and talk about real solutions to solve what is actually happening. That’s what I’m going to do,” she said.