Amid a fierce debate on the fate of Halifax Health’s CEO, the Rev. John T. Long didn’t hesitate to offer his opinion.

The Tubman-King Community Church pastor praised CEO Jeff Feasel’s leadership ability during a Feb. 2 public meeting of the Halifax Health Board of Commissioners.

He urged board members to “continue the course” despite a hefty $85 million settlement this past year with the Department of Justice to resolve allegations of Medicare fraud.

“Like others, I came prepared to condemn the decision-making process based on the sensationalized outcomes that I read about in the newspaper,” he said during a four-minute public comment. “But the more I listened, the more I learned. I’ve determined for myself the process was not flawed.”

Long described himself as a pastor, a citizen, an advocate and an “infrequent health care consumer.”

What he didn’t mention was that he was about to sign an agreement with the hospital that would pay him $60,000 plus expenses annually to become a community outreach consultant. It’s a new initiative that Halifax Health’s spokesman calls an effort “to get out there and educate people to make the right choices in health.”

During the meeting, then-Chairman John Johnson made a motion to fire Feasel, the CEO. About a half dozen community members joined Long in supporting Feasel in their remarks. Feasel narrowly escaped the ouster attempt by a single vote.

Long said he didn’t mention his pending agreement because it wasn’t signed until minutes after the meeting ended, and his remarks reflected his views on a community issue that he formed on his own.

“I wasn’t standing up there as someone representing Halifax,” Long said. “I was standing up there representing the community as pastor of Tubman-King and a resident of this community.”

Still, his financial connection to Halifax Health caught some board members by surprise.

“I wasn’t aware he was employed by the hospital,” Johnson said last week. He announced his resignation after the failed ouster attempt.

PREACHERS ON THE PAYROLL

Halifax Health is launching a new initiative to promote healthy living and spread the message of preventive health care by hiring two prominent preachers to perform outreach work.

“It’s really about finding the needs of our community and making sure we are catering to those needs,” said John Guthrie, the hospital’s director of corporate communications. “Sometimes, the best way to get to the community is through people who have a rich history and tradition of caring.”

The idea is to spread the gospel of good health by engaging well-respected community leaders to speak about healthy eating, exercise and preventive care, Guthrie said.

Hiring Long was a collaborative decision between the marketing department and the hospital’s senior management, he said.

Long will earn $60,000 this year to “assist in achieving strategic partnerships and initiatives,” according to an agreement The News-Journal obtained through a public records request.

It was drafted on Jan. 30 and signed after Long’s remarks at the Feb. 2 meeting, hospital officials said. Guthrie said the agreement had nothing to do with the reverend’s remarks and was instead all about taking the message of healthy living outside the walls of the hospital and into the community.

The agreement was signed on Feb. 2 for the sake of convenience because all parties were present at the meeting, and Long has not been paid yet, Guthrie said.

Long said he shaped his views during a series of town hall meetings held by the hospital last year. Despite the large settlement, hospital officials denied wrongdoing and gave their side in those meetings.

The whistleblower suit — filed in 2009 and settled last year — accused Halifax Health of illegally paying doctors and improperly billing Medicare.

Part of Long’s agreement requires him to remain “an active employed pastor with an established congregation” of at least five years in Volusia County.

Long said everyone in his congregation of about 250 knows of his business relationship with Halifax Health.

The agreement also bars him from contracting or working with any other health care provider without “written consent” from Halifax Health. Previously, Long worked as a “faith community liaison, ” a paid position, at for-profit hospice provider Vitas Healthcare, a competitor of Halifax Health.

Also, Halifax Health Hospice has hired the Rev. L. Ronald Durham, who is retiring as senior pastor of Greater Friendship Missionary Baptist Church on April 5. He will be paid $30 an hour.

Durham stepped down from his pastoral role at the church and has refrained from commenting at hospital meetings. His duties will include hosting radio and television shows on healthy living, along with speaking to community groups about end-of-life care.

Ethically, health care providers can pay consultants to promote healthy behavior or dispense advice, but they should disclose their financial relationship, said Marshall Kapp, a professor of medical ethics and health care law at Florida State University’s College of Medicine.

“You can’t eliminate conflict of interest,” Kapp said. “The way you annul it is through disclosure. The people being counseled ought to know of the interest the pastor has.”

In a March 6 press release sent to The News-Journal, Halifax Health officials said they had partnered with Long but did not disclose that he was a paid consultant.

Some Halifax Health board members question whether Long should have been more forthcoming and transparent about his remarks at the Feb. 2 meeting.

When Long addressed the board, Johnson had no idea of his financial interest in what was to be decided.

“When he was introduced to talk, I assumed he was a reverend at a local church,” Johnson said.

The board voted 4-3 to retain Feasel.

Two board members — Dan Francati, who voted in favor of retaining Feasel, and Karen Jans, who cast a dissenting vote — also said they were not aware of Long’s financial relationship with the hospital.

“I would hope anyone having any possible relationships of a business nature with the hospital would announce that and be forthcoming,” Jans said.

Hospital board member Glenn Ritchey, a supporter of Feasel, said he wasn’t aware of the status of the hospital’s negotiations with Long, but he has known him for several years and respects him. Typically, the board is not involved in the hiring of rank-and-file employees, Ritchey said.

“My observation of him has been nothing but the best,” said Ritchey, former mayor of Daytona Beach. “He has a sincere devotion to this community. I am certainly happy that he is aboard.”

IMPROVING MIDTOWN’S HEALTH

Both Long and Durham are active in Daytona Beach’s largely African-American Midtown community.

The 32114 zip code that includes Midtown has been identified by the Florida Department of Health in Volusia County as having disproportionate rates of chronic disease compared with other parts of the county.

Long has been active in working on health issues in the neighborhood, serving as a member of the Minority AIDS Network, among other causes.

Durham said he joined Halifax Health’s hospice organization in November on a part-time basis and will transition to full time after his retirement.

Halifax Health’s initiative will help improve the community’s health, he said.

“The Lord just sent this position to me,” Durham said. “It’s furthering my mission as a minister in so many ways. It keeps my primary focus on helping people in our city and region.”

That zip code had the highest number of people signing up for subsidized health insurance made available by the Affordable Care Act, commonly referred to as Obamacare, in Daytona Beach and one of the highest numbers of any zip code in Volusia County.

As of Jan. 15, 1,574 residents of the 32114 zip code had selected a plan, according to data from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.

“The Affordable Care Act is putting insurance in people’s hands who haven’t had it before,” Guthrie said. “We need to educate them on how to use insurance effectively.”

Halifax Health has taken other steps to reach the Midtown community, inking an agreement with Bethune-Cookman University to collaborate on wellness initiatives.

Johnnie Ponder, a resident of the Midtown community, said she appreciates that Halifax Health has taken an interest in the health of her neighborhood.

“A lot of African-Americans don’t know about hospice and the benefits it has,” said Ponder, chair of the Midtown Health Equity Action Team. “That’s a good thing to bring out to the community. Halifax Health has been positive with us. They are trying, and that’s a good thing.”