NEW HAVEN >> The city Health Department, and Hill Health Center have kicked off a partnership with Access Health CT to promote the “Because I Got Covered…” campaign to help residents enroll in health care coverage, officials said in a release.

The “Because I Got Covered…” campaign is a “targeted effort in the 14 cities across Connecticut that have the highest rates of uninsured residents,” the release said.

By mid-February, 121,983 people had signed up for health insurance through Access with 50,665, or some 41.5 percent, enrolled in private insurance plans and the rest in Medicaid. This puts Connecticut far ahead of where it projected it would be at this time.

The New Haven Health Department mission is to “advocate for and ensure the health and well-being of all New Haven residents,” the release said. “Providing residents with access to health insurance through the Access Health CT Navigator program helps them to meet that mission.”

Advertisement

See a list of enrollment events here.

“Healthcare coverage is something I encourage all New Haven residents to consider – made so much easier now by the Affordable Care Act – because it not only helps residents stay prepared for medical emergencies, it promotes better overall health through preventative care and early diagnoses of problems,” Mayor Toni N. Harp said, also in the release. “Healthier residents, by definition, also place a reduced burden on our local healthcare delivery system, reducing the overall cost of healthcare in our city.”

The city Health Department is one of six Navigator organizations in Connecticut, and more than 160 health, community and faith-based organizations across Connecticut that partnered with Access Health CT through the Navigator and Assister Outreach Program, the release said.

Paul Kowalski, acting director of the New Haven Health Department, said, “With the support of our community partners and Assisters, we are hosting enrollment fairs in New Haven County nearly every day through the end of Open Enrollment on March 31st. There are many opportunities for individuals who need insurance to enroll right in their community, where they live, work, go to school and where they pray. ”

A list of in-person assisters is available online at http://www.accesshealthct.com/ and clicking on the “Get Help” tab.

For a list of events and Assisters in this region, contact Elizabeth Hilton at (203) 533-2610 or visit http://ahctcommunity.org/news-and-events/events/

Open enrollment continues until March 31.