Two new Funding Opportunity Announcements from the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) will support projects using social media to support engagement and retention in HIV care. Issued through the Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program’s Special Projects of National Significance, the FOAs seek applications for demonstration sites as well as an evaluation and technical assistance center to support the demonstration sites. A brief synopsis of each FOA is provided below. Applications are due April 3, 2015. Pre-application technical assistance webinars will be offered next week. Access the FOAs and information on the webinars.

Use of Social Media to Improve Engagement, Retention, and Health Outcomes along the HIV Care Continuum – Demonstration Sites (HRSA-15-0290)

The purpose is to support up to 10 organizations that will implement, evaluate, and disseminate findings from innovative methods for identifying, linking, retaining, and improving health outcomes for HIV-infected underserved, underinsured, hard-to-reach youth and young adults in HIV primary care and supportive services through the use of social media. These methods are expected to include innovative system approaches using a variety of social media technologies or any other internet or mobile based applications, in the engagement and retention in care and viral load suppression of youth and young adults living with HIV.

Use of Social Media to Improve Engagement, Retention, and Health Outcomes along the HIV Care Continuum – Evaluation and Technical Assistance Center (HRSA-15-031)

This cooperative agreement will be awarded to one Evaluation and Technical Assistance Center (ETAC) to lead a multi-site evaluation and provide technical assistance to a cohort of up to 10 demonstration sites. The ETAC will be expected to fulfill three important goals for this SPNS initiative: conduct a rigorous multi-site evaluation of the processes and outcomes of all project sites’ methods; provide technical assistance to the demonstration projects in the refinement, implementation, and evaluation of their interventions; and lead and coordinate the efforts for the analysis of findings and the development of publications and other dissemination activities leading to broader replication by other health care providers serving the target population.