Photo

WASHINGTON — With the 2014 political landscape becoming more defined, it is increasingly likely that the midterm elections in November will maintain divided government in the capital for the final two years of President Obama’s second term, with the chief unknown being exactly how divided it will be.

A review of competitive congressional contests suggests that, at the moment, Republicans will hold on to the House, though Democrats could defy midterm history and gain a few seats. Senate Democrats, at the same time, are defending unfavorable terrain and will almost certainly see their majority narrowed. They are at risk of losing it altogether, an outcome that would leave Capitol Hill entirely in Republican control for the conclusion of Mr. Obama’s presidency.

“Democrats are going to lose seats, there is no question about that,” said Jennifer Duffy, who follows Senate races for the nonpartisan Cook Political Report.

Hoping to offset losses and make it more difficult for Republicans to net the six seats that would hand them the majority, Senate Democrats are taking aim at Republican-held seats in Georgia, an open contest, and Kentucky, where they hope to defeat Senator Mitch McConnell, the Republican leader and 30-year Senate veteran who has seen his popularity dip back home.

They are also hoping that Republicans, who are engaged in a continuing internal struggle over ideology, will end a series of bitter primaries by nominating far-right candidates who could be defeated in general elections even in Republican-leaning states, a phenomenon that cost Republicans in 2010 and 2012. Both parties will have to defend against an electorate sour on Washington’s dysfunction as neither seems to be benefiting much from an improving economy.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

House and Senate Republicans are coalescing around the new health care law as their chief issue and plan to frame problems with the implementation of the law — and the individual stories of those adversely affected — to paint Mr. Obama and the Democrats as incompetent administrators of an overreaching expansion of government.

“Obamacare, Obamacare, Obamacare,” said Andrea Bozek, communications director for the National Republican Congressional Committee. “It is going to be an issue in every single congressional race.”