Buy Photo Tom Bouziotis, founder of Total Care Physical Therapy, P.C., works with patient Andrew Stulack of Manville while physical therapist Kristin Wishnow, right, treats James Barry of Hillsborough, Wednesday, February 11, 2015, in Hillsborough, NJ. Jason Towlen/Staff Photographer (Photo: Jason Towlen/Staff Photographer)Buy Photo Story Highlights Total Care Physical Therapy in Hillsborough treats patients of all ages with state of the art equipment in a 2300 square foot space.

"We are very hands on, more personal and spend a lot of time with the patient," owner Tom Bouziotis said.

"If you start with a physical therapist, it should be start to finish with the same person, so there's a consistency," Bouziotis said.

Aching back? Recovering from knee surgery? Rotator cuff problems? Tom Bouziotis wants to help. Bouziotis was working as a semiconductor process engineer when he found out he had a congenital back problem that needed to be corrected with extensive surgery and physical therapy.

"I went through a lot and had intense physical therapy for a number of years," said Bouziotis. "Physical therapy helped me so much that it made an impact on me about how valuable physical therapy could be." As a result, he decided to change fields and go back to school to become a physical therapist. He enrolled in Columbia University's master of science in physical therapy and for the last 12 years he has been working as a physical therapist in Hillsborough.

In April of 2013, he opened his own practice, Total Care Physical Therapy, P.C. on 719 Route 206 South, Suite 104, in Hillsborough. "It was my dream to start my own practice and run it the way I felt was best." He said he runs his practice in a very personal way, getting to know each client and trying to understand their needs and goals before developing a treatment protocol.

"I take pride in the way we are different from many other practices." He explained, "Many others are corporate owned or owned by doctors who have it run by an outside company. They run it like a company and are always looking at the bottom line. We are very hands on, more personal and spend a lot of time with the patient."

Both of his parents also chip in at the practice, greeting clients and generally trying to create a welcoming atmosphere. "We never considered going to another physical therapist," said Andrew Rich, whose son, Kyle Rich, and wife, Cheryl Rich, go to Total Care. "We were very happy with they way he has taken care of my son, so my wife, who just had rotator cuff surgery, went to him too. Tom is very hands on, and he explains everything in terms you can understand."

Kyle Rich, 14, said he had been going there for six months. "I had an elbow, pitching injury, and I was going there three times a week, but now I am down to once a week. It seems like home there. Everyone is so nice, him, his parents, it's amazing." Rich said he never felt rushed, and that Bouziotis had even attended a couple of his baseball games.

Total Care Physical Therapy treats patients of all ages with state of the art equipment and has a large, 2,300-square-foot space. "It's big place and well equipped. We have the latest equipment and are always looking at new pieces of equipment and techniques," said Bouziotis. They treat shoulder, knee, and spinal injuries and do post surgery therapy. Bouziotis said they also treat sports injuries and muscle traumas, TMJ disorders, neck conditions, foot and ankle, disorders, hand therapy and vestibular disorders.

Bouziotis has another physical therapist who works there part time as well. "We keep it consistent though. We don't want a patient shuffled around, treated by various people each time. If you start with a physical therapist, it should be start to finish with the same person, so there's a consistency of treatment."

Kathleen Kaminski, of Hillsborough, said, "I have been going there for eight months. Tom originally treated me a few years ago, so when I needed him again, I followed him to his new practice. The atmosphere is just so welcoming. Physical therapy isn't something you look forward to, but with them, just being there makes you feel better. Tom, his parents, and everyone who works there are so sweet and kind and thorough, that you really feel you are taken care of."

Buy Photo Physical therapist Kristin Wishnow, right, treats James Barry of Hillsborough, Wednesday, February 11, 2015, at Total Care Physical Therapy, P.C. in Hillsborough, NJ. In the background is patient Fran Wierzbinski of Belle Mead. Jason Towlen/Staff Photographer (Photo: Jason Towlen/Staff Photographer)

Jennifer Baker, also of Hillsborough, agreed. "I was referred there by my chiropractor, and I almost feel like they are like my family. When you go so many times a week you get to know everyone, and it really makes a difference to have such a welcoming atmosphere, and such a good physical therapist. He's helped me so much."

Bouziotis said, "We try to have an inviting, friendly atmosphere and joke around with our patients. I know first hand how difficult it can be to recover from surgery or an injury, and we give the best care we can and try to keep it fun and friendly."

At a glance

Total Care Physical Therapy is at 719 Route 206, Suite 104, Hillsborough, NJ.

For more information, check: http://www.totalcarept.net/ or call 908-262-7404

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1EGXQYQ