TELEVISION Donald Trump Fired By NBC, Read The Statement 11 months ago comments By Nick Venable 11 months ago



Here is how

At NBC, respect and dignity for all people are cornerstones of our values. Due to the recent derogatory statements by Donald Trump regarding immigrants, NBCUniversal is ending its business relationship with Mr. Trump. To that end, the annual Miss USA and Miss Universe Pageants, which are part of a joint venture between NBC and Trump, will no longer air on NBC . In addition, as Mr. Trump has already indicated, he will not be participating in The Celebrity Apprentice on NBC.

The first signs of the fissure happened when NBC started thinking about how to handle Trump’s position as the host of



Another big blow came last week when Univision, the most popular Spanish language network in the U.S.,



In his speech, Trump took shots at China and Mexico for their immigrants stealing jobs in America, and made some derogatory comments about the Mexicans that cross the border being criminals and rapists – comments he later attempted to reword – and promised that he would build a wall between the two countries if he became president. These thoughts were definitely not universally approved of, especially not by the media giant with Universal in its name.



You can watch a chunk of his inflammatory speech below.







Remember a few years ago when Trump

Tweet Subscribe To Topics You're Interested In When billionaire and TV mainstay Donald Trump first announced he was going to run for president earlier this month, his words were met with differing levels of disgust and joy, particularly since he had some pretty harsh things to say about immigrants and Obamacare. But while Trump’s TV partner NBCUniversal stayed quiet in the days immediately following that speech, more recent troubles have forced its execs’ hands, and the company is now severing all ties with the business mogul. It remains to be seen how far-reaching this decision will be.Here is how NBC explained their motivations through a press statement.The first signs of the fissure happened when NBC started thinking about how to handle Trump’s position as the host of Celebrity Apprentice , a gig he wouldn’t be able to continue if his run for the presidency actually lasts. But it looks like he won’t have a home there anymore, no matter what happens with his political dreamscapes. I’m sure most of you were just picturing Trump saying “You’re fiyahed,” into a mirror over and over, or was that just me?Another big blow came last week when Univision, the most popular Spanish language network in the U.S., pulled out of airing this year’s Miss USA pageant. Now the event will have to find a brand new home altogether without NBC able to air it, assuming it's still going to happen. I’m sure other networks will jump at the chance to bring the two contests to viewers.In his speech, Trump took shots at China and Mexico for their immigrants stealing jobs in America, and made some derogatory comments about the Mexicans that cross the border being criminals and rapists – comments he later attempted to reword – and promised that he would build a wall between the two countries if he became president. These thoughts were definitely not universally approved of, especially not by the media giant with Universal in its name.You can watch a chunk of his inflammatory speech below.Remember a few years ago when Trump chose not to run for president, and his career didn’t change? I wonder if he’ll be thinking of those days fondly, or if he’ll be getting even more fired up in the weeks to come. Expect The Daily Show to have a few words about it. Blended From Around The Web Comments Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus. blog comments powered by Disqus Back to top