Thousands of New Hampshire residents could end up owing money when they file their tax returns this year, as the first penalties under the Affordable Care Act kick in.And it could be a lot more than they expect...First: If you and the rest of your household get health insurance through an employer, or a government program such as Medicare or Medicaid, you'll simply check a box - it's line 61 on Form 1040 - and you're all set.But if you don't, there's a lot you'll need to know. To start with, those who don't have health insurance will have to pay a penalty - what the IRS calls a "shared responsibility payment" (SRP). And it could run into hundreds of dollars.The SRP is assessed for each member of the household who was uninsured for more than three months in 2014. The amount is either $95 per uninsured adult plus $47.50 per uninsured child in the household (up to a maximum of $285), or 1 percent of your taxable income - whichever is greater...Meanwhile, those who bought coverage through the federal Marketplace and got subsidies to help pay for it - the IRS calls those "premium tax credits" - might discover they have to pay some of that money back if they underestimated their income when they signed up for a plan...It's complicated. So complicated, in fact, that IRS spokesman Mark Hanson suggested this might be a good year to get some help filing your taxes if you're affected by the ACA changes."We're really encouraging taxpayers to consider using software or going to a professional, either volunteer or paid, to help them navigate the provisions of the Affordable Care Act," Hanson said...If folks are going to try to prepare and file their own returns, he said, "It might be a good idea to have sort of a head start, so that they're not caught by surprise."According to the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS), 40,262 New Hampshire residents bought a health insurance plan through the federally run Marketplace in 2014. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services reports that 88 percent chose plans with tax credits...Marie McKay is a partner with Bigelow & Company CPA in Manchester. She's bracing for confusion, even anger, among some clients.Anyone who received an advance tax credit from the government to offset the cost of those monthly premiums will receive a new form, 1095-A; those must be sent out by Feb. 2 to anyone covered through the Marketplace.But, McKay said, "What they may not have understood is that is subject to reconciliation when they file their actual tax return," she said. "If they made more money for whatever reason, they may be surprised to see they're going to have to pay some of that back..."We've done a few calculations, and it can be more than you would expect."McKay said her company has asked clients to send some of their documents ahead of time, "so we can give them a sense if they're going to owe some money, so it's not a surprise."..Joseph O'Connor, CPA, is a principal at Melanson Heath & Co. in Manchester. He expects the phones will start ringing "as people start to navigate the forms."The instructions for Form 8962, where you report those premium tax credits, are 15 pages long, he said. "I've looked at the forms. I can make my way through them, but that's what I do for a living," he said. "I would imagine it would be difficult for somebody who doesn't do this every day."Rick Fortin, an enrolled agent at an H&R Block office in Manchester, said agents spent hours in classes last fall getting up to speed on the new requirements. His office also warned clients last year that the penalties would kick in if they didn't get insurance in 2014. "So those people are not surprised," he said.However, he said, the size of the penalty has surprised some...Fortin is expecting the phone calls to start once people begin receiving their 1095-A forms in another week or so. That's when those who received advance tax credits find out whether they accurately predicted their income when they signed up for a plan...Fortin also thinks he might be seeing some new faces this year. "I think we're going to have clients who may have done their taxes on their own in the past who just get totally confused by all of the questions."..Ken Wolfe thinks that's a "shame."Wolfe, a principal with Nathan Wechsler & Company in Concord, makes a living helping individuals and business owners with their taxes. But he bemoans the increasing complexity of the tax system that he says began with President Ronald Reagan's tax reform plan in 1986."And I've told people ever since then I thought one of the biggest shames of that would be that most people would be unable to do their own tax returns."..So couldn't someone just check that little box that says you already have health insurance, and get away with it?Perhaps in the short term, but experts advise against it."As with any item on your federal income tax return, it's probably in your best interest to be able to substantiate anything that you're claiming or not claiming," said Hanson from the IRS...In the future, taxpayers with employer-sponsored plans will be getting yet another form, 1095-B, from insurers that proves they have the required coverage. The IRS made that reporting voluntary for this year...Meanwhile, there's a key deadline looming. You only have until Feb. 15 to sign up for coverage for 2015. If you don't, those "shared responsibility payments" will increase to 2 percent of taxable income in 2015 and 2.5 percent in 2016...H&R Block estimates an uninsured couple with one child making $30,000 will pay $238 in SRP for 2014; the same family would pay $813 in 2015. And in 2016, if they still don't have coverage, it will rise to $1,738...Fortin is helping his clients to plan ahead. Whether they are covered or not, he said, "We're actually calculating what their penalty would be next year if they didn't have insurance."O'Connor said it might make financial sense for some who will pay the penalty this year to buy health insurance for 2015. But he warned, "There's very little time left. If you think it's going to be bad this year, wait till next year."..Fortin said he does hear some people say it's still cheaper to pay the penalty than to buy insurance."And the other thing that we're hearing is it kind of goes against the grain of anybody who lives in a state where the motto is 'live free or die,'?" he said. "I have one client that was arguing with me: This is unconstitutional; they can't force me to buy insurance."But they're not forcing you," he said. "You can opt not to take the insurance - and pay the penalty."..O'Connor said it won't be impossible to do your taxes yourself this year. "It can be done, but you just have to have patience, and be able to navigate through the instructions and try not to be overwhelmed by them," he said. "It's just going to take some time."..To find out about free tax-filing software available from the Internal Revenue Service's Free File program, and locations where you can get free help preparing your taxes, visit irs.gov...