Monday is back and with it, another great episode of The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon! Jimmy Fallon’s first guest of the evening was the extremely humorous comedian, Zach Galifianakis, who is starring in Birdman or (The Unexpected Virtue of Ignorance). Zach and Jimmy Fallon were in a LOL skit called Excuses. His second guest was the beautiful and talented actress, Casey Wilson, from Marry Me. Comedian Andrew Orvedahl was his third guest.

Jimmy Fallon, the Tonight Show host, began the night with his monologue. He warmly welcomed his audience, who gave him a standing ovation, then he joked about people, events, and other items in the news. Some of his jokes included these:

“President Obama played his 200th round of golf yesterday. Democrats said ‘You know what — he can do whatever he wants as long as he doesn’t campaign for us.'”

Fallon joked about ObamaCare and also said that “A new poll has found that 58 percent of millennials would vote for Hillary Clinton for president, unless Urkel decided to run. My vice president — a Power Ranger.”

Then, Fallon said “Last weekend, Mike Huckabee threatened to quit the GOP if the Republicans gave up the fight for gay marriage. I meant, he said he would play for the other team. Er, switch sides.”

“New Yorkers are the most generous of tippers,” Jimmy Fallon went on. “Last week, I met an actress who dreamed of being a waitress.”

“Runners in Kenya came in first, second and third in the Chicago marathon. It was the same guy lapping everybody,” he continued.

“Finally,” Jimmy Fallon quipped, “a new study says that kids who are born heavier are better in school. Or, as bullies call it,’The Perfect Storm.'”

“Tomorrow night, Emma Stone and I will play Box of Lies. Sting, Miley Cyrus and Brad Pitt will be here later this week. But tonight, Zach Galifianakis is here! He does a great job as a dramatic actor in Birdman or (The Unexpected Virtue of Ignorance). From Marry Me, actress Casey Wilson is here, and comedian Andrew Orvedahl,” Fallon said.

Then, Fallon did his Good News & Good News comedy bit. “There’s a 100 percent chance of puppy love today,” was one of the things news commentators said. They were all actual news broadcasters saying only good news items.

When the Tonight Show returned from a break, Jimmy Fallon talked about everybody “being so busy lately.” He showed as an example, the Excuses skit with Zach. Zach told him “I have to take my goldfish to a doctor. A shrink.” They both kept making up crazy excuses as to why they could not get together and do something together.

“We’ll be right back with Zach Galifianakis, everybody!” Jimmy Fallon said, and the Tonight Show went to another commercial break.

When the show came back on, Jimmy Fallon welcomed his first guest, Zach Galifianakis, who stars opposite Michael Keaton in Birdman.

“It’s great to see you. I want to say congratulations — you had a baby since the last time I saw you. What has it been, a year? Is it a boy or a girl?”

“We don’t know yet. We haven’t named it. It has a number — one.” Zach said.”

“What is your kid’s name?”

“His name is Sheila. His nickname is One. Kids crave discipline — prenatal spanking is important. Two birds with one stone,” Zach said.

“I have to say congratulations on Birdman. I saw you on the Red Carpet.”

“I live for the Red Carpet,” Zach said. “Someone there asked me if I had lost weight. I said ‘Yes — I’m dying.'”

They talked about the movie, Birdman, and how some of the shots were long, like maybe 15 minutes long. Fallon said “That’s why I no longer want to act. If you screw up, that’s 15 minutes gone.”

“This movie was shot in 30 days. Most movies are shot in four months. That’s why this movie is my favorite ever,” Zach said.

Zach then explained to Fallon the sort of character that Keaton plays, and how we get “to see this weird breakdown that is playing inside of his head.”

Edward Norton is another actor in Birdman. Zach complimented his acting, also. Then, Jimmy Fallon showed a clip from Birdman. It looked pretty cool — Zach was quite dramatic in the video.

“Casey Wilson joins us next!” Jimmy Fallon said, and the Tonight Show went to another commercial break.

Fallon introduced Casey after the break and showed a clip from Marry Me before Casey came out. She had insulted the guy’s mother, who was about to propose to her, calling her the “b” word. His mother and other family members were hiding and heard every word that she said.

Casey and Fallon talked about the fact that she had actually gotten married not too long ago. “The wedding went smoothly?”

“Smooth-ish. I fell very hard on the dance room floor. I was kinda drunk. The next day, my husband had to wheel me around in a wheelchair. You are a hundred, immediately.”

“There was another famous couple getting married the same weekend,” Fallon said.

“Yes, Kimye, however you want to say it,” she said. Kim Kardashian and Kanye West had gotten married the same weekend that she and her husband had.

She had made up key chains and other interesting items and told Fallon about a self-portrait her father had made, that clues at Christmas led her to “at the end of a rainbow.” She had brought the painting with her, or a copy of it. She told Fallon her dad said that he “‘used a coupon for $1,00 off.'” It looked nice, but not $1,000 nice.

Fallon then introduced his third guest of the Tonight Show, comedian Andrew Orvedahl. “I have been travelling so much I missed my daughter’s pre-school graduation. It’s not a real thing. Nobody’s held back. When they graduate, they are still super-dumb,” he joked.

“I got divorced last year. There’s a weird phenomena where sometimes I forget and think ‘I lost my wedding ring somewhere.’ I did, in a conversation somewhere.”

Continuing, Andrew said “I have bought some ice cube trays. The cashier asked me if I wanted to know a secret for how to get my kids to drink more water. She said ‘Make Kool-Aid ice cubes and put it in their water.’ That’s like saying ‘You have a hard time getting your kids to eat vegetables? Sprinkle some M&Ms over them.'”

He said he bought a flask recently. He joked about how cool it was and how his friends asked for it to be passed around. But, if he had brought a fifth of Jack Daniels with him, people would probably say’What’s wrong with you? Get it together, you hobo!'”

Watching The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon on a Monday night always helps ease the transition back to the work week and make it a bit easier. He had a terrific show this Monday, with the hilarious comedian Zach Galifianakis, the actress and comedian, Casey Wilson from Marry Me, and the comedian Andrew Orvedahl as his guests. Be sure to catch tomorrow’s episode of the Tonight Show and check back here to read the recap!

Written By Douglas Cobb

Sources:

NBC Universal Media Village

IMDb (Zach Galifianakis)

Share this: Print

LinkedIn

Pinterest

Pocket

Reddit

Email

Twitter

Google

Facebook

Tumblr