Colorado State Patrol, Weld County sheriff's deputies, Longmont police and Mountain View Fire Rescue personnel work the scene of a fatal crash Saturday near Weld County Road 1 and Colorado 66. ( Matthew Jonas, Times-Call )

Cadet Thyfault

The man accused of fatally striking a Colorado State Patrol cadet with his vehicle Saturday told police that the crash was not his fault due to his vehicle malfunctioning, according to an arrest affidavit from the Longmont Police Department.

Christopher Lee Gebers, 27, was arrested Saturday after leading police on a high-speed chase down Colorado 66 that ended in the death of 21-year-old State Patrol Cadet Taylor Thyfault.

Clinton Rushing, a 37-year-old trooper, was also struck and critically injured.

The incident happened when Thyfault and Rushing were assisting with a separate crash around 7:45 a.m. near Colorado 66 near County Line Road, just northeast of Longmont.

Trooper Rushing

Then, shortly after 8 a.m., a Honda, driven by Gebers, sped west along Colorado 66 toward the earlier accident.

Rushing was trying to deploy "stop sticks" to puncture the Honda's tires while Thyfault was watching out for the accident victims and emergency workers.

The Honda hit Rushing first and then went into a drift. That's when it hit Thyfault, who was still standing in the road. The Honda landed in a field, facing the opposite direction it had been heading.

Gebers was treated and released from Longmont United Hospital and then taken to the Boulder County Jail. He was being held Saturday for investigation of first-degree murder with extreme indifference, attempted first-degree murder with extreme indifference, vehicular assault, vehicular homicide, reckless endangerment, reckless driving, eluding a police officer, driving vehicle while license canceled/denied and illegal use of blue lights, Longmont Police said.

Advertisement

According to the affidavit, witnesses on scene heard Gebers "complain it was not his fault because his emergency brake locked up and his accelerator stuck."

The affidavit also said Gebers told this to police.

The affidavit said that Gebers' criminal history includes 16 entries with an extensive history for drug violations and numerous weapon offenses. His driver's license had been cancelled.

Gebers is expected to have a first court appearance at Boulder County Jail at 2 p.m. Tuesday.

Elizabeth Hernandez: 303-954-1223, ehernandez@denverpost.com or twitter.com/ehernandez