IT'S not every day that an old-school magazine makes a splash by interviewing an ageing character actor. But Playboy seemed to know exactly what it had on its hands when Gary Oldman unleashed a sweeping, unguarded commentary on everything from marriage and sobriety to Mel Gibson and, er, the Jews.

It takes a special kind of skill at interviewing to guide a celebrity on a publicity tour toward statements like “we’re up shit creek without a paddle or a compass”—and then to nudge him into detailing exactly why, and how, and who is to blame.

In the ensuing avalanche of disregard, Mr Oldman critiques helicopter parents, reality television and a high-school coach who talked two students into going undercover to bust a pot deal. He slams Hollywood and the media for manufacturing superficially uncontrollable “little monsters” like Miley Cyrus.

Woven in between thoughtful reflections on life, art and his work, Mr Oldman’s pointed attacks leave few of America’s sacred cows left standing. But, in a kind of poetic irony, it was his choice of whom to defend that made his interview go viral. Specifically, he weighed in on the way Mel Gibson has become a cultural villain in recent years, explaining, “he’s actually bitten the hand that I guess has fed him,” in “a town that’s run by Jews,” no less.

The remarks promptly incurred the wrath not only of the internet’s values police but the Anti-Defamation League, whose rejection of Oldman’s subsequent apology letter touched off a bona fide PR problem. On Jimmy Kimmel’s late night show, Oldman caved completely, visibly weary and defeated. “I am profoundly, profoundly sorry and deeply apologetic,” he sighed. “I’m a public figure. I should be an example and an inspiration, and I’m an A-hole.”

For many, that’s poetic justice, and exactly the kind of public smackdown a successful white man deserves for giving aid and comfort to someone like Mr Gibson.

What’s being lost in the outrage, however, is perhaps more significant. It is plain from the very outset of his interview that Mr Oldman’s ill-considered remarks are fuelled by a potent, all-encompassing frustration—a near-despair over America’s cultural and political institutions. He sees a world rotten with corruption, hypocrisy and vanity, one that celebrates its pathologies rather than face up to them. Political correctness, for Mr Oldman, is merely a symptom of the disease. So he drops an f-bomb on the Pope (“Oh, fuck the pope! [laughs and puts head in hands] So this interview has gone very badly"), he doubts that stable love and lasting marriage can survive modern life, and he cries out for “real leadership,” though “it’s nowhere in sight.”

Most important of all, Mr Oldman puts no faith in either of America’s prevailing ideological camps, whose comprehensive doctrines are the last refuge for many angry and fearful folk. “I’m probably a libertarian,” he guesses, “if I had to put myself in any category. But you don’t come out and talk about these things, for obvious reasons.”

There’s more to that caveat than a guilty conscience. What’s truly scandalous about Mr Oldman’s worldview is his unflinching claim that the American social order is built on an interconnected system of frauds. This idea is ultimately too big of a challenge for most people to process, much less accept. And Mr Oldman’s diatribe did not exactly suggest a way forward. But his views reflect the gut instinct of a growing number of independent voters, as well as the Rand Paul and Elizabeth Warren wings of the Republican and Democratic parties. Rather than a fox in the cultural henhouse, perhaps Mr Oldman can be seen as a canary in the coal mine.