Earlier this week, two decisions were released in recent court challenges to the Affordable Care Act. At issue in both cases is the legality of the health insurance premium tax credits that are being provided to individuals who need financial assistance to purchase a plan in the health insurance exchanges.

Right now, the tax credits are being provided for everyone who qualifies, regardless of whether they are purchasing from a state-based exchange or the exchange established by the federal government. The challengers in these cases ascertain the Affordable Care Act only intended to provide these subsidies for exchanges established by the states. The Obama administration argues that Congress intended for individuals in every state, regardless of the type of exchange, to have access to needed financial assistance.

These legal challenges are important because only 14 states have established their own health insurance exchange. If the tax credits were restricted, people in 36 states could lose access to their health insurance.

[MORE: Cartoons on Obamacare]

The two decisions were released on the same day. In the first, Halbig v. Burwell, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia found that the tax credits were not legal for insurance purchased in the federal exchange. In the second case released that day, King v. Burwell, the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals in Richmond, Virginia, found the opposite to be true and upheld the administration’s position. Earlier decisions by lower courts in the Halbig case also found in favor of the tax credits for the federal exchange.

Parties in both cases have various options for proceeding, and there are also additional challenges making their way through courts in other states. In the meantime, nothing will change, and the health insurance premium tax credits will continue to be administered as they are now.

When the Halbig v. Burwell decision was released, opponents of the Affordable Care Act wasted no time in declaring victory. Indeed, according to Politico, Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, said the following in a statement: ““The D.C. Circuit’s decision today in Halbig v. Burwell is a repudiation of Obamacare and all the lawlessness that has come with it.” He further went on to say, “This is a significant victory for the American people and the rule of law, but we must not rest.” The King v. Burwell decision, of course, received praise from the health law’s supporters, although the reaction was a bit more muted. However, if the conflicting decisions tell us anything, it’s that the issue is far from clear cut, and it’s too soon for either side to declare victory.

Shortly after passage of the Affordable Care Act, legal challenges arose to another one of the law’s essential components, the individual mandate to buy health insurance. Challenges were filed in multiple states, and several conflicting decisions were issued before the case finally made its way to the Supreme Court, where the mandate was upheld. Much like in the challenge to the premium tax credits, opponents and supporters of the Affordable Care Act alike seized upon the earlier court decisions as a sign of certain victory. Of course, as it turned out, some of them were wrong. There are numerous scenarios for how these latest legal challenges could proceed, but if the past is any indication, we’ll have to wait for a while before we know how the Affordable Care Act is affected.