Buy Photo Patricia Bean, left, owner of Bean Cruises and Travel, works with customer Ernestine Hymes-Swan of Rochester. Bean is chafing under the costs of her high-deductible health insurance plan. (Photo: SHAWN DOWD/@sdowdphoto/STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER)Buy Photo

For Patricia Bean, who owns a travel agency in Rochester, health care has become, to some degree, a frustrating confrontation with deductibles.

In insurance-speak, a deductible is the amount an insured person must pay before his or her insurance plan is activated.

It has become the coin of the realm in health insurance, as cost-stressed employers increasingly use high-deductible insurance plans to push more expenses onto employees. Some companies help employees with high deductibles by offering a savings plan that they seed with cash.

As insurers battle rising costs with higher premiums, people with employer-based plans are finding that, though they have good coverage, high deductibles often represent cost-sharing they can't afford.

In the past six years, the number of workers nationwide covered by these high-deductible plans has quadrupled, from 5 percent in 2007 to 20 percent in 2013, according to a Kaiser Family Foundation survey.

The same survey found that 78 percent of American workers had an annual health-plan deductible in 2013. More than half of employees at small companies (defined as three to 199 employees) now have a deductible of $1,000.

For Bean, the problem was both the cash she had to come up with and the myriad ways health reform has complicated her life.

"I had a sole proprietor plan with an insurer but the plan was canceled," Bean said. She said her employees at Bean Cruises and Travel are independent contractors, which means they buy their own coverage.

At one point, Bean said, she scheduled a visit to a specialist thinking that she had hit the limit on her deductible on her previous policy and had crossed the insurance threshold.

"It turned out that I was still on the deductible and had to pay the doctor out of pocket," Bean said. "If I had waited, I would have been covered."

Bean now has a 2014 plan purchased on New York State of Health, the state's public exchange. It's a "silver" or midpoint plan with a deductible of $2,000 for an individual and $4,000 for a family.

"I just got a letter from (insurer) Health Republic telling me that they proposed premium increases for next year," Bean said.

High-deductible plans are creating a growing bloc of underinsured families in the Rochester region and elsewhere, local providers said.

Providers' cash-flow issues

That means, in some cases, that patients can't or won't pay the medical or dental bills their high-deductible plan demands of them. And that leaves many doctors, the non-specialists in particular, with serious cash-flow problems.

"It's a huge issue," said Nancy Adams, executive director of the Monroe County Medical Society. "We're sending out a survey to our members to determine the extent of it."

She said accounts receivable for some doctors — patients with unpaid balances — is now two or three times what it was in prior years.

Adams said that the other side of the high-deductible coin is people delaying or forgoing medical care and treatment.

"I applaud what some local companies are doing to mitigate the effects these high-deductible plans are having," Adams said.

One of those, Adams said, is Penfield-based Paychex Corp., one of the region's largest employers. Paychex is wary of the direction in company health benefits. The company has gotten away from high-deductible plans, in part, because it sees how important a strong health plan is in attracting good job candidates.

"The challenge is to reduce costs and we do that in variety of ways, including promoting exercise," said Jake Flaitz, director of benefits for Paychex. "The idea is to keep the cost to employees as close to the Consumer Price Index as possible."

Nonetheless, William Blake, Paychex's national operations manager for health and benefits, said the company's clients are looking at higher employee shares, with health savings accounts and high-deductible coverage being prime movers in that direction.

Unintended effect

Kent Gardner, economist at the Center for Governmental Research in Rochester, said the Affordable Care Act's inclusion of an out-of-pocket maximum for consumers has had the unintended effect of raising annual premiums.

"Imagine that you're the insurer. Now you have to cap a family consumer's spending at $12,700 (the family limit to take effect in 2015)," Gardner wrote in a blog. "How do you pay for the big bills that some of your customers will run up? You can either charge a high monthly premium or you can impose a high deductible."

Gardner said in an email that insurers may react that way because the cost of a lot of health care — think long hospital stays, surgeries, nursing care — is way above the family maximum.

"High deductible plans change behavior in good ways and bad," Gardner said. "A survey shows that patients with high-deductible health plans are more likely to get a health risk assessment, seek generics, ask more questions of their docs. And they do cut costs — there's some evidence that the proliferation of HDHP plans has been a major contributor to the recent moderation of health cost inflation."

Still, health care, and costs, are hard things to manage as families confront the unexpected.

Bean's two adult children, one with a child, are coming home to live. Bean knows they all need health coverage. But she isn't sure yet how that will be achieved.

"I think they will be all right," she said. "But I worry."

TTOBIN@DemocratandChronicle.com

Twitter.com/tobin3

Read or Share this story: http://on.rocne.ws/1mzkY5e