Congresswoman Michele Bachmann, who is retiring from the House at the end of her current term, weighed in on President Barack Obama’s plan to use an executive order to potentially shield millions of undocumented immigrants from deportation. In comments reported by The Washington Post’s Robert Costa, Bachmann said she fears that allowing undocumented immigrants to remain in the United States could create a new class of “illiterate” Democratic voters.

Bachmann described Obama’s coming executive orders—which have infuriated congressional Republicans who have spent years fighting immigration reform—as “unskilled, illiterate foreign nationals.” Obama on Wednesday confirmed that he would outline his plans on Thursday. He is expected to announce a program that would reduce the likelihood that a family would be separated by deportation, with special considerations made for undocumented parents who need to provide for children.

“The social cost will be profound on the U.S. taxpayer—millions of unskilled, illiterate, foreign nationals coming into the United States who can’t speak the English language,” Bachmann said. “People do vote without being a citizen. It’s a wink and a nod, we all know it’s going to happen.” (Fact check: voter impersonation almost never happens. One exhaustive study found 31 credible cases—out of 1 billion votes cast since 2000.)

Leaders of the Republican Party have retained attorneys and said they might challenge the constitutionality of both the Affordable Care Act and Obama’s immigration-related executive orders. Last June, the Senate passed an immigration-reform bill that House Speaker John Boehner has since refused to bring to the floor. Obama had reportedly planned to move on immigration earlier, but held his executive orders until after the November 4 midterm elections, at the request of Democratic candidates who worried that the measures would hurt them at the polls.

Given America’s history of using literacy tests to disenfranchise minority voters, Bachmann’s suggestion that Democratic votes could be cast by “illiterate,” non-citizen residents is pretty foul. (That’s to say nothing of the G.O.P.’s nationwide push for voter-I.D. laws, which have an outsize effect on minority voting.) It is, as Bachmann might phrase it, a wink and a nod to an unsubstantiated fear of minority agency at the polls. More gross posturing: Bachmann appears to have immediately walked back her use of “illiterate,” telling Costa that she was simply parroting language from “American Hispanics” she spoke with when she visited the U.S.-Mexico border.

“Those are not Michele Bachmann’s words,” said Michele Bachman.