Instruments will be loaned to students in need

To donate Contact: Chad Lemons at lemons_chad@svvsd.org

As Longs Peak Middle School prepares to take in fifth graders this fall, former Ram Ty Mortensen is hoping to put instruments in the hands of incoming students.

For his Eagle Scout project, Mortensen, now a Longmont High School sophomore, is donating 16 used instruments to his alma mater, which will be loaned to Longs Peak students who cannot afford to buy or rent their own.

Mortensen collected the instruments, including clarinets, flutes, trombones and trumpets, through private donations this summer and turned them over to Longs Peak band director Chad Lemons Saturday.

The need for instruments is expected to increase this year at Longs Peak as the school, and likely band, enrollment grows when the school adds a grade, Lemons said.

Last school year, about 120 Longs Peak students were borrowing instruments owned by the school district, Lemons said.

Less than 50 percent of students participated in music classes when Lemons was a student at Longs Peak in the late 90s, he said. Now, 93 percent of Longs Peak students are enrolled in a music class.

"It's great to see so many kids getting involved in these programs but as participation increases, so does the need," Lemons said.

And it is not just low-income families who need help with expensive instrument costs, he said.

Students who play multiple instruments or families with more than one student taking music classes often cannot afford the price tag.

Providing loaner instruments to families allows students who would not otherwise be able to participate to remain in music classes, Lemons said.

Mortensen learned to play the trumpet in the Longs Peak band and is hoping his project will allow other students to have the same positive experience that he did.

Mortensen expects the donated instruments to last up to 15 years and provide assistance to up to 240 students.

"I'm still playing and want other kids to have the same opportunities," Mortensen said. "Mr. Lemons is a great director who taught me to have fun, develop my talents, and to be confident."

Contact Times-Call community reporter Whitney Bryen at 303-684-5274 or wbryen@times-call.com