Lactivism is a bold and brave investigation into the multifaceted and extremely persuasive indoctrination that breastfeeding is the only acceptable way to be a good mother in the United States.

One striking lesson of many in this well-researched and easy-to-read book is that breastfeeding today is a "lifestyle choice" that is designated a public health issue in America.

JOHN KENNEY / POSTMEDIA NEWS INC. FILES While Courtney Jung is pro-breastfeeding, the author persuasively exposes the way various groups have misled the public and shamed women who do not breastfeed.

Another is that breastfeeding is clearly about the product -- breast milk -- and is no longer about creating a strong and healthy bond between mother and child, or about ensuring the well-being of children.

Breastfeeding and breast milk have moved beyond the concern of mothers and babies to the (self-serving) interests of politicians, health practitioners, public policy, entrepreneurs, activists, industry and business.

Courtney Jung, a mother of two and an award-winning, internationally distinguished professor of political science at the University of Toronto, successfully exposes how the complex and multilayered interests of various groups give new meaning to the sacred act of breastfeeding.

She effortlessly investigates and clearly explains the convoluted legacy and realities of the resolve that "breast is best" in seven accessible, engaging chapters. Her conversational tone, personal stories and, at times, humorous approach gently take the reader through the logic of her persuasive argument.

By delving into the history of the importance of breastfeeding for the health and well-being of children, Jung fully explains how this "common-sense" approach to child-rearing is fraught with partial truths and untruths. She provides deep and accessible analysis of the science behind the often-believed myths and accepted health benefits of breastfeeding and breast milk.

For instance, she easily defends the claim "breastfeeding has no preventative effect on asthma, obesity, or Type 1 diabetes." She also shows how many in the field of public health consciously refuse to share the dangers of passing HIV, hepatitis, tuberculosis, cancer and other conditions associated with a compromised immune system from mother to child through breastfeeding.

The eye-opening chapters addressing "pumping on the job" and how breast milk is as lucrative as "liquid gold" reveal how "corporations that manufacture breast pumps and human milk by-products" are pushing a largely unacknowledged "research agenda that has transformed breastfeeding." She persuasively demonstrates how Obama's 2010 Affordable Care Act has strongly influenced the growing and profitable breast-pump industry and now uses "breastfeeding and pumping as a substitute for maternity leave."

Lactivism is more than advocating for, teaching about, or supporting breastfeeding. It's a dogma prescribed by government, industry, medicine, science and middle-class values. Lactivism views breastfeeding as the only acceptable way to feed and nurture children. It permits and encourages people to judge and shame non-breastfeeding mothers, and significantly contributes to mothers' feelings of guilt and shame for not providing breast milk for their children.

Choice, a necessary element for the individual autonomy for all humans, has been largely removed for women who are unable to or choose not to breastfeed. Lactivism has become another way in which mothers are dictated to -- a good mother breastfeeds, a bad mother does not.

While Jung is certainly pro-breastfeeding and would personally do so again, she successfully argues that it's not top of the list when thinking about what really matters to the health and welfare of our children.

Fiona Green is a professor on women's and gender studies at the University of Winnipeg.