Topics: FairWarning, Florida, Immigration, Labor, Latinos, U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration, Politics News

This piece originally appeared on FairWarning

As Latino workers take on more and more of the nation’s toughest and dirtiest jobs, they increasingly are paying for it with their lives.

Preliminary federal figures released last week showed that of the 4,405 U.S. workers killed on the job in 2013, 797 were Latinos. That equates to 3.8 of every 100,000 full-time Latino employees in the U.S. dying in workplace accidents during the year.

The fatality rate for Latinos was up marginally from 3.7 per 100,000 workers in 2012, and was significantly higher than the 2013 fatality rates of 3.2 for whites, 2.9 for blacks and 1.5 for Asians.

Safety experts point to reluctance among many Latino workers, particularly immigrants, to protest job hazards. They commonly attribute the reluctance to language barriers or fears that complaining about working conditions will cost them their jobs or even lead to deportation.

In addition, worker advocates blame weak federal and state regulation and a trend of employers increasingly giving dangerous jobs to temporary workers, including some with little training.

Last year’s victims included Luis Rey Rivera Pavia, a 32-year-old machine helper for a Wire Mesh Sales LLC factory in Jacksonville, Fla., where most of the workers were Latino immigrants. Federal authorities said Rivera was killed in August when he tried to retrieve a metal bar that fell into a wire mesh manufacturing machine, and wound up being struck by a piece of the equipment.

While investigating the case, U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration inspectors discovered that two other workers previously suffered severe injuries on the same machinery. One worker had a limb amputated, and the other suffered a crushed forearm. David Michaels, OSHA’s chief, last week highlighted the Wire Mesh case when he outlined his agency’s adoption of new rules for reporting severe injuries, a change intended to help authorities better target their inspections.

He later added that immigrant workers “are vulnerable workers, and they often have the worst jobs.”

Another Latino worker killed on the job last year was Adan Sotelo Preciado, who died in September when he fell from the roof of a building at a construction site in Northville, S.D. He was helping build an addition to a warehouse when he stepped from the metal decking onto an unsupported patch of insulation, and plunged to the concrete floor 20 feet below.

Preciado, who was working for a company named Sierra Steel Buildings Inc., found the job through an ad on the Craigslist website. He received no training and wasn’t given a safety harness to guard against the risk of falls.

An OSHA report on accident said the employer “was fully aware of the hazards associated with steel erection.” Yet even after a company supervisor was notified of a near accident involving a worker who stepped through the insulation, “no corrective action was taken.”