Buy Photo Bethany Lerch (Photo: Oshkosh Northwestern Media File Photo)Buy Photo Story Highlights My time in Tel Aviv just confirmed that the last six weeks have been an exercise in thinking before speaking.

Eid is a Muslim holiday similar to Christmas. School lets out for a few days. Family and friends gather to share a special meal and exchange gifts. As a teacher without these close ties, it meant I could go exploring. Having spent six weeks in Palestine, I decided to visit Israel.

To leave Nablus, I had to take a shared taxi to Ariel, a nearby settlement. These are Israeli cities or towns established on lands illegally taken from Palestine during the Six Day War in 1967. Settlements defy the norms of international humanitarian law and constitute one of the core issues in Arab-Israeli peace negotiations. Without internationally recognized borders, Israel will continue to illegally carve pieces out of Palestine at its leisure.

Settlements like Ariel are very conservative. They also come with a strong Israeli military presence. In fact, I waited for the bus at a stop guarded by a young man in olive drab armed with an automatic weapon. Guns scare the tar out of me. I hated the waiting.

Luckily it wasn’t 10 minutes before a very large, very modern bus pulled up. Forty-five minutes and one checkpoint later, my face was flat against the glass gazing at glimmering buildings that swept into the sky and clean streets with clearly marked lanes. This was Tel Aviv.

I wanted comfort food in a bad way, so I made for a well-known American restaurant on the beach. Nablus is a completely dry city where alcohol is neither sold nor consumed, so I savored two glasses of German Riesling alongside my first Mexican dinner in more than a year. Days were spent on the beach where I quietly celebrated not having to completely cover myself in the 90-degree heat. I had tomato-y sunburn by Day 2 and I sported it with joy.

Israel is full of Americans and everyone speaks English. Lots of people asked where I was from, to which I would always reply Chicago. (“Wisconsin” and “Milwaukee” get a lot of blank stares.) Then they would enthusiastically ask if I was Jewish.

Upon hearing I wasn’t, they wanted to know what I was doing in Israel. This was tricky. Should I fib a bit? Say I was a tourist? That way I could avoid divulging what I was actually doing in the Middle East.

One day I chose the “truth route” in a conversation with an elderly British man. When I disclosed that I was a teacher in Palestine, he told me not to say that word out loud because it doesn’t exist. After that I did lie. I told him I had to go somewhere I didn’t have to go just to make my exit.

But his words resonated. More than one Israeli asked me what Nablus was. They didn’t even know it was a city. The ones who were familiar would quiver with surprise: “What? Why are you there?” A few insisted I should just quit and work in Tel Aviv. I never knew how to respond to that.

My time in Tel Aviv just confirmed that the last six weeks have been an exercise in thinking before speaking. I always have to measure my words to refrain from any mention of Israel or Palestine depending on my location. I refer to Palestine as Palestine when I am in it, but it’s the opposite when I am in in Israel, where the “West Bank” is more common. Conversely, “Israel” is not a word I ever say aloud in Nablus.

Some Israelis I met didn’t rightly care what I said. They were the easiest to talk to. Their ambivalence opposite the conflict was a result of Tel Aviv’s urban rhythm, which is so far removed from border areas and that concrete monster of a wall that runs through Jerusalem and Bethlehem.

Some Israelis were just really tired of everything, particularly after the summer’s events in Gaza. Still others were easily and immediately incensed, and spoke with venom. This, too, seemed to be a remnant of Gaza. “You don’t know what it’s like!” they’d say. “You don’t know what it’s like when sirens go off and you can see rockets explode in the air!”

They are right. I don’t know what that’s like. And I never want to know what that’s like.

But what about other realities, realities like Gaza? Neither me – nor any Israeli – know what it’s like to endure a sudden airstrike. Neither of us has ever had our homes reduced to rubble, belongings to smithereens, and family members to pieces below both.

More than 2,100 people were killed in Gaza this summer. The United Nations estimates 69 percent were civilians. That is not right.

I never said that aloud, though. I choose to write it here instead. Because words have more power in print.

Northwestern Community Columnist Bethany Lerch is an Oshkosh native and a graduate of UW-Oshkosh and has a master’s degree from the University of St. Andrews.

Read or Share this story: http://oshko.sh/1wcLiFg