Gov. Jerry Brown is tight with a buck, and we usually applaud his thrifty ways.

But not when he treats developmentally disabled people as pawns.

The governor is using some of California’s most vulnerable residents as bargaining chips in an unrelated dispute over Medi-Cal funding.

That isn’t just wrong. It’s shameful.

Under a landmark 1969 law known as the Lanterman Act, the state must provide services for people with autism, cerebral palsy and other intellectual disabilities. A network of 21 regional centers that contract with the state assist roughly 290,000 people to obtain services such as counseling, placement, education and job training.

Chance are most Californians never heard of the regional centers before Dec. 2, when 14 people died in a terrorist attack in San Bernardino. The victims were county employees attending a holiday luncheon in a rented room at the local regional center.

Services for the developmentally disabled have been underfunded for decades, at least in part due to the relative anonymity of the centers. As a result, the Association of California Regional Centers warned last year that the program is “on the brink of collapse.”

Starving services for the vulnerable is never good public policy.

It’s especially shortsighted at a time when the state is rushing headlong toward closure of the Sonoma Developmental Center.

In its haste to close the Eldridge facility, the Brown administration is upending the lives of 400 residents, many of them profoundly disabled. Some arrived as children and have lived at the center for a half-century and even longer.

They will need new homes with 24-hour assistance and specialized care.

Finding places for them won’t be easy, especially with the governor insisting on closing the Sonoma Developmental Center by 2018 — a three-year window as opposed to five years prior to the most recent closure.

Where are the residents and their families supposed to turn for help? The regional centers already are struggling to fulfill their obligations.

And despite the state’s robust fiscal health, lobbying efforts by clients, family members and service providers haven’t shaken many more dollars loose for the regional centers, which lost about $1 billion in state funding during the Great Recession. They are seeking an immediate 10 percent across-the-board increase, a rate revision for services and annual 5 percent increases until the revisions are implemented and funded.

We don’t know if that’s the right mix, but the state can afford to spend more on services for the developmentally disabled. It’s not a surprise that legislative Democrats are on board, but even some Republican legislators have signed on to the effort.

The governor included about 2 percent more for the regional centers in his spending plan for 2016-17.

But even that small bump is contingent on legislative approval of a new taxing mechanism for managed care plans that is necessary to prevent a $1.1 billion reduction in federal Affordable Care Act funding to pay for expansion of Medi-Cal. On that issue, Brown is at odds with GOP lawmakers. He needs to find another way to break that stalemate.