MPHR Director: West Virginia's Free Health Clinics Faces Budget Cuts from State

Written by Your 5News Team

Last updated on January 26, 2015 @ 7:00PM

Created on January 26, 2015 @ 5:43PM

There are nine free healthcare clinics across the state of West Virginia, and they may have to tighten their belts even more after Governor Tomblin's proposed fiscal year 2016 budget called for funding cuts.

The 2015 budget appropriations for these clinics is about four million dollars, but that number will be cut more than in half to 1.93 million dollars in the next fiscal year.

That's a number, around 52%, that provides concern to Laura Jones, the Executive Director of Milan Puskar Health Right in Morgantown. She told 5 News that while they don't plan on cutting any of their services to clients, they are still going to have to tighten their belts. Starting July 1st, Milan Puskar Health Right, which is one of the only free clinics that doesn't bill Medicaid at all will lose around half a million dollars in their budget.

"A 50% budget cut in the state line item will certainly have an impact on all the free clinics in West Virginia," said Jones. "We are a safety net for people, and we run a really lean, tight ship."

Governor Tomblin's office cites more than 150,000 West Virginians who are now covered under the Affordable Care Act, but Jones said that the ACA didn't go far enough. There are still people who are falling through the cracks, mainly because they are part of a group that can't afford to participate in the market place even with government subsidies.

"What has happened is when [patients] look at those subsidies and they look at the amount they pay for the premium per month and the cost of the deductible and the co-pays for the services they use, people do not feel they can afford it," said Jones.

According to Jones, Health Right is able to provide $22 worth of health care to their clients for every $1 that's donated, and they offer services that Medicaid doesn't. Those services include dental and vision, which significantly reduce trips to the emergency room.

"For instance, our community dental partner's program here locally in Morgantown provides care," said Jones. "And all of the dentists that participate are volunteers."

Whether or not Health Right will be able to keep their doors open in the future is another question entirely. For now though, they'll proceed with tightening a belt that can't get much tighter.

Share