An unfathomable bipartisan violation of congressional duty to assure the safety of the American public and its health is now underway.

The United States Congress is poised to provide a 2.3 percent tax advantage to the medical device industry. This tax break is likely to become a reality despite congressional knowledge of a severe patient safety hazard in the federal mandates governing this industry - laws that have led to much suffering and many unnecessary deaths in America.

These are verifiable facts.

From an industry focused and free-market economics perspective this tax repeal is important. In fact, the economic gain from the tax repeal promises to be substantive enough that some powerful industry advocacy organizations around the nation are pushing hard to make the repeal happen. The medical device industry’s lobby power across our nation is so effective that even some prominent democrats in congress, such as Pa.’s own senator Bob Casey and N.H. senator Jeanne Shaheen, who vocally supported the Affordable Care Act, are willing to now “gut” it to satisfy their industry’s lobby. Even Mass. senator Elizabeth Warren, “Robin Hood” herself, seems willing.

The medical device advocacy lobby is, in fact, so strong and widely distributed across the country that a broad majority favoring the repeal has already been won in congress without a fight – in fact, the repeal may already be a “done deal”. After all, what better than a “popular” bipartisan tax repeal directed at a profitable industry that may create real jobs for people? Of course “popular”, in this case, means “popular with the device industry lobby and the congressmen and senators they socialize with, not the American people”.

The trouble with this bipartisan tax repeal rests in a very clear fact that is unknown to a wide majority of people – The American public does not recognize that the medical device industry has virtually no effective federal safety standards governing it: a majority of medical devices are being cleared for marketing by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) without any safety testing. They are sold to hospitals and doctors and they are used on American patients without any assurance of safety, efficacy or adverse outcomes surveillance. The medical device industry is where pharmaceuticals in America were over 20 years ago: Unsafe.

The American people do not recognize this fact, but both the medical device lobby and the United States congress surely do. In fact, they were formally warned about it quite explicitly by a group of experts at the Institute of Medicine in 2011. But the average trusting American citizen, with a family, a job and life’s troubles has no idea – he trusts professionals and his federal government.

To quote the words of a prominent medical device industry advocate and leader, the approval and marketing practices of the medical device industry are like those of the “wild-wild west”. This self-admission by the industry lobby means there is no real industry accountability to the federal government and there are no adequate safety and security standards for patients – but a fantastic FDA label of approval on all medical devices, provided by the FDA’s Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH), fools everyone into believing that medical devices in the United States are safe and marketable.

The congressional travesty against the American people is that the proposed medical device tax repeal provides a large financial advantage to an industry, whose federal safety checkpoints are dangerously deficient - a deficiency that has claimed many precious American lives and livelihoods, under the cloak of “life-saving” therapy.

These, too, are verifiable facts.

Of course industry advocates would argue that the medical device tax is a new burden that was imposed on their industry by ObamaCare. But the reality is that ObamaCare is now the law of the land and its cost burden is to many sectors of the healthcare industry – not just the device sector. So cutting the medical device tax from funding ObamaCare means the funds have to come from another place in the system. Therefore, this repeal provides a tax advantage to the device industry, which operates on “wild wild west” style federal safety standards: in other words, none!

The congressional leaders whose primary objective is to stimulate industry, catalyze job growth, down size federal agencies or fight ObamaCare are all participating in a very grievous error when it comes to the medical device tax repeal. Lubricating an industry with dangerously unsafe federal safety mandates with a tax advantage, will only serve to endanger more lives. And these lives could be anyone’s – including our congressional leaders and device industry leaders and lobbyists.

The danger posed by FDA’s CDRH to America’s public health does not know socioeconomic or ethnic boundaries – it is an equal opportunity threat.

So the republican position of support for the medical device tax repeal totally ignores and accepts the patient safety deficit in the FDA’s 510(k) medical device regulation. And the democrat position of support for the tax repeal not only ignores and accepts the lack of safety, it violates the democrats’ own pledge to protect citizens in harms way from corporate inefficiencies and misconduct - neither of these two positions are ethical or politically sound. Both are profoundly hypocritical. Both are travesties against the American people.

The only correct and consistent political orientation for both republicans and democrats in congress is to protect the safety of the American patient and our public health first and foremost - before they do anything else.

The FDA’s dominant legal approval mechanism for medical devices is dangerously deficient and has cost many lives. Democrats ought to push for fixing it, and republicans ought to push for scrapping it. That’s called being politically consistent. That’s called protecting lives. That’s called having a common goal: to protect the American people and their health from a severe harm in the medical device space. Alas, it does not appear to be what our congressional leaders are at all interested in.

In fact, the very opposite seems to be true. A significant number of both democrats and republicans are choosing to ignore this patient safety hazard in the medical device industry. In the words of Senator Bob Casey of Pa., “I don’t know if this will be addressed in the near term”. Instead, they seem keen on acting swiftly to provide the industry with a tax advantage. In other words, our congress, republican and democrat, is more interested in protecting economics and industry gain over the real physical integrity and health of American lives.

Is this behavior consistent with the founding purpose of American federal government? We think not.

The only people who truly grasp the serious safety deficit in the medical device industry seem to be the patients who are harmed by it – and those folks typically go home, they go bankrupt or they die. They very certainly do not lobby their representatives effectively or call industry and the FDA to account for their dangerously lax safety standards. In fact in many cases our own federal government has even eliminated the people’s right to seek justice in court when it comes to FDA and medical devices - they are legally untouchable through our court system, they are “exempt”.

In the end, the congressional representatives willing to provide a tax advantage to the medical device industry before guaranteeing that it is operating safely for the American people are violating their constitutional and ethical duty to the republic. Those of them who have built their political dynasties on the notion of protecting the consumer from corporate harm are not only violating their duty, they are very certainly guilty of hypocrisy. And neither of these positions is true to American federal purpose - neither is worthy of public stewardship or congressional representation in the United States.

When congress chooses to protect and preserve industry, economic interests and jobs over the people’s very lives – a fundamental breach to the integrity of the American republic and her constitutional purpose is at hand - because the sanctity of individual American citizens’ lives, rights and dignity rests at the core of congressional duty to the people.

Support of the medical device tax repeal, before correcting the dangerous safety deficit in the FDA’s 510(k) mechanism, is an unacceptable dereliction of congressional duty indeed.

Perhaps this citizens’ call to duty from Philadelphia will awaken our congress from its ethical slumber – but likely not.

Hooman Noorchashm and Amy Reed, husband-and-wife physicians, have campaigned to ban electric morcellators since December 2013, soon after Reed’s unsuspected uterine cancer was spread by the device during a routine hysterectomy.

Read more from the Check Up blog »