Photo

Karen Walter Goodwin, whose financial savvy helped create new sources of capital for theater productions, fueling the success of some of Broadway’s biggest hits, including “Les Misérables,” “The Phantom of the Opera” and “Miss Saigon,” died on June 30 in Annapolis, Md. She was 66.

The cause was complications of colon cancer surgery, her son, Nicholas, said.

In the early 1980s, when almost all theater producers were male and Broadway financing was largely a matter of finding deep-pocketed angels, Ms. Goodwin, who had been trained as an industrial psychologist, was working as an executive in the financial services arm of the Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company.

She was interested in the arts and entertainment, and she recognized that though corporations and accredited investors often ventured into movies and art, they rarely did so in theater, which was perceived, not without cause, as too risky.

Her idea was essentially to provide an investment bank for nascent stage productions, putting together producers — who were enthralled by the idea of financial backers who did not crave or require creative input — and investors with proven track records who were willing to try their hand in a new arena.

As a result, previously untapped corporate and individual sources of financing began to find their way to the theater. Under the Mutual Benefit umbrella, Ms. Goodwin backed a Royal Shakespeare Company production of “All’s Well That Ends Well” in New York.

That show lost money, but then she and Mutual Benefit raised $300,000, about a third of the total cost, for the London production of “Les Miz.” Opening in October 1985, it returned 167 percent to investors in the first year and a half and went on to become an international megahit.

“In every other area of entertainment there are funds from financial markets, huge funds, but they have almost been enemies of the theater,” Elizabeth Williams, who became Ms. Goodwin’s business partner, said in an interview. “That 7 of 10 shows fails is true, but if you focus on people with track records — which is what they do in the financial markets anyway — you have better results. Karen was a visionary in bringing corporate funding to theater through syndications.”

Today, almost every fund-raiser for a Broadway show receives producer credit, but that wasn’t necessarily the case in the 1980s and ’90s; Ms. Goodwin often went unmentioned above the title in a production’s Playbill.

After the success of “Les Miz,” Ms. Goodwin and Ms. Williams became financiers for its producer, Cameron Mackintosh, and the English-language productions of his blockbuster shows “Phantom” and “Miss Saigon.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Ms. Goodwin was a producer of “Annie Warbucks,” a 1993 sequel to “Annie,” and “The Ark,” a 2005 musical based on the biblical story of Noah, both of which ran Off Broadway.

With Ms. Williams, she formed Fifth Avenue Productions, which helped produce “Into the Woods,” the 1987 Stephen Sondheim-James Lapine musical treatment of Grimm’s fairy tales that ran for nearly two years on Broadway; and “The Gospel at Colonus,” an adventurous musical adaptation by Bob Telson and Lee Breuer of Sophocles’ “Oedipus at Colonus” that appeared on Broadway in 1988.

“First of all, she and her partner were unusual at the time because they were women,” Michael David, of Dodger Productions, the lead producer of “Gospel at Colonus,” said in an interview about Ms. Goodwin and Ms. Williams. “And they were very important to us. They came to us when we didn’t have any money and they had a little.”

Karen Jeanne Walter was born in Fort Dix, N.J., on April 8, 1948, and grew up in Maryland and Texas. Her father worked in the insurance business. She graduated from Southern Methodist University, where she and Ms. Williams were classmates, and earned a master’s degree in psychology from Northeastern University. She also studied at the C. G. Jung Institute in Zurich.

Ms. Goodwin’s first marriage ended in an annulment. Her second marriage, to Stephen Goodwin, a writer and teacher, ended in divorce. In addition to her son, Nicholas, she is survived by her father, Richard S. Walter; two brothers, Richard Walter Jr. and Michael Walter, and a sister, Donna Jeanne Walter.