It's our recap of the stories that mattered most in Indian country:

HELPING ITS OWN: The Rosebud Sioux Tribe is now involved with the case of Audre'y Eby, a tribal member and mother of two special-needs children, who found herself between a legal rock and hard place.

CHANGE DELAYED: The Taos Town Council has rescinded the name change from Red Willow back to Kit Carson Park, in another 3-1 vote, after an emotional and spirited 3 hour town meeting.

ARTIST HONORED: Christi Belcourt, the Métis artist who created the stirring moccasin tribute to missing and murdered indigenous women, will receive the 2014 Ontario Arts Council Aboriginal Arts Award.

SPIN OUT: Political blogger Ben Tribbett, who was hired by the Washington Redskins to defend the team's controversial name, ran into trouble when anti-Native tweets surfaced, and resigned from his job immediately.

DOCUMENTS UNSEALED: A superior court judge unsealed search warrants and other records in the investigation into the 2012 murder of Faith Hedgepeth, a student at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and a member of the Haliwa-Saponi Tribe.

ICWA IN LA: In a Los Angeles County courtroom, the Second District of the California Court of Appeals heard oral arguments in Children and Family Services v. J. E. et al (CFS v. J.E. et al), in which a non-Indian foster couple is fighting for permanent custody and adoption of a Choctaw child.

CLASSIC REMADE: Johnny Cash's 1964 album Bitter Tears: Ballads of the American Indian, has been remade by a group of country and Americana musicians that includes Emmylou Harris, Steve Earle, Kris Kristofferson, and Bill Miller.

CANOE RETURNED: Ownership of a Samish canoe, believed to date from pre-contact, has been formally transferred to the Samish Indian Nation from the San Juan Island Historical Society & Museum in Friday Harbor, Washington.

SCHIMMEL WILL START: Atlanta Dream phenom Shoni Schimmel was named as a starter in the 2014 WNBA All-Star Game (July 19), the only rookie to be so honored.

WATER CRISIS: An underground-pipeline rupture that sent a million gallons of saltwater leaking into a bay that feeds the Fort Berthold Indian Reservation’s water-supply lake could take weeks to clean up, said officials from the tribe and the pipeline company.

SIXKILLER SEZ: Sonny Sixkiller, Cherokee, a quarterback who starred at the University of Washington in the early '70s, has gone on record saying he feels the Washington (DC) Redskins football team name is racist and should be changed.

HEADDRESSES RECONSIDERED: An incident during Native American Night at the Giants AT&T Field that resulted in the hours-long detainment of two fans has spurred the team to take a closer look at some of its policies as they relate to Native Americans.