SAN DIEGO — The Rockies probably will continue to wait for prized pitching prospect Jon Gray, despite their need to fill an open slot in the rotation.

Gray will not join the Rockies for Sunday’s game against the Padres at Petco Park. He will pitch Sunday for the Triple-A Isotopes in Albuquerque.

So who will be on the mound for the Rockies?

RELATED: Corey Dickerson returning to Rockies lineup soon, Weiss says

“It’s a guy named TBA — he’ll pitch Sunday,” manager Walt Weiss said before Friday’s series opener. “We’ll announce a Sunday starter (Saturday). I can tell you we have De La Rosa tonight and (Chad) Bettis tomorrow. That’s the breaking news.”

The Rockies lost starter David Hale to a strained groin July 10. In his place last week, the Rockies used a piggyback of spot starters Gonzalez Germen and Aaron Laffey. Germen remains on the Rockies’ roster, in the bullpen. Laffey was designated for assignment. Long reliever Yohan Flande will stay in the bullpen with Germen for now.

That would seem to reduce the potential starters to right-hander Eddie Butler, who would need to be recalled from Albuquerque. Butler was 3-6 with a 4.80 ERA in 11 starts this season before he was sent down in early June. In his six Triple-A starts, Butler is 2-2 with a 6.27 ERA.

WATCH: Do the Colorado Rockies actually think they can contend in the second half of MLB season?

Butler’s demotion was intended to give him room to work on his off-speed pitches. Butler, 24, was throwing off-speed pitches at 85 mph, with a fastball at 94. There wasn’t enough separation in his velocity.

Butler’s promotion, he said, was mapped for later this season.

“They were talking to me about wanting me back up here to make a push for the playoffs,” Butler said last month. “They said, ‘Once you get that figured out, you’ll be the first guy in the rotation to get back up here.’ “

RELATED: Jon Gray remains in Triple-A after rough start

Gray, the No. 3 pick in the 2013 draft and a former University of Oklahoma star, is 2-2 with a 3.66 ERA in his past 10 starts in Triple-A. And he’s earning strikeouts with a K-to-walk ratio better than 2.5-to-1.

But in his past start, last Sunday, Gray allowed six hits and four runs in just three innings.