A recent Associated Press article raised the question whether employees, if given the option, would choose to give up their company health insurance policies in order to get salary increases.

For anyone who has been an employee for a long time, this might seem like a no-brainer, but for those just starting out in the workforce, here are some pointers to help you make the decision.

First of all, if you join your company health plan, you are part of a group of insured people whose employer has bargained for the best possible terms for your premium price and level of benefits. On the other hand, if you are seeking a private health insurance policy on the open marketplace, you have no wiggle room to negotiate because you are considered to be a party of one.

Another problem with the private plans, which has been seen frequently since the Affordable Care Act came into being, is that your insurance can be canceled at the end of the year and you will be left scrambling to find another comparable plan.

Also, even though your private plan might not be canceled, the premium can be raised exponentially each year. For example, as someone who is self-employed, I have a “grandfathered” private plan that cannot be canceled, but this year I was hit with an 18 percent increase in my premium.

I called the S.C. Department of Insurance and learned that they had allowed this exorbitant inflation because my insurance company had been able to prove that their costs for private plans had risen enough to justify the increase.

While company health plans also have higher premiums each year, employers are in a position to negotiate a lower rate of increase for their employees, based on the fact that they have a large pool of people participating in the plan.

The terms of the typical employer-sponsored health care plans are also much more attractive than the private plans. For example, a standard employee health care plan includes a copay for most doctor visits, where a private plan tends to have a high deductible that does not pay much of anything until that deductible has been met.

These private plans really provide only emergency hospitalization coverage, with the policy holders having to pay out-of-pocket for most standard care.

Finally, and this is the scary part, some doctors are opting not to take patients who have private marketplace plans because, for many of the same issues related to Medicaid payments, these medical practitioners have decided that it is not worth their time and money to participate in these plans.

Considering these factors, most company health insurance policies are worth their weight in gold.

My advice is to look before you leap. Instead of blindly trading your company health insurance plan for a salary increase, do some research and find out what a private marketplace plan will really cost you in both dollars and benefits.

Alice Lang is a writer and employment advocate. Reach her at eadvocacy@charter.net.