Topics: addiction, Cocaine, DAME, Drugs, Editor's Picks, Parenting, Pot, Life News

This piece originally appeared on DAME

It could be anything, the question that stops you in your parental tracks.

A 5-year-old, his sweet voice filled with the kind of moral certainty that comes easy to a kindergartener, points out that smoking cigarettes is so bad and wrong: “Why would anyone ever smoke, Mommy?” Or your 10-year-old, noticing for the first time that you don’t seem happy to go on the annual holiday pilgrimage to see your parents: “Why do you hate Grandpa?” Or the languid, slumping teenager, angrily tossing it back at you after you grill him about whether there will be drinking at the party he’s about to go to: “Obviously you drank when you were 17. You are such a hypocrite!”

So what do you do? Do you evade, cling to the code of parental silence, change the subject? Or do you crumble, admit everything, overshare, lose your dignity as well as any leg up you might have on these frustrating offspring who seem to see right through you?

More from DAME: “Is ‘Superman’ the Greatest Adoption Story of All Time?”

Most of us have done both.

When I was a teenager, experimenting with just about everything in my path, I was fortunate enough to have a father who leveled with me. He warned me about the drugs he’d seen do the most damage (alcohol and cocaine), and told me that pot was not a big deal but advised me never to drive stoned. He let me know that I could come to him without fear of punishment or censure.

I shared his stories, and mine, with my daughter. Not because I wanted to give up my parental authority, but because to me, being authentic and even vulnerable with my kids has always made them trust me more.

As with so many things, we can learn a lot from comedian Louis CK. In a recent NPR interview with Terry Gross, Louis described his teen pothead years, during which he was “barely cognizant of any kind of life; I never went to classes.” Now that his daughters are tweens, he told Gross, it’s a topic he thinks about a lot. There’s no way he would hide the truth of his youthful indiscretions, he said.

“My kids know that I did drugs. I think it’s important to share your mistakes with your kids—because you get knowledge from your mistakes and wisdom from it. If you can’t pass that on, what good are you?”

Still, it’s not easy to know how much to reveal, especially when kids are very little.

“I’ve been careful about sharing certain things,” says Marie of her 6-year-old son. “He doesn’t know that I ever smoked. He doesn’t know that I was treated for alcoholism, or that I did drugs.”

But smoking is one of those things young kids learn about. “He noticed people smoking on the street,” says Marie, “and he would see the no smoking sigh and he would say ‘no smoking!’” Still, if or when it comes up that Marie smoked for years before he was born, she says, “I would tell him the truth, but I definitely would have a lot of feelings about it. It would be the first big thing where I’m telling him to do one thing and I’ve done another entirely.”

More from DAME: “When Will Women Rule the World?”

For Jeanne Eschenberg Sager, the mother of a 10-year-old daughter, the issue that gives her pause is her own very young marriage. “I got married at 18,” she says, “and while I wouldn’t say I regret it, I struggle any time my daughter comes near the ‘how you and Daddy met’ story.” Sager, parenting editor at SheKnows.com, expects that one day her daughter may accuse her of hypocrisy. “I absolutely, 100 percent, without a doubt do not want my daughter getting married at 18! But it’s hard to tell a kid, ‘no, don’t do it, it doesn’t work,’ when you’re living, breathing proof that every once in awhile … it does.”

There are the things we did in our youth—smoking, drinking, shoplifting, or sleeping around—that we fear telling our kids about. But then there’s another category entirely: the hidden traumas and past pains, the horrible things that may have made us who we are, but that we wish our kids would never have to know about.