Millions of Americans have sent a clear message they need and want health coverage.

Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell. (Photo: Mark Wilson, Getty Images)

Over the past three months, millions of Americans sent a powerful message: The Affordable Care Act is working, and the quality health coverage offered on its Health Insurance Marketplace is a product that consumers need, want and like.

As of midnight Sunday, about 11.4 million Americans selected Marketplace plans or were automatically re-enrolled, including 8.6 million through the HealthCare.gov platform, and — based on preliminary data provided to us by the State-Based Marketplaces — 2.8 million through these state Marketplaces.

Enthusiasm and demand for Marketplace insurance were clear: In the final day, more new consumers signed up for health coverage than any other day this open enrollment or last.

Like this column?Get more in your e-mail inbox

Health insurers sent a message as well. Twenty-five percent more of them offered coverage in the Marketplace compared to the last open enrollment.

It's worth putting this all in perspective. We've achieved an historic reduction in the uninsured – the largest over any period since the early 1970s. These new numbers add to that progress. We're also making progress in signing up millions of Americans for Medicaid and the Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP).

The Affordable Care Act is now an important part of the everyday lives of millions of Americans. They finally have the financial and health security that comes with affordable health coverage. They now can fill prescriptions and take their children to the doctor. Some no longer have to choose between paying for health care and paying their utility bill.

I traveled to 17 cities to spread the word about this year's open-enrollment period, logging more than 22,000 miles. I had the opportunity to speak with folks who were in the process of signing up, folks who were newly insured, and the dedicated Americans helping them. I've heard so many moving stories about how affordable health coverage is impacting people's lives.

Expanding access to quality, affordable health coverage is about making progress for the hardworking families that rely upon the financial security and peace-of-mind that comes with it.

It's about access, affordability and quality.

One thing is for sure: Americans don't want the progress we've made taken away from them.

And it's not just the people in the Marketplaces counting on it. It's the millions of young Americans who have the flexibility, early in their careers, to stay on their parents' plans. It's our mothers, sisters and daughters who are no longer paying more for coverage just because they're female. It's the people with pre-existing conditions who can no longer be locked out of health insurance.

A recent Commonwealth Fund study found that the percentage of adults who had problems paying medical bills or were paying off medical debt declined for the first time in nearly a decade.

Given this progress, it's time to move beyond efforts to repeal the Affordable Care Act. I invite every American to join us in the work ahead: Helping educate both newly and already insured Americans on how to use their coverage to keep their families healthy and get the best possible care when they are sick. And building a better, smarter and healthier system of health care delivery.

When I was in Jacksonville, I met a young woman named Laura Gonzalez. She's a 26-year old mother of two who is studying to be an ultrasound tech. Her husband is a truck driver and he does not receive insurance through his work. Thanks to the Marketplace, they have been able to get covered for only $41 a month.

People like Laura were helped in the last few months by assisters, volunteers and call center employees across the country, who I want to personally thank for their work to get folks covered. It is changing lives.

For Laura and for millions of Americans, today is a new day. Together we can continue to move forward and deliver the sort of impact that the American people expect and deserve.

Sylvia M. Burwell is U.S. secretary of Health and Human Services.

In addition to its own editorials, USA TODAY publishes diverse opinions from outside writers, including our Board of Contributors. To read more columns like this, go to the Opinion front page or sign up for the daily Opinion e-mail newsletter.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1A9Dckd