With an economy that’s still drooping in spots and high long-term unemployment now a part of the landscape, it isn’t surprising that politicians have taken notice of the retirement crisis in America. American workers’ lack of retirement readiness has been dropped on the doorstep of the defined contribution market and it’s been pointed out again and again that 401(k) plans just don’t offer the same benefits and guarantees that used to come with defined benefit pension plans. Complete your profile to continue reading and get FREE access to BenefitsPRO.com, part of your ALM digital membership. Benefits:

Your access to unlimited BenefitsPRO.com content isn’t changing. Once you are an ALM digital member, you’ll receive: Critical BenefitsPRO.com information including cutting-edge post-reform success strategies, comprehensive service provider listings, educational webcasts and videos, resources from industry leaders, and informative eNewsletters.

Exclusive discounts on ALM, BenefitsPRO Magazine and BenefitsPRO.com events.

Access to other award-winning ALM publications including LifeHealthPro.com, ThinkAdvisor.com and Law.com. Register Now Already have an account? Sign In X Sign in with your ALM Account Remember Me Or... Sign In With LinkedIn

Much of the emphasis in retirement education has been on saving for retirement, but the amount needed in retirement is a vague notion nobody cares to explore. Obviously, if a person is setting money aside for retirement, that amount will be enough. But “in reality, they should be saving more,” Ward said. “Part of it is acknowledging that we have been telling them to save but not giving them the tools, resources or education they need to know how much they should be saving with respect to investments,” he added.

“Fee disclosures are now required every year, which is an improvement,” said Ward. “As the marketplace becomes more aware of the expenses associated with these programs, that may be another reason the 401(k) industry is coming under more scrutiny.” Chad Parks, founder and CEO of The Online 401(k), plants the 401(k) industry’s bad reputation at its doorstep saying that “historically it has been less than transparent in its pricing model.”