SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

On Monday, leading John McCain U.S. Senate primary challenger Doctor Kelli Ward unveiled her Patient Power Plan to repeal and offer an alternative solution to Obamacare.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Ward, a current Arizona State Senator, highlights the devastating effects and broken promises of President Obama’s signature health insurance legislation in the opening of her plan. Health insurance rates have more than doubled for some Arizonans, patients have lost their health insurance plans and doctors, and quality of healthcare is threatened.

Ward told Breitbart News:

I’m tired of weak-kneed politicians like John McCain saying we can’t repeal Obamacare because it is “the law of the land.” As a physician, I know we MUST repeal it to ensure access to high quality, cost effective care for all Americans. Americans should be able to choose the care that they want and need rather than settling for what little the government is willing to give them.

Ward’s new Patient Power Plan would repeal Obamacare in its entirety.

“All Americans without employer provided health insurance would be eligible for a health insurance tax credit equal to $2,500 per person, $8,000 per family of four,” under the new plan.

One of Ward’s plan provisions centers on returning power to the states.

“Complete control and administration of Medicaid would be sent back to each state with a federal block grant to help with financing, similarly to the enormously successful 1996 welfare reforms of the Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) program.”

Ward also advocates that all Americans have the freedom to choose Health Savings Accounts (HSAs) and market competition among health insurers.

Under the Patient Power Plan, insurance companies would be free to compete for consumer choice across state lines, in a national health insurance market. The repeal of federal Obamacare regulations and taxes would further reduce health costs. States would then reassume the regulatory authority they exercised over health insurance before Obamacare. That would include the authority to adopt medical malpractice reform.

The Patient Power Plan declares it will, “make good on all the false promises President Obama made for Obamacare.” Where Obamacare claimed to lower premiums, and let Americans keep their doctors and health insurance, Ward’s plan states, “Each American would be free to choose the health insurance they like, covering their preferred doctors. And health care would be assured for all when needed, with no individual mandate, no employer mandate, and trillions in reduced taxes, spending and regulatory costs.”

On Monday the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) released data on premium increases showing an average increase of 17.5% for Silver plans in Arizona.

“The thing that pushed me over the edge was Obamacare,” Ward told guest host Matthew Boyle during a March Breitbart News radio interview. She called the massive bill an assault on the liberty and freedom of her medical patients and the driver that propelled her to run for and win her Arizona State Senate seat.

Ward beat McCain by nine per cent in an August poll of 1,400 Arizona voters. In her first quarter of campaign fundraising, Ward raised a remarkable approximately $525,000.

Arizona Republicans formally censured Sen. John McCain in early 2014 for liberal voting, including “Amnesty, funding for ObamaCare, the debt ceiling, assaults on the Constitution and 2nd amendment, and has continued to support liberal nominees.”

Dr. Kelli Ward’s proposed Patient Power Plan:

11.02.15 the Patient Power Plan

Follow Michelle Moons on Twitter @MichelleDiana