Community Clinics Vital, Says Becerra

Congressman salutes work of local provider.

By Jacqueline Garcia, EGP Staff Writer

Speaking at Arroyo Vista Family Health Center’s clinic in North Central Los Angeles, U.S. Rep. Xavier Becerra last week commended the health care provider for decades of work to ensure residents in low-income communities have access to quality health care.

His remarks came during an event celebrating National Health Center Week (NHCW), an annual observance to recognize community health centers that deliver comprehensive, preventive and primary healthcare to patients regardless of issues such as ability to pay or legal status.

Our clinics are for the community and by the community, said Arroyo Vista Board President Roger Estrada during last week’s event. He called Becerra a champion of healthcare and said the nonprofit is honored to have the congressman’s support.

“Places like this one is where families can come, even if they don’t qualify for health insurance or federal assistance,” Becerra said, pointing out there is still much work to be done on the issue of access.

“We want every single person in this country, regardless of their [immigration] status, to have an opportunity to have health care,” Becerra said.

The Arroyo Vista healthcare network includes five community health clinics and a mobile clinic. In the greater Northeast L.A. area alone, clinics serve over 25,000 people a year, according to Arroyo Vista spokesperson Irene Holguin.

“Our mission is to offer access to high quality, comprehensive and affordable healthcare services,” she said.

An outgrowth of the Health Center Program that started in 1965 with just two clinics — one in Mississippi, the other in South Boston — Arroyo Vista is one of 1,300 health centers today providing primary health care to nearly 23 million underserved individuals across the country.

Providing healthcare to children is one of the most important reasons these clinics exists, Becerra told EGP. He said too many families and individuals still struggle with whether “they can take their son or daughter to the doctor or to the hospital” because of the cost.

Becerra said he was “lucky” growing up because his father had a union job that included health coverage, so his family of seven never worried about healthcare. “Everybody should be able to say the same,” he said.

Arroyo Vista and other community clinics are a safety net for low-income families and individuals, whether legally in the country or not. They provide a range of medical, dental, and other healthcare services, such as optometry, imaging and access to medications, often at no or very little cost. Arroyo Vista’s health fairs offer free health screenings and education, flu vaccines and childhood immunizations.

According to Becerra, healthcare ranks high on his list of priorities, right next to education.

“Just because you work hard and earn less, that doesn’t mean you should be treated differently,” Becerra said. Not being able to take off work when you are ill because you can’t afford to miss a day’s pay in unacceptable, he said. It’s even harder if you are undocumented, Becerra said.

The congressman voted for the Affordable Care Act, also called Obamacare, signed into law in 2010. The law, intended to lower the number of medically uninsured in the U.S., mandates levels of care to be provided by health insurers and provides wider access to affordable healthcare insurance through both public and private providers.

John Sawyer, director of federal affairs with the National Association of Community Health Centers, said his group is very proud to be working hand in hand with the congressman to provide resources to clinics that are seeing droves of “new people coming as a result of the Affordable Care Act.”

Without federal funding, clinics wouldn’t have been able to handle all the people, Becerra told EGP. “They would’ve had to cut some of the doctors and nurses or tell some of the people ‘you can’t come,’” Becerra said. “Or they would’ve had to charge a lot of people more than what they could afford,” he said.

Whether the healthcare battle will be resolved by the 2016 presidential elections is unclear, but according to Becerra, Congress has to work out a solution because it is “embarrassing” that the U.S. is still “the only industrialized nation in the world that does not offer all its people affordable healthcare.”

“We came a lot closer with the Affordable Care Act; 17 million families now have insurance and they can walk into a facility with dignity…[but] we still have a lot of work to do,” Becerra said.

“It took more than 40 years to get ACA done, how quickly will we perfect this? Who knows, but we will continue working on it.”

Comments