State Senator Emmett Hanger visits the editorial board at The News Leader December 10, 2014. (Photo: Randall K. Wolf , Randall K. Wolf)

With his choice of nomination method upheld in court, Emmett Hanger said he plans to get his bid for a sixth term in the state Senate going this week for a three-way Republican campaign contest likely to decide the election.

Hanger said the choice to have the nomination decided with a primary will involve more people in the crucial ballot race, since the GOP's candidate will likely win the general election in the heavily conservative 24th Senate District.

State law allows anyone to vote in primaries, so Democrats and independents could vote for the nominee on June 9. The leadership of the Republican committee for the 24th District unsuccessfully sued the state law on those grounds, claiming the open primary violates the Constitutional right of free association.

Hanger thinks the primary could be a way to help the Republican party overcome a division between conservatives on one side who tend to be aligned with the tea party faction and more mainstream Republicans on the other.

"I think it's a better way to build the party than what we're accustomed to," said Hanger said Monday.

"Nowadays there's a split in the party, and you have one side trying to take advantage of the other … so that a small group of people can decide who the nominee is gonna be," he said.

The five-term senate incumbent is facing nomination challenges from Marshall Pattie, a business professor and Augusta County supervisor, and businessman Dan Moxley. Donald "D.L." Sheets Jr. has withdrawn from the race.

The leadership of the 24th District Republican Committee challenged in federal court the state law that allows Hanger to choose the nomination method because he's the incumbent. Ken Adams, chairman of the committee, thought the organization's choice of deciding by convention should override the state law.

U.S. District Judge Elizabeth Dillon disagreed, and sided with the state law in a ruling issued last week dismissing the lawsuit.

Conventions typically attract a more conservative base of delegates than primary voters. Many in the GOP's right wing disagreed strongly with Hanger's support for expanding Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act.

Adams said his legal team was considering their options, including appeal. If the decision stands, he thinks the party will overcome its division for what he expects will be a hotly-contested nomination contest.

"They'll all be campaigning aggressively," Adams said.

Marshall Pattie represents North River District on the Augusta County Board of Supervisors. He is one of three candidates hoping to win the nomination for state senate on June 9. (Photo: Submitted)

Read or Share this story: http://www.newsleader.com/story/news/local/2015/04/06/24th-state-senate-district-primary-nomination-lawsuit-dismissed/25364657/