Mary Gastley’s dream of winning another state championship in her 30th season as Ashley Hall’s tennis coach didn’t happen on Saturday at Sumter’s Palmetto Tennis Center.

The SCISA girls Class AAA state final went the limit as expected, but the Panthers were beaten at their own game. Unlike many high school teams, Ashley Hall practices doubles routinely, preparing for the moment that could decide a state championship.

But it wasn’t in the cards. Hammond School’s superior experience and talent at the top of its lineup won this time, much like a year ago when Porter-Gaud came out ahead in the battle of doubles to turn back the Panthers in the state final.

It was 5-4 again, with Ashley Hall’s opponent again winning two of the three doubles.

It could have been senior day in that all five of Hammond’s wins were produced solely by seniors. Also, Ashley Hall’s two senior starters, Gyles Laney and McCrae Nistad, both collected victories in singles while Nistad also won at doubles.

“Yes, I would say that senior experience is an asset,” Gastley admitted.

The Panthers were out-seniored this time. With four starters returning, next year may be a different story.

SCHSL Playoffs

The SCHSL Class AAAA girls state playoffs will begin Wednesday with 2014 state runner-up Wando entertaining White Knoll. The Warriors are in the same quarter of the draw as unbeaten Lexington, the only team to defeat Wando this season.

If the two powerhouses meet again in the Lower State semifinals, the match would be played at Lexington this time. Wando knocked off another unbeaten Lexington team in last year’s Lower State final.

In other first-round Class AAAA matches, Region 8-AAAA runner-up Summerville will play host to Conway, while Fort Dorchester will travel to West Florence.

Bishop England will open defense of its four straight Class AA state championships on Nov. 2.

Local notes

After a two-year layoff, the Charleston Professional Tennis League is back for a second year in a row, and 13th overall as it heads into Friday’s semifinals and finals. The site is still undetermined, due to a change of venue forced by court conditions. For more information, visit cptltennis.org.

Four Lowcountry Tennis Association 18-plus teams won state combo titles last weekend at Hilton Head Island: captain Peter Brechtel’s 6.5 men, John Fanning’s 8.5 men, Mandy Manchester’s 5.5 women and Diana Shirley’s 7.5 women. Three local senior teams also won state titles: Elisabeth Pickelsimer’s 65-plus 7.5 women, Pat Boyd’s 55-plus 8.5 women and Jane Neckhardt’s 40-plus 6.5 women.

Charleston touring tennis professional Shelby Rogers (No. 147) is currently out of action with a back injury sustained in last weekend’s qualifying in Luxembourg. “(My) back is hurt so I am taking time to recover and heal,” she said Saturday from Florida. The injury likely ended Rogers’ hopes of climbing up the rankings high enough to earn a direct entry into January’s Australian Open. Samantha Crawford (175) was a quarterfinalist at $50,000 Saguenay, Canada, last week, while Jessie Pegula (151) made the second round. Ellie Halbauer (421), another player with local connections, made the main draw in Saguenay.

Brant Fenno gained a measure of revenge against Jacob Jahn in the recent USTA Regional in Northcross, Ga., with a straight-set victory in consolation play after both highly regarded local players had lost in the main draw boys 16 quarterfinals. Scotty Cameron and Mark Militzer both were boys 18 quarterfinalists.

Fort Dorchester’s Mittie Asbury has been selected as the Region 8-AAAA coach of the year. The all-region team is made up of Summerville’s Sullivan Long and Paige Reynolds, Fort Dorchester’s Monai Mitchel and Taylor Rodgers, Ashley Ridge’s Arianna Brim and Katelyn Schmedeke, Colleton County’s Alicia Roberson and Anni Crook, and 8-AAAA champion Bluffton’s Cooper Baxter, Rachel Riley and region player of year Natalie Bassett.

Reach James Beck at jamesbecktennis@gmail.com. See his latest columns on Grand Slam tennis at ubitennis.com/english/