The Eagle Cam has registered more than 9.4 million visits since it started in 2008

Mom incubating two eggs on Feb. 22. (Photo: Courtesy of Duke Farms Foundation) Story Highlights There are two eggs in the eagles’ nest at Duke Farms.

Nest is about 70 feet in a sycamore tree

Location of nest remains secret

The Eagle Cam has developed such a dedicated and loyal following that if the mother and father eagles are gone from the nest for a long period of time, Duke Farms starts receiving phone calls from people worried that something bad happened.

“I think it’s fantastic,” said Nora Wagner, director of strategic planning and programs at Duke Farms. “People ask if they’re OK.”

People call when it’s cold or it’s snowing because they are worried about the eggs, she said.

Those phone calls, she said, are evidence that Duke Farms is achieving its primary mission of connecting with the community on conservation issues and making people aware of the importance of protecting the environment.

Watching the Eagle Cam has become an Internet addiction in the period from when the eagles start preparing the nest in late fall to when the eggs hatch in the first weeks of spring and eventually when the eaglets leave the nest. The Eagle Cam has registered more than 9.4 million views since it started in 2008.

The Eagle Cam focuses on a nest about 70 feet off the ground in a sycamore tree on the 2,740-acre former estate of the Duke family, which is now a regional center for environmental stewardship.

The first egg of 2015 was laid Feb. 16 and the second egg followed on the afternoon of Feb. 20. It will take about five weeks for the eggs to hatch.

In 2014, the first egg was laid Feb. 17 with the second on Feb. 20 The hatchings were on March 29 and April 1.

Most of the time, the webcam captures nothing more exciting than an adult eagle protecting the eggs and keeping them warm. When the eggs hatch, the nest becomes busy with activity.

But occasionally there is drama. In a harrowing scene captured by the webcam on March 24, 2013, a red-tailed hawk swooped down on the nest but was killed by one of the adult eagles, who then fed the hawk’s remains to a chick. The webcam captured every second of the life-and-death drama.

Visitors to Duke Farms should not expect to see the eagles. The location of the nest is kept confidential, and the eagles keep private, Wagner said.

Even Wagner, who has worked on the estate for 10 years, said she has seen the eagles “only a handful of times” when they’ve been fishing for food in one of the property’s bountiful lakes.

New this year is a weekly blog, https://dukefarms.wordpress.com/, on the Duke Farms website by naturalist Jim Wright.

Also new this year is a collaboration between Duke Farms and the Conserve Wildlife Foundation of New Jersey to encourage teachers to write lesson plans incorporating the Eagle Cam. The teacher who submits the best plan, Wagner said, will have the “once-in-a-lifetime opportunity” to join biologists and Duke Farms staffers in the banding of the eaglets sometime in May.

An eagles’ nest first was discovered at Duke Farms in 2004. But in 2012, Sandy’s 90-mph winds tore the top off the nest tree, destroying the nest. But like many New Jersey families whose homes were destroyed in the storm, the eagles returned to Duke Farms, and two months after the storm built a new nest in the sycamore, about 100 feet from the first nest. The camera was moved to the new nest tree in fall 2013.

“We’ve come so far,” Wagner said.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1G9hSM5