Photo

Olamide Sanuth, 28, is a manufacturing supervisor and lab technician at Invisible Sentinel, a food test kit maker in Philadelphia.

Q. What does Invisible Sentinel do, and what is your role there?

A. We manufacture test kits that food companies use to test for bacteria, such as E. coli and listeria, in raw food and on surfaces. We also manufacture a kit that tests for what’s called spoilage yeast in red wine. I supervise the other technicians, facilitate the transfer of new products from R.&D. to manufacturing and help integrate robotics into the manufacturing process.

What is your background?

My family immigrated from Nigeria to the U.S. when I was 10. I lived in Indiana from middle school on and got a bachelor’s degree in biology from Purdue University in 2012. That same year, I moved to Philadelphia and enrolled in a chemical technology program at Community College of Philadelphia. While in school, I started an internship at Invisible Sentinel, assembling testing kits.

How did you make the move from intern to employee?

I learned everything I could about the company and did the best job I could. The two company founders came to me the day before my internship was ending and asked me if I wanted to stay, and I said definitely. They promoted me six months later.

What kinds of things have you accomplished in your job?

When I started, we had a batch manufacturing process where a few individuals would each put a test kit together from start to finish. It took six hours to assemble 500 kits. I helped design an assembly line where the same number of people work on only one part of the process. Now we can assemble 1,200 kits in six hours. I also helped hire people for the assembly line.

How would you describe your path from Nigeria to where you are now?

Getting established was difficult. My family was middle class in Nigeria, and my parents had to sell everything and take lower-level jobs here. Nigerian children are expected to be independent fairly early. I’m totally responsible for paying for my education, and I have large loans. But I’m looking into an M.B.A. degree and to adding management to my résumé.