Northampton County employees had a message for their employer: They do not want to pay more for their health insurance. It was a message they expressed passionately and repeatedly at Thursday night's county council meeting.

During a meeting so crowded that council voted to move it from council chambers to a downstairs courtroom, county employees expressed their displeasure over the recent news that they may be expected to contribute more toward their health care coverage in 2015.

County Executive John Brown gave an overview of the changes, the most contentious of which is the employee contribution. A single person now pays $250 a month, which would increase to $500. A family's cost is now $500 and would be going up to $1,000.

The county employees' union representative, Justice James, described employees as "mad as hell" and said Brown's proposal to have county employees contribute more toward their health coverage will effectively cripple them financially and have a trickle-down effect.

"They won't be able to pay taxes, their houses will be foreclosed, they'll have to turn around and apply for food stamps," James said. "It will actually have a negative effect on the county as a whole.

"It's unacceptable. We are asking tonight for this council to start backing up our employees like we back you up," he added, to thunderous applause and cheering.

After James' remarks, many employees got up to let council and Brown know how much of a financial hardship an increase in their contribution would cause.

"Is this decision going to be legal? Moral? Ethical?" Sean Carson asked. "This is putting the entire public at risk for poor service."

Stacy Beaky said she has worked for the county for more than 20 years and has to get groceries at a food bank because her paychecks aren't enough to cover her cost of living, and her credit cards are maxed out as she uses them to put gas in her truck.

"I'm actually thinking about quitting my job and going elsewhere and freezing my pension," she said. "The fact that you don't want to give us a raise … I'm barely scratching by as it is. And now you want to take away more. If this goes through, I will literally not be able to afford to come to work."

Shirley O'Brien said her department is severely understaffed and the stress is compounding daily. She said she had to visit her doctor because of the stress and now takes Xanax.

"Now I'm underpaid, I'm stressed, and I'm drugged in order to work here," O'Brien said. "Is this what you want?"

Twenty-one year employee David Keiser accused the administration of "balancing the budget on the employees' backs."

James said he doesn't understand why the county is forcing the health care contribution changes on employees in 2015, when the Affordable Health Care Act doesn't go into effect until 2018.

Councilman Ken Kraft cautioned everyone in attendance that council cannot vote on the measure. Brown has said previously that he can implement the changes without council approval. However, Kraft said, council does vote on the budget, where the proposed changes would appear.

"The Affordable Health Care Act is not the driving reason behind these changes," Brown said, adding that the county's health care costs have increased year-over-year for the past six years. In 2008, the county paid $16.7 million toward employees' health benefit, that's expected to go up to $23.5 million next year, he said.

Council Chairwoman Peg Ferraro said she thinks the county administration needs to meet with employees in smaller groups to better disseminate information and quell the rampant rumors.

"To have a conversation about health care costs is appropriate, but to talk about increasing premiums across the board and not give raises, that's not an appropriate conversation," said Councilman Lamont McClure to a standing ovation from the crowd.

Christy Potter is a freelance writer.