"To try to get all of us to agree is not an easy job. The founders never envisioned to be easy." - House Speaker John Boehner

U.S. House Speaker John Boehner traded his signature dark suit and crisp shirt on Thursday capitalizing on the idea that the ongoing Congressional Republican retreat in Hershey is an opportunity to get away from the demands of Washington and relax a little.

But taking to the podium for a midday press briefing, Boehner, dressed in blue jeans, a zipped down navy sweater, pink shirt and tassel loafers, answered questions with a tone fit for a political lashing: "The president's focus is on the past on old politics pitting one set of Americans against the other on the outdated ways of bureaucratic control all top down Washington solutions. What's that produced? Record debt and shaky economy. The country, I believe, is eager to move on. We need to start growing America's economy not Washington's economy."

Boehner and the largest Republican majority in Congress since before World War II may have been enjoying the chocolate and amenities at The Hershey Lodge (on the dime of The Congressional Institute), but they reportedly were sinking their teeth into some of the meatiest and thorniest legislative issues in Washington: the budget, the economy, healthcare and immigration.

Away from the scrutiny of the media, lawmakers gathered on Thursday in closed-door sessions and meetings to craft policy, a vision and the road forward toward 2016. Almost every lawmaker that stopped by the media center echoed the same sentiment: Member of the respective chambers may work in close geographic proximity, but they have little opportunity such as this one to let down their guard and get to know each other and how their chambers work. And Boehner is well aware that Congress has rifts to mend, outside and within his own party, if its going to get anything accomplished.

"There are 535 of us on Capitol Hill," Boehner said. "To try to get all of us to agree is not an easy job. The founders never envisioned to be easy."

All day, lawmakers spoke about finding common ground with Democrats, which they will need to advance their policies. Even though they have full control of Congress, Republicans need a handful of votes from Democrats to override any potential presidential veto.

From talk about tax reform, to immigration and entitlement programs reform, Boehner left no doubt of the gulf between Republicans and their counterparts in Washington.

"The president was never that serious about doing the kinds of reforms that would put America's fiscal health in proper shape," the Speaker said. "I like to be hopeful. I'm a hopeful person, but I've got my doubts about whether the president would seriously get into this."

The two-day legislative retreat drew hordes of national media to the midstate, although access to the lawmakers was carefully orchestrated by GOP handlers and members of The Congressional Institute, which is sponsoring and footing the bulk of the bill for the retreat. Many of the lawmakers traveled to Hershey with families.

Throughout the day, lawmakers echoed each other on their determination to safeguard their pet legislative policies while unraveling some of the president's key pieces of legislation, namely the Affordable Care Act and the immigration amnesty program. The House on Thursday approved an appropriations bill that would defund President Obama's program to grant amnesty from deportation to millions of undocumented immigrants.

The Senate needs 60 votes to override a presidential veto.

Said Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell at the press briefing: "We are going to try to pass it."

Boehner and McConnell appeared at the press room podium with Iowa's Sen. Joni Ernst, announcing that she will deliver the GOP's response to the State of Union address next week. Ernst is the first female veteran in the Senate

Taking a pointed question from a member of the media on whether he believed in climate change, Boehner said: "We've had changes in our climate although scientists debate the sources in their opinion of that change. But I think the real question is that every proposal out of this administration with regard to climate change means killing American jobs. The American people are still asking the question, 'where are the jobs? Jobs and the economy are still the No. 1 issue in this country. I just don't understand why every proposal that comes out of the administration is going to kill thousands of more American jobs."

Just hours after authorities arrested an Ohio man on charges that he plotted to blow up the U.S. Capitol, Boehner praised a controversial government surveillance program known for alerting law enforcement.

Authorities on Friday arrested 20-year-old Christopher Lee Cornell on charges of attempting to kill a U.S. government official.

Boehner said the foiled attack served a reminder of the dangers "out there."

"It's one thing to get a threat from far away. It's another to get one from three doors from where you live," Boehner said. "Obviously this young man has mental health issues that need to be addressed. I hope he gets the help he needs."

Cornell's arrest came only days after authorities charged another Cincinnati-area resident with threatening to murder Boehner.

Boehner singled out the surveillance program, FISA, an acronym for the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, as an important one to reauthorize.

"Our government doesn't spy on Americans unless they are doing something that tips off law enforcement of imminent threat," the Speaker said.

Boehner said the most positive thing to come out of the retreat so far was the coming together of House and Senate members.

"We've all had an opportunity to get to know each other a little bit better," he said. "We want House and Senate Republicans working together with our Democrat colleagues to advance solutions. It's kind of hard to do that when you don't have a good feel for who these people are."