It's a kava-up: Vanuatu and Niue players celebrate after the final whistle. Niue were making their international rugby league debut and went down 22-20 in a thriller at Municipal Stadium. Photo: Steve Mascord

1.WHAT IN THE WORLD?

According to the Rugby League International Federation constitution, the gates of all Tests are to be levied with the money going into central funds. The levy is supposed to apply, as a percentage, the same to Saturday's Vanuatu-Niue game in Port Vila as April's Australia-New Zealand match in Canberra. But is it being applied at all? The 2008 World Cup made a reported $4 million profit. How was this spent? If we are all to get behind the 2013 tournament with our cash and enthusiasm, surely a little transparency in return isn't too much to ask? The fact is, domestic leagues don't want the RLIF taking sponsors and other financial opportunities off them - and that's been holding back international footy for years.

2. INS AND OUTS

Chicko rolled: Penrith hooker James Segeyaro is out of Papua New Guinea's World Cup squad with a shoulder injury. Photo: Anthony Johnson

Another player who could have shone in the World Cup is out. Hooker James Segeyaro's shoulder injury forced him to withdraw from the Papua New Guinea side over the weekend. Italy have lost both first-choice halves, Terry Campese and Craig Gower, but Tonga's Brent Kite is playing on despite hand and wrist injuries. Samoa coach Matt Parish has not had a good time of it. Frank Pritchard, Krisnan Inu and Roger Tuivasa-Sheck were nabbed by the Kiwis while Jeff Lima, Steve Matai and Carlos Tuimavave were ruled out injured. It appears Matai played in the NRL grand final with a serious hand injury. He ran straight up the tunnel at fulltime against South Sydney the previous week – perhaps he suffered it then. He's been named as a technical advisor for the Samoans.

Advertisement

3. PACIFIC PRINCES

It used to be that you could comfortably make it to every rugby league international played in a given year. Yet on one of the quietest weekends of the year, NSW Country beat South African Clubs Selection 50-0 in Silverton, Vanuatu beat Niue 22-20 in Port Vila and Greece downed Thailand 90-0 in Bangkok. The Port Vila game was a great spectacle, with players from both teams forming a circle for a prayer at fulltime and celebrating long into the night – with the referee! Self-starting countries like these need all the help they can get from the RLIF. But it's a double-edged sword – the Federation probably wouldn't let them use players who qualify through great grandparents (and there were plenty of them), or allow five reserves!

Busman's holiday: Gold Coast hooker Matt Srama took a break in Vanuatu unaware there was a rugby league international taking place in Port Vila. Photo: Getty Images

4. THAIS HAVE LEGS

On the surface, there wasn't much for the Thais to be happy about when they were beaten 90-0 by Greece at Technology Stadium, Bangkok, on Saturday. But in the stands for the game run by Shannon Crane's Thai Rugby League was the boss of the rival organisation, Andrew Charles. Charles' Thailand Stars play the Philippines away next week and several of those players – including Queensland-based Charlie Jones - turned out in Crane's team. Charles was also invited to a sponsor's function. The result of the game is compelling proof a country that has so far hosted just two rugby league games cannot continue with the folly of two governing bodies. Despite the thrashing, everyone also seemed to have a good time afterwards.

5. SMALL WORLD

Strolling along Port Vila waterfront on Sunday night, Set Of Six was stunned to run into Gold Coast Titans hooker Matt Srama and his girlfriend. With a trip to the Philippines on hold because of a shoulder injury, Srama decided to head to Vanuatu completely oblivious to the fact a rugby league international was being played there. Titans official Matt Francis – who spoke to several promising local players – must have missed Srama at the airport by a matter of hours on Sunday. Honourable mention, too, to the local French film-makers who shot the Vanuatu players walking towards the camera, Melbourne Storm style, at training two days before the Niue game and turned it into a slick promo video at lightning speed. One suspects they were not paid anything like what our game shells out for similar clips in England, New Zealand and Australia.

6. AMERICAN CIVIL WAR CONTINUES

Jacksonville Axemen owner Daryl 'Spinner' Howland continues to rail against the number of foreign-based players in the United States World Cup team. Now comes a claim the team might actually be, in some regards, illegal. Howland has cited the Ted Stevens Act, which impacts on amateur sports in the US and their relationship with the US Olympic Committee. However, given that other sides at the World Cup have fewer, and even no, domestic players, it's hard to see anything changing with regard to the Tomahawks. In more positive news for Spinner, the Axemen have launched their own beer.