Buy Photo Gavel (Photo: The Register)Buy Photo

For the next 30 months anyway, a college student facing drunk-driving charges might be safe from being plied with alcohol by a lawyer she hired to represent her. A victim of domestic abuse might not be kissed and asked to show her breasts by the same attorney, while he represents her abusive boyfriend in a probation revocation hearing. She might not end up drunk and having sex with the lawyer when he then represents her in a separate case.

Maybe for these two and a half years, a mentally unstable, substance-abusing single mother in transitional housing won't be enticed to give oral sex, for $100, to the same court-appointed attorney hired to help get her kids back from foster care.

But after 30 months, it's anyone's guess whom Gerald Moothart might again exploit. That's the minimum time the Iowa Supreme Court last week suspended his law license for, after its Attorney Disciplinary Board charged him with professional violations, and the Grievance Commission and court concurred. The court gets credit for acting. But given how deliberate and depraved a pattern Moothart showed of preying on vulnerable, often low-income women, his license to practice should have been permanently revoked.

He tried to use clients in tough situations as objects for his sexual gratification, according to Supreme Court documents. Other victims between 2006 and 2011 included an 18-year-old Moothart was appointed to represent on a first-offense drunk-driving charge. At their first meeting, he asked her to pull her shirt down and show him her cleavage. When she asked his fees, he said that depended on how much cleavage she showed. She took her mother and sister along for the second meeting, but he wouldn't allow them in, and again asked her to pull her shirt down. After the third meeting, he asked her if they could get drinks and sit in a hot tub.

A fifth victim was an employee of Moothart's whom he was representing in a marriage dissolution. He asked her to perform lap dances on him and brandished a 20-dollar bill, saying she could have it if she danced naked on the conference-room table. On prior occasions, the court said she had given him a ride to work and he grabbed her breasts; he showed her a picture of a sex toy and asked if he should order it so they could have sex using it; and he looked up her dress and commented on her underwear while connecting wires on the floor. She also testified he constantly commented on clients' breasts, and kept alcohol in his office to supply to certain ones.

The court concluded Moothart sexually harassed all five women, who are not named, had sexual relations with two in violation of professional standards, and had a conflict of interests in one woman's case. "A vulnerable layperson cannot consent to sexual advances made by her attorney," the court said. He'll have to pass an evaluation by a health professional and complete sexual-harassment counseling before regaining his license.

Moothart's pattern of predatory behavior came to light when he was charged criminally with misdemeanor assault with intent to commit sexual abuse in the first victim's case. According to the Supreme Court and The Ames Tribune, Moothart had entered a DUI plea for her in exchange for a deferred judgment. Months later she contacted him, as instructed, to get a letter recommending an early end to her probation. In his office, he served her three or four mixed drinks, watched her get drunk, and asked her to show him her breasts. Though she was extremely uncomfortable, the court said she did. Later he took her to a dark room with a couch, where he made sexually suggestive remarks and she ended up on his lap. She said later she didn't remember how she got there. She had him take her home, and told her parents. Her father called Moothart that night and when they later spoke, Moothart didn't dispute the events.

Moothart is lucky. A jury found him not guilty in June 2011. The case prompted the other four women to file complaints with police and the Supreme Court, though there's no record of criminal prosecutions. In 2005 he pleaded guilty to second offense OWI and was sentenced to two years, but had to serve only seven days.

It no doubt helps that he's considered a good lawyer, has mentored other attorneys and developed methods others use, and held prestigious appointments. But, as Iowa Coalition Against Sexual Assault Director Beth Barnhill puts it, after such egregious conduct over the years, "It's hard to think that in 30 months, this individual would change into someone that would be safe to practice."

Iowa law provides specific criminal penalties for sexual exploitation by counselors, therapists or school district employees, ranging from simple misdemeanors to Class D felonies. But not only is there nothing equivalent for lawyers, current law doesn't even consider breasts a sexual body part. A bill currently before the Senate would change that.

Iowa has made progress in taking sexual assault seriously, but we still have a ways to go. In this case, all the board memberships and innovative legal strategies in the world can't make up for getting a woman struggling with alcohol abuse drunk so she's easier to molest. Moothart belongs on the sex-offender registry, not in a law office.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1CaSPtc