Topics: allied feather & down, Animal cruelty, Animals, down, down coats, Editor's Picks, geese, goose down, north face, winter coats, Sustainability News, Life News

Now that the weather has turned cold in New York City, down is having its fashion moment. Every other person seems to be wearing the kind of brightly colored jackets once the province of serious climbers and hikers. On the streets of Manhattan I saw a dog wearing a puffer coat; several varieties of that style are available at Barneys. Right before Thanksgiving, a teen was shot at the Bryant Park ice rink over a Marmot down jacket, the Mammoth, also known as the “Biggie.”

I grew up in the snow-swept tundras of northern Minnesota and am well-acquainted with down’s unparalleled warmth for clothes and bedding. The trouble with it then was finding a way to stuff it so that you didn’t look like the Michelin Man. With new ways of sewing down into smaller tubular shapes (“baffles” as they are called), fashionable silhouettes are possible. And even after a brief flirtation with Thinsulate, hardcore companies that equip climbers for the real outdoors, like REI and North Face, always come back to down.

What is down? “Down” generally refers to goose down (it is also sourced, but much less frequently, from ducks). It is the soft layer of tiny feathers closest to the bird’s body. Cheap down jackets might not be made of down at all, but chopped large flight feathers that, because they are flat, will eventually line up with each other and result in a collapsed, sagging product that doesn’t have the same kind of warmth. A single piece of down is called a “plumule,” basically a multidirectional puff. These plumules interlock and trap tiny pockets of air — it’s actually this layer of air that keeps the cold out and the warmth in. Down provides about three times more warmth per ounce than synthetics; that is, it’s warmer and lighter and doesn’t mat down over time as synthetics will do. It’s also resilient; I have a mid-length down coat that I can actually stuff into my handbag, a great disappearing act. Then it springs out, good as new.

Well-made down products thus can last a long time. I still use a nice down comforter from many years ago, and I used to joke while cuddling under it at night about nightmares of sad, plucked geese shivering in the cold.

That actually isn’t that far from the truth.

Even if you are careful to buy only free-range eggs and non-factory farmed meat products, you might be shocked to learn that your comfy and fashionable down may have come at the price of an animal’s suffering.

Down is often collected through a procedure called live plucking. Which is pretty much what it sounds like: A worker restrains the bird and rips out feathers by the handfuls, especially from the goose’s underbelly but sometimes also from the back. Often, pieces of skin come off as well, the birds scream in terror and struggle to get away. Sometimes they die from the trauma. Just Google “down cruelty” and you’ll find plenty of pictures of miserable, bald and dying geese straight from my nightmare. Animal rights groups contend that this practice encompasses 50-80 percent of all down.

Down obtained post-slaughter as a byproduct of meat production is considered less cruel, but it doesn’t mean that the geese haven’t been raised in crowded, inhumane factory-like conditions. According to Veterinary Practice News, “geese on Hungarian factory farms [where much of the world’s down comes from] are raised in small areas that may contain up to 20,000 geese.” Gray geese, in particular, get the worst of both worlds: They are raised for down and foie gras (mostly in Hungary, where it is still legal; all EU nations but five have banned the raising of geese for foie gras), which means the birds often endure up to six rounds of live-plucking while being force-fed and then slaughtered for their swollen livers.