VAIL — In the world of fishing, some words need no translation. “Rainbow,” “brown” and “trout” are prime examples. And this week, “champion” can be included in the lexicon.

This week’s sixth annual America Cup fly-fishing tournament brings an international field of 75 fly-fishermen to the rivers and lakes of Eagle and Summit counties for an intense angling competition that doubles as the first of three rehearsal events for the 2016 world fly-fishing championships in Vail. Competitors from Japan, Australia, Europe and throughout the U.S. will apply their long-rod skills to the Blue and Colorado rivers along with Dillon Reservoir and Sylvan Lake near Eagle.

“We’re speaking the common language of fly-fishing,” event director John Knight of Minturn said. “You’re not playing for money. You’re playing for the prestige of winning the cup, medals and bragging rights.”

Money, however, does play a part in the event many consider the largest and most prestigious fly-fishing competition in the U.S. The America Cup serves as a fundraiser for Project Healing Waters, donating $5,000 last year to the nonprofit group focused on introducing wounded war veterans to fly-fishing.

Before the 15-team tournament begins Friday, competing anglers and volunteer guides from the Vail Valley are taking Project Healing Waters participants from Fort Carson to fish the Eagle River and ponds of historic Camp Hale, where the 10th Mountain Division trained during World War II.

“It’s a great way to start the event and give something back to the soldiers,” Knight said.

The Project Healing Waters portion of the America Cup showcases the pervading attitude of competitive fly-fishing’s most prominent ambassadors. Part of the philosophy behind European organization FIPS-Mouche-sanctioned championships such as the America Cup is that they are conducted in accordance with the Olympic ideal.

After five years of establishing its character and the quality of its fisheries, Knight’s event impressed the sport’s governing body for international competition enough that it awarded its most prestigious competition, the world fly-fishing championships, to a U.S. host for the first time since 1997 in Jackson, Wyo. The junior world championships will preface the 2016 world championships in Vail in 2015.

“It’s been a big goal of a lot of fishermen and myself to bring the world fly-fishing championships back to the U.S.,” Knight said. “It really showcases the diversity of the water in Colorado.”

The fishing on display in Vail this week and at the world championship events won’t look anything like the Western artistry typically shown in the media and movies such as ” A River Runs Through It.” Instead, think surgical precision and methodical procedure as teams of five anglers apply a specific technique generally referred to as “Czech nymphing.”

The technique accommodates a set of rules specific to international competition.

“You fish a really lean setup that doesn’t allow extra items like sinkers and strike indicators,” Knight said. “It’s a whole other way to fish, but the bottom line is they catch more fish.”

The high-stick nymphing technique with weighted flies is one that American competitors have struggled with in the past, although the future looks bright for the home team. Team USA Youth won the junior world championships in Ireland this summer as 16-year-old Cam Chioffi became the youngest individual world champion in history.

The team took the bronze medal at the 2012 America Cup, just behind the adult members of Team USA, captained by Anthony Naranja of Denver, and within two points of last year’s champion, Team Emerger, from Ireland. This year the Americans wade into competition with the top team in the world, from the Czech Republic.

“This youth team couldn’t be more confident,” Knight said.

Colorado’s fishing community is encouraged to get in on the action Thursday, when a $5 entry fee allows anyone with any size of fly rod a chance to compete for a cash prize in “The Cup Casting Comp,” held at 4 p.m. on Vail’s International Bridge. A few volunteers are still needed to measure and score fish in the ensuing tournament.

Visit the website at Theamericacup.com or call Knight at 970-376-5703 for information.