Additional archival collections documenting area's history are hoped for

Boulder County history buffs, rejoice.

Boulder's Carnegie Branch Library for Local History last week received a fresh addition to its already voluminous collection of historical photographs and glass plate negatives documenting the area's history from approximately 1850 through about 1910.

Composed of 3,431 photographs in 49 meticulously labeled albums and 58 glass plate negatives originally collected and catalogued by famed Boulder mountain park ranger Martin Parsons, the historical bounty was delivered to the library Friday by Parsons' grandniece, Jeri Schricker.

When he died in 1965, Parsons bequeathed 3,606 glass print negatives, including many from famous early-day Boulder photographer, Joseph--"Rocky Mountain Joe"--Sturtevant, to the Boulder Historical Society, which later placed them on permanent loan at the library, located at 1125 Pine St.

Schricker, who now lives in California after growing up in the tiny community of Valmont, just east of Boulder, explained that her family also inherited some of Parsons' collection, which they have enjoyed in the decades since. She said the time felt right to donate much of the collection to the library.

"A lot of these albums stuck in our family because we enjoyed looking at them. At family reunions, the albums would come out." Schricker said. "I'm happy to have them in Boulder where they belong. Martin would be happy."

The albums are dedicated to area communities such as Ward, Louisville and Eldora, infrastructure like Barker Dam, railroads and Boulder streetcars and events including the "Boulder Fire of 1907." The glass plate negatives cover categories including wagons, and Boulder's old fire department "hose teams."

"He was a hoarder but he was a neat hoarder," Schricker said of her great uncle.

Schricker's family still has a number of artifacts, including some guns, from the early days of Boulder County. Those are expected to be donated to the Boulder History Museum once it relocates to its new location, the former Masonic Lodge located at 2205 Broadway, next door to the Carnegie Library.

Now in the hands of Carnegie Branch manager Wendy Hall and archivist Marti Anderson, Schricker's donation -- which also included a box with thousands of loose negatives -- will now be sorted, catalogued and checked for duplicates of photos already housed at the library.

Hall said she woke up at 6 a.m. Friday because of her excitement over the incoming donation, and she hopes others with pictures and artifacts from the area's early history will also consider a donation to the library.

"We know there are other collections out there that will help us document Boulder County's history and we encourage people to donate them so they are accessible to everyone who is researching," Hall said. "To think there are still photos from 150 years ago that we don't have and no one has seen, to us, is very exciting."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Joe Rubino at 303-473-1328, rubinoj@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/JoeCarmenRubino.