Intensity and an injury were the reverberating themes at Wednesday’s joint practice between the Broncos and Houston Texans. Twenty hours after Peyton Manning called out the offense — ” We stunk,” — the Broncos’ first-teamers scored touchdowns on Manning’s first two passes, precise spirals to Julius Thomas and Demaryius Thomas.

Well into the second day of hitting each other, and the first in full pads, the teams became testy. Broncos cornerback Aqib Talib and Texans running back Ronnie Brown jawed at each other, and Houston’s J.J. Watt didn’t seem particularly pleased with Denver right tackle Chris Clark.

It was more of a slow boil than a feud, typical for these shared practice sessions.

For the second consecutive week, the Broncos likely lost a key player. Jordan Norwood, who appeared to have the team made as the sixth receiver and starting punt returner, injured his left knee on a passing play while covered by Houston’s Brandon Harris. Norwood walked into the Broncos’ facility on crutches and sporting a heavy brace. There’s concern that he tore his left anterior cruciate ligament, which would sideline him for the season.

Norwood’s absence leaves free-agent receiver Isaiah Burse a potential path to the final roster. He must show improvement, however, as the Broncos could elect to go with Wes Welker on punt returns. Denver has had an undrafted free agent make its final roster for 10 consecutive seasons.

Last week, the Broncos lost linebacker Danny Trevathan for 6-to-8 weeks with a fractured left tibia. Trevathan had his toe stepped on, locking his leg as he was struck.

Footnotes

Defensive coordinator Jack Del Rio remains pleased with Von Miller’s progress. The linebacker continues to receive full practice work, and remains on track to start the season opener. It has not been decided whether Miller will play in the preseason. … Emmanuel Sanders (quadriceps), Kayvon Webster (ankle) and Virgil Green (calf) worked out with the trainer, but did not practice. Sanders said that he isn’t sure if he will play again in the preseason. It’s unlikely the receiver will this week. The Broncos, for now, believe he has time to get ready and regain his timing with Manning. … Manning wasn’t the only one upset with the offense on Monday. Coordinator Adam Gase spoke his mind in a meeting. “I said my piece. It was important that we had a better day. It’s not like we are in there patting each other on the back (based on the preseason),” Gase said. … Top overall draft pick Jadeveon Clowney didn’t finish practice Wednesday, leaving with a half-hour remaining with an undisclosed injury. He collided with an offensive player before leaving. The Texans’ linebacker watched the rest of practice from a tent, removing his shoulder pads. He has been a limited participant in the preseason as he recovers from sports hernia surgery performed in June. … Bennie Fowler made a leaping catch from third-string quarterback Zac Dysert during 11-on-11 work.

Troy E. Renck: , trenck@denverpost.com or twitter.com/troyrenck