POLITICO Pro Low-key but on target, Obamacare season nears its end

Obamacare enrollment draws to a close Sunday night, and all signs point to the White House easily meeting its target of getting 9 million Americans covered in 2015 — a drama-free ending to a season that proved a 180-degree turnaround from last year’s many problems.

The quiet conclusion isn’t just because HealthCare.gov hasn’t been on the verge of collapse. The White House intentionally adopted a lower key, more targeted pitch this year. There were a lot fewer star-studded tweets promoting the website and coverage.

Story Continued Below

Still, there’s likely to be some buzz as the clock ticks toward the Sunday midnight PST deadline. President Barack Obama himself appeared in a self-mocking BuzzFeed video Thursday, in which he used silly faces, aviator sunglasses, milk and cookies and a “selfie stick” to publicize the Feb. 15 cutoff. It went viral immediately — with the administration reporting more than 22 million hits in roughly 24 hours — and then was followed by a wacky YouTube video in which Vice President Joe Biden also pitched enrollment.

Other White House and Health and Human Services officials have been hitting the local airwaves, holding online chats aimed at attracting Latinos and young African-Americans and traveling to meet with enrollment workers around the country. Marketplace CEO Kevin Counihan was in Florida and Ohio last weekend. HHS Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell was in Texas Friday to visit clinics and enrollment centers.

The sense of normalcy, an inevitable result of not having a dysfunctional website, helped put the Obama administration on track to hit its own coverage target — although perhaps not the 12 million most recently estimated by the Congressional Budget Office.

Combining HHS data on enrollment through HealthCare.gov and the 14 state-run exchanges, more than 10 million people had signed up as of earlier this month. That means they’d selected a plan, but many still have to make their first premium payment to get covered. Inevitably, some won’t do that.

But a sign-up surge from the procrastinators is likely through Sunday night. In addition, some people can sign up outside the usual enrollment period as changes occur in their jobs or family status. So the numbers of people covered will fluctuate in the coming months, and it will take time to get the payment data from health plans to have a more complete picture of this season’s outcome.

Moreover, Burwell said Friday that the administration might offer some enrollment flexibility around the April 15 tax deadline, so that people who suddenly realize they face a penalty for remaining uninsured could have an opportunity to remedy that.

Officials believe simple steps to make signing up easier, like streamlining last year’s multi-click online application from 76 to 16 screens, are paying off.

“The difference in the enrollment experience between this year and last year is pretty dramatic,” Counihan said Wednesday.

The exchanges on the whole are working well, the outreach groups that were getting their feet wet last year are now experienced and entrenched, and people are beginning to use their new health benefits, although there is still concern about high deductibles and out-of-pocket costs. Survey after survey has shown the uninsurance rate is falling across the country, including in states that resisted Obamacare.

Yet the quiet enrollment season doesn’t mean Obamacare’s troubles are over. Far from it.

The Affordable Care Act continues to face unprecedented political headwinds in the states and at the federal level, with another big Supreme Court challenge. Enrollment of minorities and younger adults, which are historically harder to reach, could be stronger. Plan affordability remains challenging, even though the overwhelming number of people getting covered are getting subsidies.

And at the end of the day, as former Massachusetts Health Connector Executive Director Jon Kingsdale said recently, health insurance is still a “grudge buy.” For all of the celebrations about HHS nearly attaining its goal, millions of Americans remain uncovered.

“We still have tens of millions of uninsured people in the United States,” Shoshanna Sofaer, a health policy professor at Baruch College, noted at an Academy Health conference in Washington this week.

“I think we should all be holding the ACA to a higher bar of performance. I think looking out three to five years, we really have to look and see, did this lead to anything vaguely resembling universal coverage?” she added.

HHS’s latest sign-up figures for the 37 states using HealthCare.gov show that nearly 7.8 million people had enrolled as of early February, and at least 2.4 million have signed up through the exchanges operated by 13 states and the District of Columbia.

However, nearly 3 million people who applied for coverage through the federal exchange had not taken the next step of choosing a specific health plan. Some may do so in the remaining days.

“I think there are a lot of people who go look at it and say, ‘Eh, it’s not that great a deal,’” said Timothy Jost, a Washington and Lee University law professor and a supporter of the law. Once someone has an income larger than 200 percent of the federal poverty level — $23,540 for an individual and $48,500 for a four-person household — the law’s premium subsidies decline dramatically.

“You’re spending a lot of money for a policy with a very high deductible that you’re probably, if you’re basically healthy, unlikely to use,” Jost said.

Erin Hemlin, health care campaign director for Young Invincibles, a nonprofit that engages young adults on several domestic policy issues, said one of the biggest challenges this year was the timing of the enrollment season. It spanned the holidays and a period when students were both wrapping up and starting new semesters. She said the functionality of the website has made up for the shorter enrollment period, which was three months for 2015, half the amount of time of last year’s.

Through January, individuals 18 to 34 years old comprised 26 percent of sign-ups through HealthCare.gov. Federal officials say their numbers are expected to increase through Sunday, as young adults have already shown a tendency to wait until the last minute.

“We’re feeling really good. The numbers are great,” Hemlin said.

For this closing weekend, Young Invincibles is co-hosting big events at a Miami community center and at a Hampton Roads, Virginia convention center. In contrast to the strategy used earlier in the sign-up season, the events are less about entertainment and more about enrollment.

In-person outreach has been especially important among Latinos, helping get past language barriers and fears about exposing an undocumented family member. But enrollment groups acknowledge the uninsured rate among Hispanics is likely to stay stubbornly high.

HHS figures released in late January showed that 10 percent of individuals who chose plans were Latino. In California, data released in January said 50 percent of those determined eligible were Latino. Only 28 percent of actual plan sign-ups were from that ethnic group.

Location is one of the factors to blame, said Steven Lopez, manager of National Council of La Raza’s Health Policy Project.

“In states like Texas and Florida, where the state has been opposed to doing anything, it’s really falling on the shoulders of hospitals and nonprofit organizations” to spread the word and assist enrollment, he said.

The administration has done a good job of fixing technical issues that made it harder for Hispanics to enroll, including fields that better accommodate names with accent marks and hyphens. But there’s no fast way to encourage a “culture of coverage” among the Latino community, Lopez said.

“We’re talking about a population that has been shut out of meaningful opportunities for coverage for so long. It’s just going take time to familiarize them with this concept of insurance and address various concerns that they might have,” he said.

Judy Solomon with the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities also said minority populations get hung up on a very complicated verification process that takes place when they apply.

“I think we have a lot of work to do on the application and how we ask people questions,” she said.

Tim McKinney, president of the United Way of Tarrant County in Texas, said having pre-populated information on the applications has been helpful, yet getting timely information to verify employment coverage is a large problem. The United Way branch received federal navigator grants for 2014 and 2015, working with several organizations to promote enrollment across Texas.

When navigators call the HealthCare.gov call center to get help, the representatives “pretty much follow scripted responses and are not able to answer individualized questions,” he said.

Those are issues navigators have encountered, yet on the upside confusion among consumers seems to be declining compared with last year, McKinney said. The people who had coverage have begun to experience seeking care and understand how insurance works, and each year will become easier as people get more comfortable.

Larry Levitt of the Kaiser Family Foundation, which focuses on health policy, said there’s no doubt people drop out of the enrollment process before they get to the finish, and there could be a whole host of reasons that still aren’t clear.

Things aren’t working perfectly, he said — but at least they’re working.

Natalie Villacorta, Jennifer Haberkorn and Sarah Wheaton contributed to this report.

Authors: