“Everyone should take the community health needs survey,” says Sandy O’Ferrall, a Leadership Mendocino Class XXII graduate who works at Ukiah Valley Medical Center. “It’s a fifteen minute commitment and easy to access on the Healthy Mendocino website.” The deadline for taking the online survey is Sept. 30.

O’Ferrall, along with community members across Mendocino County formed a committee to reach out to the public to participate in the Community Health Needs Assessment (CHNA). “We’re not just talking about the number or lack of primary care docs, where you get your prescriptions, or how was your hospital stay,” says O’Ferrall.

“Community health encompasses social determinants that make up a community such as housing, employment, education, transportation, personal safety, and environmental factors,” says Susan Baird Kanaan, another member of the CHNA committee.

The questions are all multi-choice and include such topics as “What do you think are the three most important factors that make this county a good place to live?” It is followed by a list of 16 factors and a place to write your own if what you want to say isn’t included. Another asks “Does stress have a negative impact on your quality of life?” The answers range from “Never” to “Sometimes” to “All the Time.” The surveys are completely anonymous.

The survey is part of a national trend that came into focus with the passage of the Affordable Care Act. “We are mandated to lay the groundwork beyond what five people sitting around a table think,” says Baird. “In order to really make a difference and concentrate on potential solutions we need a broad range of residents to take the survey. Get your friends, families, neighbors, and clients to go online and spend a few minutes giving your opinions.”

“This survey is an opportunity for all residents to inform and direct how we as a county will work to improve our health and community resources today and into the future,” says Miles Gordon, Leadership Mendocino Class XIX and NCO Food Systems Director who represents North Coast Opportunities on the CHNA committee.

“It’s important to get a representative cross section that reflects as much as possible what Mendocino looks like as a whole,” says Baird. “This is a way to connect community wide efforts through our own personal experiences.”

The coalition will use the findings to develop a Community Health Improvement Plan that prioritizes the health needs of Mendocino County residents and sets goals as well as short-and long-term strategies to achieve them.

“This is our opportunity to have a say in which issues we feel are top priority that need to improve and we can work on as a community,” says O’Ferrall.

Advertisement

Once the results are tabulated and prioritized, the CHNA committee will reach out again to the public to share their findings. Community input will be included to finesse the results and help prioritize an action plan. The CHNA coalition includes Healthy Mendocino, the comprehensive website that is partnered with the 211 call center, Ukiah Valley Medical Center, Frank Howard Hospital, the Mendocino Coast Clinics, Alliance for Rural Community Health Care, Mendocino County Health and Human Services, and North Coast Opportunities.

The survey is available on Healthy Mendocino.org and Mendocino County’s Public Health website. It is also available in print form, in English and Spanish, from Patrice Mascolo, director of Healthy Mendocino at 467-3228 or healthymendocino@ncoinc.org and Samantha Kinney, data analyst at Mendocino County’s Health and Human Services Agency, at 472.2793 or kinneys@co.mendocino.ca.us.

Heidi Cusick Dickerson is the director of Leadership Mendocino, a ten month program that explores Mendocino County issues, opportunities and challenges. Class XXIII has just begun.