For Chief Executive Meg Whitman’s Hewlett Packard Enterprise, the challenge will be to attract corporate buyers. David Paul Morris/Bloomberg News

Good morning. The separation of the old Hewlett-Packard into two smaller, and yet somehow still massive, tech companies is now complete. Hewlett Packard Enterprise Co., under the leadership of Meg Whitman, starts trading today. The higher margin printer company, led by Dion Weisler, now known as HP Inc., “no longer will underwrite the corporate information technology sold by Ms. Whitman’s new company,” the WSJ’s Robert McMillan writes. HP Inc. will have the luxury of plowing more money into R&D.

The rise of cloud computing challenges the new enterprise company. It will have to “attract corporate buyers, who increasingly look to cloud-computing technology offered by the likes of Amazon.com Inc. and Microsoft Last week, H-P abandoned a five-year effort to build a competitor to Amazon’s AWS cloud service, leaving HPE with nothing to offer in that area,” Mr. McMillan writes.

Toni Sacconaghi, an analyst with Sanford C. Bernstein & Co., tells the WSJ that “a big part of the market is moving in a single direction, and H-P arguably doesn’t have offerings to cater to those [customers] … Traditional vendors have challenges in terms of that migration, but you could argue that others have at least taken more visible, positive steps in that direction.” International Business Machines Corp. and Oracle have articulated clear goals for shifting to a cloud-based business model and taken steps in the direction. Oracle co-CEO Mark Hurd says the company has rebuilt almost 100% of its applications for the cloud. Both companies have embraced an elaborate hybrid approach to the cloud. H-P cloud guru Bill Hilf told the WSJ that the majority of corporate spending “would continue to be made on systems in corporate data centers, and that H-P would work with companies such as Amazon and Microsoft to sell cloud services to customers that demand them.”

Execs confident about future digital gains, less sure about CEO’s ability to provide vision. In a Forrester Research survey of business executives worldwide, 46% said by 2020 digital business tools will have an impact on more than half their sales. But survey respondents were less sure about their CEOs’ ability to lead the transition. Only 26% of survey respondents said they felt that their CEOs had a “clear vision of digital in our business.”

Innovation by Design: How Design-Thinking Can Shape Digital Economy Workplaces. Today’s workplaces, the legacy of nearly a century of scientific management methods and “industrial age” ideas on process and workflow optimization, are the wrong setting for digital-age innovation, CIO Journal Columnist Irving Wladawsky-Berger writes.

‘Cyber Discipline’ Needed to Battle Hackers: Defense Department CIO. Defense Department CIO Terry Halvorsen says a cultural change is needed to protect government systems from cyber attacks. “What keeps me awake?” asked Mr. Halvorsen at a panel discussion this week in Washington, D.C. hosted by The Christian Science Monitor. “I think most people expect me to answer it’s security or it’s dollars. It’s neither of those things. It’s culture,” he said.

TECHNOLOGY NEWS

Associated Press

Can Detroit beat Google to the self-driving car. Mark Reuss, product development chief at General Motors, tells Bloomberg that the automaker is toast if it doesn’t somehow crack the industry’s paradigm shift, driven by the eventual emergence of the self-driving nut. “Yep, we’re done,” he says. GM is putting the final touches on its “most most ambitious technological foray since automatic transmission.” Super Cruise will allow drivers to let the car take over only on the highway.”

SAP Chief Bill McDermott embarks on health care mission after losing his eye. After SAP SE CEO Bill McDermott suffered an injury resulting in the loss of an eye, he began talking about how the company could improve health care using technology like Big Data and better electronic file sharing. “When top tech executives and founders face personal health traumas, they often turn to their industry to fix things,” the New York Times writes. Microsoft Corp. co-founder Paul Allen, who has battled Hodgkins and lymphoma and Eric Dishman, the head of Intel’s health and life sciences group battling cancer, have used their connections and know-how to drive tech-based efforts.

Big Mac attacks – A study finds Macs have seen more malware attacks in 2015 than in the past five years combined, Business insider reports. Researchers at Bit9 + Carbon Black Threat Research said the upturn in attacks, revealed in a 10-week analysis of more than 1,400 unique OS X malware samples, likely correspondent to the surge in Mac devices in recent years.

How touchy-feely should good customer service be? There are two schools of thought on how to provide good customer service, writes Christopher Mims, and they translate to quite different user experiences on Web interfaces and apps. Companies like Zappos and car-sharing service Zipcar make themselves available every way possible, but Uber Technologies Inc. has no customer-service line, preferring that customers file complaints through its app. Amazon.com, which owns Zappos, does have a number, but you have to use Google to find it.

Tech firms nervously watch as Spokeo case heads to top court. The U.S. Supreme Court will consider Monday a class-action lawsuit against Spokeo Inc., Reuters reports, and its decision could curtail a recent wave of cases against large online firms. Google Inc., Facebook., eBay. and Yahoo. filed court papers backing Spokeo, a people search website. At issue is whether a plaintiff must prove that he or she was harmed in order for the case to proceed. In the Spokeo case, plaintiff Thomas Robins, who was unemployed when he sued in 2010, had claimed his Spokeo entry had damaged his job-seeking prospects because it contained inaccurate information.

Vodafoneys hackers broke into nearly 2,000 accounts. In the second known hack on a U.K. telecom firm last month, Vodafone U.K. said cyberthieves stole data on 1,827 accounts, Reuters reports. Vodafone said the incident was driven by hackers using email addresses and passwords derived from an unknown source.

The startup crowd – The Securities and Exchange Commission on Friday approved rules allowing startups to raise capital by selling equity stakes to Main Street investors via crowdfunding websites, like Kickstarter and Indiegogo. As WSJ reports, the new rules enable anyone to invest as much as $2,000, or 5% of their annual income or net worth, in fundraising projects of as much as $1 million, which had long been restricted to wealthy investors.

Card cutting – Amazon.com is shuttering a mobile credit-card processing division that was meant to compete with Square Inc. by deploying smartphone and tablet card readers to coffee shops, food trucks and other small businesses, WSJ’s Greg Bensinger reports. The online retail giant is also closing Local, a daily-deals coupon unit modeled after Groupon. It gave no reason for the closures, which were both announced Friday.

Changing direction – Facing a torrent of criticism after pulling the plug on a pair of panel discussions on videogame culture, SXSW Interactive, an annual showcase for technology and entertainment, said Friday it will hold a one-day summit on online harassment at its March 2016 conference, WSJ’s Sarah Needleman reports.

Sprint targets snacks, additional cost cuts. Sprint Corp. Chief Executive Marcelo Claure is looking to shave as much as $2.5 billion from the company’s operating expenses in the next six months, the WSJ’s Ryan Knutson reports. Among the first things to go: free water bottles and yogurt.

QVC succeeds in mobile. Home shopping network QVC has been able to leverage the “second screening” habits of its viewers to maximum effect. Online sales have soared to 45%, Washington Post reports. It is now the fifth largest mobile commerce retailer in the U.S.

EMC May Float Pivotal in IPO Next Year. EMC and Dell Inc. are speeding up plans to take Pivotal public, Re/code reports. It could happen in early 2016.

Hutchison’s $14 billion deal for O2 prompts EU probe. Europe’s antitrust regulator has opened a full-blown investigation into Telefonica’s $14 billion sale of U.K. cellphone operator O2, warning that the merger could lead to higher prices and less consumer choice, the WSJ’s Tom Fairless reports.

China’s Tsinghua Unigroup to buy stake in Taiwanese firm. The state-owned chip maker struck a deal to acquire a $600 million stake in chip packager Powertech Technology., the WSJ’s Eva Dou reports. Tsinghua Unigroup’s recent deal activity reflects China’s ambitions to advance its semiconductor industry through overseas acquisitions and domestic development.

EVERYTHING ELSE YOU NEED TO KNOW

Insurers gear up to offer new health plans. The Affordable Care Act’s third open enrollment season got under way, with a new array of health plans that show how the law’s influence is starting to transform the insurance industry. As it moves toward its third year of full implementation, the ripple effects of change stemming from the law and its signature marketplaces are being felt in almost every corner of the health-care system.

Banks’ cost-cutting plan: “wet-wipe Wednesday.“ Penny pinching is a fact of life for financial institutions facing a stultifying mix of anemic economic growth, low interest rates and higher regulatory costs. Some employees at Lloyds Banking Group PLC recently received a memo dubbed “Wet-Wipe Wednesday,” imploring them to wipe down their own desks each week.

Kraft Heinz to close some plants.Kraft Heinz Co. could announce its first closures of legacy Kraft factories as soon as next week, a spokesman for the company says. It has been expected to consolidate its production facilities, too, in line with cost-cutting practices frequently employed by 3G Capital Partners LP, the Brazilian private-equity firm that controls Kraft Heinz.

The Morning Download comes from the editors of CIO Journal and cues up the most important news in business technology every weekday morning. Send us your tips, compliments and complaints. You can get The Morning Download emailed to you each weekday morning by clicking http://on.wsj.com/TheMorningDownloadSignup.