Merger mania has hit Texas, and it appears as if it is going to stay for a while.

Texas-based companies announced at least 255 mergers, acquisitions, joint ventures and divestitures during the first half of 2014 — a 30 percent increase over the first six months of 2013, according to Mergermarket, a global M&A research firm that produced the data for the Texas Lawbook.

The 255 deals are the most of any two consecutive quarters over the past decade.

Corporate lawyers and investment bankers in Texas say they have never been busier, and they predict the second half of 2014 may be even better.

“The M&A boom is definitely back, and it looks like it has legs that could be sustained for a while,” says Ken Menges, managing partner of Akin Gump Straus Hauer & Feld’s Dallas office. “The pipeline of new deals not yet announced appears to be quite robust.”

While deal count has skyrocketed, the value of the 255 transactions was $45.5 billion, down from $64.6 billion for 196 deals during the first half of 2013, according to Mergermarket. But the 2013 numbers were skewed because of the inclusion of the $20 billion deal that took Round Rock-based Dell Inc. private.

The 255 deal count is actually understated. To prevent duplication, Mergermarket includes a deal only if the target company is based in Texas.

That excludes the biggest deal announced in the quarter, AT&T’s $65 billion acquisition of DirecTV. AT&T is based in Dallas; DirecTV, the target company, is based in California.

Nonetheless, the increase is big.

“This is the most sustained recovery on M&A that we’ve seen since before the recession,” says Scott Cohen, a corporate partner at Jones Day in Dallas. “I like what I see, but I always want more and I’m always afraid it will end.”

Sharing the wealth

Cohen says the surge “crosses virtually all industries,” including energy, food, health care, chemicals and technology. One of the more high-profile non-energy deals came in January, when the private equity firm Apollo Global Management purchased Irving-based CEC Entertainment, parent of Chuck E. Cheese, for $1.3 billion.

“Our health care group is swamped, our consumer products and food folks are very active, and, of course, energy deals are going crazy,” says Rick Lacher, managing director of investment banking for Houlihan Lokey in Dallas. “People are simply more bullish on the economy, money is readily available, and that makes for a good M&A market.”

Menges points out that the Affordable Care Act has created a resurgence in deal-making among health care companies seeking to add services offering new types of medical devices or new technologies.

‘2006 again’

“The credit markets are wide open and financing is readily available,” says Andrew Calder, a partner at Kirkland & Ellis in Houston. “It is an exciting time. It feels like 2006 again.”

While most business sectors have witnessed increased M&A activity, this is still Texas, where oil and gas reign.

About 75 percent of the 255 public deals were in the energy sector.

Lawyers say that many of the deals this year involve companies that are shedding assets not core to their long-term business plan and using that cash to buy assets that are core.

A good example is Canada-based Encana Corp., which sold $1.8 billion in natural gas assets in Wyoming to Fort-Worth-based TPG Capital on March 31, only to use that cash five weeks later to purchase $3.1 billion in Eagle Ford shale assets that include oil from Freeport-McMoRan.

At the same time, private equity firms have become even more aggressive in snatching up assets viewed as strong long-term investments.

“2013 was a record fundraising year for private equity firms, diversified funds and mega-funds, and now those firms are searching for places to invest,” says Chris Rowley, an M&A partner at Vinson & Elkins in Dallas.

“We are also seeing a lot of new energy deals that are private and are not included in the Mergermarket data,” says Rowley. “For example, we have seen private equity funds also backing private energy management teams with equity lines of credit to help them grow organically.”

Robin Fredrickson, an oil and gas partner at Latham & Watkins, continues to handle a lot of joint ventures — an increasing number of them private, she says — involving private equity firms or foreign-based energy companies.

Chad Watt, an M&A specialist at Mergermarket, said that corporate lawyers and investment bankers are the huge financial winners in the M&A surge.

Who’s who

Mergermarket data show that Vinson & Elkins was involved in 35 of the 255 deals, followed by Jones Day (23), Latham (22) and Kirkland (20).

Goldman Sachs, Evercore Partners and JPMorgan took the top financial advisory spots, though boutiques served as financial advisers in a growing number of deals.

Watt notes that all parties — the buyer, seller and lending institution — in a merger or acquisition employ lawyers who, unlike investment bankers, are paid whether the deal closes or fails.

“This is a very good time to be an M&A lawyer in Texas,” says Watt.

Menges offers a slight warning.

“I worry that there is now an M&A fever or an exuberance similar to the pre-Lehman collapse days,” he says. “The good news is that most of today’s investors have the scars and experiences from those days and they have become a lot more diligent in their deal-making.”

For a list of law firms and investment banks that handled the most M&As in Texas, visit TexasLawbook.net.