Colorado’s car business has regained firm footing six years following the nation’s automotive industry collapse of 2008 and ’09.

Sales of new cars and trucks have steadily increased and dealership improvements are common throughout the state.

Grand opening Tuesday night of Audi Denver’s just-completed facility at 6060 S. Broadway showed the most recent of many new and improved dealership homes.

Audi Denver is part of the McDonald Automotive Group, founded by Doug McDonald more than 50 years ago. The new structure includes a 17-vehicle, 16,500-square-foot showroom, 34 service bays, a Quattro Café and outdoor patio.

Dealership happenings have been a big part of the Inside the Showroom column, which will end today. This column, along with my Saturday Drive column, will be discontinued by The Denver Post after today.

Dozens of e-mails from readers came my way after a one-sentence mention of the planned discontinuance in last weekend’s Saturday Drive. Here are excerpts of a few:

“I hope you have enjoyed writing your columns as much as I have reading them. What a treat it must be to enjoy extended test drives of so many different cars, trucks and SUVs. Thanks for sharing and best wishes for your next journey.” – P.B.

“I’ve been reading your column for 35 years and enjoyed them immensely. My automotive info could have come from Car and Driver, Motor Trend, Consumer Reports or other places, but your writing style is what I like best.” – D.J.

“I wanted to thank you for many years of pleasant Saturday and Sunday morning reading, sipping my coffee and enjoying your reviews.” – D.K.

“You have had an amazing run, something to be truly proud of, and have given instruction and pleasure to all who find interest in cars, from the real hard-core lovers to those ignoramuses like me who have been given some enjoyable education through your lively writing and detailed information.” – R.J.

“I’m still somewhat in shock to have read this morning that next weekend will see the last of your columns, Bud.” – J.C.

“It has been a bright spot in my weekends for as long as I can remember.” – L.H.

“I always enjoyed your honest and informative reviews and the straight-forward style you use.” – G.H.

“I would like to strongly compliment you on your depth of knowledge, vehicle-wise, and keeping up to date on the amazing progress that has occurred in the automotive world.” – A.B.

“Say it ain’t so. It is the reason I get the Post. Okay, that and the comics.” – B.S.

“I will miss you and your interesting columns. A priest friend and ex-boss was the priest at Stoneham, so I could even picture Stoneham when you described your trip there last Saturday.” – M.S.

“Drive well, my friend.” – T.M.