Ohio Gov. John Kasich holds a meeting with volunteers at a Laconia, N.H., restaurant on Thursday. The Republican candidate has events scheduled in the state until Sunday.

Published: Saturday, 1/23/2016 - Updated: 4 months ago



Kasich, Bush trade blows in fight for N.H. Ohio governor’s super PAC fights fire with ‘Mud,’ lays out S.C. strategy

With his viability rising as a candidate for the Republican presidential nomination, Ohio Gov. John Kasich parried attacks Friday from former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, slamming Mr. Bush for taking a salary as a board member of an insurance company that lobbied for Obamacare.

And on Friday the super PAC that supports Mr. Kasich’s campaign announced his strategy for the next venue after New Hampshire, which is South Carolina.

The flurry of attacks occurs as Mr. Kasich now occupies second place in New Hampshire primary polls, making him the prime candidate of the so-called establishment of the GOP against billionaire Donald Trump, who leads in the state.

The first-in-the-nation primary is Feb. 9. The outcome is expected to narrow the field ahead of the next primary states — South Carolina on Feb. 20, Nevada on Feb. 23, and the 13 states that vote on Super Tuesday, March 1.

The Bush ads portray Mr. Kasich as not conservative, using votes from his 18 years as congressman and his decisions as governor, including to expand Medicaid coverage in Ohio under the Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare.

The Bush campaign’s super PAC, Right to Rise, launched four negative mailings against Mr. Kasich in New Hampshire and one negative TV ad. The TV ad accuses Mr. Kasich of having “forced Obamacare expansion in Ohio,” voted for massive defense cuts as a congressman, and had the “worst rating for spending of any governor in the country, Democrat or Republican.”

In response, the Kasich campaign blasted Mr. Bush for accepting $2.4 million in pay as a board member for an insurance company that lobbied for Obamacare. And he blasted Mr. Bush for claiming to have not raised taxes while raising fees at the same time.

“Jeb Bush couldn’t fix Florida, so he played budget games and made everyone else pay more,” the Kasich campaign said in a mailing. The ad alludes to $150 million in fees raised by then-Governor Bush, in a state with a $28 billion general fund budget.

Kasich super PAC New Day for America aired its own ad, called “Mud,” on New Hampshire televisions.

“Jeb Bush once stood tall, before his campaign sank like a rock and he started desperately slinging mud on fellow Republicans. That’s not presidential, Jeb,” the ad says.

New Day for America spokesman Connie Wehrkamp said, “While Governor Kasich was putting Ohioans back to work and getting his state’s economy back on track, Governor Bush was filling his back pocket with $2.4 million as a board member of Tenet Healthcare, a national hospital system that lobbied for the passage of Obamacare.”

Bush campaign spokeswoman Allie Brandenburger said Mr. Bush’s record compares well with Mr. Kasich’s “support for higher taxes, record of increasing Ohio’s state spending by 40 percent, and his enthusiastic expansion of Medicaid.”

“Under Jeb’s leadership, Florida led the nation in job creation, cut taxes by $19 billion, and increased reserves to $9 billion. John Kasich is a career politician that would bring more of the same to Washington,” Ms. Brandenburger said.

Mr. Kasich had events scheduled in New Hampshire through Sunday.

The Kasich super PAC, which by law is prohibited from coordinating campaign strategy with the candidate to preserve its right to spend unrestricted amounts of money, announced its plans to take the Kasich bandwagon to South Carolina.

New Day for America is targeting black and Democratic-leaning voters in the 6th Congressional District, a majority black district in and around Charleston, because South Carolina allows Democrats and independents to pull a Republican ballot.

“Gov. Kasich’s record and message of economic opportunity and inclusion resonates across the state, including the 6th Congressional District, and this program seeks to capitalize on that,” New Day’s announcement of its Majority-Minority Project said.

The organization said it has an operation in South Carolina that includes a full-time staff of eight people in six offices.

“We’ve built one of the strongest operations in South Carolina and our team is ready to step up when John Kasich comes roaring out of New Hampshire’s first-in-the-nation primary,” said Matt David, New Day For America’s chief strategist.

Contact Tom Troy: tomtroy@theblade.com or 419-724-6058 or on Twitter @TomFTroy.