At RBS it’s out with the Mercedes, pictured. The Wall Street Journal

How the mighty have fallen.

Six years after being bailed out by British taxpayers, Royal Bank of Scotland PLC in Hong Kong has sold the company’s chauffeur-driven Mercedes sedan, used to ferry executives around town, opting instead for a seven-seater Nissan, according to a person familiar with the matter.

The silver Mercedes with the license plates ‘RBS’ was a regular feature in the precinct outside the bank’s central Hong Kong offices where both driver and car could be seen waiting patiently for passengers to arrive.

The Mercedes, sold after the bank’s strategic overhaul in February, served as a vivid reminder of a period when the British lender was bent on becoming the world’s largest bank before it crashed to earth during the 2008 financial crisis. Now 80% owned by the British government, RBS continues to cut jobs and has been plagued by controversies over bonus payments and product misselling.

The RBS license plates have survived the cull, however, and are now attached to the Nissan.

Helped by its 2007 purchase of ABN Amro, RBS in Asia controlled branches and trading floors from India to Australia, offering customers everything from sophisticated advice on deals to corporate loans.

Much of that network has now been scaled back. Instead, RBS in the region now focuses on day-to-day needs for clients such as transaction banking, debt financing and hedging in the currency and interest rates markets.

The bank plans to stay in 10 markets across the Asia Pacific, six of which are among the fastest growing markets for U.K. imports and exports.

“Our client trade flows mean that we need a strong global presence,” a spokeswoman for the bank said in an emailed response to queries. “Nowhere is it more important than in the growing Asia Pacific region.”

RBS isn’t the only British lender to have scaled back in Asia. After the 2008 financial crisis, rival Barclays PLC aggressively built out an investment bank with expensive staff hires and offered a suite of products from trading to deals advice. But after revenues disappointed, the bank has shed staff and promised to realign its Asian operations.

In a 2013 video presentation on the Barclays website, Helge Weiner-Trapness, who joined in 2010 as head of the financial-institutions group for the Asia-Pacific region, spoke of ambitious plans to build the bank into an institution to rival Wall Street’s finest.

“I chose Barclays for the opportunity to join a great team. I wanted to be part of building our Asian investment banking business into being the best on the street.” he said in the video. Mr. Weiner Trapness left the bank last month along with a wave of fellow executives.

The two giants of British banking in Asia — Standard Chartered PLC and HSBC PLC—also face challenges. Although UK based, both lenders lean heavily on Asia for revenue. Standard Chartered has warned of falling profits and is selling assets in Hong Kong and South Korea, while HSBC too has exited businesses in the region.

British banks were the first foreign lenders into Asia. Set up to grease the wheels of Empire across their colonized territories, they grew to become dominant forces in lending and trade, surviving wars and economic crises long before the ascent of Hong Kong and Singapore’s gleaming skyscrapers.

Still, there are bright spots in Asia where British banks could prosper. One is servicing the needs of the region’s burgeoning list of millionaires, according to Keith Pogson, financial-services managing partner for Asia Pacific at Ernst & Young.

“Bless her, but the Queen still brings trust and respect and tradition and all those things that connect people with private banking. So there are good opportunities there,” Mr. Pogson said.