With an eye toward reducing medical costs, the Cook County Health and Hospitals System is proposing to spend up to $70 million with a new for-profit company to coordinate the treatment of about 80,000 Medicaid patients.

That company, Medical Home Network ACO, is a spinoff of a nonprofit created five years ago to use data analysis to help local hospitals and clinics offer better treatment to Medicaid patients who often received care from multiple providers. Cook County Health, Rush University Medical Center and Sinai Health System were among the hospitals that contributed their patient data to the nonprofit, Chicago-based Medical Home Network.

The new company will build on the nonprofit's data experience and pass some of the contract proceeds on to doctors to hire care coordinators. For example, hospitals and clinics that are part of the network receive near real-time alerts if their patients show up at the ER or are admitted to the hospital. A care coordinator would meet the patient in the emergency room and set up a follow-up appointment with a primary care doctor to make sure that patient isn't using the ER unnecessarily.

Other care coordination efforts include visiting patients in the hospital before they are discharged to make sure they understand how to take their medication at home.

“It's really those types of things, really tightening up those transitions of care that are going to make a difference,” said Dr. Art Jones, chief medical officer of Medical Home Network ACO.

Cook County Health is one of the largest public health systems in the nation and historically has treated a predominantly poor and uninsured population. The network includes John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital on the Near West Side, Provident Hospital on the South Side and several clinics.

In 2012, Cook County Health launched CountyCare as a pilot insurance program. In July, that pilot effort became a full-fledged Medicaid managed care program that made the health system an insurer in addition to a care provider. The program has about 100,000 enrollees, and that number is expected to double as the state mandates that half of the roughly 3 million Medicaid recipients in Illinois enroll in a managed care program by 2015.

The money for the new contract would come from the per-person allocation that CountyCare receives from the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.

The proposed contract “is an initiative of the CountyCare health plan to see if we can lower the cost of care,” said Steven Glass, who oversees managed care for Cook County Health.

The county health board is scheduled to vote on the contract Aug. 29.

CHANGING PAYMENT SYSTEM

The proposed contract highlights the increasing number of providers and payers, such as private insurers and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, that are teaming up to coordinate patient care. The idea of ACOs, which emerged in the wake of the 2010 Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare, is to financially reward physicians and hospitals for improving patient care while lowering medical expenses and penalizing them if they don't.

ACOs do that, in part, by transforming the way doctors and hospitals get paid. Traditionally they were paid for each service provided, which did little to encourage physicians to monitor how many tests they performed or how much medicine they prescribed.

La Rabida Children's Hospital is one of the providers sharing its data with Medical Home Network and has also invested an undisclosed amount of capital to launch the ACO. The Far South Side hospital specializes in treating children with complex medical needs, and the bulk of its patients are on Medicaid.

CEO Brenda Wolf said the ACO is a robust model of care that prompts providers to pore over data to analyze how to improve patient outcomes, such as making sure patients see their doctors within a few days of an ER visit or hospital discharge.

“It really starts getting people to start thinking about their practices,” Ms. Wolf said.