Taxes: Once upon a time, President Obama promised he wouldn’t raise taxes on the middle class. Millions of those getting insurance cancellation notices are finding out how fraudulent that promise was, too.

Matthew Fleischer, a freelance writer in Los Angeles, recently learned ObamaCare will force him off a plan he likes, and a comparable policy will cost him nearly $800 more next year.

“Most young, middle-class Americans I know are happy that millions of previously uninsured people will receive free or heavily subsidized insurance under the Affordable Care Act,” he wrote in a Los Angeles Times op-ed. “We just didn’t realize that, unless we had health insurance at work, we’d be the ones paying for it.”

Adam Weldzius, a nurse practitioner in Illinois, came to the same realization after finding that his premiums will go up nearly $3,000 a year. “I believe everybody should be able to have health insurance, but at the same time, I’m being penalized. And for what?”

Lori Gottlieb, an Atlantic contributing editor, learned her premiums could climb $5,400. Obama “should be protecting the middle class, not making our lives substantially harder,” she wrote in the New York Times.

Obama dismisses such complaints as those of a small portion of the public — just 5%, he says — who are in any case getting “better” insurance because of ObamaCare.

But what’s actually happening is that this relatively small group is being hit with a massive ObamaCare tax hike, which is being run through insurance premiums and which will reach into the thousands of dollars.

It’s a tax hike these people had no reason to expect, since Obama not only promised that they could keep their plans, but that he’d never raise their taxes.

“I can make a firm pledge,” he said during his first presidential run, that “under my plan no family making less than $250,000 a year will see any form of tax increase. Not your income tax, not your payroll tax, not your capital gains taxes, not any of your taxes.”

As with his phony “keep your plan” promise, he made this one over and over again.

Left-wingers — at least those who aren’t getting cancellation notices — don’t see anything wrong with this.

“How terribly smug,” wrote Paul Waldman in the leftist American Prospect, “to think that the fate of millions of poor people who will now get insurance is as important as the suffering of this one person who might have to pay more for comprehensive coverage.”

What’s smug is for liberals like Waldman to think that Obama should get away with yet another bald-faced lie.