From Obamacare to immigration, the race for the Kansas 4th District Congressional seat isn't shying away from controversial topics.

In the latest ad to hit the airwaves, former Congressman Todd Tiahrt attacks incumbent Representative Mike Pompeo.

KAKE News fact-checked the ad so voters know what's true, what's misleading and what's false before they head to the polls on August 5.

The ad begins with, "A lot of what's happening in Washington today is just plain garbage. Like amnesty for illegals?"

This is misleading.

There is no current legislation that gives amnesty to undocumented immigrants. It's still an ongoing debate on Capitol Hill. While not referenced in the the ad specifically, Pompeo has never voted in favor of amnesty because it has never been proposed as a law.

The ad continues, "Obamacare? Mr. Pompeo voted seven times to fund it. I think it's gotta go."

This is misleading.

All of the votes Tiahrt is referencing are for appropriations bills that often prevented a government shutdown in 2011. They provided funding for a couple weeks at a time to federal agencies and departments, including Homeland Security, FEMA and Border Protection. Among the departments, is Health and Human Services, which administers and implements the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare. But Obamacare is mandatory spending and would be funded regardless. There could have been money in these bills, though, that would have funded the Medicaid expansion in Obamacare.

The bills were all passed with Republican support, and the majority were supported by Kansas Republicans. Pompeo has been vocal from the beginning in his opposition to Obamacare.

The ad goes on to say, "New air force tankers for Wichita. Pompeo voted no."

This needs clarification.

The ad references The Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2014. It is an omnibus spending bill that provides funding for a number of departments. Part of the legislation gives money to McConnell Air Force Base to prepare for the new tankers. However, this bill only addresses military construction for housing the tankers and has no impact on the decision to bring tankers to McConnell. The Air Force made the decision to bring the tankers last year.

The ad then says, "He went Washington on us. EPA. NSA. The IRS."

This needs an explanation.

The ad doesn't reference any legislation or make any statements about Pompeo's position on an issue. He's just throwing out hot button issues being debated on Capitol Hill.

The ad ends with, "Back in Kansas, we know garbage when we see it, and what to do with it."

Overall, this ad is very misleading. The KAKE News I -Team will continue to track campaign ads as they appear, bringing voters the facts behind each one.