The Right Opinion Please Consider the Alternative!

By now, I have to assume you all know that Donald Trump was never my favorite in the race. I had fonder feelings for others — including a few, such as Dr. Ben Carson, Bobby Jindal and Scott Walker — whom I didn’t feel were qualified to be the Commander-in-Chief.

But that was then and this is now, and quite frankly, I don’t understand those who either intend to sit out the election in November or even vote for Hillary Clinton. After all this time, I don’t wish to list all the reasons I didn’t want Trump to be the GOP standard bearer. But that list would read like the forward to a 600-page book dealing with the multiple sins and failings of Mrs. Clinton.

Whether dealing with her tenure as First Lady, when she divided her time between stealing FBI files; trying to shove Hillary’s version of the Affordable Care Act down our throats 20 years before Obama succeeded; fending off her husband’s accusers by dismissing the women he abused as sluts and trailer park trash; her lack of accomplishment as a U.S. senator; or her miserable term as Secretary of State, which saw Iraq and Syria fall to the terrorists, while she and her re-set button encouraged Russian inroads in the Middle East and Ukraine; it is a record rife with blind partisanship, blatant corruption and lousy judgment.

In addition, she used a private server, which was about as private as the P.A. system at a train station, divulging state secrets to China, Russia and at least one Romanian hacker; a greed so consuming that it encouraged foreign entities to disguise bribes as donations to the family foundation even when she held a Cabinet position; and a vow to continue the Obama policies that have done so much to destroy the coal and oil industries, along with the economy and our relations with former allies in Europe and the Middle East.

If all that isn’t reason enough to reconsider voting for her or easing her path to victory by staying home on Election Day, how about listening once again to Hillary Rodham, attorney, cackling on the 40-year-old tape as she celebrated getting a creep off with a slap on the wrist for raping a 12-year-old?

The fact that she would even consider putting herself forth as a defender of women, and that millions of women are willing to swallow the self-serving swill, merely proves that her gall is only surpassed by their gullibility.

A picture of her and her husband, the aging lecher, has gone viral. It shows her declaring: “It’s time to have a woman in the Oval Office” and a smirking Bill responding: “Been there, done that.”

It would astound me if any past or current member of the U.S. military would ever consider her the lesser of two evils when compared to Donald Trump. Anyone who has read Ron Kessler’s informative books about the First Families is aware — whether it was agents of the Secret Service or members of the military who crossed her path when she was last in the White House — that the mere sight of a uniform or of a guy sworn to take a bullet for her would have Hillary launching a volley of f-bombs. The First Lady was and is definitely no lady.

There was a reason that had nothing to do with partisan politics that caused the crew of the Marine One helicopter, according to Kessler, to nickname the craft “Broomstick One” whenever she was aboard.

While we await the conclusion of the FBI investigation of Mrs. Clinton, the speech police department of the Justice Department has decided that “felons” and “convicts” are prejudicial words and will be changed henceforth to “person who committed a crime” or “person who was incarcerated.” Yes, that’s ever so much better. The terms just skip trippingly off the tongue, and, best of all, rapists, thieves and murderers, won’t have their tender feelings bruised.

Still, if that’s what it takes, I’ll be only too happy to refer to Hillary Clinton as “a person who has committed a crime and has been incarcerated.”

Speaking of laws, Congress passed 114 of them last year, which, in turn, enabled unelected bureaucrats to pass 3,410 regulations, costing the typical American family $15,000! No wonder the Democrats want to keep raising the minimum wage. It isn’t so unskilled workers can support their wives and kids, but so we can all support thousands of bureaucratic troublemakers.

Is it possible that as awful as ObamaCare is, it’s actually saving millions of American lives by keeping a great many of us out of the hands of medical professionals? The question occurs to me because a recent report disclosed that the third leading cause of death in this country, trailing only cancer and heart disease, is medical error.

On the one hand, if you don’t seek medical attention, you may die. On the other hand, at least a doctor won’t be dunning your widow for killing you.

Up until now, I have felt that even after 15 years and over 1800 political columns, I have somehow flown under the radar of all but a few precious readers. I haven’t been called before a congressional committee, been invited on Fox or asked to substitute for a vacationing Rush Limbaugh.

But, now, I think my halcyon days of anonymity may be over. That’s because one of my readers who had been receiving my articles at his government email address has been notified that he runs the risk of facing criminal charges if he persists.

According to Department regulations 7-3.b, there’s a whole passel of things that could set off these alarms, but my reader finally narrowed it down to #2 on the list: “Email messages or file attachments that contain any profane, obscene, sexist or racist materials or other materials that could be considered offensive.”

I’m not often guilty of profanity or obscenity, if you don’t get too perturbed by the occasional “schmuck,” so I guess sharing my true sentiments about Black Lives Matter, Islam, Hillary Clinton, Bernie Sanders, the DNC, the ladies of NOW and campus fascists, just finally got to be too much for the government snoop. Fortunately, my reader can now receive my treasures at home without the risk of being brought up on charges. At least not until Big Brother catches on.

Getting back to Trump, if the GOP elite think they’d have a hard time getting re-elected if they support Trump, they should take a deep breath and consider their odds if they simply stand by and help Mrs. Clinton get elected.

As it is, the GOP will have its work cut out for them, which is nothing new. That’s because starting with the 1992 presidential election, the Democrat has carried 19 states and Washington, D.C. That adds up to 242 electoral votes. During that same period, the Republican candidate has won all six times in just 13 states representing a skimpy 102 electoral votes. Inasmuch as it takes 270 to be elected, if the Democrats merely carry Florida with its 29 electors, their side wins.

Whenever I’m in my car, I listen to talk radio. Because Dennis Prager and Michael Medved are on my favorite radio station here in L.A. from 9 a.m. to 3 p.m., they’re the two I hear most often. Although I tend to agree with their take on politics, neither of them seems able to contain his contempt of TV. At least once a week, one or both of them feels compelled to heap abuse on the medium I’m sure they both wish would hire them.

Because it was Prager who went on at some length this morning excoriating TV, it was to him that I addressed my rebuke.

“Dear Mr. Prager: I don’t wish to be impertinent, but your anti-TV screeds make you sound like someone who is not only a snob, but a snob who doesn’t know what he’s talking about. As a result, your condemnation comes off as condescension that says far more about you than it does about television.

"I am not trying to make a case for the drivel that often permeates the tube if you stick to the three major networks day and night. I don’t happen to watch very much, limiting myself for the most part to baseball games featuring the suddenly pathetic New York Yankees; an occasional old movie on TCM; Bret Baier’s daily show on Fox; and "Media Buzz” and Chris Wallace on Sunday mornings.

“But people who are every bit as smart as you are watch a great deal of highbrow fare on the History and Discovery channels, along with the occasional Ken Burns' multi-part documentary devoted to the Civil War, baseball. national parks, jazz, Prohibition and the Roosevelts, etc.

"Moreover, TV has also been responsible for most of the decent comedy over the past 60 years, including shows starring Sid Caesar, Phil Silvers and Jackie Gleason, along with such ensemble comedies as "Barney Miller,” “Fawlty Towers,” “Corner Gas,” “Seinfeld” and “Frasier.”

“Inasmuch as you never mention what you watch or if you watch at all, I don’t know the basis for your low opinion, but judging TV by its worst product strikes me as being foolishly elitist, on a par with condemning motion pictures based on Adam Sandler movies or judging music by commercial jingles or art by French postcards.

"At least, unlike your colleague Michael Medved, who also trashes the medium every chance he gets, you don’t then embarrass yourself by devoting precious air time to reviewing every piece of crapola Hollywood sends his way. Sincerely, Burt Prelutsky”