As U.S. Population Ages, Capmark Grabs Specialized Retailer Orchard Brands

Orchard owns Blair, Huband, Norm Thompson, Solutions, Sahalie, Gold Violin, Appleweed’s, Tog Shop, LinenSource, Draper’s & Damon’s, Old Pueblo Traders, Bedford Fair and WinterSilks

Capmark Financial Group is buying a direct marketing retail business that focuses on seniors, Orchard Brands Corp., for $410 million in cash.

Orchard Brands, headquartered in Beverly, Massachusetts, sells apparel, accessories and home products for men and women through catalogs, mailers, e-commerce and 30 retail stores. The group’s brands include Blair, Huband, Norm Thompson, Solutions, Sahalie, Gold Violin, Appleweed’s, Tog Shop, LinenSource, Draper’s & Damon’s, Old Pueblo Traders, Bedford Fair and WinterSilks. The company’s products are aimed at baby boomers and seniors. (See related graphic.)

Orchard’s Eden Prairie, Minnesota-based buyer is a holding company that also owns Bluestem Brands Inc., which operates Fingerhut, Gettington.com and PayCheck Direct. Bluestream’s companies sell general merchandise to low and middle-income consumers in the U.S. Capmark expects the Orchard acquisition to diversify Bluestream’s customer base and expand its retail capabilities.

Orchard had $1.02 billion in net sales for the period ended Dec. 27, and Ebitda of $70.7 million.

Goldman Sachs is Orchard’s financial adviser, while Schulte Roth & Zebal is providing legal advice. Capmark’s financial adviser is Morgan Stanley & Co. and its legal counsel is Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld LLP as well as Faegre Baker Daniels LLP. Capmark is making the acquisition with a combination of cash and new debt. Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC and Morgan Stanley Senior Funding Inc. are underwriting a term loan, and Credit Suisse and U.S. Bank NA are leading an asset-based credit facility.

Other recent retail deals include Sycamore-backed Hot Topic Inc.’s acquisition of pop-culture themed retailer Geeknet Inc., announced earlier in May, and Ascena’s deal for Ann Inc., the owner of Ann Taylor and Loft.

For more information on related topics, visit the following: