While diplomacy has moved forward with Iran’s nuclear program, President Rouhani faces increased criticism on domestic issues, such as freedom of the press and access to the internet, during the next round of talks set to start on Monday in Vienna.

Human Rights issues were brought up at the March 8, 2014 meeting between EU foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton and several human rights activists at the Austrian embassy in Tehran. Among the activists was Gohar Eshghi, the mother of blogger Sattar Beheshti, 35, who died while in police custody in November 2012.

The meeting riled up hard-liners in Iran, who used it as a rallying point against President Rouhani and his reformist policies. A billboard spliced Ashton’s face with dead Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein, while the conservative newspaper Javan labeled Eshghi a “seditionist” and photoshopped her out of pictures taken from the get-together.

Sattar’s sister, Sahar Beheshti, also become an outspoken critic, publicly noting that the investigation into her brother’s death had not been forwarded to the court five months after he died. On April 11, 2013, Sahar told the International Campaign for Human Rights in Iran that she had received threats to remain silent, and threathened with death or imprisonment at the notorious Kahrizak prison, where her brother and many other activists have died.

The case has lead to several arrests so far, and resulted in the firing of Iran Police Chief Colonel Mohammad Shokrian. A parliament committee announced it will examine the case, and the judiciary that said it would deal “quickly and decisively” with those responsible.

However, Iran’s Judiciary closed the Sattar Beheshti case on December 4, 2013, rejecting premeditated murder against the policeman over the death of Beheshti while in police custody.

None of these issues have been largely covered by the international media, even when Ashton met president Rouhani several days later on March 14, 2014. And while the Obama administration has championed human rights in other circumstances, it has largely remained silent on the issue when it pertains to Iran or Ukraine. But it does appear human rights may become an issue in the Iranian nuclear talks.