Loveland Planning Commission to consider appeal of expansion of former FirstBank building for as many as 5 new restaurants

The new owner of the former FirstBank building at 225 E. 29th St. in the Orchards Shopping Center, shown here Friday, hopes to expand the building and use it for as many as five restaurants. But two adjacent property owners, including the owner of the office building in the background of this photo, will challenge that plan at Monday's Loveland Planning Commission meeting. ( Craig Young/ Loveland Reporter-Herald )

LOVELAND -- Two potential neighbors are objecting to a plan to expand a former bank building in Orchards Shopping Center and open five new restaurants.

The two property owners will make their case Monday evening before the Loveland Planning Commission.

A special-review modification for the Loveland Preston 7 Restaurants development had received approval from the city's current planning division.

The Fort Collins-based developer, Post Modern Development, hopes to add onto the 4,960-square-foot former FirstBank building at 225 E. 29th St., vacant since last year, to create a 12,825-square-foot building that could contain as many as five restaurants. It would have one drive-up lane.

J.D. Padilla, one of the members of Post Modern Development, was involved in the development of the Villaggio project at East Harmony Road and Snow Mesa Drive in Fort Collins. That development features seven buildings with stores, offices and several restaurants, including Smashburger, McAlister's Deli and East Moon Asian Bistro.

Two property owners in Orchards Shopping Center are appealing the restaurant plan. One is Matador-Orchard LLC, managed by David Duke.

Duke founded Duke Communications, a Loveland-based computer-magazine publisher that he sold to Penton Media Inc. in 2000. Matador-Orchard owns the 41,000-square-foot office building directly east of the FirstBank building that Penton occupied until it moved its operation to Fort Collins at the end of 2010. That building is for sale or lease.

John Waterbury, principal with California-based Waterbury Properties, the owner and manager of much of the Orchards Shopping Center, also is appealing the plan.

According to city of Loveland documents, the two allege that the approval of the Preston 7 plan involved various failures to follow Loveland municipal code. They say the project won't be compatible with surrounding property uses, it didn't receive the required consent of other property owners and it will negatively affect the area's parking arrangements, traffic flow and property values.

The Planning Commission meeting will start at 6:30 p.m. Monday in the City Council Chamber of the Loveland Municipal Building, 500 E. Third St.

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Craig Young at 970-635-3634 or cyoung@reporter-herald.com. Follow him at twitter.com/CraigYoungRH.