For National Public Safety Telecommunicator Week, a tribute to Marathon County’s 911 dispatchers.

Deb Waldhart, supervisor at the Marathon County Sheriff’s Department dispatch center, monitors calls on Christmas Day. Shereen Siewert/Daily Herald Media

The Marathon County E911 Dispatch center receives and processes all 911 calls for Marathon County, in addition to all routine service calls, administrative calls, and dispatches for all police, fire and emergency medical services in Marathon County.

The communications division dispatches for 12 law enforcement agencies, 33 emergency medical agencies and 33 fire departments. It annually handles over 32,000 911 calls and over 143,000 non-emergency calls for service. Staff is composed of 23 dispatchers and six supervisors working 12-hour shifts with a minimum of five people.

Not many people are able to handle the long hours, rollercoaster stress, multi-tasking and emotional toll it takes to keep the citizens and officers of Marathon County safe. However, this is the life of a public safety telecommunicator, better known as the 911 dispatcher.

A 911 dispatcher plays many roles: therapist, doctor, lawyer, teacher, psychic, weatherman or -woman, sounding board, guidance counselor, parent, priest, secretary, politician, peacemaker, repairman, phone directory and negotiator. Each dispatcher on a daily basis deals with angry or frantic citizens, terrified victims, suicidal people and sometimes grouchy officers. These dedicated individuals are expected to gather information from agitated callers (many of whom either can’t remember answers to the questions or just simply can’t understand why they are being asked any questions at all), type everything into a bank of computers, assess priority, dispatch appropriate help, continue gathering information, listen for calling officers, keep officers and field personnel safe and field all sorts of non-emergency calls — all at the same time.

These professionals sit at a bank of computer screens with a headset and a phone for a 12-hour shift, speaking with people whose faces they will never see, being taken for granted, criticized or sworn at, rarely receiving accolades or even a thank you and usually only getting the beginning of a story, as there is rarely any closure. Don’t forget that it’s a 24/7 operations, meaning they also work weekends and holidays. Every dispatcher is expected to be the calm or sanity in any storm, have the patience of a saint, answer every question, be an encyclopedia, ignore his or her own stress and emotions, have the speed of “Flash” and above all, be perfect all the time.

It has been my privilege and honor to work with many such people in 18 years at the Marathon County Sheriff’s Department. Faces have come and gone over the years, but they have all found in one way or another that this is not just a job — it is a calling. They have been my coworkers, friends, a shoulder to lean on, inspiration and my mentors.

These public safety telecommunicators, each talented and unique, deserve much more than simply a week in their honor! You are heroes every day and I’m proud to work with each of you!

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1yv9l7z