U.S. Rep. Ted Yoho faced a largely supportive crowd for his positions on tightening immigration rules, cutting spending, questioning Common Core education standards and most other topics at a Saturday morning town hall in Newberry.

But he did encounter some headwinds on the Affordable Care Act and federal programs that provide food to the hungry.

The hour-long gathering at Oak View Middle School was Yoho's first town hall of the year and drew a large crowd, with some visitors coming from Keystone Heights and other nearby communities.

Yoho, a Gainesville Republican who is considered part of the tea party wing of the GOP, recapped his positions on several key issues: He is opposed to the Affordable Care Act, to the executive action President Obama took on immigration and to Common Core.

Some swings were also taken at fellow Republicans who have told him they sometimes vote on issues with which they may not agree out of fear of not getting re-electing. And Yoho also spoke of his failed attempt to wrest the House speakership from Rep. John Boehner of Ohio.

"We started this year off … with a coup against the speaker of the House," Yoho said, drawing applause. "It is amazing how politics works or doesn't work. That's something we have been working on for over a year and had about 60 people who said they were going to support us. But when it comes time to perform … 25 people stood up and voted against the speaker."

A resolution that Yoho said will lay the groundwork for impeachment of presidents by specifying boundaries of executive action is being developed.

It is spurred by some of the executive orders that Obama has made, particularly those that eases some restrictions on undocumented immigrants.

"It will say from this point forward these are the lines that you cannot cross or we will hold you accountable. But in order to do that, you have to have a speaker of the House and leadership that is willing to bring that up," Yoho said.

Yoho added he is not certain he would support of a declaration of war against ISIS because ISIS is not a nation.

When Yoho asked for a show of hands of people who believe the U.S. is sliding toward socialism, the vast majority shot their arms up.

But when Yoho asked rhetorically "Why is the federal government raising our children, why is the federal government feeding our children?" he got some responses.

"To keep them from going hungry," one man said.

Added another, "Because their parents can't afford to buy their children food. Don't make the children suffer."

Yoho's supporters then began shouting for the critics to keep quiet.

A handful of people wore yellow T-shirts saying "Hands off my Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid."

Before a question and answer session, the crowd was told it could only ask questions and not make statements. However, Yoho stayed after the formal session to meet with people for questions or discussion.

Yoho, a veterinarian, first won election in 2012 by upsetting longtime incumbent congressman Cliff Stearns, R-Ocala. Yoho was re-elected to a second term last fall.