Navigating Healthcare Reform (Photo: iStock)

The second of two parts.

Implementing the Affordable Care Act's small business mandate is "a very specific headache" for Chris Williams, director of human resources and risk management at Hollingsworth Oil Co.

The Springfield-based company has about 550 employees and had to create a special enrollment period in the fourth quarter because its annual enrollment period is in the summer. The company is self-insured, meaning it takes on financial obligations for employee health insurance costs.

Estimating the additional work resulting from the ACA at 20 hours per week is conservative, said Williams, who is half of Hollingsworth Oil's human resources department.

And there's the additional $22,000 in taxes the company has to pay on March 15.

"It's not just us. I've got peers in HR in companies that are smaller than us, and everyone is pounding their head against the wall," Williams said.

The business mandate requires companies with more than 50 employees to provide health insurance to all full-time employees. The mandate was originally slated to take effect on Jan. 1, 2014, but was delayed.

Now, companies with 100 or more employees have to start providing insurance as of Jan. 1, 2015. Companies with 50-99 have to start reporting the number of eligible employees to the U.S. Internal Revenue Service on that date, but not provide insurance until the first day of 2016.

The implementation is plaguing companies of all sizes, said Austin Madison, vice president at The Crichton Group, an insurance and risk management firm in Nashville. Madison and his colleagues have spent the better part of three years trying to prepare clients for the regulations.

"At first glance (the regulations) are pretty cut and dried, but they're not," he said.

The fines for not providing coverage or not providing enough coverage are complicated. Companies with 50 or more employees have to offer insurance plans that include preventative and in-patient care. There is also a penalty if a full-time employee who is eligible for a company-sponsored plan opts to buy a plan on a private exchange.

The learning curve of the new regulations is steep. The Nashville Chamber of Commerce is considering making the ACA part of its Business Studio sessions in the coming year, said Mark Drury, director of communications and marketing for the Chamber.

While some of Madison's clients have been working on their game plans for a couple of years, other companies are rushing to get up to speed.

"There are a lot of employers that expected this bill to get kicked out after the last presidential election or expected it to get kicked out in the last Supreme Court ruling," Madison said.

Companies with employees who work fluctuating hours, such as retail shops and restaurants, are seeing large jumps in the number of employees who now qualify for health insurance. The ACA requires hours to be tracked for a year to get an average amount of hours per week with an average of 30 hours per week qualifying an employee for insurance. For Hollingsworth Oil, which has a lot of retail employees, that means about 130 employees are being added to its insurance plan on Jan. 1.

Tracking employee hours comes with its own set of problems, said Madison, explaining that shops and restaurants often have high turnover leading to a laborious tracking process.

Companies are leaning heavily on consultants, certified public accountants, legal counsel and other advisers to parse the details.

"The scary thing is — I know it seems crazy — but there are still a lot of employers who do their own payroll," said Madison, explaining that they have to go through paper or digital spreadsheets to find the information.

The flip of the calendar to 2015 is not going to solve the confusion.

The reporting process is stymied at this point because the IRS has not released final guidance on the completion and submission process for the required 1094 and 1095 forms that track employer- and employee-specific information. The IRS expects to release the guidance in early 2015.

The lack of guidance has much of the payroll and benefit accounting process at a standstill. Companies don't have firm answers on how to report the information, and third-party payroll companies can't write the final code into software to automate reporting.

Williams' experience with the online reporting systems thus far highlights another problem that business owners may encounter. He has tried to upload the spreadsheet of the company's employees — under another set of IRS forms —half a dozen times to the IRS via the www.pay.gov website only to get error messages.

"There's quite a bit of cost across the board," said Williams of the work that goes into understanding and implementing the changes. The company bought a supplement to its monthly payroll service to help with some of the accounting.

Contact Holly Fletcher at 615-259-8287 or on Twitter @hollyfletcher.

To learn more

•Resource Guide for Employers: Find the draft 1094 and 1095 Internal Revenue Service forms at http://apps.irs.gov/app/picklist/list/formsPublications.html

•Employer responsibility flow chart: http://kff.org/infographic/employer-responsibility-under-the-affordable-care-act/

Get answers

The Tennessean is hosting a Twitter chat at 11 a.m. Jan. 6 with Austin Madison (@amad1106), vice president at The Crichton Group, about what businesses can do to prepare for the health insurance mandate under the Affordable Care Act. Submit questions or topics you'd like to see addressed to #ACABizTN or @hollyfletcher.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1B0dG0D