Hours before they were to learn their first opponent in the postseason, the Broncos took to the field of their indoor field house Saturday to prepare for their Jan. 17 divisional playoff game.

Outside linebacker DeMarcus Ware, wearing a wrap on his left knee, and inside linebacker Brandon Marshall (ankle) both participated in stretching and the early portion of drills.

Coach Gary Kubiak said he expects Ware as well as backup quarterback Brock Osweiler, who was absent Saturday with a knee injury, to return to practice in full on Monday.

Safety Darian Stewart, who left last Sunday’s game against the Chargers early after aggravating a hamstring injury, joined fellow safety T.J. Ward (ankle) and cornerback Chris Harris (shoulder) in street clothes on the sideline Saturday.

“He’s probably the biggest concern getting into next week,” Kubiak said of Stewart. “But I think you’ll see him Wednesday. I’d love to see that secondary back in tact for the first time and healthy.”

Danny Trevathan, Brandon Marshall win Ed Block awards

Inside linebackers Danny Trevathan and Brandon Marshall were selected by their teammates as the Broncos’ 2015 Ed Block Courage Award winners for their “commitment to sportsmanship and courage.”

The two overcame significant injuries that required surgery to return this season as the team’s No. 1 and No. 2 leading tacklers, respectively. Trevathan (110 tackles) missed significant time last season and underwent reconstructive knee surgery. Marshall (101 tackles) had two screws placed in his right foot to repair a Lisfranc injury.

“We pushed each other,” Marshall said. “We pushed each other a lot because I would see him, how he was doing, and if he was ahead of me I felt like in his progression, I would try to exceed that. I think he did the same thing.”

Von Miller’s high praise for Wade Phillips

Von Miller, the Broncos’ outside linebacker, earned the second first-team all-pro honor of his career after leading the team in both sacks (11) and quarterback hits (32) in the regular season.

Wade Phillips, who returned to the Broncos as their defensive coordinator this season, installed his 3-4 defense and quickly won the trust and support of his players.

“Coach Phillips — instrumental in my success this year,” Miller said. “Every day, he came in, he coached me like — it’s kind of hard to explain. He didn’t coach me like he had been with me through four years. He coached me how I needed to be coached. He pushed me every single day and got it out of me this year. “

For Danny Trevathan, Super Bowl rings before contract

Trevathan will be an unrestricted free agent in March but said he’s not focused on his next contract.

“Contract, all this and that — I’m not really too focused on that,” he said. “It’ll take care of itself. I came from nothing, so it’s nothing for me to wait a couple more months and get this big ring for us.”

Nicki Jhabvala: njhabvala@denverpost.com or @NickiJhabvala

NFL news from The Associated Press:

Bob Quinn agrees to be Detroit Lions’ general manager

DETROIT — The Lions agreed to a deal in principle with Bob Quinn to be their general manager, hoping to replicate some of the Patriots’ success.

Lions president Rod Wood confirmed the agreement late Friday night.

Quinn had been the Patriots’ director of pro scouting for four seasons after serving as assistant director of pro personnel for two years. He was a part of the franchise’s personnel department for 16 years, working as a national, regional and pro scout after starting out as a player personnel assistant.

Browns interview New England Patriots defensive coordinator Matt Patricia

CLEVELAND — The Browns interviewed New England defensive coordinator Matt Patricia for their head coaching job.

Patricia is the fifth candidate to meet with the Browns, who began their search by speaking with Chicago offensive coordinator Adam Gase, who was hired by Miami on Saturday.

Under Bill Belichick, the 41-year-old Patricia has constructed one of the NFL’s best defenses over the past four seasons. The Browns have a track record with Belichick defensive assistants, hiring Romeo Crennel as coach in 2005 and Eric Mangini in 2009.

Giants talk with former Bills coach Doug Marrone

EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — The Giants interviewed former Bills coach Doug Marrone for their head coaching job.

Marrone was the head coach of the Bills in 2013-14.

Bart Starr recovers from hurt hip

GREEN BAY, Wis. — The family of Bart Starr said the Hall of Fame quarterback is recovering after breaking his hip just before Christmas.

The family said Starr, 82, fell in the bathroom three days before Christmas and broke his hip.

The family said Starr will be in a wheelchair for six weeks but “is in good spirits.”

The Associated Press