From the four directions come this year’s four picks for the 2015 Tribal ecoAmbassadors program, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced on October 27.

Four tribal college and university professors hailing from Minnesota, New Mexico, Montana and Washington State will “work in partnership with EPA scientists to improve environmental conditions and public health in tribal communities,” the EPA announced.

Dr. Courtney Kowalczak of Fond Du Lac College in Cloquet, Minnesota, will study the use of dragonfly larvae to monitor mercury bioaccumulation in tribal waters, the EPA said. Dr. Annie McDonnell from the Institute of American Indian Arts in Santa Fe, New Mexico, will work to create a “living, GIS map of sustainability projects on campus and educate the community on major environmental issues, including climate adaptation and climate mitigation.”

In Washington, Ane Berrett, from Northwest Indian College in Bellingham, will partner with AmeriCorps “to conduct several projects, including model garden and landscaping plan creation, to help build a model of food sovereignty for the Northwest Indian College and Lummi communities,” the EPA said. Lastly, Dr. Robert Kenning of Salish Kootenai College in Pablo, Montana, will work to “enhance the effectiveness of local camas restoration efforts on the Flathead Indian reservation by enhancing knowledge of soil moisture and competition from invasive species.”

The ecoAmbassadors is a funding mechanism that enables tribal colleges and universities to conduct research and thus enact environmental improvements in schools and neighborhoods, the EPA said.

“Through the Tribal ecoAmbassadors program, we are strengthening an important partnership between EPA and tribal communities in addition to supporting research to combat climate change and improve public health,” said EPA Administrator Gina McCarthy in announcing the selection at the National Congress of American Indians’ annual convention in Atlanta. “This program allows EPA scientists and tribal professors to work side-by-side to improve public health and the environment in tribal communities.”

RELATED: STEM Programs Take Tribal Colleges Into the Future