There’s a lot of excitement in the air about the November Congressional elections. Will the Republicans take the Senate? And what’s going to happen to tea party candidates? In the House, will we see a threat to Speaker John Boehner's leadership? Fascinating stuff, right?

Nope. Here’s why you shouldn’t care. Let’s say that the Republicans hold both branches of Congress after November. With current Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid relegated to relative obscurity as minority leader, the Republicans will pass a whole bunch of bills, which they’ll send to the White House. They’ll repeal or replace Obamacare, the Dodd-Frank financial reform law, maybe the Sarbanes-Oxley law of 2002, and a host of other laws, as well. It’ll all be great fun.

And then nothing will happen. The legislation will land on Obama’s desk, and will be quietly dispatched into the garbage. Oh, the Republicans will sputter, but nothing will have changed.

Most importantly, Congress will not have clipped the president’s wings. He’ll still be able to enact new rules by executive order, in effect legislating without legislative approval. “Stroke of the pen. Law of the land. Kinda neat,” said Clinton advisor Paul Begala.

[SEE: Cartoons on President Obama]

The president will also be able to ignore laws he doesn’t like by failing to enforce them. Congress refused to enact the Dream Act, to normalize children of undocumented aliens, and so Obama simply created a special admission category for them by diktat. In the process, he announced that immigration laws that got in the way wouldn’t be enforced.

The president’s ability to ignore inconvenient laws amounts to a new presidential non-enforcement power that seemingly violates the letter of the Constitution in several ways, most notably by skirting the express presidential veto power of Article I, Section 7. That section contemplates a Congressional override if two-thirds of both houses of Congress insist on passing a bill over a presidential veto, and that has happened from time to time. But why take the risk of an override, a president might wonder, if he can simply refuse to enforce a statute? Better to sign the bill and then ignore it.

Over the last few decades, and especially in the last few years, a new form of government has emerged in the United States, one of super-strong presidents and of Congressional eunuchs. It’s not what the framers intended, and it’s not the form of government we were taught we had. We thought that the doctrine of separation of powers meant that Congress and the presidency were co-equal branches of government, that we had preserved liberty by preventing the accumulation of power in the hands of a single person or body. But now the doctrine of separation of powers has served to immunize presidents from criticism. It is like a boomerang that has returned to strike the person who threw it.

There was a moment like this in British constitutional history. In the 18th century, Britons were told that their government was one of separation of powers, of king, House of Lords and House of Commons, each of which had to sign on to a pass a bill. By 1867, however, Walter Bagehot recognized that things had changed, that Queen Victoria and the House of Lords had lost power and that only the House of Commons counted for anything. The monarch and House of Lords were still there, but were only the powerless “dignified” or ceremonial parts of government. The “efficient” part, where power resided, was the House of Commons.

[MORE: Cartoons about Congress]

There has been a like change in America. Today, the House of Representatives and the Senate are of vastly diminished importance. They are part of the dignified American constitution (for how could we have a State of the Union address without them). As for the efficient part, that is the presidency and only the presidency. The structure of the federal government has been reduced to a mere dozen words of the Constitution, found in Article II, Section 1, Clause 1: The president "shall hold his Office during the Term of four Years."