"I Voted" stickers in Kalamazoo, Mich., on Nov. 4, 2014. (Photo: Mark Bugnaski, AP)

As the Senate convenes Jan. 6 with the GOP in the majority for the first time since 2006, the legislative agenda may well be influenced by an unfriendly electoral map facing GOP senators in 2016.

While Republicans are eager to show they can pass legislation, incoming majority leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., will be aware that some senators won't want to cast votes that could hurt their re-election campaigns.

McConnell "is going to want to hang on to the majority leader's job for more than two years," says Kyle Kondik of the University of Virginia Center for Politics. "He's going to do what he can to protect his senators who are from less conservative states than his own state.''

In the days just after the 2014 midterms, McConnell told reporters, "We will not be shutting the government down or threatening to default on the federal debt." On a wide range of the most hot-button issues ranging from guns to health care to immigration, McConnell and the GOP caucus will have to take into account how their most vulnerable colleagues will be judged back home for votes they take in Washington over the next 18 months.

Of the 34 senators up for re-election in 2016, 24 are Republicans and 10 are Democrats. All of the Democrats are from solidly blue states, while several of the Republicans are running in states that have voted repeatedly for Democratic presidential candidates.

It's the reverse scenario of 2014, when Democrats outnumbered Republicans on the ballot, and seven Democrats had to defend seats in states that President Obama lost. All seven were defeated, and Democrats lost control of the Senate after eight years in the majority. "It's not as good for (Democrats) as 2014 was bad, but it would take a true (GOP) landslide for them not to pick up at least some seats,'' says Sean Trende, senior elections analyst at Real Clear Politics.

In addition, the increased voter turnout that historically takes place in a presidential election year tends to favor Democrats.

At least, that's what Democrats are hoping for: continued high turnout among African-American and Hispanic voters, who voted heavily for Obama but stayed home during the two midterm elections of his presidency. That would inevitably help candidates running in Democratic-leaning states against incumbent Senate Republicans.

It is not all bad news for Senate Republicans; there remain a couple of Democrats facing tough re-election bids in 2016. Here's our list of the 10 most endangered Senate seats, grouped by the reasons for their inclusion on the list.

CLASHING COLORS: RED IN BLUE

These Republican senators represent states that have voted Democratic in the past six presidential elections, and a potential Hillary Rodham Clinton presidential campaign could boost turnout in Democrats' favor. Each state also has potential Democratic candidates who could be formidable opponents.

GOP Sens. Mark Kirk of Illinois, Pat Toomey of Pennsylvania and Ron Johnson of Wisconsin. (Photo: AP)

Sen. Mark Kirk, R-Ill.

Kirk often stands to the left of the rest of his party — he was the only Republican to defy the National Rifle Association and vote for Obama's nominee for surgeon general in December.

Sen. Pat Toomey, R-Pa.

Pennsylvania was the only state to toss out its Tea Party-inspired governor in 2014; Toomey won in the same 2010 wave.

Sen. Ron Johnson, R-Wis.

A Tea Party conservative when he was elected in 2010, he recently said he no longer wants to repeal the Affordable Care Act.

SWING STATES, SWING SEATS

Obama won New Hampshire and Ohio in 2008 and 2012 and North Carolina in 2008; all three states are likely to be battlegrounds again in 2016. The incumbent GOP senators all have strengths, and Democrats may have a hard time finding strong candidates in these states, but a strong Democratic presidential contender would make them worth watching.

Republican Sens. Rob Portman of Ohio, Kelly Ayotte of New Hampshire and Richard Burr of North Carolina. (Photo: AP)

Sen. Rob Portman, R-Ohio

He has recently announced he will not run for president but is likely to be mentioned again as a potential vice presidential pick. If he runs for re-election, he has the advantage of a state Democratic Party in disarray.

Sen. Kelly Ayotte, R-N.H.

Ayotte has proven popular, but the Granite State was the only place where a Democratic senator survived a close race in 2014, and a Clinton presidential run could turn out a lot of Democratic voters.

Sen. Richard Burr, R-N.C.

Burr, who keeps a low national profile, was on many "most endangered" lists heading into his 2010 re-election bid but won easily against an underfunded opponent.

DEMOCRATS IN DANGER

While most Democrats will be in safe seats this year, the presidential race will be in full tilt in Nevada and Colorado, adding an extra dimension to re-election campaigns by two Democrats likely to be targeted by the GOP. Both states are also heavily influenced by Hispanic voters, and any Senate action on immigration would likely be a major part of the 2016 campaigns here.

Democratic Sens. Michael Bennet of Colorado and Harry Reid of Nevada. (Photo: AP)

Sen. Michael Bennet, D-Colo.

He won in a squeaker in 2010. But his colleague Sen. Mark Udall lost in 2014 — when Bennet was chairman of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee.

Sen. Harry Reid, D-Nev.

The top Senate Democrat faced a tough race in 2010, and Republicans are likely to target him again in 2016. GOP Gov. Brian Sandoval, re-elected in a landslide in 2014, would be a formidable opponent if he runs.

MOVING ON UP — OR OUT

Every year somebody in the Senate retires or runs for another office, and 2016 is likely no different. Retirement whispers circle around Sen. Chuck Grassley, R-Iowa, who will be 83 on Election Day 2016, but he insists he's staying in. There are at least a couple of senators who could give up their seats for a White House run.

Republican Sens. Marco Rubio of Florida and Rand Paul of Kentucky. (Photo: AP)

Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Fla.

If he leaves the Senate to run for president at the end of his first term, his seat would almost certainly be a tossup race.

Sen. Rand Paul, R-Ky.

Paul has been leaving every indication that he plans to run for president in 2016; even if he leaves the Senate, Republicans would favored to hold his seat in a state that has gotten more red since the 1990s.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1I7U9M9