Rep. Don Hill, R-Emporia, surprised many people Monday when he announced he will not seek re-election to his 60th District House seat.

Hill, a pharmacist who has served seven terms in the House, has been a leader among the dwindling faction of moderate Republicans who often found themselves at odds against Republican Gov. Sam Brownback and the conservative House leadership.

He had earlier filed for re-election this year, but told his hometown Emporia Gazette on Monday that he had decided to retire from the Legislature at the end of this year.

Hill was thought to be in a relatively safe district where no other candidates had filed as of Tuesday afternoon. Democrat Paul Davis carried that district with nearly 59 percent of the vote in the 2014 gubernatorial race.

In a telephone interview Tuesday, Hill said he believes the Legislature will move back toward the center in the 2016 elections, and he wants the person who fills his seat to have some experience under his or her belt when a new governor is elected in 2018.

He didn't mention any names as a possible successor but said there may be as many as three or four candidates file within the next few days, including, "at least one who will be extraordinarily capable and talented and a good fit for the Emporia district."

Meanwhile, another prominent moderate from the House, Rep. Barbara Bollier of Mission Hills, filed paperwork Tuesday to run for the Senate seat currently held by the more conservative incumbent Sen. Kay Wolf, R-Prairie Village, who now says she plans to retire from the Legislature.

Bollier is a retired physician who angered House Speaker Ray Merrick last year by coming out fully in favor of expanding the state's Medicaid program as allowed under the federal Affordable Care Act. She has also been a vocal opponent of conservative-backed bills restricting abortion in Kansas.

Wolf, a former House member, is finishing her first term in the Senate. She is generally seen as a conservative on social issues such as abortion, but more centrist on fiscal issues like Gov. Brownback's sweeping tax cuts of 2012, which she voted against.

Wolf had earlier filed for re-election, but she issued a statement Tuesday endorsing Bollier in that race.

“With experience in the legislature and knowledge of the concerns of our district, Rep. Bollier will provide capable leadership and be a strong advocate for Johnson County,” Wolf said.

One Democrat, Jerry Stogsdill of Prairie Village, has also filed in that race.

In other races around the state:

• Rep. Boog Highberger, D-Lawrence, filed for re-election Tuesday to his 46th District seat. No other candidates have filed in that race, and it's unlikely any serious contender will since Highberger won the seat in 2014 with 84 percent of the vote.

That leaves Sen. Tom Holland, D-Baldwin City, as the only member of the local delegation who has not yet filed, although he has indicated he intends to. Republican Echo Van Meteren, an advertising consultant and wife of GOP strategist Chris Van Meteren, has filed to challenge Holland in the general election.

• Former Sen. Jean Schodorf, who switched parties to become a Democrat after losing her 2012 GOP primary, filed this week to run for a seat in the Kansas House. Schodorf, who now lives in Sedan, filed for the 12th District seat in southeast Kansas being vacated by Republican Rep. Virgil Peck of Tyro, who is now running for the Senate seat being vacated by the retiring Senate Vice President Jeff King of Independence.

Schodorf now serves as secretary of the Kansas Democratic Party. Republican Doug Blex of Independence is the only other candidate who has filed in that race.

• And in Wichita, Democrat Robert Leon Tillman has filed, again, to challenge 4th District Congressman Mike Pompeo, a Republican. Tillman is a retired court services officer and social service worker who challenged Pompeo in 2012, losing by more than a two-to-one margin. He also ran unsuccessfully in 2008 for the Democratic nomination in the 4th District, losing to then-state Rep. Raj Goyle.