Safety Kevin Pierre-Louis back with Colorado State teammates

The Arizona Bowl was looking for a unique gift to give the players at Colorado State and Nevada, going with cowboy boots that represent the city of Tucson's Old West history. ( Nic Hallisey / Colorado State University )

TUCSON, Ariz. — Part of the bowl experience for players is the gifts they receive from the game organizers. It is commonplace for the games to provide a gift suite, where players are free to choose items they want based on points they receive.

At the Arizona Bowl, the suite was available to players from both Colorado State and Nevada, in addition to watches and backpacks they also received. But the organizers of the inaugural bowl also wanted to add a personal and unique touch, representing the area.

Cowboy boots.

The Arizona Bowl contacted the Cowtown Boots company in El Paso, Texas, and the group was quick to jump on board.

"It's the first time that I've heard of boots being given at a bowl game," said Cowtown Boots representative Jeff Pundt. "

The players had four different styles to choose from, and Pundt and his group were on hand to handle questions and help fit the boots, which are made from custom leather.

Some of Colorado State's players were excited, some curious. Linebacker Kevin Davis said he was excited to wear them, and defensive end Joe Kawulok thought it was a different idea, saying, "you'll never know when you'll need them."

Pundt said the most popular choice was the black cherry lizard boot, which is a $200 pair of boots. For Jake Bennett, they'll just be added to his collection.

"I'm definitely excited about it," he said. "I'm sure there's guys who don't have any business wanting or wearing boots, but I know there's some guys who have been trying to barter to get somebody's who doesn't want them."

Advertisement

Samples of the boots were on display for the team to see Saturday, and by Sunday, Pundt said some had come back and changed their mind on which style to choose. For quarterback Nick Stevens, it will help complete his Christmas wardrobe.

"I know some of the guys on the team are really excited for them, to get them boots," he said. "I know I don't have any boots, but I just got for Christmas some boot-cut jeans, so I'll definitely be wearing them around."

Welcome addition — Senior safety Kevin Pierre-Louis joined the team in Tucson on Sunday, arriving in time to go through practice. He came late because Pierre-Louis, who has already graduated, hadn't finished work for classes he was taking this semester. In the end, Pierre-Louis missed two practices, but head coach Mike Bobo said Friday he wasn't worried about that because of the amount of action the senior has seen in his career as a four-year starter. He'd also been involved in every bowl practice in Fort Collins before the team broke for Christmas, sessions that covered the game plan for the first time.

It's a major boost for the team which was already short at safety with the season-ending injury to Trent Matthews in the Fresno State game. In Pierre-Louis, the Rams gain back their second-leading tackler with 82 stops, including an interception. He will pair with backups Nick Januska, Justin Sweet and Jake Schlager, who himself missed Friday's workout with an injury.

Mike Brohard: 970-635-3633, mbrohard@reporter-herald.com and twitter.com/mbrohard