New pictures show smouldering beauty of Lisa Harnum as Simon Gittany admits he was a 'jealous partner'

Video

Image Tighter bail for accused balcony killer Accused murderer Simon Gittany has been slapped with tougher bail conditions.

WITH her dark eyes and stunning features, it's easy to see why Simon Gittany knew his fiancee Lisa Harnum to be a head-turning beauty.

These images, obtained by The Daily Telegraph, show a previously unseen side to the 30-year-old Canadian ballerina. Gittany told his Supreme Court trial last week that he sometimes "advised" Lisa, who he called by her middle name Cecilia, on her clothes.

"Cecilia was obviously very beautiful," he told the trial. "She would wear revealing clothes, sometimes with no bra. I would tell her she should continue to look beautiful but just to tone down how much she was revealing of her body so she didn't attract the wrong sort of attention and give out the wrong signals."

He told the trial that he now believed he should not have told her what to wear, and said he had been "a jealous" partner.

But he has denied throwing her from the balcony of their 15th floor apartment on July 30, 2011 in an act the Crown alleges was testament of his "apoplectic" anger that she was finally leaving him.

Gittany told the court he forced Lisa back inside the apartment because he wanted to talk about their relationship and was making her a hot drink when she "ran towards the balcony".

The 40-year-old demonstrated in court his four-point description of how he tried to reach out and save Lisa before she "just disappeared, let go" and plummeted to her death.

He said he monitored her texts and emails because of "a secret" she told him she could not confess.

The court has heard Ms Harnum, who had an eating disorder as a teenage dancer, told her personal trainer and counsellor friend that she struggled with bulimia.

Gittany told the court his fiancee stuck to a diet of "veggies, fish and a bit of fruit." But the court heard he had promised to pay for a trip to Canada to see her mother Joan if his 1.78m tall partner got her weight up to 50kg through training.

Ms Harnum's striking dark hair has also been alleged as an issue in the pair's "dysfunctional" relationship.

Text messages have been tendered to the court showing Gittany blasting Ms Harnum for "walking around like a peacock with your hair out".

Gittany's current partner, 24-year-old aspiring actress Rachelle Louise, will give evidence this week. Evidence being heard by Justice Lucy McCallum is expected to finish by the week's end.