A new law will prevent people from having to pay more out-of-pocket medical costs for choosing family coverage rather than individual coverage. Getty Images/Hero Images

The Obama administration on Tuesday took steps to prevent consumers who are married or have children from paying double that of single people in out-of-pocket medical costs.

Under the rule, which was clarified in a letter sent to groups representing employers, a consumer who purchases a family health insurance plan will have an out-of-pocket cost of $6,850 for themselves or for a single family member – the same amount as someone with individual coverage. A family cap of $13,700 would apply if more than one person in a family submits claims.



This means after a patient has paid $6,850 in individual copays, coinsurance and deductibles, the health insurance company is then responsible for 100 percent of the total remaining costs. Individuals and families are still responsible for monthly premiums, and the rule does not apply to health savings accounts.

The Department of Health and Human Services, Treasury and Labor, wrote in Tuesday's letter, provided in advance to U.S. News, that this rule keeps consumers from being penalized for choosing family coverage rather than individual coverage. It goes into effect Jan. 1, 2016.

The rule applies only to essential health benefits, which are the 10 categories of care covered in plans since the passage of the Affordable Care Act, and include well-child checkups, prenatal care, hospitalization, prescription drugs and mental health services, but not items such as elective cosmetic surgery. The rule also applies to non-grandfathered self-insured and large group health plans.

Tuesday's rule is another example of how the administration has addressed loopholes in health insurance coverage. As components of President Barack Obama's health care law, also known as Obamacare, have rolled out, the administration has sought feedback on various rules and clarified how health insurance companies and health providers are to work with patients.



[READ: After Hobby Lobby Ruling, HHS Announces Birth Control Workaround]

During the past year, topics have included the extent to which health insurance plans should cover care for transgender Americans, what contraception methods are covered at no cost to women and looking at whether doctors should be reimbursed by Medicare for having end-of-life discussions with patients.

The Department of Health and Human Services first proposed this limit in November 2014, then published the final rule in February 2015. The agency was prompted to send Tuesday's letter after receiving questions from trade associations about how the payment applied.