Xavier Kelly

WICHITA, Kan. -- Xavier Kelly arrived back in Wichita Saturday afternoon with a chance to look back on his unique summer. A season of trips to see numerous settings in SEC country, Pac-12 powerhouses and "Touchdown Jesus."

Kelly traveled with his father, Will, to 15 colleges in just under 2 months. While somewhat surreal to meet football masterminds and tour campuses, the goal was clear: To find the best fit for athletic and academic success.

"It's been a blessing. I got to see a lot of things a lot of people don't get to see so I'm thankful for that," Kelly said at the KAKE-TV studio Saturday. "I got to see a lot of big time colleges and big time coaches. I think that's the way you're supposed to do it. Visit A LOT of schools and pick the best one."

The best one for him, he says, was Clemson.

"You can just feel what it is that you want. I just felt that. Clemson was the right choice for me," he said.

Since announcing his commitment on July 24th, Clemson followers have done much to reaffirm his feeling. Kelly's Twitter timeline routinely features retweets from excited fans paying tribute to his announcement and a future full of potential.

"I love all of the Clemson fans. They're very supportive and they have a really big fan base so I definitely love all of the fans," Kelly said.

Those fans will carefully track the progress of East High this year, when Kelly plays defensive end and tight end as the most widely recognized player in Kansas. He welcomes the attention if it provides a spotlight for his team, but says it will not get the better of him.

"I try to be as humble as possible," he said. "I try not to get my head too big and I don't want to rub this in anyone's face because a lot of people work hard to get a D-1 offer. All I wanted was at least one D-1 offer."

He ended up with 32. And while he's not likely to field any others, it's been difficult for some coaches to separate with their hopes of obtaining the 4-star recruit's services. Some still call or text, leaving Kelly to tell them the same thing he'll tell anyone who asks, 'Why Clemson?'

It wasn't all because he sees a good chance to play early, or even because his father lives 4 hours away from Clemson in Savannah, GA.

It wasn't all because of positive interactions with head coach Dabo Swinney or because he wanted to play in the ACC. In the end, he went back to the beginning. His first of two visits to Clemson back on June 1 never lost its impression.

"It's just the feeling I had."

And that's enough for the Clemson-bound commodity who will soon switch his focus away from recruiting and into his senior season at East.

"I have to be a leader this year because I have an effect on other people. So I will stay positive and do the right things because some people look up to me," he said.

That lead might be an easy one to follow.