The realm of politics inside the Beltway in Washington, D.C., "is not the real world," according to Gary Palmer, the new representative of the Alabama 6th Congressional District in the U.S. House.

That's why the Hoover resident and conservative Republican, who will fly to D.C. next week, plans to stay rooted in Alabama -- not in Washington -- during his Congressional service.

"The real world is back here," Palmer -- the long-time director of the Alabama Policy Institute, a conservative think tank -- said. "I want to be in my yard on Saturday and my church on Sunday."

Given that, Palmer -- who handily defeated Democrat Mark Lester in November -- said that he would not use the word "excitement" to describe his emotions just days before taking office.

However, "there is a heightened sense of anticipation about the work load and being able to do some of the things we need to do," he said.

'It's a lot colder up there'

Palmer is in for a hectic weekend as he prepares to fly to D.C. to begin his term.

"I haven't really started thinking about what I need to pack," Palmer said. "Wardrobe will be an issue, because it's a lot colder up there than it is down here," he added, laughing.

It won't be the rookie congressman's first trip to the nation's capital. At an AL.com candidate forum in October, Palmer said that he was "not enamored of being in Washington," in part because he has gone to D.C. often over the last 25 years to help push conservative causes while heading up the API.

"The shiny wore off a long time ago," Palmer said at the forum.

One danger of spending too much time in Washington is that the town can work subtle changes in an elected official's values and viewpoints, according to Palmer.

"You start assimilating into that culture, and you start thinking that you are a member of that culture, and everyone you come in contact with is part of that government culture," he said.

Palmer also rejects a viewpoint expressed by some Washington insiders in recent years that the fact that fewer members of Congress live in D.C. full-time -- and socialize with people across the aisle -- has increased the partisan divide.

"I'm not sure how much of that (social activity) goes on now," Palmer said.

"The ideological chasm is so wide right now that living up there would not help it one bit," he said.

'Getting things done'

Palmer said that there are "some misconceptions" among the members of the Republican Congressional and party leadership and others about the significance of the midterm elections.

"They are under this impression that this election was about reaching across the aisle and getting things done (but) I don't think this is about just getting things done," he said.

The president can do things with the stroke of his pen on an executive order, but that doesn't solve the big problems of the country or allay voters' fears about the way the federal government conducts its business, according to Palmer.

"People want to get the economy going," Palmer said. "They want jobs. They want spending under control. And they may not be able to articulate it exactly, but there is a real concern that we are losing constitutional government."

People have "a respect and veneration for" proper constitution government and they 'have a conscious concern that we are losing that," Palmer said.

The Republicans should not be shy about fighting back against things they don't believe in, according to Palmer.

"A majority of the public want Obamacare to be repealed and replaced," he said. "That is an issue that is not us reaching across the aisle. It will be us acting as a majority to get that done."

Palmer, like many conservatives, is still hopeful that the federal Affordable Care Act -- better known as Obamacare -- can be undone.

"I am guardedly optimistic that the Supreme Court will strike down Obamacare in June," he said. "(The Republicans) have to be ready to go immediately with our plan to replace it. It must make sense but also be something that everyone can afford and get everybody coverage."

Palmer's priorities

One of the most important priorities for the new Congress is "getting spending under control," Palmer said.

Palmer asked for and received a seat of the House Budget Committee, giving him ample opportunity to influence the process, and said he is ready for the challenge.

"The work load on the budget committee will be heavy the next two and a half months, but you get to learn more about what is going on (in Congress) than on any other committee" he said. "We have to get our fiscal house in order.

Another example of what Palmer calls an "overarching issue" facing the new Republican majorities in the House and Senate over the next two years is the need for "restoring constitutional government, restoring the separation of powers," Palmer said.

He is referring, in part, to the executive orders issued recently by President Obama to push forward his agenda on such issues as immigration reform.

But Obama is not the only one who deserves to be criticized on this issue, according to Palmer.

"A lot of people cast aspersions toward the president, but it's also Congress that has not fulfilled its responsibility constitutionally," he said. "It is a lot of things they have done that reflects a lack of seriousness about protecting their authority as the legislature."

Palmer also said the country "badly needs come regulatory reform, especially regarding the EPA (Environmental Protection Agency)."

The new Congressman was also appointed to the House Oversight & Government Reform committee, which is essentially a legislative watchdog of the executive branch, and the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology.

Fitting in

Palmer expressed concern in October that his campaign promise not to vote for John Boehner -- no favorite of many conservatives -- to continue as the Speaker of the House might harm his chances to get the committee assignments he wanted.

However, Palmer believes that has not been the case, in part because he took the time to explain his position to the Speaker.

"Actually, I think Boehner respected the fact that I was willing to sit down with him and explain up front that I would not vote for him," Palmer said. "I explained why and that I made that promise to the voters. I think he respected that. If you watched how I campaigned, I never went negative. I never went personal. It is not about attacking the Speaker. It is about honoring the commitment I made to the voters."

But Palmer said he has his differences with Boehner on a number of "key issues, particularly on what we ought to do on spending, how we should approach the debt limit. This whole thing about the President's executive orders and not aggressively challenging them, even going to court. There is so much at stake here."

Palmer will begin his commute to Washington on Monday. He will be sworn in as a member of the 114th U.S. Congress on Tuesday.