Topics: Best of 2013, Book reviews, Books, Editor's Picks, literary criticism, Entertainment News

De gustibus non est disputandum — there’s no arguing over taste — is a maxim worth quoting in its original Latin as a reminder of just how long the idea has been around. As with many aspects of human nature, the Internet only makes this disconcerting fact more visible, in, for example, the flagrantly categorical opinions people express about books, both the ones they hate and the one they (inexplicably) like.

Critics are in the business of defying this principle every day — arguing about taste is our job — but that doesn’t mean we aren’t acutely aware that we have no objective basis for insisting that a Dan Brown novel is badly written or that Joan Didion is a sublime stylist. A quick perusal of the one-star Amazon reviews awarded to beloved classics (perennial clickbait for listicle journalism) underlines the truth that there is no cultural product that everyone likes. Not even the Beatles.

With that disclaimer, here are some books I couldn’t bring myself to finish in 2013. What to Read, the column I write for Salon, singles out the best book I’ve found that week, so I don’t end up writing negative reviews and therefore am seldom forced to finish a book I don’t care for. But, contrary to the recent outbreak of Chicken-Little hand-wringing about the decline of critical standards, this doesn’t mean I’m indiscriminate. The vast majority of books are published into obscurity and my thumbs-downs typically take the form of allowing them to remain there. For that reason, what follows are my responses to books you might possibly have heard of, rather than the absolute worst things I read. (Those would be the half-dozen self-published YA and fantasy novels I looked at while researching a piece on reviewer-author feuds on Goodreads.)

“Me Before You” by Jojo Moyes. A surprise bestseller, this novel is narrated by an out-of-work waitress with a propensity for quirky, brightly colored outfits who gets hired (despite a lack of prior experience) to care for a surly, suicidal, upper-class quadriplegic man. It was clear from the start that I’d boarded the express train to Tearjerk Town, which is not necessarily a disqualifier, but I also didn’t believe any of it for a minute. The narrator is a cross between insecure Bridget Jones and the Manic Pixie Dream Girl of indie-movie notoriety; the inside of her dithering head became intolerable after about four chapters.

“Gun Machine” by Warren Ellis. Sometimes, the timing is just off. This is a supernatural detective story about a tough cop in pursuit of a time-traveling killer who keeps a shrine stocked with guns used in murders — exactly not the sort of thing you want to read a month after the massacre at Sandy Hook Elementary School. There is a type of genre fiction that revels in the preoccupations of its villain while pretending to deplore them, and this book struck me as far more complicit in the bad guy’s gun fetishism than I could stomach.