SAN DIEGO, July 15, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- InsureWell, the leading digital insurance marketplace platform for income protection, announced a new dedicated program for small businesses today and partnership with the leading voluntary benefits insurer, Colonial Life. The new small business program will bring together a dedicated service operation and broad suite of disability, business protection, life and voluntary benefits solutions geared for the growing insurance and health care cost challenges of small businesses today.

"Only 36% of small businesses with under 10 employees offer voluntary benefits like vision, dental, disability or accident insurance. Many business owners don't know that voluntary benefit programs can actually be zero cost for the business, drive employee retention and deliver cost savings as high as $500 per employee," said Bill Unrue, CEO of InsureWell.

The partnership with Colonial Life allows InsureWell to offer small business owners and employees a full suite of supplemental insurance covering Vision, Dental, Life, Disability, Critical Illness, Accident, Cancer, and Wellness Incentives. Colonial Life voluntary benefits provide small businesses an affordable way to offer employees a range of protection benefits with tax incentives for the business itself. The insurer's new Medical Bridge 3000 product also provides small businesses a solution to deal with the rising cost of healthcare and potentially dangerous, high-deductible 'coverage gaps'.

InsureWell is also bringing together a disability product suite for small business owners. Disability coverage may be the most neglected area of financial risk and planning for business owners. The loss of the business owner or key manager can be devastating for the many small businesses which operate on a few key customer relationships and tight working capital. All business owners should have two types of disability coverage: individual coverage for themselves, and key-person insurance for any employees who are fundamental to the businesses operation.

Business owners should also duly consider Buy-Sell disability insurance and Business Overhead Expense (BOE) protection. Buy-Sell disability protection pays the disabled partner or owner for their buy out portion of the business, while BOE provides cover for overhead such as operational expenses and salaries.

About InsureWell

InsureWell.com is a leading consumer advocate and national online insurance marketplace for individuals, small businesses and financial intermediaries. The Company leverages technology, data analytics and informatics to enhance the consumer digital experience and develop next-generation technology enabled insurance solutions. InsureWell works with the major carriers, including Mutual of Omaha, Met-Life, Principal Financial Group, Guardian and Colonial Life.

For additional information, please visit www.insurewell.com.

Investor and Media Contact:

InsureWell

Chris d'Eon

888-986-8226



SOURCE InsureWell.com