North Henderson's Hannah Brackett plays three different sports, but her winters spent on the hardwood are her favorite.

That's evident in how she plays the game of basketball. The senior is a picture of constant hustle. She's on the floor. She's battling for rebounds. She's fighting for layups in the paint. Her face is generally full with emotion as she wrestles the ball away on defense. Brackett leads the Lady Knights in drawn charges.

"She really loves the game of basketball," North coach Sue Moon said.

Brackett is an integral part of a Lady Knight (11-5, 4-3) team that is jockeying for a playoff spot as the home stretch of her final basketball season is in full gear.

While opposing teams are stretched by the sharp shooting of Ellie Caldwell and Jonnie Petree and are trying to slow down Caroline Marsh on the post, Brackett is the North player that makes them pay.

Her tough defense and strong offense have punished teams this season. The senior is averaging 10 points and eight rebounds per game.

"Hannah works hard every single day," Moon said. "She is that blue-collar worker. She does all the jobs that a lot of players don't want to do."

Often times, that leads the North star into piles on the floor where she's getting kicked or elbowed.

Those situations are where Brackett strives, though.

"It's just instincts," the senior said. "I just want to make my team better by doing the little things."

There's also some basketball in her genes. Bracket's mom, Sarah, played basketball at West Henderson. Her brother, Ryan, played at North.

While Brackett's family may have gotten her into the game, it's her drive that's made her even better as her senior year has rolled around.

"I push myself to make myself better at practice," she said. "I worked really hard over the summer."

Moon concurs. When the gym doors were open for voluntary workouts, Brackett was present.

And all of that hard work has culminated into a successful personal season so far this year with the opportunity to help push North forward into the playoffs.

That hard work is who she is, Moon said. It's a part of her DNA.

"Hannah's going to do what her team needs her to do," Moon said. "She's not going to save herself. She's going to give you everything she's got."