When students at Turner Elementary and Bartels Middle returned to school Aug. 19, they had a new bell schedule, new uniforms and a new focus on science, technology, engineering and math across all grades and subjects.

The biggest change, though, is that all of them are now attending a single school — the new Turner/Bartels K-8. The side-by-side New Tampa campuses on Imperial Oak Boulevard merged over the summer to give some relief to the overcrowded Turner, which enrolled 1,130 students last school year.

Four weeks into the new school year, with many of the bugs worked out, Hillsborough County school district officials say the merger accomplished their goal of making room for students who need it without the expense of building a new school.

Turner was filled to the brim because of growth in New Tampa. The community is drawing families with more young children than there are seats in the elementary school and no nearby elementary had room to spare.

“It is more of a regional solution,” said Rory Salimbene, the district’s general manager of construction. “By converting some of our middle school spaces to elementary spaces, we more efficiently used the space we have.”

To free space at Bartels, which enrolled about 850 students last year, attendance zones were redrawn to send a couple hundred students to Liberty and Benito middle schools.

As of last week, 1,800 students were enrolled at Turner/Bartels. Of those, 1,150 are in elementary school and 650 are in middle-school. It’s now a student body comparable in size to one of the district’s high schools. And there’s room to grow to 2,311 students.

Over the summer, district and school officials worked to join the two schools top to bottom in time for the students’ first day.

The cost came to about $460,000, $300,000 of it for a new covered walkway to link the two schools. Other work included $180,000 to paint both campuses the same off-white color, as well as adding a digital message board, upgrading security fencing, redoing the gymnasium floor with the school’s new logo, and replacing signs.

❖ ❖ ❖

What used to be the old Bartels Middle building now houses the “upper campus,” which includes classrooms for students in fourth through eighth grades, as well as some classes for third-graders. The “lower campus” is for pre-kindergarteners through second-graders, as well as some third-graders.

New Principal Jonathan Grantham has an office on both campuses and rides a golf cart between them throughout the school day.

So far, things are running smoothly for the most part, thanks to good planning over the summer, Grantham said.

“It’s continuous improvement,” said Grantham, who previously was principal of Roland Park K-8, a magnet school. “This whole year is going to be a process. Our goal is to get a little better every day.”

All Turner/Bartels teachers were trained in infusing science, technology, engineering and math into their lessons, as the school now has a “STEM” curriculum.

Two STEM coordinators — Angel Danger and Nicole Tuminella — are on staff to train and work with teachers.

“Every conversation here has been geared toward STEM,” Grantham said, even in English, physical education and music.

On Thursday afternoon, music teacher Melissa Grady incorporated a science lesson into her class by having her students monitor how sound travels through different materials. They paired up and talked to each other through cups strung together with copper wire, fishing line or yarn.

“Our instruments do not work properly without STEM,” Grady said. “When they do this kind of thing, they can figure out how instruments work.”

When word spread last spring that the two schools would be combined, some parents were skeptical or downright opposed.

They didn’t want 5-year-olds walking the same halls as 13-year-olds. They worried about younger and older children riding on the same school buses and feared it would be difficult to keep such a sprawling campus safe.

Some worried the adjusted day would be too long for the younger kids. Turner’s school day was previously six hours and 15 minutes and ran from 8 a.m. to 2:15 p.m. Bartels’ school day lasted seven hours and 15 minutes, from 9 a.m. to 4:15 p.m.

Now, school lasts six hours and 50 minutes, from 8:45 a.m. to 3:35 p.m. and parents have the option to drop their students off at a before-school program that begins at 6 a.m.

But the schedule is still a concern for some, including Enaye Englenton, who has children in the first and third grades at the school. Englenton said this adds to an “already long day.”

❖ ❖ ❖

Even though they attend the same school now, the older kids rarely come into contact with the younger ones, Grantham said. When they do, it’s because the school has organized an event. He says the older students serve as role models for the younger ones.

But a few weeks in, seventh-grader Liam Kilcommons said he and his fellow middle-school students miss having their own school.

“I wish they could have kept the elementary kids over there,” Liam said.

Still, the school year is going OK because “they don’t bother us and we don’t bother them.”

Englenton said her biggest concern now is transportation, which she says the district should work to address.

“Buses routinely run late both in the mornings and afternoons,” Englenton said in an email. “There continues to be a lack of supervision. This is a major concern when there are children ranging from ages 5-14 on the same buses.”

She said Turner/Bartels administrators have done a great job at addressing parents’ concerns.

Like all principals, Grantham still hears complaints, but fewer than he did. He acknowledges transportation can be an issue but says it has improved.

Students, parents and staff are still getting used to the sheer size of the student body.

For Grantham, one of the toughest challenges is planning. For example, Grandparents Day in the past has been a one-day event. This year, it will be spread over three days.

Third-grader Alexis Modonado, 9, who likes that her classroom is on the upper campus, sees the size of the school as a plus.

“We get to do experiments around the whole school,” Alexis said.

Salimbene, the district’s construction manager, expects that the school will eventually fill up and the district will reassess how to accommodate more growth.

“We try to keep our schools so that they’re not so large that it makes management even more difficult,” he said. “When you reach capacity and you can’t address it by boundaries, the only alternative is to build.”

ekourkounis@tampatrib.com

(813)259-7999