The American people aren’t too thrilled with President Barack Obama following the disastrous rollout of Obamacare, but Democratic strategist James Carville knows just how the president can get back in their good graces: take a toke off the mayor of Toronto’s crack pipe.

Carville appeared on MSNBC’s “Morning Joe” Monday and discussed Obama’s tanking approval ratings with hosts Joe Scarborough and Mika Brzezinski. The Democratic strategist decided to give President Obama some much-needed advice on how to raise his favorability with Americans.

“I think the best thing he can do is take a toke on the mayor of Toronto’s crack pipe, because his numbers are about 48,” Carville said.

The former Bill Clinton campaign manager referenced Toronto Mayor Rob Ford, who recently admitted to smoking crack cocaine months after Gawker reported there was a video of him doing so.

Carville isn’t the only one joking Obama should take a page out of Ford’s playbook. “Tonight Show” host Jay Leno cracked — no pun intended — one at the President and Ford’s expense last week, saying Obama is better off “smoking crack than passing Obamacare.”

Following the disastrous rollout of the president’s signature healthcare law, Obama’s approval ratings sagged to 39 percent, a two-year low. But contrary to President Obama’s dismal numbers, Ford’s actually ticked up to 44 percent from 39 percent in the wake of his confession.

Carville, though, tried to defend the president’s dwindling favorability with Americans. He said Obama’s record speaks for itself, despite what the numbers show.

“I think we can stop putting the nails in the coffin here. We can admit that there’s some real, deep, fundamental problems with this president. But I think we’re throwing the dirt here too soon,” he said. “The deficit is dropping as a percentage of GDP faster than any time since World War II. He saved the auto industry. Health care costs are flattening better than any time in the last 20 years. Teenage pregnancy is at an all-time low.”

h/t POLITICO