The Big Bang Theory star Jim Parsons has something in common with his TV character: he’s not ready to walk down the aisle just yet.

The National Enquirer recently claimed that Jim Parsons popped the question to Todd Spiewak, his boyfriend of over a decade. According to the tabloid, The Big Bang Theory production delay played a part in Jim Parsons’ decision to get engaged:

“The week’s work stoppage left Jim with unexpected time on his hands. That led to a heart-to-heart with Todd, the 37-year-old art director who has been his partner for nearly 11 years.”

An unnamed source told The Enquirer that Jim Parsons hasn’t popped the question yet because “he wanted to make sure that he was settled and secure before he took on such a major change.” The source went on to claim that Todd Spiewak pressured Jim into getting engaged by pointing out that his lucrative new Big Bang Theory contract will provide the couple with all the stability that they need.

However, Big Bang Theory fans might see a Shamy wedding before they see Parsons and Spiewak walking down the aisle. Jim was quick to respond to the engagement rumors with a cute throwback Instagram photo bearing this caption:

“Me and Todd in 2003. Still very happy today… And NOT engaged! #justFYI #NationalEnquirerMakesS**tUp #duh.”

Some Big Bang Theory fans just don’t understand why Jim Parsons refuses to wed Todd Spiewak. Marilynm60 wrote:

“I agree you should get married, this way you have the right to make important medical decisions if one of you would take I’ll.”

Other fans see nothing wrong with the couple remaining unwed. Ericatrippy wrote:

“The two of you know what your relationship needs and if marriage isn’t necessary then it isn’t necessary. You’re happy and in love and that’s all that matters. If only all of us could have that. You two are absolutely adorable. Congrats on 11 years and here’s to many, MANY more!”

As The Inquisitr previously reported, Jim Parsons recently admitted that marriage has never been a life goal for him. However, The Big Bang Theory actor is happy that more and more members of the LGBTQ community are getting the opportunity to wed their partners.

During an appearance on The Ellen DeGeneres Show, Jim Parsons struggled to explain why he’s so against the idea of getting married. According to the Daily Mail, this is how The Big Bang Theory star responded when DeGeneres asked him if he would ever consider tying the knot:

“I don’t know. That’s a hard one. You get used to your life as it is.”

It sounds like Parsons is a creature of habit just like his Big Bang Theory character.

Speaking of the odd creature that is Sheldon Cooper, Mayim Bialik recently dropped a hint about the astrophysicist’s future when she shared the Instagram photo below. It reveals the title of the first episode of season 8 of The Big Bang Theory.

The “locomotion” could refer to the locomotive that Sheldon is on, and it sounds like his train trip might come to an end before it’s supposed to. This will probably make Amy and Shamy fans very happy, but hopefully Shelly is gone long enough to find the peace that he’s searching for.

Sheldon might actually realize that he misses Amy during the time that he’s away, and maybe soon Big Bang Theory fans will get to witness the nerdiest nuptials ever – Shamy’s wedding wouldn’t be complete without replicas of the One Ring from Lord of the Rings, a Flash T-shirt underneath Sheldon’s suit, and Amy rocking Princess Leia buns.

Would you like to see a Shamy wedding on The Big Bang Theory, or do you think that Parsons and his character both need to stick to their guns by refusing to conform to social conventions?

[Image credit: Robyn Beck/Getty via E! News]