Donald Trump is a self-absorbed presidential dilettante that has taken the political world by storm. He's a bigoted, sexist and callous campaigner that has already shunned a large portion of the American electorate. Not only have multiple GOP representatives come out swearing to never endorse him as the nominee, all analytics show that Donald Trump is the least likable politician in our country's history. His favorability ratings are historically low. His likability statistics make Kanye West look like Mother Teresa. In other words, regardless of the political ideology, Americans aren't particularly warming up to the bombastic billionaire businessman from the Big Apple. Trump can't win.

And for some reason, you don't care.

You. Yes, I'm talking to you. You sitting there with that ever-present scowl on your face. You, that citizen that verbally proclaims that "America is going to hell in a handbasket" to anyone within an earshot. Allow me to sit down and talk to you for a second. You GOP apologists. You left-wing haters. You, the same people that have cheered the relentless obstruction of republicans against President Barack Obama for the last 7+ years. You, someone that has watched the Republican Party seize both houses of Congress, yet still seemingly still wield little legislative power. Sans gun control, you've watched Obama still manage to pass practically every piece of legislation his heart has ever desired. From the Affordable Care Act to climate change to the legalization of same-sex marriage, you have watched Barack Hussein Obama score touchdown after touchdown. Spiking the ball in the process. I get the frustration. And I can see what you're doing.

You see, I have a theory. I believe that conservative republicans understand that the country is in transition. They're not stupid. They understand that the browning of America is in full swing. They watched an electable Mitt Romney lose the election in 2012 primarily due to receiving only 23 percent of the latino vote and practically none of the black vote. All statistics show that the 2016 GOP nominee would need more than 60 percent of the white vote and more than 40 percent of the latino vote. That's just not going to happen. The writing is on the wall and has been for a while now... Hillary Clinton is your next president. Her inevitable presidency will usher in the nation's first female president and solidify the legacy of Barack Obama at the same time. You know it. We all know it. That's why the email and Benghazi scandals have been so blown out of proportion. That's why voting rights are being tampered with all over this country. It's a desperate grasping of straws by her detractors and will fail at the end of the day. Prepare for First Gentleman Bill Clinton.

You just wanted someone that would fight. You want someone that shows aggression. You want someone that would wield and swing whatever political hammers available in an attempt to slow down the inevitable second-coming of the Clinton administration. And surprisingly, you are willing to compromise all belief systems throughout the duration of this season's electoral process. Decorum shmuckorum.

But here's the problem... By following a demagogue like Donald Trump, you inflict damage in three different areas of concern: One, you deteriorate the relationships with our allies internationally who have already shown signs of consternation. Two, you implode the Republican Party and its historical beliefs, principles and archetypes, leaving an already thin bench to pick up the pieces. And three, most importantly, you divide this country along all race, gender and socio-economic backgrounds like never before. The aftermath of which we may never recover.

Of course, you're fine with that. You just want Hillary Clinton to absorb as much political and personal damage as possible before being elected. I know. I get it. So much for patriotism.

Senator Lindsay Graham famously said, "(The GOP) is not generating enough angry white guys to stay in business for the long term."

And he's right. Trump can't win. And you'll vote for him because he's the torch bearer for those feeling fits of frustration in today's America. Good luck with that.

Danny Morrison is an on-air radio personality and motivational speaker.