It was only a year ago that Terrance Knighton arrived at Broncos headquarters as an obscure washout from Jacksonville.

He is now so famous that his moniker, “Pot Roast,” is familiar in NFL households, and he stars alongside a French bulldog in a national TV commercial.

“With winning as a team comes individual success,” Knighton said. “I mean, look at Richard Sherman. He’s having a heck of an offseason.”

But wait, it gets better for Knighton. The Broncos and their fans don’t really care how much fame and fortune their lovable 330-something-pound defensive tackle engulfs off the field.

Their hope is that all this newfound attention doesn’t get in Knighton’s way of creating interior havoc at the line of scrimmage. Equipped with an outsized confidence that matches his frame, Knighton said his second season with the Broncos will be his best.

“I think the game has slowed down so much for me,” he said. “Right now, I think I’m in the prime of my career. I honestly don’t feel like there’s a center that can block me. I’ll just keep working at it. I’ve watched film from last year, and I’ve watched future opponents. Right now, I’m just trying to go out there and dominate and continue where I left off.”

Chances are, a few NFL centers will be made aware of the fearless faith Knighton has in himself. Which is only fair, because he notices the brashness of the enemy too.

As the San Antonio Spurs were blowing out the Miami Heat in the decisive Game 5 of the NBA Finals on Sunday night, Arizona Cardinals defensive back Tyrann Mathieu tweeted, “This is turning out to be worse than the Super Bowl.”

Knighton took that as an affront.

“Don’t worry,” Knighton tweeted in reply. “Ya’all on the schedule.”

It was a more patient Knighton who spent three days in Los Angeles this offseason filming a Bridgestone tires commercial.

“It was a lot of fun, though,” he said. “The dog was a little timid. But we ended up getting along pretty good.”

The highlight of the commercial is when a Bridgestone researcher, riding shotgun and holding Knighton’s dog as the hungry Bronco drives to a grocery store, tries to change the radio station.

“She likes country,” Knighton says, scolding the researcher.

Knighton said the most common reaction he has received from the ad is people teasing him about how the dog stole the show.

There was one play during the Broncos’ practice Monday that offered proof Knighton hasn’t been distracted by the spotlight.

The Broncos’ first-string offense was running goal-to-go plays against the No. 1 base defense. Peyton Manning called out an audible. Knighton put his left hand behind his fortress of a rump and waved middle linebacker Nate Irving to shift over to his left.

Sure enough, the play was a counter handoff to tailback Montee Ball, who ran into the gap that Irving had just moved to fill. Ball was stacked up for no gain.

“I know my stuff,” Knighton said. “I played against Peyton six times when I was with Jacksonville (and Manning was with Indianapolis). When the offense makes a check, I go to the sideline and let them know what I heard. Being right by the quarterback, lining up right under the center, it’s kind of my responsibility to let everyone know what’s going on.”

These are heady times for Knighton. He is enjoying the recognition and will take more endorsements if they come, but he also understands he’s lucky to be in this position.

“I think it was the name, ‘Pot Roast,’ ” he said. “It blew up nationally. Playing at the level I did last year — there probably would have been a lot more had we won the Super Bowl. But it was a heck of a lot more than when I was in Jacksonville.”

Mike Klis: mklis@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikeklis