The following stories are under consideration:

CALIF-IMMIGRATION-MEDICAL:LA — Ever since Obamacare took effect two years ago, many California legislators have been fighting to get health insurance for those it left out — the quarter of all immigrants in the country illegally who live within the state’s borders. Next month, California will make a sizable dent in that effort when immigrants younger than 19 who are here without papers begin receiving free health coverage through Medi-Cal, the state’s low-income health program. State officials estimate that 170,000 residents will be eligible. But insuring children is an easy battle to win, experts say, because of kids’ emotional appeal and their low medical expenses. California isn’t blazing the way here. Massachusetts, Illinois, New York, Washington and Washington, D.C., already have extended coverage to children in the country illegally. The remaining frontier — covering adults — will be a much tougher sell. By Soumya Karlamangla (Moving at a later date).

CAMPAIGN-GOP:LA — Donald Trump stacked up five more primary wins Tuesday, sweeping the East Coast in a decisive showing that moved him significantly closer to capturing the Republican presidential nomination and avoiding a bruising fight at the party’s convention this summer. Trump’s victories — in Connecticut, Delaware, Maryland, Pennsylvania and Rhode Island — were never in doubt, as he opened a sizeable lead the moment polls closed. The only question was how big the final margin of victory would be, thus determining his share of the 172 delegates at stake. Early returns suggested Trump would take the overwhelming majority, with Texas Sen. Ted Cruz and Ohio Gov. John Kasich fighting for a meager share. By Mark Z. Barabak.

CAMPAIGN-DEMOCRATS:TBW — Hillary Clinton was projected to win primaries in Pennsylvania, Maryland and Delaware, three of the five states voting Tuesday, as the Democratic front-runner seeks to build an insurmountable lead over rival Bernie Sanders. Clinton is expected to expand her lead of 275 pledged delegates when ballots are counted in the five Eastern states at stake. Sanders was the winner in Rhode Island, according to The Associated Press. Results were still pending in Connecticut. But the delegate haul from Pennsylvania and Maryland, the two largest states voting, could make it close to impossible for Sanders to catch up, even with voting on June 7 in the biggest prize of the campaign, California. Polls show he faces an uphill race there as well. Sanders signaled again Tuesday that he would stay in the race until the Democratic Party convention in July. By Evan Halper in Washington and Kurtis Lee in Philadelphia.

MEXICO-VIOLENCE:LA — The Pacific city of Acapulco remained gripped by fear Tuesday with thousands of businesses and many schools shuttered following two brazen attacks on federal authorities — the latest round of bloodshed in the city’s long fall from storied vacation paradise to Mexico’s murder capital. Gov. Hector Astudillo of Guerrero state pleaded for a return to “normalcy” after Sunday night’s attacks by suspected drug gangs on a police station and a hotel that housed federal police. The attacks were apparently reprisals for the arrest Saturday of Fredy del Valle, alias “El Burro,” head of the Independent Cartel of Acapulco, the governor said. By Cecilia Sanchez and Chris Kraul in Mexico City.

PARIS-ATTACKS-VICTIM:LA — There was a salad, small sandwiches and peanuts. Her daughter’s send-off to Paris was a neat, organized and quiet affair that ended before the night grew old. To Beatriz Gonzalez, it seemed like a formal baptism into a brave new world that many immigrants who came to America poor could only dream their children could penetrate. Nohemi wore a beach dress, her face beaming, her feet bare. Because Beatriz lived and saw through her daughter’s eyes, she felt, in a way, she too was traveling to the City of Light. She hugged Nohemi a final time and told her she was happy she was going to Paris. Nohemi had been at a Paris bistro that Friday night in November when terrorists opened fire. She was one of 130 people — the only American — killed in the bombing and shooting rampage. By Brittney Mejia in Norwalk, Calif. (Moving at a later date).

Additional news stories appear on the MCT-NEWS-BJT.

———

©2016 Los Angeles Times

Visit the Los Angeles Times at www.latimes.com

Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

_____

Topics: g000065558,g000362661,g000066164,g000065564,g000362665,g000220524,g000221937,g000065582