Contact: Mark Miller

Managing Attorney - Atlantic Center

Pacific Legal Foundation

mm@pacificlegal.org

(561) 691-5000



Christina M. Martin

Attorney - Atlantic Center

Pacific Legal Foundation

cmm@pacificlegal.org

(561) 691-5000





PLF challenges boat speed limits to ‘protect’ manatees where they aren’t found

Florida regulators are violating state law — and bowing to politics instead of science — with unjustified restrictions on water recreation in two Pinellas County basins



Pinellas County, FL; August 11, 2015: The Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission (FWC) is exceeding its manatee regulatory powers by proposing to limit boat speeds in a pair of popular Pinellas County basins with few or no manatees — indeed, where the commission’s own staff recommended against regulations because of the infrequency of manatee sightings.

For this reason, attorneys with Pacific Legal Foundation (PLF) today filed an administrative challenge to the FWC’s proposal to impose boat speed limits in the basins where, as the commission’s staff recognized, there is no scientific or legal justification for regulations — specifically, two manmade water areas around Indian Rocks Beach that are popular with boaters, water skiers, and jetskiers.



PLF attorneys represent Bill Thomas, a boating enthusiast whose home at Indian Rocks Beach (along with the homes of his neighbors) is adjacent to the basins. Donor-supported PLF represents Mr. Thomas free of charge, as with all PLF clients.

State law bars FWC manatee regulations where there are no manatees

The Florida Manatee Sanctuary Act allows the FWC to impose manatee-related regulations where manatees are “frequently sighted” and where the best available scientific information shows that manatees inhabit the waters. These criteria are not met in the two Indian Rocks Beach basins that are at issue in this lawsuit.



Ironically, this fact was acknowledged by the FWC itself when it issued its draft of proposed regulations in Pinellas County waters. FWC staff argued specifically for excluding those two basins from regulation because “documented manatee use was relatively low in both areas compared to the rest of the area.” In fact, during the period of intensive aerial review by FWC staff, there were no manatee sightings in the northern of the two basins, and no more than two in the southern basin. Based on these findings and recommendations, the FWC’s original proposed rule excluded both basins from boat speed regulations.

FWC bows to local political demands instead of manatee science

Then, local politicians intruded into the process. The Indian Rocks Beach City Commission asked the FWC to withdraw the exclusion and impose boat speed regulations on both basins. But the city officials’ request had nothing to do with manatees; instead, they wanted boat speed restrictions because they don’t like the noise from boats in the basins.



Late last month, the FWC complied with the request. On July 23, it published its intent to impose severe boat speed restrictions in both basins, from April to October of each year.

PLF statement: FWC violates the law by ignoring manatee findings — and responsible recreationists’ rights

“We are challenging these proposed restrictions because the Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission is bowing to local politics instead of following the requirements of science and the Manatee Sanctuary Act,” said Mark Miller, Managing Attorney with PLF’s Atlantic Center office in Palm Beach Gardens. “The FWC has a mandate to protect manatees where significant numbers of manatees are found. But it also has a legal duty not to impose regulations where manatees aren’t found. By playing politics and imposing unjustified mandates, agency officials are squandering scarce regulatory resources. And they are ignoring their legal responsibility, under the Manatee Sanctuary Act, to avoid unduly interfering with the rights of recreationists such as fishermen, boaters, and water skiers.”

Statement by Bill Thomas

Bill Thomas is a retiree who owns a home in Indian Rocks Beach, near the two currently unregulated water basins where FWC intends to impose strict, unjustified boat speed rules. A boating enthusiast, he moved to Florida to engage in the recreational activities he loves. But that vision of an enjoyable retirement is now threatened by the illegal regulations that FWC is proposing.



“I’m taking this step of challenging this illegal rule because the FWC doesn’t want to abide by the law and the legal limits on its power,” said Thomas. “By overstepping its authority, it is stepping on my rights, and the rights of other Floridians, to engage in responsible recreational activities as protected under Florida law. I am a member of the Audubon Society and worked for the Youth Conservation Corps. I love the environment and I love manatees, and I want them protected. But these boating restrictions aren’t about protecting the environment or the sea cow. They’re about playing politics, and that’s not just wrong — it’s illegal.”



The case is Thomas v. Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission. More information, including the petition, is available at: www.pacificlegal.org.



About Pacific Legal Foundation and its Atlantic Center in Florida

Donor-supported Pacific Legal Foundation is a nonprofit public interest watchdog organization that litigates for limited government, property rights, and free enterprise, in courts across the country. PLF’s Atlantic Center is located in Palm Beach Gardens, Florida. PLF represents all clients free of charge.