“NO FREE SPEECH FOR YOU!”

Israel is provoking all kinds of free-speech issues with a proposed ban on using the word “Nazi” as an insult. The New York Times reports that a similar measure was proposed and voted down in 2012, but a version presented by legislator Shimon Ohayon passed in Parliament by 44 to 17 Wednesday. It will now face committee hearings and three more Parliament votes before being signed in to law.

According to the Times the proposed bill will “make it a crime to call someone a Nazi — or any other slur associated with the Third Reich — or to use Holocaust-related symbols in a noneducational way.” The punishment? Up to $29,000 in fines and as much as six months in jail.

The move comes as a reaction to the increasing levity with which the words are bandied about—the lawmakers in favor the bill think it’s necessary in order to preserve a sense of reverence for one of the greatest human tragedies of the twentieth century.

“Freedom of speech is important, but in my opinion, every country has to establish certain value-based limits,” says Rabbi and Parliament member Dov Lipman.

What’s weird is that we’re not talking about curbing free speech in order to keep people from insulting Jews or the Jewish legacy. Israel is actually trying to forcibly stop people from degrading the Nazi reputation.

Let’s face it: Making fun of Nazis has been a form of catharsis for Jews and non-Jews alike for decades. From Woody Allen movies to The Soup Nazi on “Seinfeld,” making fun of Nazis has had constructive place in culture. It’s lessened the sting of an incalculable atrocity, and giving the Nazi archetype some levity has been a way to exert a degree of dominance over a crushing period of history.

Sure, the comparisons to Hitler do get old. “Obamacare is just like Hitler.” “Suspending A-Rod from the Yankees is just like Hitler.” It’s obnoxious and it’s tiresome. But if you’re that evil, you’re going to get parodied. People are going to take your image and use it as an insult. It’s just a basic human impulse.

Of course, the bill has plenty of opponents in Israel. Civil liberties lawyer Amir Fuchs tells the Times, “Of course, I don’t support using these words, and also the symbols of the Nazis, and using the Holocaust to persuade and to try to use it in every conversation. But you measure the freedom of speech in a democratic country in the freedom to say these disturbing and annoying things, not in what is nice and pleasant to hear.”