TOP STORIES

GSK has been given a $54.68 million fine by the Competition and Markets Authority over deals it made to pay cash to competitors so that they wouldn’t bring the generic version of Seroxat, called paroxetine, to market between 2002 and 2004. Other companies fined included Generics UK, Merck, Alpharma, Activis UK and Xellia Pharmaceuticals. — BBC

Zenefits is under investigation by California insurance regulators. It joins Washington which is also investigating the company — Reuters

Charlie Sheen wants in on a CytoDyn clinical trial of its monoclonal antibody to block HIV from invading immune cells, he told Dr. Oz on his talk show. Sheen appeared with CytoDy CEO Nader Pourhassan. — Forbes

LIFE SCIENCES

Generic drug producer Lannett plans to sell or close its Philadelphia production sites, move 88 jobs to Indiana, cutting 20 percent of its workforce. It’s part of a restructuring following its $1.2 billion acquisition of Kremers Urban Pharmaceutical Co. last year. — Philadelphia Business Journal

Despite concerns about a slowdown in biotech, Quintiles had a strong fourth quarter earnings report with a 9 percent increase in revenue to $1.13 billion. It also had net income of $111 million and a backlog of orders to the tune of $12 billion. — The News and Observer

Today in Martin Shkreli news, the former Turing Pharmaceuticals CEO apparently owes the IRS $4.6 million in back taxes — Gawker

Kanye and his label are legally required to take my offer letter to their Board of Directors. This should delay the album by a few days. — Martin Shkreli (@MartinShkreli) February 11, 2016



Not content to incite the ire of Wu-Tang Clan fans, former Turing Pharmaceuticals CEO Martin Shkreli is now turning his attention to Kanye West. He has offered to pay $10 million for his latest album so that he can be the sole owner. — The Washington Post

Ireland wants to create a medtech hub. — Irish Times

PAYERS-PROVIDERS

UC San Diego Health appointed Dr. Christopher Longhurst as its new CIO. He previously worked for Stanford (Calif.) Children’s Health, where he served as CMIO since 2004. Beckers Hospital Review

The Affordable Care Act is impacting profits for the five largest health insurers. — Fierce Health Payer

TECHNOLOGY

Electronic health records can reduce the odds of contracting a hospital acquired infections, according to a study funded by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. — HealthcareIT News

American Telemedicine Association is up in arms over Texas’ telemedicine position. Its state board plan calls for limiting “distance counseling” to Texas providers and require face-to-face visits before a virtual session. — mHealth Intelligence

POLITICS

Democratic presidential candidates Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders may agree on a lot of things but Medicare for all isn’t one of them. “If it’s Medicare for all, then you no longer have the Affordable Care Act. — Forbes

A bill passed by Pennsylvania’s House of Representatives would shift the penalty for violence against healthcare workers from a misdemeanor to a felony. — Penna Medical Society

A LITTLE BIT EXTRA

A Tampa woman who was stabbed more than 30 times by her then boyfriend found love in the form of one of a firefighter who responded to the incident that nearly took her life. Now they’re engaged. Ain’t love grand? — Fox 13 News

Photo: Getty Images