Editorial: Gouging, a dose at a time

Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 Photo illustration by Tyswan Stewart / Times Union Photo illustration by Tyswan Stewart / Times Union Editorial: Gouging, a dose at a time 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

THE ISSUE:

Pharmaceutical companies use many methods to keep drug prices high.

THE STAKES:

Congress must stop consumers from being victimized by these shrewd practices.

Price manipulation in one form or another is often cited as the reason prescription medications cost so much in the U.S. But pharmaceutical companies have hit a new low: limiting the way certain cancer drugs are packaged, forcing Americans to throw out billions of dollars in unused drugs each year.

Researchers at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center and the University of Chicago examined the way the top 20 cancer drugs are sold and found consumers end up paying $3 billion more annually because the drugs come in larger doses than doctors normally prescribe. Selling these drugs in "one-size-fits-all" vials means consumers end up paying for more than needed.

The unused portions get thrown out for safety reasons.

In one example, the study found that about a third of the drug rituximab, commonly used to treat lymphoma and leukemia, gets tossed nearly every time it's administered. Still, patients have no choice but to pay for the full vials, causing excess spending of $254 million annually.

More Information To comment: tuletters@timesunion.com or at http://blog.timesunion.com/opinion

An estimated $309 million worth of the drug bortezomib, used to treat multiple myeloma, is wasted annually, the researchers found. In the U.S., it is only available in 2.5 mg vials, but in the United Kingdom it is sold in 1 mg vials, substantially reducing waste.

These revelations come months after the infamous case of Martin Shkreli, the former CEO of Turing Pharmaceuticals, who jacked up by 7,000 percent the cost of Daraprim, a medication used to help prevent infections among cancer and AIDS patients. Turing raised the price of a single pill from $13.50 to $750, yet the same pills can be purchased for pennies outside the U.S. — reportedly for less than 10 cents in India and only two cents in Brazil. Unfortunately, the U.S. prohibits the importation of prescription drugs.

The Associated Press reported last week how companies like Turing are able to get away with this "hyperpricing" by using tightly-controlled distribution systems that stifle competition and artificially keep the costs of even generic drugs high.

Drug manufacturers routinely counter that high prices support the development of new and better drugs. The huge profits these high prices generate also support the industry's significant campaign contributions, allowing it to wield considerable clout in Congress and block reforms that would hold down costs for consumers and for expensive government programs like Medicare and Medicaid.

Yet, instead of changing the laws requiring various size doses to reduce waste, or opening the door to importing cheaper drugs while building in sensible safeguards, or enabling the government to negotiate directly with drug companies for better pricing, Congress has instead tried 55 times to repeal the Affordable Care Act.

Talk about misplaced priorities. If Congress truly wants to rein in the high cost of health care, it should start by cracking down on Big Pharma's gouging of American consumers.