Small board-and-care facility provides personalized care for early-Alzheimer's residents

Elva Funk, right, the first resident at TLC on Taft, visits Thursday with Jessica Stimmel, far left, Joanne Rauh, center left, and 2-year-old Julianna Stimmel. TLC on Taft, co-owned by Stimmel and her mother, Rauh, is a new board-and-care facility for people with early Alzheimer's. ( Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

A woman with passions for elder care and hospitality is combining those loves in a new Loveland board-and-care home for people with early-onset Alzheimer's disease.

The facility, TLC on Taft, offers a comfortable family-like setting for up to just two residents in a remodeled home at 1250 N. Taft Ave.

Joanne Rauh operated a bed and breakfast in Garrison, N.D., for 20 years and has more than 15 years' experience working in senior-care facilities as a certified nursing assistant and then as a spiritual care director.

After her daughter persuaded her to give up the Robin's Nest B&B in Garrison three years ago and move to Loveland to be closer to her grandchildren, Rauh wanted to keep working in elder care. But because of profound hearing loss, she wasn't able to get the kind of position she was hoping for here.

That's when she and her daughter, Jessica Stimmel, decided to try to fill a need with people who require more care than an assisted-living facility can provide but who aren't ready for a locked Alzheimer's unit.

"Maybe they're forgetful — they don't remember if they took their medication, they don't remember if they had breakfast that day," she said. "We're trying to bridge the gap."

Members of the household

"We're aiming to be a small private home where life is happening, where a 2-year-old (my daughter) is running around, and you are an active member of that household," she said.

Rauh, who recently received a cochlear implant that has dramatically improved her hearing, lives at the house, and Stimmel, a stay-at-home mother of three, is there often with her children.

Advertisement

Rauh is qualified to administer medications, she communicates with residents' physicians and she can help residents with dressing, bathing and other personal needs. Plus, she loves to cook.

TLC on Taft also has a registered nurse who works three shifts a week and is on call at all times.

With the capacity for only two residents, the business is considered a board-and-care home and isn't required to be licensed as an assisted-living facility, Stimmel said.

So far, the home has just one resident, Elva Funk, so it has a 1-to-1 caregiver ratio. Consequently, Rauh has the luxury of being much more flexible with her schedule than a larger care facility can be, Stimmel said.

The life of Riley

If Funk wants to sleep in, and then go to breakfast in her bathrobe, there's no problem, she said.

The business's tag line is "Delivering the life of Riley in 24-hour residential elder care," borrowing a comment from Stimmel's grandmother, who was evidently pleased with her life in the home of her daughter and grandchildren in the last years of her life.

Stimmel said Funk recently celebrated her 96th birthday, and the party drew 30 people to the home. She took it as a good sign that those visitors, rather than staying for an obligatory 15 minutes or an hour, hung around for four or five hours, visiting and enjoying themselves.

Stimmel recently left her 2-year-old daughter, Julianna, at the home while she ran errands. Her mother texted her a picture of Julianna in Funk's lap as the two watched cartoons together.

'We're pretty blessed'

Rauh said she is blessed by the presence of her first resident.

"She told me recently, 'I'm so lucky,'" Rauh said. "I said, 'No, I'm so lucky.' We're pretty blessed to have one another."

Turning to Funk, she said, "You're one of the most kind people I've ever known."

She acknowledged that Funk sometimes struggles with her loss of memory and awareness.

"Not everything is happy, but we treat everything with humor," Rauh said.

TLC on Taft charges $110 to $175 a day, depending on the amount of care a resident needs. Stimmel said those fees are covered by some long-term-care insurance policies.

Stimmel said it's good to have a broad range of options for care. To her, the question is "where would I want to have my mom live ... and be able to wave goodbye to her and feel good about it, and be able to go back and visit."

Craig Young: 970-635-3634, cyoung@reporter-herald.com, www.twitter.com/CraigYoungRH.