Florida became the epicenter of presidential politics last week, with White House hopefuls from both parties barnstorming the state and participating in debates on consecutive nights in Miami.

After so many debates, it would be easy to overlook the latest. But for voters who might still be undecided before tomorrow's Florida primary, there were revealing policy differences among the candidates.

In the Republican debate, front runner Donald Trump didn't resort to insults in presenting his views, but that didn't make some of them less outrageous or unrealistic.

Trump refused to back away from his gross and offensive generalization that "Islam hates us," even after Florida Sen. Marco Rubio reminded the audience that American Muslims have fought and died for this country.

When asked about his calls for resuming waterboarding and targeting family members of terrorists, Trump talked about the need to "expand" the law so that the U.S. can fight the Islamic State "on at least somewhat of an equal footing." That immoral and illegal appeal brought rebukes from Rubio and Texas Sen. Ted Cruz, who said, "We've never targeted innocent civilians, and we're not going to start now." Fortunately, Cruz no longer talks about "carpet bombing" Syria, a strategy our military condemns because it would similarly kill large numbers of civilians.

On a key domestic policy, Trump called for leaving Social Security, whose trust fund is headed for insolvency by 2033, "the way it is," while vowing to eliminate "waste, fraud and abuse." But as debate moderator Jake Tapper noted, eliminating improper payments would close only 2 percent of the funding gap. The other three candidates, including Ohio Gov. John Kasich, preferred to level with listeners, acknowledging that changes must be made for future retirees to bolster Social Security's finances.

On the subject of climate change, to which Florida is especially vulnerable, only Kasich called for policies to reduce carbon emissions. By contrast, Rubio discounted the calls of 20 Florida mayors who seek leadership on climate change, ridiculously saying we can't pass laws "to change the weather."

Trump reiterated his promise to crack down on trade practices that he says cost American jobs, even after Tapper pointed out that the billionaire's companies have imported foreign workers and manufactured products overseas. "We're allowed to do it," Trump said. True, but hardly a principled call to action.

Rubio reminded the audience that 95 percent of global consumers live beyond U.S. borders. He made a cogent case for trade: "We have to have access to the hundreds of millions of people in the world today who can afford to buy things."

In the Democratic debate, Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders denounced "disastrous trade policies." That message might have contributed to his upset win this week in Michigan, a state whose economy has been hit hard by foreign competition. But more than 270,000 jobs in Florida are supported by exports, and more than 60,000 companies in the state sold their products abroad in 2013.

Sanders also doubled down on his promises to establish a government-run, single-payer health care system and provide free tuition to public colleges and universities to all, including the wealthy. Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton argued for more realistic alternatives: building on the Affordable Care Act and reducing higher education costs.

And while Sanders said he would raise taxes on the rich and Wall Street to pay for his promises, Clinton noted that "independent experts" have concluded his numbers don't add up.

Tuesday's primary will be pivotal for both parties. We've offered our thoughts about the candidates. And now it's time for you to decide.