Republican presidential candidate, Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas smiles while listening to his introduction at a campaign event, Friday, Jan. 29, 2016, in Emmetsburg, Iowa. (Photo: Jae C. Hong/AP)

Ted Cruz focused on issues ranging from rescinding executive actions to repealing the Affordable Care Act in Wilton on Friday but did not mention his views on renewable fuel policy or Thursday night's debate.

Cruz spoke to a packed room at the Wilton Center and focused on themes of renewal and revival in the nation, comparing the current political season to the months leading up to former President Ronald Reagan's election in 1984.

“The same thing is happening again," he said.

This comes after Gov. Terry Branstad last week warned Iowans against supporting Cruz, saying Cruz's opposition to the Renewable Fuel Standard could be a blow to Iowa. The Renewable Fuel Standard is a program requiring the use of renewable fuels, including biodiesel, in the nation's fuel supply.

Cruz has said he is against the fuel standard and other energy subsidies, and has said the government should not be picking winners and losers.

During Thursday night's debate, a moderator asked the Texas Republican about his stance on ethanol and fuel policy, referencing Branstad by name as cameras juxtaposed Branstad and Cruz in an extended split-screen view.

Some Iowa Republicans and political watchers were skeptical of Cruz's performance during the debate, The Des Moines Register reported.

Iowa Sen. Chuck Grassley spoke during the event Friday, saying Cruz is committed and passionate when it comes to defending the U.S. Constitution.

“Tonight, I’m here to support an outstanding conservative," Grassley said.

Cruz, during his speech, thanked Grassley for his "friendship" and "leadership."

He spoke on what he would hope to accomplish in the days and weeks after his election, saying he views recent executive actions by President Barack Obama as illegal and unconstitutional, and saying he vows to "repeal every word of Obamacare."

He said he aims to defend the Second Amendment, to defeat "radical, Islamic terrorism" and to fight the Islamic State.

"We will utterly and completely destroy ISIS," he said.

Lori Schott said Friday's event was her second time seeing Cruz. She said she appreciates his values and enthusiasm, and said she thought he had a good response to an attendee's question on health care and global health.

On health care, Cruz said he wants to focus on researching cures for diseases such as cancer and combating the threat of bioterrorism, but said he opposes spending taxpayer money on boosting other nations' health care systems.

"The more I see him, the more I like him," Schott said.

Jeff Meyers, of Riverdale, attended the event as part of his tour of candidates' appearances in Iowa. He said Cruz's genuine demeanor stood out to him, and said he appreciated Cruz's acknowledgment that the selection of Supreme Court justices could be key during the next presidential term.

But Meyers said he is undecided as to whom he will support during the caucus and plans to attend events featuring candidates Donald Trump and Carly Fiorina in the coming days.

"I definitely am going to caucus," Meyers said.

Reach Holly Hines at hhines2@press- citizen.com or at 319-887-5414 and follow her on Twitter at @HollyJHines.

Republican presidential candidate, Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, right, and his wife Heidi, second from left, arrive to attend a campaign event, Friday, Jan. 29, 2016, in Fenton, Iowa. (Photo: Jae C. Hong/AP)

AT THE EVENT

SETTING: Wilton Center in Wilton

CROWD: A packed venue with standing room only

REACTION: Ted Cruz spoke for about 40 minutes to an enthusiastic crowd prone to frequent applause and standing ovations. Sen. Chuck Grassley introduced Cruz, alongside Cruz's wife, Heidi Cruz, former Iowa Secretary of State Matt Schultz and Iowa GOP Chairman Jeff Kaufmann.

WHAT’S NEXT: Cruz will appear at South Hardin Middle School in Hubbard at 9:15 a.m. Saturday.

Read or Share this story: http://icp-c.com/1WSXZSy