EVANS — As Laura Speer looked around Riverside Park, it was hard to hold back the tears. One year ago, the floods that swept through the state submerged the park and surrounding community.

On Saturday, a small portion of the beloved park was reopened as the community came together to reflect on the disaster and celebrate the recovery the community has made since it was severely damaged last September.

Speer was manning the event’s popcorn machine as she recalled the day the flood came. Her home, barn and stables sat near the South Platte River. She watched as the river rose and raged.

“It was shocking. It became a 5- foot wall of water,” she said. “It looked like a tsunami.”

She rushed to evacuate her horses, which fled to their stable. Once she entered the building, she waded through chest-deep water to get them out.

The water just missed her home and barn, but she knew others in her neighborhood were not as lucky. She soon joined the Evans Flood Recovery and Redevelopment Taskforce to help the city and residents recover.

“The flood brought the community together. A year later, this day symbolizes the resilience of the community,” Speer said.

Sen. Michael Bennet and Gov. John Hickenlooper, both Democrats, stopped by Riverside Park on Saturday to attend one of several events scheduled in communities affected by last year’s floods.

Bennet chatted with some families and cast a line into the park’s fishing area.

He said although there are big recovery projects still to be done, the celebration at Evans is a great testament to a community coming together in adversity and rising above it. “We’re going to move heaven and Earth to accomplish the rest of what needs to be done.”

Evans has spent $1.2 million on flood recovery, according to City Manager Aden Hogan, and is in the process of waiting to be reimbursed by FEMA.

Hogan said costs would run between $12 million and $18 million.

“It was a total loss, but our city and community are coming together to make it better,” he said.

As Hickenlooper surveyed the park grounds, he said he felt pride for the whole state’s resilience.

“We’ve got to keep raising money and reaching out to communities that need recovery,” he said. “We’ll do it.”

Mayor John Morris said it will take a long time before Evans is completely healed. More than 200 mobile homes were destroyed, he said, along with 56 homes that suffered severe damage.

“Seeing the devastation was unbelievable. Seeing the progress and the park come back like this just warms my heart,” Morris said.

He pointed to a group of kids playing tag and said seeing the activity and enjoyment the reopened space was getting was incredible.

“This park was our pride and joy. Seeing a part of it reopen is seeing the road to recovery,” Morris said.

Warren Jones, Evans flood recovery manager, said there are several ongoing projects consisting of redesigning the park, helping the affected Riverside neighborhood and constructing a new wastewater treatment plant.

“We want to take our time with all of this and do it right because we don’t want to build back a park that will be as vulnerable to floods,” Jones said.

There was no projection as to when more of Riverside Park would be open to the public, Jones said.

Although only a small section of the 101-acre park was open, residents headed out with their fishing poles, dogs and families.

Kenna Linden, 7, held up a worm and wrinkled her nose as she baited her fishing pole.

“I’m excited to fish some more here,” she said.

Later in the day, Udall and Hickenlooper also visited Lyons’ Bohn Park. “Colorado is not defined by disasters, but by the way it rebuilds,” Udall said.

Mike Matzuk, a Jamestown resident, said the Lyons celebration helps return life to normal.

“Anybody who has been through this year needs to feel the high spirits and energy of our community,” he said.

Elizabeth Hernandez: 303-954-1223, ehernandez@denverpost.com or twitter.com/literally_lizzy