Gloria Werner was always known as creative and tenacious.

The co-founder of the Werner Enterprises transportation company was never afraid to do what was necessary to see the business succeed in its early days, when cash was tight and she juggled multiple roles.

“She packed the boys up with some unfolded laundry and sat in a customer’s lobby until she could see somebody about getting her check,” her daughter Gail Werner-Robertson recalled. “It didn’t take long for her to get that check.”

Gloria Werner died Tuesday after a 17-month battle with lung cancer. She was 79.

She and her then-husband, Clarence L. Werner, founded Werner Enterprises in 1956 with one truck. She worked there until she retired from the business in 1984. Werner Enterprises now operates internationally and has about 13,000 employees and independent contractors.

Gloria Werner started out doing the bookkeeping, and eventually oversaw financial transactions and handled regulatory reporting to various government agencies.

“I kind of like to think of her as one of the first real working women executives,” Werner-Robertson said. “But it didn’t take over her whole life, so she had a good balance.”

Werner was born Oct. 27, 1934, on her family’s farm in Petersburg, Nebraska. She met Clarence Werner at the wedding of her brother and his sister, and a long distance courtship ensued. They married and settled in Council Bluffs, where they founded Werner Enterprises. In 1977 the company moved to Omaha, where Gloria Werner lived out the rest of her life.

After retiring, she threw herself into the lives of her grandchildren, Werner-Robertson said, often swooping in to watch them when parents were out of town or between day cares and nannies. “She was so dedicated to her family,” Werner-Robertson said. “She just really left her schedule open so she could help like that.”

Werner also was a voracious reader interested in current affairs and politics, her daughter said. “She was very interested in her local community and what was going on and how she could be a good citizen.”

In addition to her daughter, Werner is survived by her children Gary Werner, Greg Werner and Curt Werner; 12 grandchildren; and five great-grandchildren.

Visitation is scheduled for 5 p.m. Tuesday at St. Wenceslaus Catholic Church, 15353 Pacific St., with a vigil service at 7 p.m. A funeral Mass will be celebrated at 10:30 a.m. Wednesday at the church.

Contact the writer: 402-444-1414, paige.yowell@owh.com