Sponsored content, or marketing material designed to blend in with editorial content, is an area of growing interest for many online publishers. But according to new research from the Interactive Advertising Bureau, consumers say it’s not always clear whether the content they see online is paid for by a company or not.

As part of a broad study about consumer attitudes to sponsored content, the IAB and market research firm Edelman Berland exposed 5,000 U.S. users to mock sponsored content placed on business, entertainment, and general news Websites. The fake ads resembled those currently found on those types of sites, researchers said.

After being shown the mock ads, respondents were asked how clearly they communicated to readers that they were paid placements.

On general news sites, 59 percent of respondents said it was either “not very clear,” or “not at all clear” that the content they were shown was sponsored. Just 13 percent of respondents said the mockups made “very clear” that the content was sponsored, while 28 percent said it was “somewhat clear.”

According to the IAB’s research, however, sponsored content is easier to identify on different types of sites. For example, just 18% of respondents said the ads they were shown on business news sites were unclearly labelled. On entertainment news sites just 16 percent of respondents said the ads were unclear.

The findings highlight the tightrope publishers walk when it comes to displaying and labeling sponsored content or “in-feed” ads on their pages. Sponsored content that looks more obviously like advertising is less likely to be read. However, publishers risk alienating their audiences if paid content isn’t clearly identified.

As a result, publishers and marketers continue to debate how best to disclose sponsored content and “native advertising” to consumers. In May, for example, BuzzFeed overhauled the way it labels its paid posts.

“It’s early days for social advertising, but as a technology-driven media company, we are always testing and iterating our ad product to create the best experience for our readers and best product for our clients,” said Chris Johanesen, BuzzFeed’s vice president of product at the time.

In the case of the The Wall Street Journal, which also publishes sponsored articles that relate to the products, services, or interests of advertisers, the articles are labeled “sponsored generated content” and carry a disclaimer that the company’s news organization is not involved in its creation

Elsewhere in the industry, conversations about the way native ads should be marked rumble on.

“When native advertising first appeared many [companies] thought about whether disclosure was necessary or not. I think everyone recognizes now the answer is ‘yes’, but the debate has shifted to how that disclosure actually needs to be made,” said Linda Goldstein, advertising lawyer and partner at law firm Manatt, Phelps & Phillips.