× NARAL ad: Gardner win would cause a condom shortage

DENVER — It’s hard to pinpoint the exact moment the Democrats’ battle-tested “War on Women” strategy morphed from political genius into farce, but a last-minute TV ad released Wednesday by NARAL Pro-Choice Colorado that suggests Cory Gardner’s election would lead to a condom shortage is yet another example of how the Democratic messaging has seemingly jumped the shark.

That said, the edgy spot attempts to do something new, framing the potential impact of a Gardner win on women’s contraception choices in a way that might resonate with younger men.

“Guys, guys, guys, guys–” a female narrator says as the ad begins over video of a man’s hand slapping at a condom wrapper on a nightstand. “If Cory Gardner gets his way, you better stock up on condoms.”

After giant text reading “Ban Birth Control” fills the screen, the ad cuts to a young couple in bed with the male frustrated that he’s run out of condoms.

“Cory Gardner tries to deceive Colorado voters on his opposition to birth control and his belief that politicians have a right to interfere in our personal, private medical decisions,” said Karen Middleton, Executive Director of NARAL Pro-Choice Colorado. “These ads highlight how Cory Gardner is on the wrong side of Colorado values and voters, especially young voters.”

Democrats have spent much of this year’s campaign against Republican Congressman Cory Gardner attacking his past support for a statewide personhood initiative (since disavowed) and his ongoing co-sponsorship of a federal personhood bill that could outlaw some forms of birth control.

Gardner, meanwhile, has blasted Udall for running a “single-issue campaign”, buoyed by an endorsement from The Denver Post that slammed Udall on that very issue.

He has also put forth a proposal to make birth control pills available over the counter, arguing that it would make them more affordable for women even though the Affordable Care Act now ensures that all insurance plans cover contraception — the pill and other forms — with no co-pay.

Ultimately, with only $450,000 behind the campaign, the TV spot won’t have a huge impact in the closing days of the race aside from the publicity the over-the-top spots are generating.