Louisiana’s last two gubernatorial candidates slugged it out today in their first forum since their intense primary election, trading body blows on all topics ranging from tax and spending policy and education to private trackers and prostitutes.

The candidates, Republican U.S. Sen. David Vitter and Democratic state Rep. John Bel Edwards, pulled no punches, attacking each other’s records from the get-go. No topic was deemed off-limits in the unscripted debate before a packed crowd at the Press Club of Baton Rouge forum.

Vitter criticized Edwards for running a campaign “built on a myth that he’s some sort of a conservative” who is in favor of Medicaid expansion under Obamacare and has low scores from the Louisiana Association of Business and Industry and the National Federation of Independent Business.

Edwards, meanwhile, called Vitter a “political schoolyard bully for two decades” who is unfit for office. “He is dishonest, he is lying, and he ought to do better. He ought to know better,” Edwards said.

Substantial policy discussion took a backseat to flashy issues in the beginning, with early questions focusing on endorsements, negative ads and Vitter’s long-hovering prostitution scandal from 2007.

Edwards touted his recent endorsement from Republican Lt. Gov. Jay Dardenne as proof that he can work across party lines. However, Vitter claimed his campaign benefited in a way from the endorsement, receiving a wave of phone calls from those angry voters almost immediately.

“Well I felt really good about Jay’s endorsement until I just found out it was really good news for Sen. Vitter,” Edwards joked.

While negative ads have been particularly ugly during this contest, the local TV spots took an even more drastic turn at the end of last week. The Edwards campaign released a spot accusing Vitter of taking calls from prostitutes while missing votes that honored slain troops.

The ad has been criticized both for featuring photos of Arlington National Cemetery and for showing an older picture of Edwards in an Army uniform. The Vitter campaign has circulated a letter from retired Brig. Gen. George P. Cole Jr. saying military regulations prohibit its members from wearing uniforms for campaign ads.

Edwards said he would remove the Arlington image but would not back down from the Army picture because it is an old image and he did not re-wear it for the spot.

Vitter, though, said the letter from Cole is enough for Edwards to take the ad down.

“He cited the regulation that he helped enforce during his career. You just said that was a subterfuge, that was a lie on his part. I think that’s offensive,” Vitter said. “His letter speaks for itself.”

Vitter couldn’t escape the accusations from the ad. Faced with pointed questions about his past, Vitter was about as forthright as he has been during this campaign about his “serious sin” admission from 2007. The senator said he “failed my family 15 years ago” and has worked to regain the trust of voters ever since his admission. It’s a theme he also hits on in a new TV ad that acknowledges the scandal.

“I know that sincere answer is not going to be good enough for my political opponents,” Vitter said. “I know it’s not going to be good enough for the great majority in the press. But I’m heartened that it has been good enough to my family.”

Edwards, though, said the issue isn’t about forgiveness of sins. He said it’s about Vitter missing key votes while calling prostitutes, as accused in the ad.

“His performance of his public duties were compromised as well,” Edwards said.

After a series of tense questions and answers, the two candidates were finally able to wade into serious policy debates.

Both men said they would call special sessions to address the state’s budgetary woes. For higher education, both agreed low funding levels were a concern, but Vitter said college and universities need to streamline their services in order to develop even more cost savings.

Vitter hammered Edwards over a recent speech at Southern University during which, Vitter claims, Edwards spoke about “releasing” 5,500 prisoners in an effort to reduce the state’s high prison population. Edwards responded that his speech was more about setting up anti-recidivism programs and creating court alternatives like pretrial diversion and specialty courts to reduce the population.

But the debate steered back into odd territory when a question was raised about private trackers, or political operatives who are enlisted to follow candidates around and film them in case they say or do anything that could harm their campaigns.

The question was a veiled reference to an incident right before the primary election, in which a private investigator with ties to the Vitter campaign was accused of filming a private conversation between Jefferson Parish Sheriff Newell Normand—a longtime Vitter foe—and a prominent Edwards supporter.

Vitter dismissed the incident and said nothing improper or illegal happened, noting that he has been “tracked” for years. Edwards, however, said the issue was in no way “just silly” and that it amounted to “Nixonian” tactics.

Early voting has already begun for the Nov. 21 runoff and ends Saturday.

—Robert Stewart