A man who called in a traffic complaint to the Juneau Police Department on Tuesday morning probably didn’t receive the kind of service he was looking for.

JPD ran the caller’s name through their criminal information database as part of routine and discovered he had an old warrant out for his arrest in Washington, a police spokeswoman said. He was arrested within minutes at his workplace, Wingnut Auto Salon, on Old Dairy Road.

JPD spokeswoman Erann Kalwara said she doubts David A. Whisenant, 29, knew he was a wanted man, or he probably wouldn’t have called in.

“He probably didn’t recognize that he had this outstanding extraditable no-bail warrant,” she said in an interview Thursday.

The warrant was issued in August 2011 by the Washington State Department of Corrections after Whisenant failed to report for community supervision, which is akin to probation, according to Washington DOC spokeswoman Norah West.

Whisenant had pleaded guilty to possessing a controlled substance in Thurston County in central Washington near Olympia in 2010 and was sentenced to serve 30 days in jail and a year of supervision after his release, plus pay legal fees and surcharges, according to a legal assistant with the Thurston County Prosecutor’s Office.

A month after Whisenant was sentenced in that case on Sept. 16, 2010, he was extradited to Alaska to be in custody at Lemon Creek Correctional Center in Juneau as a federal inmate, West said. Then, he was extradited to Pierce County Jail in Washington in connection to another case, she said.

At some point, he was also a material witness in a federal case in Juneau and was not allowed to leave Alaska, West said. More information about the federal cases was not available by press time Thursday, and federal prosecutors could not be reached for comment.

It appears that with all the legal proceedings in the different cases, Whisenant didn’t realize he still owed supervision time and money to the state of Washington.

“He was supposed to report to the Olympia field office (for supervision intake) on Aug. 2, 2011,” West said. “That just never happened. He just never showed up for supervision.”

While the Washington DOC renewed the warrant every year, Whisenant has been a law-abiding citizen in Juneau. He is a homeowner with wife and kids, he told the judge during his arraignment in Juneau District Court on Wednesday.

Whisenant did not contest his extradition, and he will be extradited back to Washington later this month. Until then, Judge Keith Levy ordered him to stay in custody at Lemon Creek Correctional Center without bail.

• Contact reporter Emily Russo Miller at 523-2263 or at emily.miller@juneauempire.com.