"Ringside Seat: Wisconsin Politics, the 1970s to Scott Walker." (Photo: Courtesy of Little Creek Press)

In the opening pages of his new political book, “Ringside Seat,” Tim Cullen tells the story of how he and his fellow Democratic state senators in February 2011 decided to leave Wisconsin in order to deny Republicans a quorum to vote on Gov. Scott Walker’s public union-busting Act 10. What, Cullen wanted to know, was their strategy to wring concessions enough out of the governor that would allow them to come back?

Cullen’s fellow Democrats, he writes, “said the topic never came up. I was astounded, but kept it to myself. I concede time was short, but making such a dramatic move with no thought of the end game seemed foolhardy.”

Maybe it was foolhardy or maybe it was the Dems' only option at the time, but one thing we can say for sure these nearly five years later is that whatever the strategy was, it didn’t work. Democrats got no concessions on Act 10 itself, lost the gubernatorial recall election that followed its passage and lost the gubernatorial election after that.

Cullen, a senator from Janesville who declined to run for re-election in 2014, is a thoughtful guy, no one’s idea of a fire-breathing partisan. He first did a stint in the state Legislature in the 1970s. He served in the administration of Republican Gov. Tommy Thompson and worked as a health care executive before coming back to the state Senate in 2011. He’s a moderate by inclination and was something of a centrist Dem in the Legislature. (In the famous 2011 prank call Gov. Walker took from a person he believed was right-wing funder David Koch, Walker referred to Cullen as “about the only reasonable one over there.”)

That sense of moderation is also part of the reason he feels compelled to sound the alarm against Walker and today’s GOP leaders in Wisconsin. “Ringside Seat” is a sustained argument that Walker represents a break with the longstanding Wisconsin practice of hewing to the center in politics, as exemplified by governors of both parties such as Thompson or Tony Earl.

At times, Cullen’s case feels a bit like he’s grasping for arguments, as when he bemoans — with lots of supporting empirical data -- the sad decline of so-called “blue ribbon commissions” in Walker’s Wisconsin. Those are, of course, the once-popular task forces of experts whose job is to concoct reasonable, common-sense, broad-based policy solutions that legislators and the public can then put on a shelf and completely ignore. Cullen may the first person to lament their decline.

I kid, sort of, but it is really more of a quibble than a serious misgiving. In its broad strokes, at least, it is hard to argue with Cullen’s case that politics in Wisconsin has taken a deeply polarized turn. All kinds of supporting data show that political polarization has dramatically increased across America — and Wisconsin, with deep blue Democratic pockets in Milwaukee and Madison balanced by bright red Republican exurbs in Waukesha and Wauwatosa, is among the nation’s most deeply polarized states.

Buy Photo Protesters demonstrate against Gov. Scott Walker's Act 10 bill in February 2011. (Photo: File/Gannett Wisconsin Media)

What’s the solution? By what means does this polarization reverse itself? Cullen provides a list of things that unite all of Wisconsin — the Packers, the beauty of Up North, the great institution of the Friday night fish fry. It’s a nice list, and I also love fried fish. But as a strategy to steer Wisconsin away from political polarization, it’s not much better than the 2011 Democrats’ plan to come back from Illinois.

That’s not entirely Cullen’s fault, of course. The trend toward polarization is bigger than Wisconsin. And things do shift and change in unexpected ways. Walker ends 2015 with the lowest approval ratings he’s ever had in Wisconsin. Who knows what comes next? Maybe someone should appoint a blue ribbon commission to figure it out.

Tim Cullen will sign copies of his book, "Ringside Seat: Wisconsin Politics, the 1970s to Scott Walker" from 3 p.m. to 5 p.m. Jan. 12 at Janke Book Store, 503 Third St. in Wausau.

Robert Mentzer is storytelling coach and a columnist for Gannett Central Wisconsin Media. Contact: robert.mentzer@gannettwisconsin.com, 715-845-0604; on Twitter: @robertmentzer.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1QYeaxY