An Oregon legislator wants lawmakers to bar 15-year-olds from using the Oregon Health Plan to pay for sex reassignment surgery.

No minors have yet used the state insurance to pay for such a surgery. But Carl Wilson, R-Grants Pass, said a 2014 decision to offer Oregon Health Plan coverage for transgender-related medicines and procedures could allow teenagers to make life-altering decisions they will later regret.

"We all remember what it's like to be 15," Wilson said. "Some of the decisions we were prepared to make in that time of our life, I'm really not sure we thought about the lasting implications of those things."

LGBT advocates say Wilson's push is misguided: The age of consent for all medical and dental procedures in Oregon is 15, and excluding one procedure would be discriminatory.

"This is deeply disappointing," said Jeana Frazzini, co-director at the LGBTQ advocacy group Basic Rights Oregon. "We believe that doctors, patients and families should be allowed to decide the best course of treatment on a case-by-case basis. There's no need to carve out an exception when the care is related to gender dysphoria."

Oregon's state Medicaid began covering hormones and some surgical procedures this year after the state Health Evidence Review Commission, which examines medical research to determine the coverage priorities for Oregon Health Plan, deemed the treatments "medically necessary" for transgender Oregonians.

The 2014 decision didn't specify an age limit, but Oregon's medical age of consent has been 15 since 1971. That means a 15-year-old can go to the doctor or the dentist, seek birth control or a root canal, all without a parent's OK. They can also agree to have surgeries.

Wilson, the deputy House Republican leader, said he decided to introduce legislation after hearing from more than 50 "outraged" parents and grandparents. Wilson said his staff rarely hears from that many people. Only Senate Bill 941, a 2015 legislation requiring background checks for private gun sales, inspired as many calls.

His constituents said government officials had "overreached," Wilson said, in allowing teenagers to "go behind their parents' backs" to seek care.

The age of consent has come under fire before: In 2012, after the Affordable Care Act guaranteed coverage of sterilization, conservative activists worried 15-year-olds could be sterilized without their parents' knowledge.

Wilson said he has heard advocacy groups such as Basic Rights mention the 2011 survey that showed 40 percent of transgender Oregonians have attempted suicide. The state review board agreed with doctors and activists who testified that coverage of hormones and some surgeries will reduce the rates of suicide, anxiety and depression for transgender patients.

"While I do think that is a noble thing to consider," Wilson said, "the greater thing to consider here is if we let 15-, 16- or 17-years-olds do this without the knowledge of their parents, they might wind up waking up one day realizing they have made the mistake of a lifetime."

He doesn't know if anyone in his district has used the benefit. He said he hasn't, as far as he knows, ever met a transgender person.

So far, 10 adult patients have used Oregon Health Plan benefits to pay for surgeries including the removal of breasts and testicles, according to data kept by the Oregon Health Authority.

No patients younger than 17 have used the benefit to pay for sex reassignment surgery.

More than 50 minors have used state coverage to pay for therapy related to gender dysphoria, the medical diagnosis for someone who is transgender. The coding for all 56 of those visits indicated that family members were involved, said Stephanie Tripp, a spokesperson for the Oregon Health Authority.

Another 17 minors have used the state insurance to pay for hormone treatments or puberty-suppressing medications.

Though Oregon law allows 15-year-olds to pursue sex reassignment surgery, surgeons can decide not to operate.

"This isn't surgery on demand," Frazzini said. "It's a significant process with plenty of built-in safeguards."

In Oregon, surgeons require several things before performing sex reassignment surgery on a patient. They ask for two letters from a licensed therapist. Some surgeons require patients to have been on hormones for a year. Doctors can also take into account whether a patient has family or friends' support to help during recovery.

Wilson said he knows the treatments are not "walk-up service."

"But if the government opens up an opportunity for something to happen," he said, "it will ultimately happen."

Wilson said his legislation will only focus on taxpayer-funded procedures for teenagers. He won't challenge a teenager's right to use private insurance to pay for gender dysphoria treatment, and he won't immediately try to repeal the state coverage for adults.

He hasn't talked with fellow legislators about the proposal, but he "trusts" they will support him.

Frazzini said her organization will fight his legislation.

"This is life-saving treatment for transgender Oregonians," Frazzini said. "If he does in fact propose legislation, we'll be there every step of the way to defeat it. We're working not only to advance policy but to defend our victories everywhere they're challenged."

-- Casey Parks

503-221-8271

cparks@oregonian.com; @caseyparks