Americans have become much more dependent on federal subsidies during the Obama presidency, according to data compiled by the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS).HHS defines a family as "dependent" if more than 50 percent of its total income in a one-year period comes from TANF (formerly AFDC), SNAP (formerly food stamps), or Supplemental Security Income.HHS reported that the welfare dependency rate "peaked" under Mr. Obama's watch in 2010 when 5.3 percent of the total population was receiving half of its total income in a one-year period from the government, according to The Washington Times. And that figure has only "declined slightly since," according to "Welfare Indicators and Risk Factors," an annual report published by HHS.The overall dependency rate was almost cut in half during the Clinton presidency, falling from 5.9 percent in 1993 to 3.1 percent in 2001. It inched upward during most of the Bush presidency, rising to 3.5 percent through 2007. During the 2008 financial crisis, the rate jumped to 4 percent, with the most recent figures under Obama rising to over 5 percent.Last month, the Census Bureau reported that 65 percent of American children are living in households that receive some form of federal assistance, up from 56 percent in 2003.The Affordable Care Act pushed through Congress in 2010 on a party-line vote has served to increase dependence on government subsidies, with seven out of every eight Obamacare participants using it to pay their premiums.The Department of Health and Human Services reported last month that approximately 87 percent of people who selected health insurance plans through Healthcare.gov for coverage starting on Jan. 1, 2015, were determined to be eligible for financial assistance to lower their government premiums.Last year, by comparison, 80 percent were eligible for the subsidies, according to HHS.HHS figures released in June showed that the average monthly Obamacare subsidy was $264 – more than three-quarters of beneficiaries' premium. The result "is that four out of five people with subsidies are paying premiums of no more than $100 a month," according to The Washington Post. The figure does not include deductibles and other out-of-pocket costs.Other forms of federal dependency have grown on Mr. Obama's watch, including Social Security disability, where the number of Americans has jumped from 7.4 million in January 2009, when Mr. Obama took office, to 10.9 million in November, according to The Times.