Obama’s sore throat is related to acid reflux, according to the latest report by US News. Earlier today, it was reported that President Barack Obama made an impromptu trip to the hospital for symptoms of a sore throat. The president had complained of the sore throat for weeks before seeking treatment today at Walter Reed National Military Medical Center in Bethesda, Maryland. The recommendation to have a CT scan came from Obama’s physician, Dr. Ronny L. Jackson, after a fiber optic exam performed at the White House showed signs of inflammation.

President Barack Obama’s doctor released the following statement regarding an update on the president’s condition.

“The president’s symptoms are consistent with soft tissue inflammation related to acid reflux and will be treated accordingly.”

The trip to the hospital today was not considered a matter of urgency but a matter of convenience to accommodate President Obama’s hectic schedule. Obama has already had his annual exam for the year, and was given a clean bill of health, according to USA Today.

Acid reflux is often treated with prescribed medications such as Nexium. There are also natural ways to combat the disease. Acid reflux can be brought on by smoking, obesity, and stress. If left unchecked or untreated, the disease can worsen causing GERD or cancers of the esophagus and stomach. The president is known for his smile and his ability to stay calm. Though it is possible he could be internalizing a lot of stress, anxiety and fear—causing a flare up in acid reflux.

If the acid reflux is due to a food sensitivity, it is recommended that the trigger foods are avoided. Foods that contain a lot of fat, spices, and tomatoes, such as pizza, heavy sauces, some Latin and Mexican foods, along with onions, garlic, citrus fruits or juices, and caffeinated beverages should not be consumed.

Obama supporters and fans hope that he can successfully treat the symptoms and the cause. Some famous people who have suffered with throat problems related to acid reflux are Joan Rivers and Kim Kardashian’s father, Robert Kardashian. Inquisitr has reported frequently on Obamacare.

(Photo Credit: Facebook)