Ohio police say they have “overwhelming evidence” to prove a former Navy SEAL turned prominent TV personality lied when he claimed he was shot during a fight with three black men outside of a Bath shopping plaza.

Chris Heben, a former Navy SEAL and current spokesman for Montrose Auto Group, has been charged with misdemeanor counts of falsification and obstructing official business, a local ABC affiliate reported.

“We have overwhelming evidence based upon video, cellphone records and interviews that the shooting did not occur in the West Market Plaza and that Mr. Heben made false allegations to us,” said Bath Township Police Chief Mike McNeely.

Mr. Heben, who has served in Iraq, Africa, Pakistan and Afghanistan, told police that he was shot in the stomach March 28 by the driver of a car who backed into him. The car contained three black man who allegedly shouted profanities at him and fled. Mr. Heben, 44, told police that he plugged the hole in his abdomen and chased the suspects in his vehicle. Then, realizing he was gushing blood, he said he drove himself to a police station to seek treatment, the ABC affiliate reported.

After his release from a hospital, the 44-year-old Mr. Heben said he didn’t call 911 because he wanted to chase the men down.

“I wanted to keep it on the down low. At that point in time, I did an immediate physical assessment and I was still functioning. Plus, I wanted to chase after these guys. I’m aggressive,” he said.

The former SEAL, who makes regular appearances on Fox and CNN, underwent surgery and police launched an extensive search for his attackers, the Daily Mail reported.

Chief McNeely acknowledged Mr. Heben suffered a gunshot wound, but officers concluded the shooting did not happen in the parking lot. He wouldn’t speculate on how Mr. Heben was shot.

“That’s only something he can answer,” Chief McNeely said.

Mr. Heben has appeared on TV shows that have aired on the History Channel, the Discovery Channel and Channel 4 in the UK, the Daily Mail reported. His website says he is the founder of INVICTVS Group, a special operations consortium, and holds a master’s degree in physician assistant studies.

In 2008, the former SEAL pleaded no contest to three counts of forgery in Ohio and had his physician’s assistant license suspended for writing up fake prescriptions, the Daily Mail reported.

He is due in court Sept. 11 for the misdemeanor charges.