One-third of students at Mount Pleasant Academy, an elementary school in the town's Old Village, attend the school on voluntary transfers. Most will have to move to their neighborhood schools next fall when new school boundaries are implemented.

MOUNT PLEASANT - Six years ago, Jessica Browning asked to transfer her rising kindergartner to Mount Pleasant Academy, a high-performing school in the town's Old Village with empty seats and a sterling reputation.

The Constituent District 2 Board, which spans East Cooper, said yes as part of an effort to provide parents' choices and to ease overcrowding in some schools. Today, one in three students at the elementary school attends on voluntary transfers.

Browning's older son graduated from the school last year. In 2013, her younger son started kindergarten, also on a voluntary transfer, with the kids and teachers he's known his entire life. She figured he'd stay through fifth grade too.

But that's not the case, not for her son or the hundreds of others attending schools across East Cooper on voluntary transfers. Instead, the District 2 board has decided most must return to their home schools next fall when new district-wide school boundaries go into effect.

"There is incredible outrage among so many parents about this decision," said Browning, Mount Pleasant Academy's PTA vice president.

But few issues in the 13,000-student constituent district, which includes booming Mount Pleasant and its high-performing schools, are as complex and emotional as where children are educated.

"I understand from parents' perspective. It is hard," said Michael Bobby, acting superintendent. "But the constituent board had a very difficult task, and this is something that has to be done."

Buildings pressures

Redrawing the district's school boundaries began two years ago and required analyzing an ever-moving moving target of residential developments sprouting up all over Mount Pleasant, the nation's ninth-fastest growing city. They include everything from apartment complexes to massive new subdivisions, all of which are likely to produce differing numbers of children in different school areas.

At the same time, the Charleston County School District's massive rebuilding program has brought several new and bigger school buildings to East Cooper - with more to come.

And that's not all. The constituent board studied socioeconomic balances at schools, ingress and egress from neighborhoods, transportation and other factors.

"We never had the rezoning we've needed for years. It's a massive, arduous undertaking," said Marty Belk, District 2 board chairwoman.

In the meantime, to reduce overcrowding at some schools and to fill others that had open seats, the district allowed students to transfer voluntarily if space allowed. And transfer they did, hundreds of them.

Then came the decision in recent days to return students with voluntary transfers, except for those heading into their last year at a given school, to their home schools.

That caused tremendous anger among some parents - and talk of legal action.

"What do I tell my 7-year-old next August when I drop him off? 'I know you're scared but keep your fingers crossed that you'll get to go back to the school and the teachers you've known since you were a baby?'" Browning asked. "That's cruel to do to a child, not to mention the chaos it will cause at all schools across East Cooper."

Roughly 450 students in District 2 have voluntary transfers today, although some of those are students who asked to transfer in advance of boundary changes to avoid switching schools twice. But many are not - and don't want to return to their home schools.

"Sending such a large percentage to their home schools will disrupt the learning process, and be an emotional challenge for all students, not just the ones who are leaving," Browning said.

However, district officials contend the move is needed to get accurate counts of how many students will attend schools under the new attendance boundaries. Without that, it's impossible to plan for critical things like funding, teachers, equipment and buses.

"If we're not very sure what our projections will look like, it's very hard to put the proper resources in place," Bobby said.

Parents can reapply for the transfers. But school officials won't consider those until after they get the 10-day enrollment figures, used for official planning and funding purposes. They won't grant transfer requests into schools that are full.

About 25 parents attended last week's countywide school board meeting to appeal the constituent board's decision.

"To remove these children from their school, not only goes against the written promise that we were given, but is traumatic for children and a hardship for families," said Jean Morgan, whose son just started kindergarten on a voluntary transfer.

Home away from home

No school will feel the impact more than Mount Pleasant Academy where one-third of students attend on voluntary transfers.

Browning, who lives in Creekside, dreads the day her son Fritz will leave the school where he attended kindergarten, where he went to his big brother's class parties and tagged along to parent meetings, to go to a new school in the fall.

"MPA is his home away from home," Browning said.

Hers and other transfer families helped bring Spanish and a full-time technology program to the school, including raising more than $50,000 a year to hire teachers for them. They raised money for new playground equipment and books. Three of the school's last PTA presidents were parents of transfers.

Plus, her Creekside neighborhood has been in flux over the two years of debate over new boundaries.

While new boundaries were discussed at numerous public meetings, Creekside has been zoned from Mamie Whitesides Elementary to Mount Pleasant Academy to James B. Edwards Elementary, back to Whitesides, and now James B. Edwards again, she said.

Browning's entire neighborhood except for two households signed a petition to be zoned for Mount Pleasant Academy - to no avail, she said.

Morgan, who is her neighbor, said she thoroughly reviewed the transfer policy before requesting one for her son, Will.

"In all honesty, I would never have applied if I had known there was a chance it would be revoked. I feel the constituent board is obligated to fulfill the written promise that they gave families," Morgan said.

Instead, her son will start first grade at a new school, unsure if he'll stay there.

Parents may take legal action. Morgan wrote a letter to the school district's attorney last week urging officials to fulfill what parents consider a contractual obligation.

"Legal counsel with whom I have consulted have suggested that our position is a strong one and that the school and the community would be well served by everyone following its commitments," she wrote.

Bobby said school officials are reviewing whether the transfer approvals constitute legally binding documents.

"We're just asking everyone to work with us, and we will continue to listen," he said.

'We need relief'

Driving rezoning is the fact that while some schools in the southern end of town have open seats, nearly every school in northern Mount Pleasant exceeded projections this year.

"We're overcrowded," Belk said. "We need relief somewhere. There is no room."

And it's only worsening. By 2040, Mount Pleasant likely will top 100,000 residents, many drawn to its quality public schools. That means more children riding District 2 buses and filling its classrooms- about 3,000 more in the next decade.

Even without those students, Laurel Hill Primary, which serves kindergarten through second grade, has 1,079 students this year, about 140 more than the building's capacity. Next door Charles Pinckney Elementary, which serves third through fifth grades, has 1,296 students, at least 200 students more than capacity.

"We have really tried our best to alleviate overcrowding so we can have smaller class sizes and students get the best education possible," Belk said.

Without changing attendance boundaries, schools on the southern end of town tend to operate under capacity. Enrollment even dropped at a few this year. Plus, rezoning will be needed anyway when the new and larger campus housing Laing Middle and Jennie Moore Elementary, with a combined capacity to house 2,400 students, opens in the north area of town next fall.

"It became clear this needed to be done," Bobby said. "We're trying to ensure that enrollments match the capacities so that at the end of the day, we still don't have more students than we have seats. We're trying to balance that across the district."

Besides, many students with voluntary transfers never gave their home schools a try, and their departures hurt.

"Many left without ever walking through the door," said Nicky Purves, a former James B. Edwards Elementary PTA president. One of her children graduated from the school and another is in fourth grade. She loves the school, especially its global leadership emphasis.

"The bigger impact is from those who left to begin with," Purves said. "When kids transfer out, your numbers go down and your resources go down."

Officials considered grandfathering all voluntary transfer students next year, but with so many it posed too much of a challenge to get accurate numbers of students who should be attending which schools with the new boundaries.

"Schools with changes to their attendance boundaries won't be able to handle all of the students in the boundaries, and those with voluntary transfers. So we came up with this compromise," Bobby said.

That compromise allows voluntary transfer students who will be attending their final year at a given school next year to remain there. The children of school staffs also can remain.

Parents also can reapply for voluntary transfers. The constituent board will consider requests at its next meeting after 10-day enrollment numbers come in see if open seats remain at schools like Mount Pleasant Academy. They grant transfers as space allows, Belk said.

"Choice in this district is something we have valued," Bobby said. "It's clear that is a value - and it will continue to be valued."

All East Cooper schools are rated excellent by the state, so no student will go from a top-notch school to a low-performing one. "There's not a school not performing at a high level," Bobby said.

More to come

The turmoil won't stop next year. In such a growing and kid-dense area, the current attendance boundaries likely will change again - and fairly soon.

Earlier this month, voters approved an extension of the sales tax to fund the school district's countywide building program. That will allow the district to build a new 900-student elementary school in Carolina Park, which could open as early as 2017, and the area's second high school. Then the conversation will begin again.

"I feel like we have done the best we can do," Belk said. "No one - no one! - likes to rezone."

Reach Jennifer Hawes at 937-5563 or follow her on Twitter.