Peek into any discussion on parenting and you'll notice a repeating theme: The so-called Mommy Wars are raging all around us, and we had better suit up and stock our armory. YouTube, The New York Times and the thousands of parenting blogs all have something to say on the subject, lobbing grenades of judgment and superiority to the "other side," whatever that side may be.

Personally, I don't buy into the Mommy Wars idea. Find me a mom who has the time to judge every other mother she meets and I'll find you a brilliant ad agency behind her, capitalizing on fear and insecurity.

No. I'm far more concerned about the war the rest of us have waged on mothers. This insidious war is built on a foundation of shame and guilt. It has nothing to do with clever marketing schemes, and has everything to do with putting ourselves above the needs of mothers and babies.

Not long ago, Nikki, a Chicago mother, was visiting her case manager's cubicle at a social service agency. Her 6-month-old was with her and got hungry, as babies often do. Seeing as she was breast-feeding, Nikki pulled up her shirt and latched her baby on while continuing the conversation. Her case manager got up from the desk, stood to block the entrance of the cubicle and told her to cover up or leave — she didn't want to see breast-feeding in her office.

Unfortunately, this story is hardly unique. Since 2011, I've helped run an organization that supports breast-feeding mothers in Chicagoland. In that time, I've heard of mothers being asked to leave their friends' living rooms for breast-feeding, of employers threatening termination for breast-feeding, of grandparents warning of spoiling and starvation because of breast-feeding, and of health care providers giving ridiculously unfounded and damaging advice to breast-feeding mothers.

These are the true weapons of the war on moms: The incremental dismantling of a mother's confidence in herself and her ability to nourish her child.

The cost of this behavior is great. The number of breast-feeding moms in Illinois is dismally low. Fewer than 50 percent of mothers are still breast-feeding to some extent at six months, which is only halfway toward the minimum duration recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics. As a state we're behind the rest of the country, and if you look at data for our low-income moms, we're even further behind. Research shows that only one-third of all mothers who want to breast-feed reach their own breast-feeding goals, much less the AAP's recommendations.

Some say that breast-feeding is fine as long as mom covers up, or doesn't show too much skin, or hides in a bathroom.

Are our sensibilities so delicate that we believe our needs for comfort are greater than a baby's for nourishment?

Do we tell Victoria's Secret models and Oscar contenders to "cover up" so we're more comfortable?

Hypocrisy like this negatively impacts moms and babies in a big way: If moms can't comfortably fit breast-feeding into their everyday lives, they won't do it. Hiding under unwieldy covers, sneaking away to a dirty bathroom or otherwise trying to please others' ideas of modesty does not make for a mom-friendly community.

This is not to say that breast-feeding is always easy, nor that it fits into every mother's life. The lack of quality health care and timely access to accurate information, medical and physical limitations, diagnosed low milk supply and lifestyle choices are among many impediments to exclusive or part-time breast-feeding success.

Mothers who don't breast-feed are also doing the best they can to be good parents and deserve respect and support. Unfortunately the war on mothers extends to all mothers — mothers are literally damned if they do and damned if they don't.

Regardless of how individual mothers feed their babies, we have a vested interest as a community in helping more moms to breast-feed. Just as we can agree that having more students graduate from high school is better for our entire community, having more mothers breast-feed benefits all of us.

The data tell us that mothers who breast-feed reduce their own risks for cancer, heart disease and diabetes. Their breast-fed children also have lower chances for chronic diseases, obesity and sudden infant death syndrome. Breast-feeding mothers who work outside the home save their employers money, missing fewer work days, staying in their jobs longer and visiting the doctor's office less often. A 2010 study featured in Pediatrics claimed that if 90 percent of moms breast-fed exclusively for the first six months of their children's lives, we could collectively save $13 billion annually in health care costs alone (yes, that's billion) and prevent the deaths of about 900 individuals each year, almost all of them infants.

Several recent national developments have begun to turn the tide toward better support. The Affordable Care Act provides pumps and lactation services, amenities that were formerly only provided to moms with premium health care plans or generous employers. Additionally, in 2011, the U.S. surgeon general rolled out a Call to Action to Support Breast-feeding, outlining many of the barriers to breast-feeding success, as well as what health care professionals and communities must to do address them.

While these efforts are integral to encouraging more moms to breast-feed, they don't completely disarm our war on mothers. Our families, communities and workplaces all hold incredible power over a mother's experience of parenting. If we want more moms to choose to breast-feed, we're going to need to do a much better job of setting aside our notions of what's "normal" and start doing what's right for moms and babies.

Accepting that moms have a right to feed their babies in public, whatever that looks like and however that makes us feel, is right. Giving moms time and space to express milk for their children during the work day is right. Setting aside our experiences and prejudices so our friends and co-workers can make their own choices is right. Giving a thumb's up and a comfortable chair to moms like Nikki is right.

Katrina Pavlik is the founder and board chair of Breastfeed Chicago.