Former Sen. Phil Gramm once quipped that “if you think health care is expensive now, wait until it’s free.”

He said that when President Clinton was, unsuccessfully, trying to get his wife’s Health Security Act through Congress in 1993.

Graham was right. While Clinton didn’t get his plan enacted, health care has become increasingly “free” to consumers, as the share they pay out-of-pocket dropped from 47% in 1960, to 23% by 1980 to less than 11% today.

This trend has been driven almost entirely by government policies — either through government programs like Medicare and Medicaid, or because of distortions caused by the tax code, which heavily subsidizes generous employer-provided insurance. And because health care looks like a bargain, this trend has fueled health care spending, which has outstripped growth in the economy for decades.

The problem is that much of this extra health care spending didn’t buy better health care. Much of it went instead to increased overhead costs, as doctors and hospitals were forced to cope with increasing paperwork demands from Medicare, Medicaid, managed care plans, and other third-party payers — paperwork that, by the way, was supposed to hold down costs.

Between 1960 and today, overhead costs as a share of health spending doubled to 8%. But the explosion in overhead costs is shown dramatically in the chart at left, which measures the relative growth in physicians and health care administrators from 1970 to 2009.

ObamaCare has only added fuel to this health care paperwork fire. In 2014, insurance overhead costs jumped 12.4%, and the cost of administering government programs jumped more than 10%.

This phenomenon is not limited to health care.

Over the past several decades, the federal government has sharply increased the amount of college aid it provides students. According to The College Board, federal aid today is 134% higher than it was in 2000.

But, as Paul Campos noted in the New York Times, that money simply fueled tuition inflation. “The astonishing rise in college tuition correlates closely with a huge increase in public subsidies for higher education. If over the past three decades car prices had gone up as fast as tuition, the average new car would cost more than $80,000.”

As with health care, much of that money is not going to better education, but to college administrators. “Average salaries of the people who do the teaching in American higher education are actually quite a bit lower than they were in 1970,” Campos noted. “By contrast, a major factor driving increasing costs is the constant expansion of university administration. According to the Department of Education data, administrative positions at colleges and universities grew by 60% between 1993 and 2009” — or about 10 times the rate of tenured faculty.

A report by the American Institutes of Research found that in 1990, the average public university had twice as many professors as administrators. By 2012, the two were almost equal.

So in both health care and education, massive government spending programs have done nothing to hold down the costs — in fact, they’ve turbocharged inflation — while at the same time fueling a rapid growth in paper pushers.

Remember that the next time someone tries to sell you on a plan to have the government make something “free.”

Note: This story has been updated to correct the spelling of former Sen. Phil Gramm’s last name.