WASHINGTON–Keep the Promise I, a super PAC supporting Sen. Ted Cruz’ presidential run, announced today a $1 million radio ad campaign on a slew of Christian and conservative radio shows and networks.

The ad is a 60-second summary of Cruz’s presidential pitch: The son of a Cuban refugee who’s fought for conservative principles in the Supreme Court and U.S. Senate is the one person we can trust in the White House.

“His father was jailed fighting for the freedom of his fellow countrymen and fled Cuba to live the American Dream. Like his father, Ted Cruz fights for what matters: liberty, freedom, and the Constitution that protects both,” says a female narrator in ad’s open.

The ad will run on religious networks like the Contemporary Christian Music Network, the Platinum Plus Network and the Gold News Network, and popular conservative radio talk shows hosted by Rush Limbaugh, Sean Hannity, Laura Ingraham, Mike Gallagher, Michael Medved, Hugh Hewitt and Dennis Prager.

Like many Republican candidates, Cruz is a frequent guest on conservative talk shows, where hosts friendly to his message give him free reign to speak, often unchallenged, to millions of listeners pre-disposed to agree with him.

Cruz also leaned on those shows this spring to tamper criticism from conservatives enraged by his support of President Barack Obama’s trade agenda. Cruz later flipped against it, citing concerns it would be tied to renewing the Export-Import bank.

The ads will start Sept. 28, and run through the end of 2015. Keep the Promise I estimates reaching 28 million listeners every two weeks.

A full transcript is below:

“(Narrator) His father was jailed fighting for the freedom of his fellow countrymen and fled Cuba to live the American Dream. Like his father, Ted Cruz fights for what matters: liberty, freedom, and the Constitution that protects both. Ted doesn’t need a pollster to tell him what to think about things that matter.

As Solicitor General of Texas, Ted Cruz argued nine cases at the Supreme Court, gaining victories for the American people on important issues like religious liberty and Second Amendment rights.

As Senator, he’s been fighting for the people and against the Washington Cartel. He fought against Obamacare and the Iran nuclear deal. Ted stood up to the Democrats and the Establishment of his own party.

(Ted Cruz) The biggest divide in this country we have is between career politicians and the American people.

(Narrator) Lots of candidates call themselves conservatives but there is only one we can trust to be one: Ted Cruz.”