STATEN ISLAND, N.Y. — Gov. Andrew Cuomo issued a warning to New Yorkers this week about a rampant wave of scams by crooks targeting both taxpayers and tax preparers in the state.

Here are three hoaxes Cuomo highlighted in a press release:

1. Scammers posing as New York State or U.S. Treasury representatives ­ Callers posing as state Treasury agents encourage victims to turn over their bank account information along with $250 in return for a larger sum of cash to come at a later date. To make themselves appear more convincing, the scammers provide the victim with a phone number, address, and confirmation code specific to the transaction. New Yorkers have also received calls from individuals posing as U.S. Treasury agents.

Click here for a sample recording of such a scam scam, identified and provided by the governor's office.

2. Pocketing Affordable Care Act penalties

Uninsured New Yorkers may face another tax scam involving penalties under the Affordable Care Act. In some cases, untrustworthy tax preparers tell clients to pay the penalties directly to them, and they keep the money. Taxpayers should never make a tax payment directly to an individual or tax preparer. Payments should be made only with a tax return or in response to a letter from the IRS.

3. Tax preparers become the targets

Tax preparers also need to remain vigilant. Recent scams are targeting the preparers via phone calls demanding client information. In these cases, scammers pretend to be from the IRS in hopes of gaining usernames and passwords to taxpayer accounts.

"Our administration is committed to protecting consumers from scammers who seek to prey on hardworking New Yorkers," Cuomo said in the press release. "New Yorkers need to remain vigilant, be skeptical of anyone seeking to solicit personal information, and report any suspicious activity to the appropriate authorities."

Several Staten Island have contacted the Advance in recent days to report tax scams — in some cases, from particularly aggressive crooks trying to get them to part with their hard-earned money.

One Grymes Hill woman told the Advance a caller said she had 45 minutes to pay off a tax debt or she'd be arrested at her home.

Another woman told the Advance a caller identified himself as an IRS arresting officer who provided a case number and claimed he would take her into custody if she didn't pay up.

Here are some scams every Staten Islander should be aware of: