BOSTON — The Massachusetts Health Connector has engaged an outside consultant to review the problems with its website. State officials, at a Health Connector board meeting on Thursday, said all options remain open, including legal action.

State officials continue to blame technology vendor CGI for the website's poor performance. The state has invested significant time and money into developing workaround solutions to get people enrolled in health insurance coverage without a functional website. Roni Mansur, the connector's chief operating officer, said Gov. Deval Patrick has directed the connector to consider all of its legal rights related to CGI's performance and the associated costs. Connector officials said the state has not ruled out a lawsuit to recoup state losses.

"I think all options are on the table right now," said Secretary of Administration and Finance Glen Shor, who chairs the Health Connector board. "The project is currently subject to an independent review. It will help inform us about how to get the project on the right track. It will inform us about CGI's continuing roles and responsibilities and, among other things, it will help inform us about the level of damage done and the appropriate approach to accountability." Shor said the state is committed to fixing the website, identifying the problems and ensuring CGI's accountability.

State officials stress the length to which the state has gone to ensure that everyone who wants insurance has it. They say that remains the first goal, even as they work to fix the website.

"We're really glad at the number of people who were able to get into health insurance," said Health Connector Executive Director Jean Yang. "We perfectly understand that not everyone is exactly where they need to be. There are people who are still in the process, there are people whose coverage is yet to be secured. ... Our commitment is not to leave a single person out."

The independent review will be done by MITRE, a non-profit research and development company working in systems engineering and information technology. Their report is due Jan. 17. Mansur said the review will assess the quality of the parts of the website that are already working; determine the best way to move the system forward; and calculate the costs to the state of implementing the workarounds. It will also make recommendations for CGI's role in the project going forward.

Yang said the study will be paid for with federal money, which was set aside for research and development projects under the Affordable Care Act.

Jonathan Gruber, a member of the health connector board and MIT professor who has helped craft health care reform in Massachusetts and nationally, asked whether the review would also look at what the Health Connector staff did wrong. "CGI clearly messed up," Gruber said. "The review presumably has to review not just CGI's fault but the institutional fault in the Connector for not realizing this went wrong."

Yang responded that the review is technical-focused, but "everything is being scrutinized."

CGI is the same company that created the federal health care website, which also had significant problems. It was also the lead agency creating health care websites in Hawaii, Colorado and Vermont.

Linda Odorisio, a spokeswoman for CGI, said in an email Wednesday that CGI is continuing to work with Massachusetts officials to deliver improvements and expand the functionality of the Massachusetts Health Connector.

"The health-care marketplace in Massachusetts is successfully processing applications from citizens to enroll in insurance," Odorisio said. "CGI has led or played a major role on the most successful state insurance marketplaces in the country, including Colorado, Kentucky and California. We are working closely with Massachusetts leaders to avoid any formal disputes by ensuring that contract requirements for all parties are met."

New insurance plans and subsidies became available through the Affordable Care Act on Jan. 1.

According to the connector's latest figures, among those seeking subsidized coverage for the first time in 2014, only 4,100 people have been processed for eligibility by MassHealth, the state's Medicaid program, or the Health Connector.

Another 26,000 have been unable to enroll and were instead put in temporary coverage through MassHealth. Shor said the federal government is reimbursing 50 percent of the cost for those in temporary coverage, and the state does not yet have an estimate for what that cost will be. These could include people who were previously uninsured or who are newly eligible for subsidies due to the Affordable Care Act.

Another 4,000 people have enrolled in unsubsidized coverage.

The state also successfully moved 130,000 people who were either enrolled in the state's Commonwealth Care program or eligible for it to MassHealth, due to a Medicaid expansion put in place by the Affordable Care Act.

The technical difficulties have prevented the state from determining eligibility for subsidies and programs automatically through the connector website. People have had trouble with error messages and log-ins. As a result, the state has been using an online program run outside of the connector website. It has been offering paper applications and staffing call centers where officials can help process applications. Yang said the state has been working with the non-profit Health Care For All, which used Facebook to identify people having trouble signing up for plans.

"We continue to have user challenges and member challenges when they navigate the website, and that’s caused us to rely on workarounds," said Ashley Hague, deputy executive director for strategy and external affairs for the connector. "The workarounds do carry a lot of additional staff work, and obviously the additional work and the pathways we've established do carry with them costs."

Mansur said the state and CGI continue to make fixes to stabilize the performance of the website. The state is developing new methods to work around the problems. "We are determined to resolve the problem and have brought in an expert team to help chart the course forward," Mansur said.

The next key date will be March 31. The state has extended the insurance plans of 124,000 people who are currently enrolled in Commonwealth Care and two smaller plans, one tied to small businesses and one for those who are unemployed, from Dec. 31 until the end of March. By that point, all these people will need to be moved to new permanent plans.

Shor, asked whether he was confident that the state could meet that deadline, said, "The team had to develop very significant manual processes and workarounds due to the IT vendor's underperformance to protect people's coverage for Jan. 1, and they were able to accomplish it. They're going to bring the same level of creativity and commitment to protecting people's coverage for March 31."