A federal judge will rule early next week on whether to temporarily suspend a portion of Seattle, Washington’s $15 minimum-wage law, pending the outcome of a longer inquiry into whether the legislation is constitutional. The International Franchise Association (IFA), which requested the temporary injunction, is suing the city of Seattle on charges that the new law unfairly discriminates against franchisees. The outcome of that lawsuit could potentially influence wage laws and other labor regulations across the country.

Seattle’s minimum-wage law, which is scheduled to take effect on April 1, requires employers to raise wages at different rates depending on how many workers they employ nationwide. A business with 500 or fewer employees in the U.S. must pay its workers at least $10 per hour starting on April 1, and $15 per hour by the first day of 2021. Businesses with more than 500 employees must pay at least $11 starting on April 1, and are required to raise their wages to $15 an hour by 2019, two years ahead of schedule.

The IFA isn’t trying to block the entire law. It simply rejects the way its members are affected by the distinction drawn between small and large businesses. Seattle counts franchisees among the businesses that will have to raise wages at a faster rate.

In other words, the city is placing franchisees in a separate category from other small businesses due to their licensing agreements with large conglomerates such as McDonald’s Corporation, the world’s largest fast-food chain.

The IFA argues that this violates the commerce clause of the U.S. Constitution because Seattle is attempting to regulate an interstate relationship between a franchisee and the licensing franchisor. Additionally, IFA lawyers charge that the law breaches the First and Fourteenth Amendments by discriminating against franchisees.

The IFA’s argument, if upheld, would not just affect Seattle. When officials in Chicago, Illinois were developing a plan to raise the city’s minimum wage last year, they initially floated a proposal similar to Seattle’s, under which franchisees would have been again regarded as large employers and required to raised their wages to at least $15 per hour at a faster rate than other small businesses. They eventually backed down under pressure from business groups, including the IFA.

Paul Clement, the lead attorney representing the IFA in its lawsuit against Seattle, referenced the defunct Chicago proposal when asked by a journalist for Fortune magazine whether the suit would “have ramifications beyond the city of Seattle."

“For other jurisdictions looking to increase the minimum wage in a non-discriminatory way, this lawsuit won’t have any impact,” said Clement. “But for jurisdictions — and I think Chicago is one — that are using Seattle’s legislation as a model for their own, that want to borrow not only the $15 wage but the discriminatory provisions as well, then this lawsuit would have direct implications for them."

Clement, who served as solicitor general under President George W. Bush, has something of a reputation for getting involved in precedent-setting cases. He has argued before the U.S. Supreme Court more than 75 times, including as part of a crucial 2012 lawsuit concerning the constitutionality of the Affordable Care Act.

Asked over email if the IFA viewed the Seattle lawsuit as a potentially precedent-setting test case, association spokesman Matt Haller told Al Jazeera: "Franchises provide opportunities for minorities, immigrants, veterans and first-time business owners to own their own businesses — and they do so at a greater rate than non-franchised businesses. If policymakers in other cities or states create barriers to economic growth and franchise ownership by adopting radical policies like Seattle, they do so at their own peril."