International Business Machines Corp., which announced last month it has established a $100 million venture fund to back developers of applications for its Watson supercomputer, has made its first investment from that fund, participating in a $22.1 million Series C round for Welltok Inc.

Bloomberg News Watson researchers at work inside IBM. The corporation is spending $1 billion to build a new division around its Watson supercomputer.

Denver-based Welltok offers a health-optimization platform that health insurers and employer groups can roll out to members of their health plans, in the hope that offering incentives and rewards for adopting healthier habits will lead to a healthier membership.

Welltok will soon have a new feature: a quasi-cognitive supercomputer that can answer consumers’ questions directly.

“It’s not like search,” Welltok Chief Executive Jeff Margolis said. “You don’t get back a bunch of results. Watson gives you the answer.”

The investment is the first from IBM‘s new $100 million fund, as well as Watson’s first move into the area of consumer health, Mr. Margolis said.

Welltok and IBM began developing a consumer-health product together last November, information from IBM said.

The Series C brings the company’s total venture backing to around $50 million, he said. Valuation was not disclosed.

The round was led by New Enterprise Associates, joined by IBM, Qualcomm Ventures, Emergence Capital Partners, InterWest Partners, Miramar Venture Partners and Okapi Venture Capital, the company said.

Watson, a supercomputer that IBM has been working on for years, proved several years ago that it has developed a form of cognition when it beat human contestants on game show Jeopardy! On the show, questions are asked in a form that usually stumps computers, as it does not direct them to a pool of data from which to draw an answer.

Watson uses natural-language processing to come up with information, and will use that skill when answering health-related questions via the Welltok CafeWell Concierge, said Steve Gold, vice president of IBM‘s Watson Group.

“Watson can answer difficult questions like, ‘I have high cholesterol, what should I do?,’” Mr. Gold said.

Welltok said Watson will pull data from a variety of sources, including health-plan information, online activity logs, social networks and other sources. As Watson is not providing diagnoses or dispensing clinical information, it will not integrate with electronic health records, the company said.

IBM has been attempting to move Watson out of the lab and into the lives of consumers, opening up the supercomputer’s platform to outside developers and launching its new fund, which is aimed at helping developers with applications in the areas of health-care, travel and retail, Mr. Gold of IBM said.

In health care, Watson has been tested out by the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York, which would like to incorporate the supercomputer in cancer treatment.

Health-benefits company WellPoint Inc. aims to one day use Watson to help with treatment decisions, according to VentureWire records.

Write to Timothy Hay at timothy.hay@wsj.com.