Topics: antibiotic resistance, Korea, pandemic, Scientific American, Life News

This article was originally published by Scientific American

Antibiotic resistance, which transforms ordinary microbes into menaces that cannot be easily controlled, is exacting a growing toll on the human population. More than two million people in the U.S. develop drug-resistant infections each year and at least 23,000 of them die as a result. Yet most antibiotic resistant infections are only identified long after a patient has left the doctor’s office.

The diagnostic hitch is how long it takes for bacteria to grow in the laboratory. The standard method for identifying drug resistance is to take a sample from a wound, blood or urine and expose resident bacteria to various drugs. If the bacterial colony continues to divide and thrive despite the presence of a normally effective drug, it indicates the microbes are drug-resistant. The wait time for such answers, however, is typically between 16 and 20 hours.

New innovations in engineering are allowing scientists to speed up that diagnostic process by sidestepping the need to watch for bacterial division altogether. A novel approach involves observing how the structure of individual bacterial cells changes in response to such antibiotic exposure, and only takes three to four hours. This rapid test could help clinicians to more quickly identify the best antibiotic and switch patients over to the correct treatment course, the study’s lead author Sunghoon Kwon of Seoul National University wrote via e-mail. The new findings were published in the December 17 Science Translational Medicine.

Developing such diagnostic advances is exactly what the World Health Organization called for this year in a sobering global analysis of antibiotic resistance. In too many cases, WHO noted, available tests take too long to run so physicians forgo them and simply prescribe broad-spectrum drugs. Developing faster tests that would lead to more targeted drug treatments would be a crucial step to help safeguard medications, the report said. If the new method makes its way into treatment centers it would be a step in the right direction. “The ability to determine changes in the structure of the single cell makes this unique among rapid-type analyses and it is an optimistic sign that this could be the beginning of a new area of study,” says Stuart Levy, director of the Center for Adaptation Genetics and Drug Resistance at Tufts University School of Medicine.

As a matter of course, a clinician will typically prescribe a drug to treat a patient’s suspected infection but only receives definitive lab results confirming whether the clinician’s best guess was correct a day or two after the patient started taking the drugs. That delay causes patients to take too many unnecessary antibiotics and inches us ever closer to a world where essential treatments are no longer effective.