The mug shot of her son is not the image Doreen Palmer sees when she closes her eyes.

She pictures the young boy with a quick wit and curls in his hair who loved soccer and baseball, and the man who was set to take over his father’s construction business.

“Do you know what it does to a mom to see their son on TV — wanted?” Palmer, of Winchester, said on a recent afternoon, her voice wavering. “My heart breaks every day.”

Ryan Williams, 28, Palmer’s youngest child, was arrested last month on state and federal drug charges of possession of heroin with intent to distribute. His wife, Amanda, 33, was arrested the day before Ryan, and faces a felony count of heroin possession.

Palmer and her loved ones are among families throughout the state grappling with an opioid crisis Gov. Maggie Hassan has called an “epidemic.”

Keene’s police and fire departments have responded to 199 overdoses in all since 2013. In the past two years, 17 people have died in the city from drug overdoses.

Palmer said she doesn’t know exactly when her son started using heroin, but first became aware of his addiction about two years ago. Though she tried to reach out to him, she said, he didn’t seem to want the help.

“They shut you down,” she said of addicts. “I don’t know if they shut you down because they love you or if they shut you down because now you know and you want to help them and they’re not ready to be helped.”

Efforts by The Sentinel to reach Ryan and Amanda Williams in jail were unsuccessful by the time the paper went to press today. The couple last lived in Swanzey.

Ryan Williams is being held at the Cheshire County jail without bail and is scheduled to appear in U.S. District Court in Concord on Aug. 24. Amanda is also at the county jail, where she’ll stay until she finds a place to live while undergoing drug treatment and counseling through Cheshire County’s Alternative Sentencing Program and Mental Health Court.

Among the reasons the Williams’ case resonated locally is because of the media attention and community support their son Oliver, now 4, gained as a baby as he struggled with a rare blood condition.

Called Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, the disorder prevents patients’ blood from clotting and leaves them vulnerable to blood disease. The community rallied behind the young family, and Oliver received a bone marrow transplant in 2011. Oliver is safe with family, according to Palmer.

“Our family never took for granted what was done in this community,” she said.

Palmer said her focus now is on taking care of her family as they navigate the waters through addiction, treatment and the court system.

While the legal consequences of substance abuse are often very public, less visible are the struggles families face behind the scenes.

“There’s a pain that runs deep for a lot of people,” Palmer said.

The pain comes from not knowing if someone you love is going to get hurt, and not being able to help, Palmer explained. She searched for a solution to her son’s addiction for a while, attending support groups in the area, but continually came up empty-handed.

“I was the mom who wanted to fix it and they wanted to teach me I couldn’t fix it,” Palmer said.

“And they were right, I can’t fix it.”

An increasing problem

About 3 percent of New Hampshire residents who took part in the National Survey on Drug Use and Health between 2010 and 2011 said they’d used heroin at least once in their lifetime. This statistic was included in the June 2014 Collective Action Issue Brief by the N.H. Bureau of Drug and Alcohol Services, N.H. Center for Excellence and the N.H. Charitable Foundation.

Nationally, the average age people start using heroin is 23, according to the brief.

“The kids are younger, they get addicted faster because the heroin is strong and it’s cheaper and more readily available,” said Amelie Gooding, director of Phoenix House in Keene.

Phoenix House is a nonprofit drug and alcohol rehabilitation organization with programs in 10 states. There are four in New Hampshire: one in Keene and Northfield, and two in Dublin.

More people are coming to the Keene Phoenix House to get treatment for heroin, according to Gooding. In 2011, 32 percent of the 189 admissions were for heroin addiction, she said. In 2014, this number increased to 58 percent of the 489 admissions.

Though part of the reason for the increase in admissions was due to more widespread access to health care from the Affordable Care Act, these numbers are still indicative of an increase in heroin use, Gooding said.

And as more people use heroin, more people are dying.

This past spring, the state medical examiner announced that 321 drug-related deaths occurred in New Hampshire in 2014. Of these, 97 were caused by heroin — either alone or in combination with other drugs. Another 143 deaths involved the potent opioid painkiller fentanyl, either by itself or combined with other drugs.

Based on these numbers, the medical examiner’s report said deaths from heroin had become more common in New Hampshire than deaths from traffic accidents.

How can a family help?

While these statistics are a clear indication of the epidemic at hand, how families and friends can help their loved ones isn’t always as obvious.

Families are key to a successful recovery, according to Gooding.

“When (health care workers are) long gone ... families will always be around,” she said.

Families may also be directly involved in medical treatment, due in part to wider accessibility of overdose reversal medication.

Narcan, a brand name for naloxone, used to be available only in hospital emergency departments. First responders now keep the medicine with them in case it needs to be administered in the field.

On June 2, Hassan signed into law a bill that allows doctors to prescribe Narcan to people who either have friends or family members at risk of overdosing, or are at risk themselves.

“That’s something that family members never had to think about before,” Gooding said.

The emotional distress of helping a loved one through addiction and into recovery is incomprehensible, according to Polly Morris. She works as a coordinator for Monadnock Voices for Prevention, a regional network that works to reduce substance abuse in communities.

“It goes past the point of worrying,” she said. “They’re not sure what’s going to happen.”

Palmer, for example, worries about whether she’s somehow responsible for her son’s addiction.

“You question what you did. ‘What did I do, what did I do wrong?’,” she said.

For this reason, Morris said families must find a way to deal with the stresses of the situation.

“It’s important that they have a community that you’re welcome in, supported in and can still be yourself,” she said.

The Monadnock Region hosts a variety of addiction support groups on any given night of the week. Nar-Anon in Keene, for example, meets every Thursday in the basement of St. James Episcopal Church on West Street.

Members of the group — for family members of people struggling, or in recovery from, substance abuse problems — agreed to speak with The Sentinel on condition of anonymity.

“It’s so hard to explain,” said a woman whose son was just over four years into his recovery from substance abuse. “Everyone that comes to this meeting knows exactly what I mean.”

“Being here helps us to become strong and more educated on the subject.”

The group shows the strength that can come from shared experiences, said Sue Avery, who runs the Keene and Brattleboro chapters of the support group.

“We have a common thread, we all have a family disease,” she said.

“A lot of hope in this room comes from the support ... that we give each other.”

Morris said her advice for people as they try to help loved ones through addiction is similar to that given in the event of an airplane crash: Put the mask on yourself, flight attendants say, before assisting anyone else.

“You have to take care of yourself before you start taking care of others,” she said.

Overcoming a stigma

For Palmer and others whose loved ones suffer from substance abuse problems, a major challenge can be overcoming the stigma thrown not just at their loved ones, but also at themselves.

Because of this, Morris said, parents are often scared to talk about their child as an addict, even if the signs of drug abuse are clear.

Part of the reason for the stigma comes from the lack of education around the subject, she said.

Treatment facilities are doing their part to help raise awareness on how to work with a loved one in recovery.

At Phoenix House, for example, Gooding said a patient’s family members are not allowed to visit until they attend an hour-long seminar to learn about the Phoenix House programs.

“We really want to capture the family, and make sure they hear about treatment and recovery,” Gooding said.

But even armed with this information, the process can be difficult.

It’s a delicate balance between tough love and compassion, according to Morris; while you don’t want to cut off someone with a dependency issue completely, she said, you can’t let them take advantage of you, either.

“It might take more than once” for a person to enter into recovery, Morris said.

“Just keep going, don’t give up on your person.”

Because as hard as situations like this may be, Palmer said, she will never stop caring about her son.

“I’m glad he’s caught; I am, and that nobody was hurt,” she said. “No police officers were hurt, my son wasn’t hurt, no one innocent got hurt.”

“But I’m his mom, and I’m wondering just how lonely he is right now.”