To understand why the Broncos coveted Emmanuel Sanders, don’t listen to them. Listen to him.

Two months after signing Sanders, the Broncos drafted wide receiver Cody Latimer in the second round. This isn’t about fostering creative tension. General manager John Elway wants options, seeks competition.

Sanders’ reply?

“I like it. Whoever wants to come in and put their hands in the pot to help us win a championship, the more the merrier,” Sanders said Wednesday. “This is my fifth year. Things happen. Guys get hurt. I’ve always said you’re only as strong as your weakest link. The more guys that we bring here that are about winning, and the better they are physically and mentally, the better we are as a team.”

Sanders’ path to Denver — while controversial, because the Kansas City Chiefs believed they had an agreement with his agent — began in Texas. Sanders played collegiately at Southern Methodist in coach June Jones’ caffeinated offense. He stressed opponents with spacing.

In the Broncos, Sanders saw the Mustangs.

“As a receiver, to say that you’re going to the No. 1 offense in the National Football League last year, why wouldn’t you want to be a part of that? My whole deal is when I first came out in free agency, I wanted to go to a spread attack,” Sanders said. “I like to block, but I’m not trying to block 75 percent of the time. I’m 185 pounds. I told my agent that I wanted to be here depending on what they did with (Eric) Decker. All the numbers lined up, and now I’m here.”

This isn’t the first time Sanders attempted to run a deep route out of Pittsburgh, where he caught 67 passes for 740 yards and six touchdowns last season. He signed with the New England Patriots a year ago, but the Steelers matched the $2.5 million restricted free-agent offer.

The Broncos gave Sanders a three-year, $15 million contract that pays out $6 million in 2014. Quarterback Peyton Manning invited Sanders to his offseason workouts at Duke. Manning welcomed his arrival, pointing to the minutiae in Sanders’ bio.

“In the studies that I did on him, I saw that he led the (Steelers) in tackles on the kickoff team one year. That tells you the guy likes football. That is more than just being a receiver; that is being a football player,” said Manning, who has been throwing extra passes to Sanders after practices to improve their timing. “I look forward to playing with a guy like that.”

Sanders replaces Decker, but his experience as a slot receiver could create more wrinkles with Wes Welker. Tight end Julius Thomas called the possibilities exciting.

“We can do a lot of creative stuff,” Thomas said. “One thing I saw from him (while working out) at Duke is just how explosive he is. He’s a guy that when he touches it, he can make a big play out of something small.”

Troy E. Renck: trenck@denverpost.com or twitter.com/troyrenck