Saturday was the kickoff to the Bay scallop harvesting season.

The season lasts until mid-September and culminates with a scallop festival in early October.

Tourists and locals were out on day one to celebrate the start of the season.

“You have to find a grassy area with a sand area,” said youngster Will who was on vacation with his family. “Then you’re supposed to get on that sand area, then when you see a scallop you get it.”

It’s that easy. For first timers, and old timers, scalloping is a favorite panhandle pastime.

“We’ve been going in and out there for the last 30 years,” said local John Cox.”It’s just a good time is what it is.”

Adrienne Woodward works with the Tourist Development Council for Port. St Joe. She spent the day scalloping with family and friends and said it’s an outdoor activity everyone can enjoy.

“There was tons of kids out there,” she said. “It’s so easy for them just to walk and feel these with their toes and feet.”

While the first harvest of the scallop season was small, executive director of the council, Jennifer Jenkins, said tourist and locals are abundant.

“We have a big influx of visitors right now,” she said. “Tourism is growing very rapidly here in Gulf County.”

Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission (FWC) officials encourage everyone to take advantage of the bay’s treasured treat. They do, however, want harvesters to keep in mind safety precautions and legal restrictions.

The daily limit for a single person is a two gallon bucket full of scallops or a single pint of shucked scallop meat.

FWC Gulf County officer Hal Webb said the regulations are meant to preserve the valuable resource.

“We want to ensure that generations to come get to enjoy and experience the harvest of natural resources, just as we are today,” he said. “So you know when someone takes more than they’re allowed by law to take then that’s what we as law enforcement officers look for.”

People are also reminded to carry their saltwater fishing license and to display dive flags. They must also stay within 300 feet of a divers down flag or buoy when in the open water.

But as soon as harvesters have done their due diligence, it’s time to enjoy.

"At the end of the day you take your scallops,” Jenkins said, “and you can go to any of out local restaurants and they'll cook them for you."

"My wife usually fries them or broils them in the oven," Cox said.

Woodward said in her family, it’s tradition to eat them raw. But according to Will, you should probably ask his parents.

For more information on scallop season, you can visit: http://myfwc.com/fishing/saltwater/recreational/bay-scallops/