More Amer­ic­ans con­tin­ue to say that Pres­id­ent Obama’s health care law will help the poor and the un­in­sured rather than their own fam­il­ies or the coun­try over­all, the latest United Tech­no­lo­gies/Na­tion­al Journ­al Con­gres­sion­al Con­nec­tion Poll has found.

Com­bined with the sur­vey res­ults re­leased Monday, these at­ti­tudes cap­ture the tenu­ous polit­ic­al situ­ation fa­cing Obama and the law’s Demo­crat­ic sup­port­ers: While the earli­er res­ults found that only about two-fifths of Amer­ic­ans want to re­peal Obama­care, these find­ings show that most adults, par­tic­u­larly whites, view it largely as a trans­fer pro­gram that will mostly be­ne­fit the poor rather than the na­tion broadly.

Still, like the res­ults re­leased Monday show­ing no mean­ing­ful up­tick in sup­port for re­peal, these find­ings point more to­ward dur­ab­il­ity than change in as­sess­ments of the law since Ju­ly des­pite its stormy, and at times chaot­ic, rol­lout. The law’s pub­lic stand­ing re­mains only equi­voc­al, the poll found, but it also re­mains largely stable — not only with the coun­try over­all, but among most of the key sub­groups. And giv­en everything that’s happened lately, that trend may rep­res­ent the best the be­lea­guered White House can hope for now.

The United Tech­no­lo­gies/Na­tion­al Journ­al Con­gres­sion­al Con­nec­tion Poll, con­duc­ted by Prin­ceton Sur­vey Re­search As­so­ci­ates In­ter­na­tion­al, sur­veyed 1,013 adults by land­line and cell phone from Nov. 14-17. It has a mar­gin of er­ror of plus or minus 3.6 per­cent­age points.

Amid all of the tur­moil sur­round­ing the law, sol­id ma­jor­it­ies of Amer­ic­ans con­tin­ue to say they be­lieve it will “make things bet­ter” for people who do not have health in­sur­ance (63 per­cent) and the poor (59 per­cent). Only about one-third thought the law would “make things “¦ worse” for each group. In each case, that’s a slight im­prove­ment in the over­all judg­ment since the Ju­ly poll. Back then, 58 per­cent thought the law would help the un­in­sured and 55 per­cent be­lieved it would be­ne­fit the poor.

These res­ults re­flect a broad con­sensus. In the new sur­vey, sol­id ma­jor­it­ies of Demo­crats, in­de­pend­ents, non­whites, and both col­lege-edu­cated and non­col­lege whites say the law will help the un­in­sured; ma­jor­it­ies of each of those groups ex­cept whites without col­lege de­grees also say it will help the poor (and even a 49 per­cent plur­al­ity of those non­col­lege whites agree). Re­pub­lic­ans were more du­bi­ous, but even so, 47 per­cent thought the law would help the un­in­sured and 42 per­cent be­lieved it would be­ne­fit the poor.

These res­ults are a mixed bless­ing for the law’s sup­port­ers, though, be­cause the poll also finds that most Amer­ic­ans, es­pe­cially whites, are much more du­bi­ous that the law will be­ne­fit broad­er groups in the coun­try, or their own fam­il­ies. That con­founds the an­ti­cip­a­tion of Demo­crat­ic strategists who have hoped for dec­ades that health care re­form could re­verse the skep­ti­cism among many voters, par­tic­u­larly middle-class whites, that Wash­ing­ton can de­liv­er tan­gible be­ne­fits in their own lives.

Re­l­at­ively few voters, es­pe­cially whites, are an­ti­cip­at­ing such be­ne­fits from the health care law, the poll found. Over­all, just 33 per­cent said they ex­pec­ted the law will make things bet­ter for “people like you and your fam­ily,” while 49 per­cent said they thought it would make things worse. That was little changed since Ju­ly (when those polled split 35 per­cent pos­it­ive to 46 per­cent neg­at­ive). But the res­ults con­tin­ued the de­cline since Septem­ber 2012, just be­fore Obama’s reelec­tion, when a nar­row 43 per­cent to 40 per­cent plur­al­ity ex­pec­ted the law to im­prove their per­son­al health care.

The latest res­ult con­tin­ued the stark ra­cial split on this crit­ic­al ques­tion. Minor­it­ies, by a 51 per­cent to 30 per­cent mar­gin, thought the law was more likely to make things bet­ter than worse for their fam­il­ies. That rep­res­en­ted a small de­teri­or­a­tion (with­in the mar­gin of er­ror) for Obama since Ju­ly, but main­tained a huge gulf in at­ti­tudes com­pared with whites. Just 25 per­cent of whites said they be­lieved the law would im­prove con­di­tions for their fam­ily; nearly three-fifths of whites (58 per­cent) thought it would make things worse for them. (That also rep­res­en­ted only a small de­teri­or­a­tion, also with­in the mar­gin of er­ror, since Ju­ly.) Only about one-fifth of whites without a col­lege de­gree, a group con­sist­ently tough on Obama, thought the law would make things bet­ter for them; but so did only about one-third of col­lege-edu­cated whites, a con­stitu­ency usu­ally more open to him. Minor­it­ies and whites re­main starkly di­vided as to whom will be­ne­fit from the pres­id­ent’s health care plan.

In­deed, Obama faces skep­ti­cism about the law’s per­son­al im­pact from two groups cent­ral to his co­ali­tion. While Monday’s poll res­ults found little sup­port for re­peal­ing the health care law among mil­len­ni­als and col­lege-edu­cated white wo­men, just un­der half of re­spond­ents in each group thought the law would make things worse, rather than bet­ter, for their own fam­il­ies. Only 31 per­cent of the well-edu­cated white wo­men, and 37 per­cent of young adults un­der 30, thought the law would make things bet­ter for them.

The sur­vey also pro­duced ad­verse judg­ments on what the law will mean for oth­er groups. Just 39 per­cent said the law will be­ne­fit the middle class, while 53 per­cent said it would harm it. That was also down sig­ni­fic­antly since Septem­ber 2012, but es­sen­tially un­changed since last Ju­ly when re­spond­ents split 36 per­cent pos­it­ive to 49 per­cent neg­at­ive.

Like­wise in the new poll, 40 per­cent said Obama­care would make things bet­ter for seni­ors, while 45 per­cent thought it would make things worse. Again that was vir­tu­ally un­changed since Ju­ly, but also a fall since Septem­ber 2012. Both in Ju­ly and in the new poll, the share of whites over 50 who said the law would make things worse for seni­ors was about double the por­tion that ex­pec­ted im­prove­ments.

Fa­mil­i­ar polit­ic­al di­vides re­sur­faced over the law’s im­pact on the na­tion as a whole. Only 42 per­cent said it would make things bet­ter for “the coun­try over­all,” while 51 per­cent said it would make things worse. This meas­ure too de­clined from Septem­ber 2012 to Ju­ly, but hasn’t changed much since.

On this ques­tion, Obama con­tin­ues to face enorm­ous skep­ti­cism from groups tra­di­tion­ally crit­ic­al of him (about two-thirds of non­col­lege whites, just over three-fifths of rur­al res­id­ents, and nearly three-fifths of whites above 50 thought it would make things worse for the coun­try). But, com­pared with the ques­tion about the law’s per­son­al im­pact, the pres­id­ent ral­lied more sup­port from groups fa­vor­able to him, with nearly three-fifths of minor­it­ies and al­most ex­actly half of col­lege whites say­ing the law would do more to make things bet­ter than worse for the coun­try over­all. (Only about two-fifths of mil­len­ni­als, though, agreed.)

On both sides of that di­vide, the res­ults showed little change since last Ju­ly. All of that adds to the sense from this week’s poll that the health care law con­tin­ues to face power­ful doubts, but isn’t yet fa­cing the col­lapse of its pub­lic sup­port (par­tic­u­larly with­in the Demo­crat­ic co­ali­tion) or a crest­ing of op­pos­i­tion that could ig­nite a le­gis­lat­ive stam­pede to­ward re­peal.