Gov. Greg Abbott will be in Tyler on Thursday, signing his new book “Broken but Unbowed” at Hastings, 5015 S. Broadway Ave. The signing begins at 11 a.m.

His book is part autobiography, part policy treatise on what the Constitution means to a nation still slogging through the after-effects of the Great Recession. Instead of functioning properly - with powers enumerated and clearly separated, the three branches of government are actively seeking to increase their own power, Abbott contends.

“Each branch of government bustles around creating pages of legal wallpaper, trying to cover up the endless number of cracks,” Abbott wrote. “They sure look busy. But in reality nothing’s accomplished.”

He cites the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, which he refers to as Obamacare.

“The Obamacare law was a direct assault on the Constitution and on liberty as we knew it,” he wrote. “The proposed law contorted the Constitution beyond where it had ever been stretched.”

As Texas attorney general, Abbott was one of 12 state attorneys generals who sued the Obama administration over the law.

But it was a doomed effort.

“This was like The Little Engine That Could chugging up the mountain, with everyone watching from below insisting there was no way the engine would make it over,” he wrote.

Abbott also outlines some strategies for returning the nation to its constitutional roots - such as a Convention of States. This is something Abbott has been calling for since taking office.

“The increasingly frequent departures from Constitutional principles are destroying the Rule of Law foundation on which this country was built,” Abbott said in 2015. “We are succumbing to the caprice of man that our Founders fought to escape. The cure to these problems will not come from Washington D.C. Instead, the states must lead the way. To do that, I am adding another item to the agenda next session. I want legislation authorizing Texas to join other states in calling for a Convention of States to fix the cracks in our Constitution.”

The Constitution itself offers a way to do this in Article V. That portion of the Constitution says states can amend the Constitution, without action from Congress. Any amendment would require two-thirds of state legislatures approval, so it would be a high hurdle. But it could be the nation’s best shot at reining in the federal government, Abbott says.

In his book, Abbott also includes a poem, to help illustrate his point:

Little Miss Muffet

Sat on a tuffet (On her property),

Eating her curds and whey (Just eating, not selling),

Along came a spider,

Federal agents beside her,

And frightened Miss Muffet away.

The Tyler Paper’s Roy Maynard will tweet from the event Thursday morning.

Twitter: @tmt_roy