By CATHERINE ELLERTON

Moapa Valley Progress

They talked of ‘River Rats’ and helicopters, comrades and Landing Zones, training and Landing Crafts. Around 50 local residents gathered together on Saturday, Nov. 29, at the VFW Elwood Perkins Post 8336 home in Overton to honor all local Vietnam veterans during the 50th anniversary of the official commencement of that war.

In attendance at the event was VFW Commander-in-Chief John Stroud who presented each veteran with a certificate of appreciation for their service.

It was a time of remembrance, a time of appreciation and a time to close the circle. Fifty years ago in 1964 the U.S. presence in Vietnam was increased. This was a cold-war-era “Proxy” war being fought in Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia. According to the record books it was fought from November 1, 1955 to April 30, 1975 at the fall of Saigon. Over 58,000 U.S. service members died in that conflict.

At home in the States, anti-war movement had begun which was instigated by the counterculture of the 1960s. The men and women, who had fought so bravely and represented the United States with so much dedication, had never been welcomed home.

Instead they were often marginalized and mistreated by the public.

At Saturday’s event, the members of the local VFW post took the opportunity to say “Thank you, for a job well done!” The crowd that attended came to hear the stories and to join together to show appreciation. Members of the VFW Ladies Auxiliary, Linda Brommer (President), Anita Lang (Chaplain) and Kathy Hollinger (Secretary) were also present to offer their support.

Dan Beckdahl, the Post Commander, worked with the current National Chief of Staff and Adjutant Quartermaster of Post 8336, Bruce Hollinger, in presenting this occasion.

Beckdahl is the recipient of the 2013 – 2014 Nevada Veteran of the Year award due to his dedication in establishing the post’s recently acquired home and the work he does helping veterans in the Moapa Valley community. His current goal is to assist Dalton Tom, the Chairman of the So. Paiute Veteran’s Association in his efforts to recognize and develop membership in this area and become more involved in the Moapa Valley Post with the thought of eventually, in the near future, establishing their own Post.

Over thirty local Vietnam Veterans were honored on this day, receiving Certificates of Appreciation. They were invited to share their stories of service in Vietnam. Included in that group were Purple Heart recipients: Bill Cook, Lee Hawker and Ron Jirak.

In an interview with the PROGRESS, VFW Commander-in-Chief John Stroud stated that his current position was the “greatest job in the world! Allowing him to reach out and touch and help America’s heroes, military service members, veterans and families.” He felt it was a good fit as he ended his career as a 1st Sergeant, a position which is involved in the training and welfare of the military men and women and their families.

Stroud began his career in 1976 when he enlisted in the Air Force upon his graduation from Colonial High School in Orlando, Florida. He served his Country for 21 years, retiring in 1997.

In the Air Force, he began with the F-4 Squadron, then transitioned to the F-16 in the early 1980s, and on to the F-117 – the Stealth Fighter classified program.

Stroud spent 1992-93 in Korea with the 51st Fighter Wing at Osan Air Base. In his off-duty hours he attended Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University and graduated in 1990 with a Bachelor of Science Degree in Professional Aeronautics.

In his early years he was a Flight Operations Superintendent. He spent 1995-97 at Nellis Air Base out of Las Vegas and retired as a 1st Sergeant, with the Security Police Group.

He then became active in the VFW, transitioned through the various positions and was elected as the VFW Commander-in-Chief in 2014.

One of his first privileges in that position was to lay the Wreath at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier and at the Vietnam Memorial this past Veteran’s Day.

Stroud took a moment to talk about the current issues currently facing the national VFW organization. Asked what the thoughts were of the VFW organization on the resigning of Secretary of Defense Hagel, Stroud commented that the organization is grateful for his service. Stroud pointed out that Hagel had served in Vietnam, was awarded the Purple Heart, served in the Senate. “We were sorry to see him go,” Stroud said.

Stroud said that the VFW is satisfied with the new Director of the VA, Bob McDonald. “He is one of us!” Stroud said. “He is a West Point graduate, was in the Army and then headed Proctor and Gamble. He didn’t ask for the job but was asked to take the job as the Director. He is a courageous man.”

In reference to recent problems with VA Benefits, Stroud pointed out that legislation has been submitted for extra funding to remedy those problems and to give authority to take care of it through appropriate personal actions. Problems with VA benefits are being handled by a Patient Affairs Advocate, Stroud said. He added that military personnel may call 1-800-VFW-1899 to receive help and advice. This is an answering service number. But all complaints will be recorded and receive a response.

Stroud said that the VFW has been active in protecting the military’s Tricare benefits? Resolutions to Congress are submitted annually in an attempt to protect the benefits earned, Stroud explained. In addition, objections are voiced whenever a move is made to take away those benefits. Currently the benefits meet the criteria of the Affordable Care Act, Stroud said.

Stroud also said that the VFW is taking steps to protect the student benefits of military members? Currently the Post 911 G.I. Bill protects these benefits. There is also the “Help A Hero” Scholarship Program available, he said.

What are the issues that will be brought before Congress this coming year? Stroud said that they have asked for the Congressional Charter to be changed from: ‘men, soldiers, widows’ to ‘veterans, soldiers and surviving spouses’ to more actively reflect the current demographics of the service. This was passed by Congress and they expect it to be signed into law.

Stroud said that the VFW is calling on Congress to do the job they were elected to do and pass a budget – eliminating sequestration. If sequestration were to continue, only 20% of the Nation’s budget would be allocated for defense – 50% of sequestration cuts come from the Department of Defense budget. “Pilots would not be flying, ships wouldn’t sail and soldiers would not be trained,” Stroud said. “With the current threat of ISIS this would be devastating.”

Stroud added that he was happy to take part in Saturday’s 50th Anniversary Commemorative Partnership program to assist, honor and thank the veterans. This is the first of several events planned, he said.