With the revival of retro stemware styles and rapid growth in European-inspired beer glasses available, barware is a booming trend.

Often the shape of the glass serves a purpose — to showcase the best qualities of the beverage inside.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

Yet the allure of barware can sometimes just be about beauty. Impractical, but impossible to resist.

Coupe glasses — the round, low bowl-shaped glasses used to serve Champagne or cocktails — are experiencing a revival. Their popularity is linked to the midcentury modern trend.

We are also seeing a lot more trumpet or V-shaped flutes available, and the variety of beer glasses is exploding to satisfy the sophisticated tastes of serious beer connoisseurs.

Cathy Pinkerton, of Nielsen's Exclusive Gifts, said she still owns the Fostoria coupe glasses that she bought in the '60s for $5 a stem.

"At the time, that was a lot of money," Pinkerton said, noting that the glasses were also called sherbet glasses because they are equally useful for a variety of desserts.

"That is what people used back then instead of the flute," Pinkerton said.

But she also has a set from the line of coupe glasses released by Waterford that Nielsen's sells at its two locations, 8138 S. Lewis Ave. and 3515 S. Peoria Ave.

"They have a tall, unique look. They just came out. They're pretty," Pinkerton said.

Glasses with unique finishes — such as romantic etchings or metallic rims and designs — are also popular. So are glasses that have been totally infused with color, making them solid rather than clear, she said.

The varied and unique glassware used at The Vault downtown reflects the restaurant's retro style and the owner, Libby Auld's, slight obsession.

"The Vault has a crisp, clean environment; we wanted to use the glassware to bring a little bit of our personality out ... modern and eclectic," Auld said.

Her glass collection spans the spectrum of color and includes other current trends such as gold rims and etchings.

"I really enjoy collecting them," Auld said. "People joke that I just don't have enough room at home so I have to collect them here at work."

One of Auld's favorite places to find glasses that go with the restaurant's style is Retro Den, 2735 E. 15th St., she said.

"That is where we go when we are in a bind a need something right away," Auld said.

"But when I travel, I stop at all the antique shops on the road. That's where you can find some of the best deals."

The rapid expansion of beer glass choices has paralleled the growth of the craft beer movement, noted Tony Collins, head bartender with the McNellie's Group.

Gone are the days when the trusty pint glass was the only choice when sipping on a cold brew.

When designing the bar at McNellie's South City, they made space for eight or nine different types of beer glasses to keep up with trend, Collins said.

This trend has migrated from countries such as Germany and Belgium where chalices and tulip-shaped glasses are used to showcase Belgian ales and IPAs. Teku glasses, with a broad base and angular design, have become increasing popular, also.

"For a long time, America has really been the land of pint glasses, but with the craft breweries producing more craft beers — and strong beers with 10 percent alcohol especially — it is good to have a smaller pour," Collins said.

He explained that the designs of the glasses also enhance the aroma of the beer.

"It is like a white wine glass that is meant to be paired with chardonnay. Different styles of beer are meant to be served in different glasses," Collins said.

The evolving glassware trends also reflect increasingly sophisticated consumers.

"People are becoming more savvy with their wines, beers and whiskeys," Collins said. "And that means they are becoming more particular."