Actiance has announced a cloud-based, unified platform for the healthcare and pharmaceutical industries.

The new Actiance Platform aims to help organizations deal with new and existing regulatory retention and security and privacy requirements, while reducing the risk and expense of costly e-discovery and compliance activities.

According to the vendor, similar to financial services, the healthcare and pharmaceutical industries are highly regulated and highly litigious. The introduction of new regulations, constant changes to existing protocols, and the rise of collaboration technology have necessitated healthcare and pharmaceutical companies to update their information management strategies.

The data management landscape for the healthcare and pharmaceutical industries is complicated and growing more so every day, according to Actiance.

Regulations, such as the 2009 American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA), the 2013 HIPAA Omnibus Final Rule, the Affordable Care Act (ACA), and the Physician Payment Sunshine Act final rule (42 CFR Parts 402 and 403), govern processes such as Electronic Health Record (EHR) adoption, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) reimbursement, and document retention and management for everything from drug research and development to sales and marketing. Moreover, innovations, such as telemedicine and doctor-patient chat, have led to laws for Protected Health Information (PHI) and Electronically Stored Information (ESI).

Although patient-to-provider communication channels such as Skype and social media have emerged, due to regulatory and legal requirements associated with health-related data, the healthcare industry has been slow to respond. With the challenges of these new channels and rapid increase in health data, existing record retention systems which were originally designed for email capture are insufficient, according to Kailash Ambwani, CEO, Actiance.

Moreover, as new communications channels and networks become available to the healthcare and pharmaceutical industries, records management responsibilities are becoming even more critical to avoid exposure to non-compliance with industry regulations, potential litigation, and an increased threat of security breaches and data leakage.

The Actiance Platform for the healthcare and pharmaceutical industries is targeted at providing a single point of control and security for regulated structured and unstructured content, with context, from a variety of sources, and doing so in real-time. It aims to provide the ability to meet regulatory compliance, data security, retention, and disposition requirements for more than 70 communications channels. It also seeks to enable early case assessment with access to the archive of all relevant communications; and automatic classification and tagging of Title 21 CFR Part 11 records based on custom lexicons, said Actiance.

For more information about the new Actiance Platform, go to www.actiance.com.