Photo

While Jeb Bush was fumbling around with the question of whether he would have authorized the invasion of Iraq, Chris Christie (the governor of New Jersey who is either thinking about running for president or using that idea to pump up his public image and raise money) did not have that problem.

“I don’t think you can honestly say that if we knew then that there was no W.M.D., that the country should have gone to war,” he said on CNN on Tuesday, using the abbreviation for weapons of mass destruction.

Mr. Christie also said: “I think President Bush made the best decision he could at the time, given that his intelligence community was telling him that there was W.M.D. and that there were other threats right there in Iraq.”

He added: “Sometimes real mistakes of national consequence can be made if we don’t have correct intelligence.”

Mr. Christie is right, except it’s not what happened with Iraq. Mr. Christie’s loyal defense of President George W. Bush is based on a completely false premise at the heart of the discussion about Iraq.

According to that premise, President Bush was focusing like a laser beam on protecting the homeland when the intelligence community presented him with information about chemical, biological and nuclear weapons in Iraq that compelled him to take action.

What actually happened is that Mr. Bush, Vice President Dick Cheney and a handful of other neo-cons in the administration decided to attack Iraq for ideological reasons that are still obscure. Needing congressional authorization, the administration cooked up a “national intelligence estimate” that offered a false picture of confidence among the intelligence agencies about dangerous weapons and Saddam Hussein’s ambitions to destroy America.

In fact, there was serious dissent within the intelligence community about that information, which turned out to be wrong. But that dissent, and evidence that contradicted the previously made decision to go to war, were ignored, covered up, papered over — choose your verb.

Mr. Cheney’s team of ideologues actually established their own boutique intelligence operation within the Pentagon to massage analysts’ reports so that they would conform to what the White House wanted them so say.

The National Intelligence Estimate was drawn up because Congress wanted it, when Mr. Bush asked lawmakers to approve an invasion of Iraq. It did not represent either what the intelligence agencies actually believed or what Mr. Bush had been told about Iraq. Mr. Bush did not reluctantly go to war because the nation’s spies showed him powerful reasons to do that. He decided to go to war and then presented a version of the intelligence to justify his decision. As Mr. Christie said, it was a mistake of “national consequence.”