The ABIM has announced several new efforts aimed at including internists and subspecialists in the process of improving Maintenance of Certification assessments, according to a press release.

The board had previously announced significant changes to its MOC program in February 2015 after physicians voiced concerns over the program's efficacy.

As detailed by ABIM, physicians have been able to review an outline of MOC exam content and rate topics by their importance in practice. Based in part on these ratings, the board updated the fall 2015 outline. They have now opened the review process to subspecialists.

Richard J. Baron

“Internists and subspecialists will have a hand in shaping the content of MOC assessments so they better reflect what physicians need to know to provide the best care for their patients,” Richard J. Baron, MD, president and CEO of ABIM, said in the release. “Moving forward, ABIM will continue to invite physicians to review assessment content, and, through their timely and representative responses, we will be able to create an even more meaningful credential that is a source of pride for those staying current in medical knowledge and practice.”

Internists certified by ABIM also participated in the process for establishing the minimum passing score for the ABIM fall 2015 Internal Medicine MOC exam, according to the board.

“It was incredibly valuable to hear perspectives from physicians who participated in the standard setting process for the fall 2015 Internal Medicine MOC exam,” Nick Fitterman, MD, chair of the ABIM Internal Medicine Exam Committee, said in the release. “This enhanced process is quite reliable and representative, and we heard from several participants that they appreciated the opportunity to learn more about the exam. More physicians will be invited to participate in standard setting as other subspecialty MOC assessments are updated.”

ABIM also worked with internists to implement an electronic score reporting system that is user-friendly and allows physicians to receive descriptions of exam performance.

The board acknowledged that it is open to continued collaborations with the internal medicine community to advance its MOC program, acknowledging that "its 10-year MOC exams are still in place and produce reliable, valid results."