Celebrity Hot News

Wonder Woman Movie 2013: Olga Kurylenko Hints Playing Sexy Superhero? Fans Debate Over ‘Oblivion’ Actress, Jaimie Alexander vs. Gina Carano, 2014 Film Announcement Soon

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Reuters/Toru Hanai) Cast member Olga Kurylenko makes appearance before fans at the Japan premiere of her movie "Oblivion" in Tokyo May 8, 2013. The movie will be released to the public in Japan from May 31, 2013.

It looks like a Wonder Woman movie could really be happening in the future as new rumors suggest that an actress is already being looked at for the sexy role.



According to Moviepilot.com, Schmoes Know's source "The Phantom" revealed that Ukranian beauty Olga Kurylenko is testing for the Wonder Woman role.



"Again, this same source has been proven right on various scoops over the past month, so while it's always smart to take rumors with a grain of salt, there may be more a more legit rumor than normal," the report said.



The website said that Kurylenko is not just a pretty face: she knows how to act in an action scene. She is a former Bond girl and was an "equal match to Daniel Craig in Quantam of Solace, held her own again opposite Tom Cruise in this year's Oblivion, and will be seen as the tough-as-nails Headmistress Kirova in the upcoming Vampire Academy: Blood Sisters."



One commenter said, "She better hit that gym. Diana has some muscle." Another said, "She is a descent and beautiful actress. I think she might be able to pull it off."



While she seems like a great casting choice for Wonder Woman, fans seem to be divided with Kurylenko. DC fans are still screaming out their favorite choices such as Jaimie Alexander and Gina Carano. Here's what other fans had to say:



"She's pretty but doesn't have the build for wonder women."



"She fits the profile of what Diana looks like, but I would still have to question her ability to pull off the action. I'm watching 'Centurion' now for the first time to check her out. She's exotically attractive and can act, but does she have the action chops?"



"Jamie Alexander, she's looks perfect for the part, face wise, and with a bit of muscle on her body wise as well, she did drop a hint that she as talked to DC for something."



"Jamie Alexander would be perfect for the role with a bit more build, she is even good without building more muscle though it would be nice."



"Have Gina Carano go through some real intense acting classes....and we have our Wonder Woman she already has the body and the agility just needs to know how to act..."



"Gina Carano has the dramatic chops and the build for the part."



Do you think Olga Kurylenko has what it takes to play Wonder Woman? Sound off below!



Check out the latest Wonder Woman news HERE.



SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.