Liz Swaine Columnist

In 2010, a completely new concept opened in downtown Shreveport called Cohab. It was a place dedicated to getting aspiring business owners out of their pajamas and away from their home computers and into a professional office setting with lots of networking and educational opportunities.

The whole co-working idea was new to Shreveport/Bossier City, and Cohab was in an unenviable position of having to explain what they were before they could interest people in what they did. The bulk of the explaining fell to John Grindley, Cohab’s first – and to date – only executive director.

For those of you who do not know John, you need to. John is as close to lightning in a bottle that you would ever want to be around. He fairly crackles with intensity and when he talks about Cohab, the depth of his belief in the power of entrepreneurism to change both the economy and society as a whole is apparent. John’s co-working career was a life change from anything he had ever done. John grew up in Bossier City, went to college at University of Louisiana at Monroe, and armed with a degree in mass communications, became a production assistant for David Letterman on The Late Show. He left the intensity of the Big Apple for the West Coast and a career in music videos and commercial production in Los Angeles. In 2005, John was called back to Shreveport to work with an organization planning downtown’s newest venue, a small, independent art house theater that would come to be known as Robinson Film Center.

It was during his time at RFC that John came to know the mountains that civic support and vision could move. This knowledge would serve him well as he transitioned to another challenge – bringing a shared workspace to downtown to fuel the rise of the creative class that all regions need to survive and thrive. As John gathered partners and talked up the idea, Cohab’s pieces began to fall into place. An impressive board of directors was assembled, funding was pledged on both sides of the river, a building was located; desks went in.

John and his dad built movable walls on the cheap to save money and those walls became part of Cohab’s signature thrifty style that though short on expensive furnishings was long on free coffee and creative partnerships. Magic started happening relatively quickly. The entrepreneurial aspirants who inhabited shared desks and traded newly-minted business cards became real business owners that grew, expanded and moved out of Cohab, part of the original plan.

Twin Engine Labs graduated, Mollie Corbett Photography, iArchitecture, Red River Brewing Company and others found their mojo with the help of Cohab. It was validation of the co-working concept, which over time, had morphed to add programs to help startup companies figure out their products and market, and prevent costly mistakes that could lead to early failure.

For seven years, John was there as a mentor, friend, collaborator, traffic cop, fundraiser and chief explainer — a wearer of many hats. Through his tenure, he has continued to believe that entrepreneurship is a precious commodity that should continue to be fostered.

“I believe that through entrepreneurship we can change lives,” John told me. “We can solve social and economic issues, and continue to change the landscape of North Louisiana.”

A couple of weeks ago, John alerted the Cohab board that a wonderful job opportunity had come his way and told them it was the appropriate time to launch another life adventure. Board members were uniformly happy and proud of John, proud of Cohab, proud of what will be.

We are pleased that John is staying in the region, will continue to care – forcefully – about Cohab, and will never stop working to encourage small startups. Meanwhile, the board will work with the great staff he helped assemble to move Cohab to the next exciting phase. We encourage you to be a part of it.

Liz Swain is executive director of Shreveport’s Downtown Development Authority.

Read or Share this story: http://www.shreveporttimes.com/story/opinion/2016/04/08/life-change-thank-john-grindley/82806988/