Buy Photo UW-Oshkosh Nursing student Stephanie Bennett takes a pulse while Miranda Burt checks the heart and lungs of “Red” their dummy patient during a simulated diagnosis of a patient. The Elmer Leach Learning Lab is located in the basement of the Nursing Education building on the UW-Oshkosh campus. (Photo: Joe Sienkiewicz/Oshkosh Northwestern Media)Buy Photo

When it comes to training workers in the health care industry, the University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh is one of the go-to places in northeast Wisconsin.

For Leslie Neal-Boylan, dean of the university's College of Nursing, giving students the skills employers need is about much more than teaching them how to care for patients. Equally important are so-called "soft skills," such as critical thinking and communicating effectively.

"You can teach anybody to put in a catheter, but it's about teaching them to know when that should happen," Neal-Boylan said. "They now not only need to know that but also have to know how to deal with all sorts of technology. We have to prepare a nurse to work in any number of settings."

An increasing number of employers need workers who understand how the business side of health care works, including the financial implications of programs such as the Affordable Care Act, Neal-Boylan said. The college also works with local healthcare providers through its Board of Visitors to help adjust its curriculum to better prepare students.

"That give and take is really helpful because we can directly integrate their needs (into the curriculum)," she said.

Another way the university works with local providers is through the Fox Valley Healthcare Alliance to ensure the same level of standards for care.

"We all work together; it's not working a vacuum in the College of Nursing," Neal-Boylan said.

Local providers say they, too, enjoy the close working relationship with UWO and other educational institutions, such as Fox Valley Technical College, which offers a medical assistant program.

In fact, many often hire students for part-time positions who are certified nursing assistants but are continuing their education. Eventually, employers end up hiring many students full-time once they earn their baccalaureate degree, said Becky Inniger, a recruiter for Aurora Health Care in Oshkosh.

Local healthcare providers also participate in mock interview and other opportunities for students to learn more about the industry, Inniger said.

Neal-Boylan said UW-Oshkosh is the largest producer of baccalaureate-prepared registered nurses in Wisconsin. It has also earned the distinction of having the highest board pass rates, and also offers an accelerated, 12-month baccalaureate degree program online, two master's degrees — nursing educator and clinical nurse leader — and even a doctorate of nursing practice.

"In talking to people (in the industry), we find that they want our students and want our grads more than anything else," she said. "We do develop relationships, and it's not just in a bed in a hospital."

Read or Share this story: http://oshko.sh/1GN3I4F