An apparent disagreement among Republicans led a Senate panel Monday to reject the party’s own push to create a presidential primary in 2016.

The surprising move, in the final three days of the Colorado legislative session, left a cloud of confusion and hurts the state’s ability to draw a bigger spotlight in the much-watched contest for the White House.

Sen. Jesse Ulibarri, one of the Democratic sponsors, said he had “no clue” what happened. “This is one of those where I walked away scratching my head,” the Westminster lawmaker said.

Under the bill, Colorado would have held a presidential primary in March that ran parallel with the state’s complicated caucus system. In doing so, it would have allowed unaffiliated voters to play a larger role in selecting the party’s nominees for president and attracted more national political attention. Colorado is considered one of the seven true swing states for the 2016 election.

In addition to both major parties, the bill drew support from prominent Democrats and Republicans, including Senate President Bill Cadman, R-Colorado Springs. But when it came before the Senate Appropriations Committee, four Republicans voted to kill the bill with three Democrats supporting it.

Committee Chairman Kevin Grantham, R-Canon City, sponsored the bill but voted against it, saying “everybody who claimed to be in support of the bill were not in support of the bill.”

In particular, he said GOP Chairman Steve House retracted his initial support.

“We got an indication from the Republican chair this morning that he wasn’t (in support),” Grantham said. “Until they can all get all their ducks in the row, we are not going to do anything major like this at the 11th hour of session.”

But a Republican Party spokesman said House did not revoke his support.

Just before the bill’s introduction, the chairman voiced support saying it would “give this critical swing state more attention during the primaries, and it will make it easier for voters to get involved in the nomination process.”

The bill’s price tag did create questions. The cost to the state was estimated at $1.7 million — with the cost at the county level ranging between $4 million and $5 million, according to a legislative analysis.

The committee amended the bill to cover the $1.7 million cost from the general fund, or the discretionary pot of taxpayer dollars, rather than force the Secretary of State to raise fees on businesses and charities to pay for it.

But a more powerful undercurrent came in opposition from conservatives in the party, who believed a primary election would lead to more mainstream Republican candidates with the involvement of unaffiliated voters.

Also, a group called Save the Caucus, led by John Wren, pushed lawmakers to oppose the bill because it hurt the current process.

Colorado Democratic Party Chairman Rick Palacio responded to the news with frustration. “It’s disappointing, but not surprising, that Republicans would choose to limit the role of Colorado voters instead of expanding the electorate and the voice of Colorado in choosing future Presidents,” he said in a statement.