SPONSORED POST

RENO, Nev. (Feb. 11, 2016) – Community Health Alliance is pleased to announce the opening of the Center for Complex Care, a health center devoted to patients with chronic care conditions and mental illness. To celebrate this occasion, Community Health Alliance will hold their Grand Opening event on Wednesday, February 17, 2016 from 11:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. at the Center for Complex Care, 330 Crampton Street, Reno, NV 89502. City Councilmember Oscar Delgado will be taking part in the grand opening and will be discussing the shared stake in community health.

The Center for Complex Care (CCC) provides innovative and integrated health care, which emphasizes collaboration between multiple health care providers including primary health care and behavioral health care. The team starts with the patient and includes: a primary care physician, behavioral health care professional, care coordinator, an adult nurse practitioner, psychiatric nurse specialist, medical assistants and clinical pharmacist. A traditional care team would consist of only the provider and the medical assistant. In doing so, CCC provides patients with the services and support they need to improve their quality of life and achieve physical, social and emotional well-being.

“We found that individuals with chronic conditions weren’t getting the care they needed to properly manage their conditions, so we transformed our health care system to align with our patients’ needs,” said Charles Duarte, Chief Executive Officer, Community Health Alliance. “It has been amazing to witness the success of our patients within the last five months. After all, our success is truly evaluated by our patients’ growth.”

The CCC offers patients a variety of services to improve symptoms of chronic care conditions and guide patients to a better, healthier life. Following a personal, team-based approach to chronic care management, each patient works with their care team to develop a personalized care plan. A personal care plan, allows patients to self-identify and overcome barriers to health care like overeating, substance abuse or lack of sleep.

“Our goal is to help our patients reach their health care goals and live a better healthier life,” said Jason Crawford, MD, MPH, Chief Medical Officer, Community Health Alliance. “This team approach to medicine allows us to provide all of the necessary services in one appointment, which is more convenient for the patient. We offer physical, social and behavioral health in one setting under one roof…you cannot find that anywhere else in Reno when it comes to a Patient-Centered Medical Home (PCMH).”

Advertisement

Since the soft opening in September 2015, the Center for Complex Care has served 500 patients with nearly 1,500 patient visits. More information about the Center for Complex Care and other Community Health Alliance health centers available at chanevada.org.

About Community Health Alliance

CHA is a non-profit federally qualified health center formed in July 2012 through the merger of Health Access Washoe County (HAWC) and Saint Mary’s Mission Outreach programs. CHA is the largest provider of primary medical and dental services to low-income patients in northern Nevada, and serves many patients without insurance. CHA operates six (soon to be seven) health centers in Washoe County, as well as mobile preventive and restorative dental programs, Women, Infants and Children (WIC) nutrition program, hospital dental services and charity dental programs for children and veterans. Last year, CHA served nearly 30,000 patients and clients with more than 120,000 patient visits. For more information, visit www.chanevada.org.

SPONSORED POST

Advertisement