Shooting Threat at Whitman High School; Bethesda Film Fest; Water Main Break Road Repairs

News, announcements and other helpful links for Thursday morning

By Aaron Kraut

Rockville Pike water main break lane closures continue until 8 a.m.

WSSC had to do more road repairs on southbound lanes of Rockville Pike than expected following Tuesday's water main break. All southbound lanes should be reopened by 8 a.m. Thursday. [WSSC/Twitter]

‘Anonymous threat’ brings large police presence to Walt Whitman High School

Principal Alan Goodwin sent a message to members of the school community saying the large police presence Wednesday morning was because of an anonymous threat made via social media. [Walt Whitman High School]

The school’s student newspaper reported whoever made the threat talked about a school shooting. The school day went on as usual after administrators and police determined there was no imminent threat. [The Black & White]

Call for Entries for 4th annual Bethesda Film Fest

The documentary film festival set for March 2016 is looking for films by its Jan. 8, 2016 deadline. [Bethesda Urban Partnership]

Backers of pesticide ban urge County Executive Ike Leggett to sign bill

Leggett has concerns about the bill the County Council passed last week, though it would become a law even without his signature. [Safe Grow Montgomery]

Rockville will install solar canopy at city maintenance facility

The City of Rockville will put a canopy of solar panels over the employee parking lot at its main maintenance facility, providing shade to vehicles and generating about 26 percent of the facility’s electricity needs. [City of Rockville]

Road closure Sunday in Chevy Chase

Park Police will close a stretch of Beach Drive from East West Highway to the D.C. line Sunday for a running event, limiting access to Meadowbrook Local Park. [Montgomery Parks]

Woman pleads guilty to stealing checks sent to Rockville rehabilitation center

Jennifer Xanten, 51, of Frederick pleaded guilty Wednesday to stealing more than 500 checks worth about $426,000 meant as payments to the Rockville rehab facility where she worked. [FBI]

‘Cadillac Tax’ could cost county $22 million by 2022

The tax set to start in 2018 as part of the Affordable Care Act could cost Montgomery County when it comes to its employee healthcare plans. [Montgomery County Council]

Sunny Thursday expected

The high temperature will reach near 68 degrees. [National Weather Service]

In case you missed it…

How 18 local neighborhoods got their names

Bethesda’s Barrel and Crow gets some love on list of top area restaurants

Police blotter