Art by Mike Lucas

Health-care startups, are looking to continue the strong pace of initial public offerings that set a record in 2014, Brian Gormley reports in Dow Jones VentureWire. Zosano Pharma went public Tuesday amid a rush by privately held medical companies to capitalize on a historic run of health-care IPOs. Venture capitalists took a record 58 biotechnology companies public in 2014, up from 35 in 2013, according to Dow Jones VentureSource. With interest in life sciences offerings running high, some venture-backed medical-device and diagnostics businesses are also staging IPOs. About a dozen more venture-backed health-care companies have advanced IPO plans this month.

ALSO IN TODAY’S VENTUREWIRE (subscription required):

UserTesting and ClickTale have raised a combined $80 million for different approaches to learning how customers experience technology. UserTesting.com raised $45.5 million in a Series C round led by Accel Partners for software that aims to replace expensive consultants and focus groups by letting selected panels of users record their thoughts as they use a website or react to a product. ClickTale raised $35 million led by KKR, with Amadeus Capital Partners, Viola Credit and other current investors participating.

Advance Health, a company with mobile technology for health assessments and a team of nurse practitioners who provide care, has raised $40 million in growth equity, the company said. The funding was led by Summit Partners, joined by Noro-Moseley Partners.

Final has scored $1 million in seed financing for a credit card that promises better protection for consumers. Investors include Ludlow Ventures, T5 Capital Partners, Y Combinator and several individual investors.

Pluralsight, an online training company, said it bought Code School for $36 million. The acquisition is the Salt Lake City company’s sixth in the past 18 months.

(VentureWire is a daily newsletter with comprehensive analysis of all the investments, deals and personnel moves involving start-ups and their venture backers. For a two-week trial, click here.)

ELSEWHERE AROUND THE WEB:

Funding Flows to Food Delivery Services. The Shanghai-based food delivery service Ele.me raised $350 million from investors that include Tencent Holdings, e-commerce company JD.com, restaurant review and group buying site Dianping, as well as Citic Private Equity and Sequoia Capital, the WSJ’s Juro Osawa reports. Large Internet companies in China, including Alibaba Group Holding and Baidu, are funding food delivery startups that could broaden their platforms and services.

FTC Recommends Limiting Data Collection From the Internet of Things. The Federal Trade Commission on Tuesday issued a report that recommends steps that businesses can take to protect consumers’ privacy when gathering data from Internet-collected devices, the WSJ’s Elizabeth Dwoskin reports. One recommendation is that companies build security into the devices from the outset rather than as an afterthought.

Pinterest Puts Ads in Users’ Feeds. The photo-bookmarking site Pinterest has added advertising to users’ home feed, the WSJ’s Yoree Koh reports. The site rolled out ads earlier this month, but they had been limited to search results and categories. Now the ads are pooping up on the page that displays the images collected by the users.

Bitcoin Miner Defaults After Data Center Cuts Access. A Utah data center has denied CoinTerra access to a facility in which it ran an industrial-size operation earning payouts in the digital currency, the WSJ’s Michael J. Casey reports. The startup Cointerra is accused of not paying for electricity and rent. The company has countersued the C7 Data Centers, saying the action has caused CoinTerra to default on $4.15 million promissory note and on payments to its “cloud mining” customers.

P2P Lender Prosper Buying Medical Loan Provider. Peer-to-peer lender Prosper Funding, one of the largest online marketplace for matching borrowers and lenders, is acquiring American Healthcare Lending, which makes software for doctors and hospitals to offer loans for medical procedures, for $21 million, the WSJ’s Telis Demos reports. The cash-and-stock deal will add another way for Prosper to get borrowers onto its platform, which slices up loans from borrowers and sell them to investors.

Lyft Looks to Grow in the U.S., Not Abroad. In the car-hailing battle between Uber and Lyft, the former has raised more funding and expanded internationally. But Lyft says it is gaining market share on Uber, the Los Angeles Times reports. The San Francisco-based company said it is launching a new marketing plan next week, which comes shortly after the company ditched its furry pink mustaches drivers attached to their cars for sleeker pink mustache lights that sit on the dashboard.

The Highs and Lows of Marijuana Startups. Entrepreneurs in one of the fastest-growing industries are in San Francisco this week to pitch investors, the WSJ’s Jeff Elder reports. Some see Peter Thiel‘s Founder Fund‘s investment of a holding company of several marijuana-related businesses as legitimizing the cannabis markets. But there is also the Apple Inc. app store refusing to allow apps that are related to marijuana.

Slack Founder Shares Company’s Launch Strategy. The two-year-old startup Slack is already valued at $1.1 billion, and its founder is sharing the company’s launch strategy. On First Round Capital‘s blog, Stewart Butterfield talks about the company’s first days and its growth.

Write to Mike Billings at mike.billings@wsj.com. Follow him on Twitter at @mbillings