Orange County residents in need of a free medical exam, dental cleaning or a new pair of glasses can visit the Anaheim Convention Center starting Friday for a three-day health clinic expected to draw thousands.



Anaheim’s ninth annual Free Health Fair is teaming up for the first time with Remote Area Medical, the Tennessee-based nonprofit that most recently treated earthquake survivors in Nepal.



Orange County is a far cry from the developing nation where the group brought its 762nd mobile clinic, but RAM founder Stan Brock said many working Americans are in desperate need of dental and vision care, which are not covered benefits for adults by Obamacare.



“There are a lot of people that do have a job but they’re not able to stay ahead of their financial situation and they cut back on things like the dentist or the eye doctor,” Brock said. “We hear that all the time, ‘I’ve got medical coverage at my job but it doesn’t cover dental and vision.’”



Brock said the clinic will draw as many as 1,200 people per day on a first-come first-served basis. He said more medical volunteers, particularly dentists, opthalmalogists and optometrists are needed.



“Very, very few will actually come with a preference to see the medical doctor even though throughout the U.S. all the people that come to these events have far reaching medical problems: diabetes, hypertension, women’s health,” Brock said.



Brock said because people can go years without dental care, tooth extractions are typically double the number of cavity fillings provided.



Dr. Nitin Shah, an anesthesiologist and emergency medicine specialist, who is coordinating fellow medical volunteers this weekend, said he’s excited to have the expertise of RAM, which sent equipment and personnel from Tennessee.



“We should be able to see a lot more patients because we have advertised about dental and eye care,” Shah said. “We just want to invite people to come and take advantage.”



The fair takes place Friday, Saturday and Sunday, with doors opening at 7 a.m. and medical services provided from 8 a.m.-2 p.m. All services are free and include: dental cleanings, extractions and fillings; eye exams and eyeglasses; physical exams, cholesterol checks (eight-hour fast required); diabetes testing; mammograms and Pap smears; and chiropractic and acupuncture services.



The fair will take place in Hall E of the Anaheim Convention Center at 800 W. Katella Ave. Free parking will be available in the Car Park 4 structure at the West Street and Transit Plaza entrance. Medical professionals who want to volunteer must bring a copy of their California board license. Information: 714-765-5191.



Contact the writer: cperkes@ocregister.com 714-796-3686