GOLDEN — A presentation by noted ice climber Will Mayo was the main attraction at an American Mountaineering Center event last week that celebrated the annual Ouray Ice Festival, but legendary alpinist Jeff Lowe stole the show.

Before Mayo took the stage, Lowe addressed the crowd from his wheelchair, typing remarks on an iPad that converted his words into sound. Lowe was joined by his partner, Connie Self, who told the crowd the movie about his life will have its world premiere Nov. 2 at the Banff Mountain Film Festival.

” Jeff Lowe’s Metanoia” chronicles his climbing achievements and his battle with a motor-neuron disease similar to ALS that is slowly killing him. A highlight video mesmerized the crowd, and when Mayo took the stage he addressed Lowe directly.

“It’s so hard, in a way, to see you this way,” Mayo said. “And yet the manner in which you are dealing with it is so inspiring. It’s inspiring to see you deal with a situation with such grace. We’re all terminally ill, we’re all not long for this world. It’s just a matter of what we do with what we’ve got in the meantime.”

Some would say it’s a miracle Lowe is still alive.

Lowe’s prognosis was grim last May. Lowe and Self were hoping he would live long enough to attend a June 24 tribute in his honor in Boulder, but prospects weren’t good.

“He was dire,” said Self, who speaks for Lowe because the disease has impaired Lowe’s ability to speak. “May was very challenging. He signed a ‘do not resuscitate’ order. … He looked awful. The doctor said, ‘He won’t make it until June 24. Three weeks, max.’ “

Remarkable turnaroundBut Lowe has made a remarkable turnaround since coming to realize the high levels of pure oxygen he was inhaling on a respirator — as much as 18 liters per minute — were causing some of his problems. The percentage of oxygen in the air our bodies were designed to breathe is about 21 percent. Pure oxygen can be toxic, especially at such high levels. Sensing that was part of his problem, Lowe weaned himself from pure oxygen to the point where he doesn’t use any during the day and uses only 1 to 2 liters per minute at night.

“People ask him, ‘How did you do that?’ He said, ‘It’s a spiritual solution to a physical problem,’ ” Self said.

The distended belly and puffy face that Lowe exhibited in May are gone. He has been able to cut back on his medications. Having had five frightening bouts of pneumonia between January and May, he hasn’t had one since he cut back the oxygen.

Lowe’s home hospice care- givers were asked to provide a medical explanation for this story but they declined, citing policy.

“The doctor did say, ‘Oh, yes, supplemental oxygen is toxic,’ because we don’t breathe pure oxygen,” Self said. “When you start to get really high levels of oxygen, all your blood gases get really screwed up. But no one tells you that, because they had never had anybody on those high levels.”

In May, Lowe and Self were planning for his death, but now they are planning a future. He looks forward to attending the premiere of his film next month in Canada. A few days later they will travel to England for a film festival there.

The disease still is killing him slowly, but they believe addressing the oxygen issue has extended his life expectancy.

“I will still probably die of aspiration-caused pneumonia,” Lowe said. “I can go along breathing well, then I might aspirate on something, develop pneumonia and be gone in a week. I’m very happy to see the film being finished, to be able to influence the film right up until the end, and to be able to go to the premiere. It’s kind of like that old Mark Twain quote: Rumors of my death are highly exaggerated.”

“Wonderful, inspiring”

Through his iPad, Lowe spoke to the crowd at the mountaineering center.

“I can’t tell you how happy I am to be here to be able to see what one of my young heroes, Will Mayo, has to share with us,” Lowe said, “but also to be able to announce that our film, ‘Jeff Lowe’s Metanoia,’ is finally done. Better yet, I think there’s a very good chance that I will actually be able to attend one more time my favorite climbing festival, the 2015 Ouray Ice Festival. Please join me in support of this incredible climbing resource. I hope to see you in just a few months.”

After showing highlights, Self summarized what the film was about for the crowd.

“Climbing was Jeff’s medium, but really the story is about life and what you make of it and how you deal with it,” Self said. “It’s a really wonderful, inspiring human-interest story. We’re super psyched that Jeff is still here. It’s just Jeff continuing to do what people say is not possible. That’s who Jeff is, that’s what he does.”

John Meyer: 303-954-1616, jmeyer@denverpost.com or twitter.com/johnmeyer