Millions of salaried workers will be eligible for overtime pay at the end of the year.

The Obama Administration's new regulation will raise the salary threshold at which companies can deny overtime pay.

However, because this legislation is new, a lot of business don't understand it.

Payroll Management President Christopher Hedges says there are three major components to this new regulation.

First, the salary threshold has been raised to nearly $47,000 a year.

That's double the nearly $23,000 a year threshold that was put into place about 12 years ago.

This means that if your salary is less than $47,000 and you work more than 40 hours a week, you are required to get overtime pay.

Secondly, this threshold will be evaluated and adjusted every three years. This means it could keep going up.

Lastly, the overtime pay regulation goes into effect December 1, 2016.

One local business with salaried employees says it's not going to be an easy change.

“We're going to have to do some forecasting,” says Firefli President Greg Brock. “One of the the things that's most challenging is that we didn't budget for it. So as we get ready to inch towards December we now have to figure out this whole new game that we haven't even anticipated yet.”

Hedges says there won’t be any way for businesses to get around the new legislation.

“One way or the other you're going to either pay somebody an hourly rate or you're going to have to fall into the guidelines with the new legislation,” says Hedge.

Hedges says you could see some salaries change to hourly rates.

He says Businesses are going to have to really examine the roles of their salaried employees using a duties test.

This test will determine whether or not a salaried employee is exempt from overtime.

If an employee is making more than the nearly $47,000 threshold and meets the requirements from the duties test are exempt from overtime.

On the other hand, if you make more than the threshold but don't meet the requirements of the duties test by law, according to the department of labor, your employer must give you overtime pay.

Jobs that typically pass the duties test are administrative or managerial position.

WDBJ7 reached out to Representative Bob Goodlatte about the new regulation. He’s opposed to the legislation:

“Folks in the Roanoke Valley want the opportunity to work hard, provide for their family, and earn the chance for a brighter future. The Administration’s recent overtime rule slams the door on those opportunities, forcing American businesses to choose between creating new jobs and complying with new bureaucratic rules from Washington, D.C. For those companies who can least afford to comply with this new rule – non-profits, colleges and universities, start-ups, small businesses – forcing them to make such drastic changes in the basic structures of their business plans will mean job cuts, reduced hours, and fewer opportunities for the future. For Virginians already working less because of the negative effects of Obamacare, this new overtime rule is another threat to job security and a bright future for millions of Americans. The House is prepared to look at all options available to stop this rule, and will work toward bipartisan solutions that will help grow the economy and create private sector jobs.”