The government agency that aims to regulate the Internet can't even manage traffic from an increasingly vocal digital public, potentially damaging its ability to make informed decisions on business deals and policies that affect America's tech industry.

The Federal Communications Commission is caught in a fierce partisan debate about its proposed rules that aim to ensure equal Internet speeds for all websites, but the potential loss of 1 million public comments in the latest round of feedback on the issue shows the commission’s networks need an upgrade.

In the months since the FCC announced its proposed net neutrality rules, the commission has said Americans filed more than 3.5 million public comments about the best way to preserve competition online. Some of those comments appear to be missing, however, as the Sunlight Foundation think tank wrote "there's a difference of 1,124,656 [public comments] between what the FCC is reporting and what we counted in the files the agency provided."

The FCC declined to comment for this article. Recent blog posts from agency officials recognize its computer systems are “antiquated,” however, meaning approximately 1 million recent comments may have been lost in its electronic filing system.

[READ: FCC Net Neutrality Comments Stem Largely From One Source]

Courtesy Sunlight Foundation

The commission was one of the first agencies to adopt electronic filing systems, but that system responsible for managing public comments is in need of an upgrade. The agency’s website has undergone changes in recent years but the back end of that filing system responsible for making documents and public comments available to the public has not, potentially damaging the agency's transparency and ability for Americans to inform decisions about key issues. The commission is testing new designs for its public online content, and its engineers hope to complete that phase by the end of January, the FCC’s Chief Information Officer David Bray wrote in a blog post.

A lack of federal funding makes it difficult for the agency to upgrade its systems, FCC Chairman Tom Wheeler said in a separate blog post in July.

“The FCC has been forced by budget restrictions to operate with an IT infrastructure that would be unacceptable to any well-managed business,” Wheeler said. “Efforts to upgrade this IT capability were a casualty of sequestration.”

The outdated FCC systems crashed under the strain of processing millions of public comments this summer, and the gap noted by the Sunlight Foundation shows they may have once again failed to process all of the public submissions.

[ALSO: FCC Delays Net Neutrality Rules Until 2015]

While noting a gap in the amount of reported comments, the Sunlight Foundation analyzed that 60 percent of public responses in the latest round were anti-net neutrality comments, a dramatic shift from the 1 percent of comments filed by opponents of the policy in the first round of public feedback. This shift was due largely to one form-letter campaign spearheaded by the anti-big government group American Commitment, according to the Sunlight Foundation.

This study has stoked criticism from supporters of net neutrality policies, as Fight for the Future advocacy group claims the FCC excluded comments that called for the commission to pass rules supporting equal online traffic speeds. Republicans including House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, and Internet service providers like Comcast oppose net neutrality, criticizing it as move that would expand the power of regulators and may confuse potential investors in telecom companies.

The debate became more heated in November when President Barack Obama called for the FCC to pass net neutrality rules that invoke the legal authority it claims over phone companies, echoing the wishes of numerous Democratic senators including Sens. Ron Wyden, D-Ore., Cory Booker, D-N.J., and Elizabeth Warren, D- Mass.

By invoking this power known as Title II of the Communications Act senators have said this would allow the FCC to pass rules mandating companies to treat all online traffic equally, while using legal authority that could withstand a lawsuit. Any net neutrality rules will likely face a court challenge, Wheeler said during an open commission meeting in November.