Privacy and civil rights advocates were inflamed this week, as news out of China reveals new plans that involve sweeping citizen’s social media, financial and personal data to rate their civic participation within the country.

Reports have named giants such as Alibaba, a group that focuses mostly on finance, and Tencent, a large internet provider, as the agents collecting this data. A veritable laundry list of reforms from the ACLU pointed to some incredibly disturbing new measures.

According to their sources, credit scores would be rated 350 and 950, and would take into account both financial and personal data. This includes who your friends are and the sort of information you post online. Posting things that have a negative connotation in China, like information on Tiananmen Square, would lower your citizen score. However, even more disturbing are the allegations that if your friends or family post about these controversial topics, it will also lower your score. This, advocates say, helps isolate political dissidents.

This report is given heft by a document leaked last year, which details plans by the Chinese government to collect citizen data in order to rate them.

They call it a social credit rating and say it will, “Strengthen sincerity in government affairs, commercial sincerity, social sincerity and judicial credibility construction…establish and complete a social credit system, commend sincerity and punish insincerity.”

It’s worth noting there is a distinct lack of specifics within the document as to what this social credit actually is. Although it throws out issues such as transportation, medical care, social aid, money lending and civil service, it never actually specifies how that will be framed within data collection and what it will mean for Chinese citizens. In fact, the only particularly specific part of the document is the time frame, which puts implementation at 2020.

Some have speculated that these new credit rating systems by Alibaba and Tencent are the ‘training wheels’ for the government’s program. Yet there have also been articles written admonishing the western media for running wild with speculation. Tech In Asia says that, “The ACLU seems to have been confused about a few things…Alibaba’s Sesame Credit scoring system, Tencent’s credit scoring system, and the mandatory government one (which isn’t mandatory until 2020) are not the same things. They are three different things that many articles in the Western press are treating as if they were the same.”

According to the article, Alibaba is mostly working within the financial sector, mirroring western style credit ratings. However it is Tencent which is using data taken from social media to create the credit rating.

This is backed up by China Daily, who says that Tencent is analyzing the “quality” of people’s social networking and pairing that together with their financial obligations. They then sell this information to financial institutions. Daniel Wu, the general manager of Tencent says that this is being done to help those without credit scores achieve loans and build their financial future.

Wu told China Daily that, “About 800 million people in China have demands for various kinds of financial services, but the current credit system can only cover 300 million people. We can help meet the demand of the other 500 million by analyzing the massive amount of data generated from all kinds of footprints they leave online.”

Yet for many privacy advocates, this explanation is not good enough. Using people’s social media data to determine their ‘worth’ is a scary prospect. And while most people no longer expect privacy while posting on public forums, it is not yet known if private messages will factor into these ratings. How that will change the way people live their lives, and who they socialize with, both online and in private, could have massive and long lasting implications for the citizens of China.