After holiday celebrations are over, students who plan to attend college next fall should begin preparing for a looming financial chore: completing the document that is crucial for financial aid.

Known as FAFSA, which is short for Free Application for Federal Student Aid, the form is used to calculate how much students and their families are expected to contribute to the cost of attending college, and what sort of financial aid they will receive.

“The FAFSA,” said Lauren Asher, president of the Institute for College Access & Success, “is the gateway to government aid and federal loans.”

The form for the 2016-17 school year became available online Friday, and filling it out as soon as possible helps families maximize the odds of qualifying for grants, scholarships and federal loans. Students seeking financial aid must file the form each year.

Applying early is important because some states have early grant deadlines, and some distribute aid on a first-come, first-served basis, Asher said. So waiting may mean students will miss out.

Although filing the form in early January is ideal, not all families are ready to do so. The form requires filers to use information from their federal income tax return from the calendar year that just ended — so January filers would use information from 2015. But most people will not receive their W-2 forms and other information necessary to file a 2015 tax return until later in January, at the earliest.

This is the last year filers will face this situation. The form for the 2017-18 academic year can be filed as early as Oct. 1 and will rely on income tax information from the previous tax year (or, in financial aid lingo, “prior-prior” year tax information). So in 2016, students will file two FAFSAs — each using 2015 tax information.

In the meantime, families who want to file in early January, before they have filed their 2015 income tax return, can complete the FAFSA with estimated financial data. That will get their application in the system, and they can update it, if needed, when they actually file their return, “without losing your place in line,” said Martha Holler, a spokeswoman for Sallie Mae.

Filing estimated financial information and updating it later may raise the chances of your application being flagged for verification, Asher said. That means you may be required to submit extra documents before your financial aid package is completed. But estimating is the best option, she said, if you might risk missing an early state deadline by waiting.

Here are some questions and answers about filing the FAFSA:

Do I have to file the FAFSA online?

It is not required, but most filers do, and there are benefits to doing so, Asher said. If you have already filed your income taxes, for instance, you can use the Internal Revenue Service’s Data Retrieval Tool to automatically transfer tax data into your FAFSA form.

Do I need a PIN to fill out the FAFSA online?

In May, the rules changed so that instead of a PIN, FAFSA filers must use a Federal Student Aid ID, which consists of a user-created username and password. The ID can be used to get access to financial aid information online and electronically sign the FAFSA. Information about setting up the ID is available on the federal Education Department’s website.

Is there a fee for filling out the FAFSA?

No. Student aid experts emphasize that the “F” in FAFSA stands for “free,” and that consumers should be wary of websites pitching help for a fee. The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau this year took action against the operator of a FAFSA website that illegally billed more than 100,000 consumers.

The New York Times