Allegations against Longmont woman sparked worldwide attention

Dynel Lane, accused of attacking Michelle Wilkins and cutting the Longmont woman's unborn child from her womb, is led into the courtroom July 23 before she is arraigned on attempted-murder charges in Boulder District Court. ( Matthew Jonas / Staff Photographer )

Opening statements could happen by the middle of the week in the Dynel Lane trial, a case with an unusual allegation — fetal abduction — that led to dozens of motions by attorneys, hundreds of newspaper articles and TV spots, and a gag order effected by the judge overseeing the proceedings.

Lane's attorneys do not plan to present a mental health defense, but court records show Lane told Longmont police that Michelle Wilkins, 27, attacked her and she cut out Wilkins' baby in order to save its life believing the she had killed Wilkins. She initially said the baby was hers and she had miscarried.

Eric Zale, a former public defender now in private practice, said that a person accused of a crime, in general, has two defense options — denial that they committed the act, or admitting they committed the act but insisting what they did was legal. The latter includes self-defense.

Zale said an insanity plea generally has to be entered at the time of arraignment, when a defendant pleads guilty or not guilty. He added that a "safety valve" exists if new information comes to light.

Feigned pregnancy

Prosecutors contend in court records that Lane feigned pregnancy for a year, took photos of herself appearing to have a pregnant belly and posted ultrasound photos and heartbeat recordings taken off the Internet. She also told friends she gave birth to a boy named James and posted baby photos online.

Advertisement

Court records show her husband, David Ridley, began questioning the legitimacy of the pregnancy and delivered an ultimatum two weeks before the alleged assault that she go to a doctor with him or their relationship would end.

Prosecutors allege Lane lured Wilkins to her home on March 18 with a Craigslist post advertising maternity clothes, then bludgeoned her with a lava lamp and stabbed her with its broken shards before choking and attempting to smother her then performing a cesarian section.

Wilkins was able to call police, who arrived on scene and spirited her to Longmont United Hospital, where Lane had arrived a short time earlier with the baby.

Trying an 'open and shut' case

Chris Estoll, a former Boulder County prosecutor now in private practice, said a prosecutor can never assume that a case is a "slam dunk" and present the case any differently when the evidence is strong.

Estoll said a prosecutor still bears the burden of proving the case beyond a reasonable doubt and has to assume that jury will presume the defendant to be innocent.

"The hardest part of trying an 'open and shut' case is balancing the need to be thorough and prove every aspect of every element without boring the jury or losing credibility by 'piling on' unnecessarily," he said.

Michelle Wilkins appears on the "Dr. Phil" talk show in September. Dynel Lane's defense team has also sought to suppress evidence from Wilkins' appearance on the show. (Courtesy photo)

The baby, whom Wilkins planned on naming Aurora, did not survive. An autopsy later revealed that the baby never took a breath, a fact that stifled calls from some members of the community that Lane be charged with murder.

Lane is charged with attempted first-degree murder, unlawful termination of a pregnancy and four counts of felony assault, allegations that could land her in prison for more than 140 years if she is convicted on all counts.

She has remained in custody at Boulder County Jail on a $2 million bond since the outset of the case and has not spoken in court other than to her attorneys outside of earshot from the courtroom gallery.

Attempt to throw out evidence

District Judge Maria Berkenkotter, who is presiding over the case, implemented a gag order on Feb. 5 that prevents attorneys in the case from commenting.

The defense unsuccessfully sought to have Berkenkotter suppress most of the evidence gathered by Longmont police on the day of the alleged attack — including searches of her home and vehicles and statements she made to police at two hospitals.

Zale said defense attorneys will often look to have evidence thrown out based on constitutional grounds, giving as an example police soliciting a confession from a suspect without reading them their Miranda rights beforehand.

The defense has also sought to suppress evidence from Wilkins' appearance on the "Dr. Phil" television talk show last September, but as late as Wednesday was still seeking unedited tapes from the show.

The outcome of a California state court hearing could not be verified as of Friday, but Boulder County District Attorney Stan Garnett said at a motions hearing that he did not expect the tapes to be turned over because of a "strong press shield" in California.

Large jury pool

A pool of 335 jurors were called in to Boulder District Court on Thursday, and attorneys in the case intend to seat four alternate jurors for the trial, which is scheduled for 10 days.

The jury pool is much higher than two recent murder trials. In the Kevin Elmarr Sr. trial in October, 190 jury candidates were called. Elmar was convicted of murdering his ex-wife, Carol Murphy. And 176 were called in the Moises Mendez and Daniel Ortiz trial in September. Mendez and Ortiz were acquitted.

The initial incident in the Lane case garnered worldwide media attention, and a horde of journalists descended on Longmont in the days that followed. Defense attorneys unsuccessfully sought a change of venue last year.

Zale said that cases with a high amount of media attention can leave defense attorneys concerned about a "tainted jury," especially in a case in which someone is accused of a horrendous crime.

He added that there is a "100 percent advantage" for prosecutors to keep a case in the judicial district where it occurred.

"There is an unconscious bias toward seeing photographs of an individual in custody, doing a perp walk, being charged, going through proceedings," Zale said. "I think that is just human nature."

Estoll said that trials are both rational and emotional events, and prosecutors have to prove that the facts meet the elements of the charge, but they also have to convince the jury to care enough to convict the defendant.

"One of the reasons to keep trials in the local community is the idea that people care deeply about things that happen in their own community," Estoll said. "There might be a very slight (or) subtle undertone of an advantage, but I don't think it represents any significant advantage to the prosecution."

John Bear: 303-684-5212, bearj@timescall.com or twitter.com/johnbearwithme