Contestants in the Build Your Own Boat Race go through the whitewater feature at the Whitewater Kayak Recreation Park on the Arkansas River on Saturday during the sixth annual Royal Gorge Whitewater Festival. The two-day event also featured a raft rodeo, a community raft race, a downriver kayak race, the Whitewater Adventure Race and more. To view more photos, see the albums at https://www.facebook.com/CanonCityDailyRecord. ( Carie Canterbury / Daily Record )

Whitewater Event Results Community Raft Race Place, team and guide 1 - Royal Gorge Zipline, John Rice (Clear Creek) 2 - Cañon City Daily Record, Ty, Royal Gorge Rafting 3 - My Brother's Place, Justin, River Runners 4 - Royal Gorge Brew Pub, Jelly, American Adventure Expeditions 5 - Fremont Community Foundation, Muppet, Whitewater Adventure Outfitters 6 - Winery at Holy Cross Abbey, Will, Raft Masters 7 - Cañon Rental, Emily, Arkansas River Tours 8 - CSU Pueblo Outdoor Pursuits/The Edge, Emily, Lost Paddle 9 - Cañon National Bank, Andy, Echo Total money raised in guide auction: $2,480 Cripple Creek & Victor Gold Mining Company Build Your Own Boat Race Place, team, time 1 - Team Lotik, 2:47 2 - Team America, 3:10 3 - Cañon Rental, 3:42 4 - SS Sub, 3:49 5 - Dump Truck, 3:58 6 - Team S., 3:59 7 - On the Delivery Bobcat, 4:17 8 - Getting Dirty, 4:21 9 - White Water Bar & Grill, 4:27 10 - Boomer's Emporium, 4:27 11 - Vista Windows, 4:48 12 - Jokers Wild, 5:15 Raft Masters Raft Rodeo 1 - Up In 'Ya 2 - Heroes in a Half Shell 3 - Raft Masters 4 - The Mad Paddlers 5 - Paddle Daddies 6 - Team Raven Advertisement Holcim River Board Rodeo 1 - Shea Trujillo 2 - Billy Glasgow Expression Session 1 - Joe Ashton 2 - Thomas Wilt 3 - John Bideneaugh Black Hills Energy Royal Gorge Downriver Kayak Race River Boat Class: 1 - Cody & Noel 2 - Will Clements 3 - Brian Bothglo Creek Boat Class: 1 - Adam Stillman 2 - John Bailey 3 - Warren Hart White Water Bar & Grill Royal Gorge Downriver Raft Race 1 - Royal Gorge Rafting 2 - Women of AVA 3 - Red Ladies Altitude Paddleboards SUP Sprint 1 - Scott Powers 2 - Martin Welch 3 - Greg Alvarado Altitude Paddleboards SUP Cross 1 - Scott Powers 2 - Nancy Bridenbaugh 3 - Martin Welch Hyside Raft Cross 1-John Bailey and Liz Klar 2-Kalem Lenard and John Seimens 3-Jesse Young and Fleur Kaiser Sunflower Bank Whitewater Adventure Race Men: 1 - Chris McIntyre 2 - Ian Sturgeon 3 - Michael Franta Women: 1 - Amy Riggert 2 - Lori Shepard 3 - Sarah Ley High Country Bank Duckie Dash Men: 1 - Scott Eckstrom 2 - Doug Moore 3 - Tyler Lovato Women: 1 - Kristyn Econome 2 - Sam Hoar 3 - Tenille Lenard Fremont County Cannabis Pixie Bike Race 1 - Chris McIntyre 2 - Scott Eckstrom 3 - Chuck McCasland 4 - Thom LeDoux

It was a wet 'n wild weekend at Cañon City's Whitewater Kayak and Recreation Park and along the Arkansas River.

Thousands of people enjoyed picture-perfect weather and a smoke-free sky during Friday and Saturday's sixth annual Royal Gorge Whitewater Festival. Last year's festival was smoky from the Royal Gorge Fire and other wildfires burning across Colorado and in surrounding states.

"We couldn't have asked for better weather," said Kyle Horne, event organizer. "It ended up being perfect. The water level was ideal conditions, we had plenty of participants, and people were really getting involved this year."

A final visitor tally has not yet been finalized, but Horne said the weekend's turnout was "tremendous."

"It's great to see the support of the Whitewater Festival continue to grow," he said. "I think over the two-day event, without question, it was the largest turnout we have ever had at the Whitewater Festival."

He said people were spread out throughout Centennial Park and along the river, and the vendors seemed happy about the turnout.

He said attendees came from Mississippi, Arkansas, Louisiana, Texas, Kansas and other parts of the state.

"I think that we'll continue to put on a great show year after year and, of course, raise money for our community projects," he said.

Fremont Search and Rescue spent the weekend keeping an eye on the river and event competitors. Horne said organizers set up a safety plan to run at river levels of more than 3,200 cubic feet per second.

"Just because the river levels were down at 1,900 cfs, we didn't change anything," Horne said. "The safety plan we had in place, we executed and it worked very well."

Rescuers did help some event participants with throw-bag assists and a safety kayaker went after a participant who was floating in the water. Horne said every participant had the required safety gear, including a personal floatation device and helmet, all provided by Raft Masters, Echo Canyon River Expeditions and Royal Gorge Rafting.

"We kept people safe, and they simply came on out and had a good time," he said. "Search and Rescue played a big role in that."

The new events introduced this year were a success, including the pixie bike races, inner tube races and R-2 raft races. Also new this year, although unplanned, was a marriage proposal on stage. Horne hopes to add a big air kayak ramp next year.

"I think we've found a mix that works for the most part," he said. "Now we are just going to continue to improve on things, tweak them and make them better."

The RGWF is a fundraiser for Fremont Adventure Recreation, Fremont Community Foundation, Cañon City Park & Recreation District and WKRP. The The Cañon City Rotary Club and the Florence/Eastern Fremont County Rotary Club also are partners in the event, Horne said.

Horne said event proceeds stay in the community, going toward river restoration, Whitewater Park improvements, different charities, trail expansion and park improvements.

To view photos from the event, see the albums at https://facebook.com/CanonCityDailyRecord.