“Short-fingered vulgarian.” That’s how the late, great Spy magazine hilariously described Donald Trump, the megalomaniacal billionaire who has a seeming obsessive-compulsive need to stick his name on everything he owns.

The Donald – as first wife Ivana nicknamed him – announced a fortnight ago his candidacy for the 2016 Republican presidential nomination.

He was cheered on by supporters invited to attend the spectacle held at Trump Tower New York, the setting for Trump’s sur-reality show “The Apprentice.” But nowhere was the cheering louder than at Democratic National Committee headquarters in Washington, D.C.

Trump “adds some much-needed seriousness that has previously been lacking from the GOP field,” Holly Shulman, the DNC’s national press secretary, deadpanned. “We look forward to hearing more about his ideas for the nation.”

Well, most of us heard more of The Donald’s vacuous ideas for the nation (and for the world) than we cared to during his presidential launch party.

The economy: “I’ll be the best jobs president God ever created.”

Campaign finance: “I’m really rich. I’ll show you that in a second.”

Health reform: The Affordable Care Act “really kicks in in ‘16. Obama’s gonna be out playing golf. He might even be on one of my courses. I would invite him. … I have the best courses in the world.”

Border security: “I would build a Great Wall. And nobody builds walls better than me. … And I’ll build them very inexpensively.”

Terrorism: “Islamic terrorism is eating large portions of the Mideast. They’ve become rich. I’m in competition with them.”

China: “I’m not saying they’re stupid. I like China. I just sold an apartment for $15 million.”

Mexico: “When Mexico sends its people, they’re not sending their best. … They’re sending people who have lots of problems, and they’re bringing those problems [to] us. … They’re bringing drugs; they’re bringing crime; they’re rapists; and some, I assume are good people.”

Shulman didn’t even bother to respond to Trump’s remarks. For, as Napoleon reputedly said, “Never interrupt your enemy when he is making a mistake.”

Meanwhile, Ann Coulter, with whom I used to appear on air when we were regulars on MSNBC, tweeted out Thursday that “Trump is surging in the polls for saying what other GOPs too stupid to say.”

Well, The Donald has indeed vaulted into second place behind Jeb Bush among Republican presidential contenders in the latest CNN/ORC poll. But it has little to do what he is saying, and much to do with his celebrity.

Indeed, if the soi-disant conservative Republican Caitlin Jenner announced that she was joining the crowded GOP field, she, too, would probably enjoy an initial surge in the polls.

That’s not to say the GOP’s electable presidential candidates need not worry about Trump’s poll numbers. They should.

But not because he has remotest chance of capturing the party’s nomination (U.K. bookmaker Ladbrokes rates him a 33-1 shot). But because his poll numbers just might remain high enough for him to be included in GOP primary debates.

That would be a nuisance the party’s serious candidates don’t need. Because they almost certainly would spend much of primary season undoing the damage to the Republican brand that The Donald almost certainly would do.

Already Republicans have had to distance themselves from Trump’s rant about Mexican immigrants – which was, at best, xenophobic, and, worst, racist. And we can expect more of the same from the plutocrat who would be president when campaign season begins in earnest.

Running for president is serious business. Donald Trump threatens to turn it into a farce. As Napoleon also said: “There is only one step from the sublime to the ridiculous.”