Topics: Game of Thrones, Horror, The Weeklings, Entertainment News, News

This article originally appeared on The Weeklings

I’M A HORROR FAN. I’ve been watching the “weirdies” (as my grandmother dubbed horror flicks) since I was a kid. I watched so many and talked about them so often that the Sisters of Christian Charity who taught at my elementary school called my mother in for a parent-teacher conference. Was there a problem at home? (There wasn’t.) As an adult, I’m still on the lookout for that special film which will have me digging my nails into the upholstery. That experience is harder to find in the age of the internet where overexposure has dampened our feelings.

I may have found what I’ve been looking for in Game of Thrones.

When I settled down to watch “Two Swords,” the Season Four premier of HBO’s mega-hit, I posted on Facebook, “No one should have to watch Game of Thrones alone.” (I wasn’t exactly alone. There were 6.6 million viewers of the 9 pm broadcast.) But there I was, in my apartment on a Sunday night, imagining 6.6 million people holding my hand as I huddled on my sofa, a box of Thin Mints (don’t judge!) at my side, watching with jaw clenched and toes curled. That kind of unbearable, nearly-painful suspense is what I imagine audiences felt when they first saw movies like The Exorcist, Psycho, The Last House on the Left and Night of the Living Dead.

Fans of George R. R. Martin’s A Song of Ice and Fire know (and will tell over and over and over again) that Martin’s world is not wanting for brutality. The television adaptation, created by David Benioff and D.B. Weiss (with Martin as Co-Executive Producer) has even bested some of the novel’s shocks, but pure brutality isn’t enough to keep us playing. Surprise doesn’t sustain drama, nor does it keep millions of fans engaged. In Game of Thrones, the horrific and the grievous, the heroic and the vengeful are part of a larger thematic map of a complex and sometimes confusing world. Game of Thrones doesn’t rise above its sensational moments, it makes them necessary. Characters have multi-layered motivation, decisions have consequences, and the plot twists keep the next big moment hidden. The surprises come but, on reflection, seem inevitable; if we are paying attention, clues have been there all along. The result is that viewers are constantly listening for danger in the subtext and watching for daggers at the corners of the screen… hoping (sometimes against hope) that their favorite characters will not suffer cruel ends.

The shocking death of a lead character is a device used to unnerving effect in Hitchcock’s Psycho. In Game of Thrones, Ned Stark’s beheading at the end of Season One massacres expectation in the same way. The result is that Westeros is transformed from a fantasy kingdom into a real place — despite dragons, demon babies, and men with changing faces. To say “no one is safe” is trivial: the greater danger is that good might not triumph over evil. This will be no typical hero’s journey.

One of my friends has broken up with Game of Thrones. “I will not be Red Wedding’d again” he tells me. And there are others like him. From the torture of Theon Greyjoy to The Red Wedding, the cruelty feels helter-skelter. But Martin has a code. In his Westeros, the naïve are punished. It’s not really win or die, as Cersei declared in S1E7, it’s “learn or lose.” Game of Thrones suggests that cunning is more valuable than honor. The fallen Starks are those who haven’t learned fast enough. The Red Wedding, like so much of what happens to the Starks, makes integrity seem like naiveté. The Starks’ belief in honor is a noble trait which impairs their judgment, blinding them to the treachery of others.