HR Unum has taken the complexity out of workforce management. We also have peace of mind because all of the reporting, disclosure and notification requirements are in place to ensure we’re ACA compliant. ~Tina Root, SPHR, Wagamama Director of HR USA

TaxBreak — the nation’s leading tax credit experts — today announced the launch of sister-company HR Unum. Designed to transform today’s HR marketplace, HR Unum provides companies universal personnel records while tearing down information silos found with other solutions. Information access occurs from one single point of entry on the HR Unum HRIS and payroll platform. Duplicate record entries and multiple platform integrations are eliminated while creating aggregate HR analytics and reports. In addition, built-in Affordable Care Act checkpoints ensure compliance saving the end-user headaches and fines.

“HR Unum has taken the complexity out of workforce management,” shared Tina Root, SPHR, Wagamama Director of Human Resources, USA. “Working with payroll and HR processes that use one record has dramatically made our lives much easier. We also have peace of mind because all of the reporting, disclosure and notification requirements are in place to ensure we’re ACA compliant.”

U.S.-based Wagamama has taken advantage of HR Unum’s Enterprise Solution as an early adopter. “With 185 employees, 5 locations, active expansion plans HR Unum’s approach is vital to our success,” said Root.

As a disruptive technology, the HR Unum platform:

*Offers the only universal personnel record HRIS. HR Unum provides a refreshing alternative to today’s accepted industry norms that provide multiple back-end integrations (and lots of duck-tape).

*Pairs customers with a dedicated Account Manager for white glove concierges service. HR Unum eliminates industry-standard “call centers” by providing customized one-on-one support.

*Eradicates hidden fees and provides per-employee discounts based upon the number of services purchased. HR Unum payroll and HR administration cost projections do not waiver and never have buried per transaction kickbacks.

*Ensures ACA compliance with built-in metrics and reports. HR Unum provides the research, support and tools needed to maintain compliance with the ACA law. These safeguards guarantee protection while providing time focus on other HR-related strategy and tactics.

Modular in nature, clients can choose where they want to focus or use the entire HR Unum Enterprise Solution. HR Unum features include: ACA tracking and compliance, recruiting tools, benefits enrollment, core HR management, paperless onboarding, pay-as-you-go workman’s comp, payroll, tax credit processing, time and attendance, scheduling and 401(k) 360.

“Our mission is to change the current status quo by providing world-class payroll and HRIS technology,” shared Shannon Scott, HR Unum Chief Executive Officer. HR Unum is well-positioned to revolutionize the HR and payroll industry with our affordable total cost of ownership model and universal personnel record. With a robust pipeline of new clients actively being onboarded to HR Unum, we are well on our way.”

Register for a full suite demo of HR Unum today by visiting: http://taxbreakllc.hs-sites.com/hr-unum-demo.

About HR Unum

Designed with people in mind, HR Unum empowers the people that power your business with the only universal personnel record payroll and HRIS platform. HR Unum’s power of one workforce management system reduces double entry, eliminates system redundancy issues and facilitates compliance. Choose our modules to be highly focused or use our entire suite for your or small business. With revolutionary pricing and white glove concierge service, HR Unum is transforming the way HR processes are done. Learn more at HRUnum.com.