The single-biggest source of campaign contributions to Rep. Scott Garrett in recent years has been the employees of a New York hedge fund whose billionaire chief executive has bankrolled efforts to legalize gay marriage and set up a political action committee solely to help gay Republicans.

RECORD FILE PHOTO/ASTRID RIECKEN Rep. Scott Garrett

Garrett, however, has reportedly told his Republican colleagues he does not want any of the money he raises to go to support the House GOP’s political committee because that PAC has supported gay candidates in the past.

Garrett’s office on Friday again did not respond to a report published by Politico that said Garrett told colleagues on the House Financial Services Committee he would not pay “dues” to the National Republican Congressional Committee because it had recruited and supported gay candidates.

Garrett’s daughter told a reporter calling at his home that he was not there. Staff at his district office in Newton, Sussex County, said Garrett was in New Jersey but not at the office, and referred calls to his Washington spokes­man, who did not respond to messages.

Garrett, from Wantage, has won seven terms in Congress despite repeated claims by Democrats he was too conservative for his district, in which 70 percent of the voters live in Bergen County.

He could face his best-funded challenger ever next year, however, in a former speechwriter for President Bill Clinton, 40-year-old Josh Gottheimer of Wyckoff. Gottheimer has raised $631,000 for the race, and will be running in a presidential election year when Democratic turnout traditionally spikes.

Garrett, however, had more than $2 million in his campaign account on June 30, campaign finance records show

Those same records show Garrett stopped giving to his party’s political committee in the 2014 election cycle after contributing nearly $380,000 in the two previous cycles.

In the 2014 election, the NRCC spent nearly $3 million supporting the candidacy of Carl DeMaio, the openly gay former mayor of San Diego, who narrowly lost in California’s 52nd District.

In the same election, political committees Garrett controlled got a $7,600 contribution in June 2014 from Paul Singer, chief executive of Elliott Management. Elliott’s employees and their relatives have been Garrett’s biggest contributors since 2008, giving nearly $203,000 to Garrett’s main campaign committee and to an affiliated fund called Supporting Conservatives of Today and Tomorrow, or SCOTT PAC, according to the Center for Responsive Politics.

Singer is also one of the main financial backers — giving more than $4.3 million since 2012 — of American Unity PAC, according to Federal Election Commission records. American Unity’s website says it “is focused exclusively on protecting and promoting candidates for U.S. House and U.S. Senate who support freedom for all Americans, regardless of their sexual orientation.”

Singer is a major backer of conservative candidates nationally, but has also helped fund efforts to legalize gay marriage in several states, including New York and New Jersey, and The New York Times reported he made contributions of up to $250,000 to some of the New York legislators who helped make it law there.

In an interview with CNN, the billionaire said his support for the issue grew after his son revealed to him he was gay in 1998.

Through an Elliott Management spokesman, Singer declined to comment about Garrett’s stance.

Garrett has long opposed same-sex marriage and has also voiced concerns about the fate of traditional marriage. As an assemblyman in Trenton in June 1996, he co-sponsored a bill to prohibit New Jersey from recognizing any such marriages issued in other states. In 1998, he was on the losing side of a 53-12 vote that simplified divorce laws.

“This goes in the wrong direction,” Garrett said at the time. “This makes divorce easier.”

After being sworn into his first term in Congress in 2003, he voted to support an amendment to the Constitution, which failed, that would define marriage as only between a man and a woman.

Garrett also expressed concerns about the fate of traditional marriage when he appeared on Feb. 26, 2014, as a guest on “Washington Watch with Tony Perkins,” a daily podcast that the Family Research Council posts on its website.

Garrett was asked to respond to comments Vice President Joe Biden had made on the television show “The View” stating that Obamacare reforms would enable single mothers to buy health insurance, and perhaps allow them to stay home with their children instead of having to take a job to pay medical bills. Perkins suggested the government should not encourage single-parent homes and Garrett agreed, saying that carrying Biden’s view “to the extreme” would lead to government policies that said marriage was no longer needed.

“You certainly saw that under past entitlement programs. We do know the welfare system, starting in the ’60s, basically encouraged the dissolution of marriage, encouraged families to separate in order to get the benefits. Now the vice president, I guess, is just going along with that same failed program,” Garrett said.

The recent comments reported by Politico, however, appear to |be the first in which Garrett revealed his opposition to helping his party elect gay or lesbian candidates.

It is unclear what impact his comments will have. The conversation with fellow members of the Financial Services Committee came in the context of House Speaker John Boehner’s leadership team trying to rein in members who have bucked the leadership on important procedural votes.

One potential consequence to Garrett, who has often gone against leadership on issues he believed compromised his conservative principles, is he could lose the chairmanship of the capital markets subcommittee on Financial Services. But it is also possible fellow Republicans will rally to Garrett’s side if he is seen as being punished for making what they may see as a politically incorrect statement.

While Garrett remained silent on the issue, Democrats continued to try to make political hay.

Bergen County Executive James Tedesco and his fellow Democrats on the Freeholder Board issued a statement calling for Republican candidates on the ballot this year to denounce Garrett.

Tedesco said Garrett’s reason for not contributing to his party’s committee “clearly shows how out of touch and bigoted his views are.”

Staff Writers Nicholas Pugliese and Salvador Rizzo contributed to this article.