We see you’ve been enjoying the content on our exclusive member website. Ready to get unlimited access to all of WORLD’s member content? Get your risk-free, 30-Day FREE Trial Membership right now. (Don’t worry. It only takes a sec—and you don’t have to give us payment information right now.)

Many readers have asked how we decide whether to criticize some powerful institutions and individuals, both Christian and non-Christian, and how we go about avoiding error. Here are 12 thoughts and questions:

WORLD over the past 20 years has published about 60 investigative stories of various kinds. Through God’s grace (and some procedures we’ve followed) we have not had to retract any of them, nor have we ever been sued for libel—but we’re aware that any issue could end that streak.

Last week major sections of an investigative article that received huge media play, Rolling Stone’s report on a gang rape and rape culture at the University of Virginia, turned out to be false, and the editors had to admit that.

Ethical questions emerge as investigations continue. We sometimes have to deal with issues of leaked documents and deception, which we accept in times of war—for example, making Hitler think the D-Day invasion would be at a different place. We can extend that thinking to those who are clearly at war with biblical truth, such as abortionists, but it’s easy to fall down a slippery slope, so we need to be careful. WORLD has a reputation for truth-telling, and if we deceive others in pursuit of a story by creating our own sting operations and doing hidden-camera investigations, we may win a battle but lose a war.

As a story develops we discuss it in editorial meetings to sharpen its focus. Some financial investigations are complex, but we need to avoid “inside baseball stories” that only fans understand. (We don’t want to be left explaining the equivalent of the infield fly rule to readers who will be too bored to turn the page.) We make sure reporters have research assistance, if necessary.

Once a reporter sends in a draft, the work continues. On many investigative stories editors go line by line with the reporter: How do you know this? How are you sure about that? At least three persons, and often more, look carefully at every story before it is published. I sometimes ask our reporters for one more check: When submitting a story, underline any portion that says or suggests a person has committed a crime or done anything that would injure the person’s reputation. This underlining is the reporter’s attestation that he has double-checked those facts.

When an article makes accusatory statements about a person or organization, the accused party needs to be given the opportunity to respond in the article. If we have criticized a person by name in a way that could harm his reputation, and if we did not give his view within an article or a column, we are likely to offer guaranteed space in our letters-to-the-editor section of the magazine for him to respond.

State-of-mind is important here: We should humbly realize that the Ninth Commandment—“you shall not bear false witness”—indicts us all. If it merely said, “Do not lie,” then sometimes we could defend ourselves, because lying implies a conscious state. But we can be bearing false witness even when we think we are sincere, if our presuppositions and attitudes propel us away from honest accounts. Operating from our own understanding, none of us can hope to stand before God and be told: Well done, good and faithful reporter.

These policies I’ve laid out have been our practice for 20 years. Here’s one statement from March 23, 1996, that WORLD founder Joel Belz wrote about investigations: