The 2014 election is the election about nothing. It's something we've said (only semi-seriously) on several occasions. Basically, what it means is that there aren't any prevailing narratives or universal issues that candidates are fighting over. It just ... well ... is.

About the only thing all these campaigns have in common, as Dan Balz notes, is fighting over President Obama.

Beyond that, 2014 is a mess of issues — from Obamacare to the economy to the Islamic State to women's rights — of which none are dominant. And part of the reason we don't really know which issues are most important to deciding control of the Senate is that it's a really difficult question to poll.

Most pollsters, for example, only allow people to pick one, most-important issue. Well, what if Obamacare is the most important issue to 10 percent of people but the second most-important to 60 percent (this isn't the case of course; just a hypothetical)? That poll would still suggest Obamacare isn't a big issue.

Other polls, meanwhile, ask an open-ended question and allow people to mention more than one issue if they choose. But then you're asking people to pull their most-important issues out of thin air, and that can be difficult to do for someone who's pretty casual about their politics.

A new poll from Democratic pollster Democracy Corps, though, offers some real insight. The poll, conducted in 12 key battleground Senate states for the Democratic women's group Women's Voices Women Vote, asked people to name their three most important issues and then gave them some options.

Here's what they came up with for Republican voters:



Women's Voices Women Vote

And for Democratic voters:



Women's Voices Women Vote

There's no big shock here, but we would point out a few things:

1) Yes, the economy is No. 1 for both groups. That's not surprising. "It's the economy, stupid" is a cliche for a reason.

2) Women's issues ranks as No. 2 for Democratic voters (41 percent mention it among their top three issues), but they rank second-to-last for Republican voters. That's a big reason we hear Democrats devoting so much time and energy to that subject.

3) Foreign policy and the Islamic State is the No. 2 issue for Republicans (40 percent) but is a priority for significantly fewer Democrats (27 percent).

4) Obamacare is kind of a wash. It's a priority for 38 percent of Republican voters and 34 percent of Democrats voters.

5) Few people voting for either party offer Obama as one of their key issues.

That last point is a great example of how these polling questions aren't great at figuring out what's most important to voters. This poll basically suggests that Obama is less important to the 2014 campaign than immigration, which just isn't true.

But aside from that, it's a pretty good approximation of where voters' priorities lie heading into the final four weeks of the campaign.