The story of Storey Age: 53 Title: Title: Level 3 Communications president and CEO Family: Married with six children Education: Undergraduate degree from Northeastern (Oklahoma) State University; graduate degree from Southern Methodist University. Career: 30 years in telecommunications started with Southwestern Bell Telephone. Held senior level positions at WilTel Communications, Leucadia Telecommunications Group and Cox Communications. On landing deal with Starbucks: "It's a very exciting win for us. It demonstrates that major partners believe in our ability to manage complex, broadscale distribution networks for them."

BROOMFIELD -- It is one of the great Colorado mysteries lingering from the technology boom of the mid- to late-1990s.

Level 3 Communications dug up roads and laid thousands of miles of fiber-optic cables across the country, betting $14 billion that the nation's appetite for Internet capacity would explode as businesses and consumers turned to broadband for communications services and content such as movies, news, music and games.

Years later, the high-stakes wager hasn't paid off.

Rather than becoming a Wall Street darling and household name, Level 3 has yet to post a net profit since going public 15 years ago, perplexing investors and analysts. Last week, the company announced it was slashing 700 jobs worldwide, including about 150 in Colorado, where Level 3 employs 2,700.

In late 2010, Southeastern Asset Management, a large shareholder, vented frustration, declaring publicly that it was "unhappy with Level 3's operating results and stock price."

Those concerns still exist.

The man now responsible for solving the riddle, however, is not co-founder Jim Crowe, the longtime face of the Broomfield company.

It is Jeff Storey, who was promoted from chief operating officer to CEO in April, an appointment that came just one month after Crowe said he would step down from the top post by the end of the year.

In separate, exclusive interviews with The Denver Post, Storey and Crowe revealed details about the succession plan, how Level 3 will attempt to turn the corner and why the company has struggled to successfully capitalize on the insatiable demand for broadband capacity.

Handing over the reins

"It was an open conversation that we had for several years," Storey said of Crowe's decision to leave the company. "The timing and all of that was never exactly known. But it was a conversation that we had from the day I joined until the day he left."

Crowe echoed Storey's comments, noting that he recruited Storey to Level 3 in 2008 with thoughts of handing the reins over to him at some point, if the board approved.

"This isn't something that happened overnight," Crowe said. "When I recruited Jeff, part of my job is to make sure somebody has the capability, skills, experience to take my place."

Analysts laud the change, though they believe major investors, including Southeastern Asset Management, played a role in the executive shuffle.

"I think they pushed for this," said Colby Synesael, an analyst with Cowen Securities. "They finally said, 'We've given you enough time.' "

Southeastern, headed by Mason Hawkins, declined comment. The company had said it would not sit idle as Level 3 struggled operationally.

In shareholder reports issued in late 2012 and early this year, before Crowe announced plans to leave, Southeastern specifically highlighted Storey's work with the company, but mentioned no other executive.

Level 3 CEO Jeff Storey poses for a portrait inside the company s offices in Broomfield on Aug. 16. ( Erin Hull )

"The investor sentiment around (Level 3) is improving," Synesael said. "Changing out the management team is the main reason why this is happening."

That's not to say that Level 3 was a failure under Crowe.

Founded initially as part of construction giant Peter Kiewit Sons and backed by billionaire Walter Scott Jr., the company survived the dot-com crash and telecom meltdown that swallowed competitors.

Level 3 operates one of the world's largest Internet backbones, carrying a large percentage -- 40 percent by one analyst's estimate -- of U.S. Web traffic.

The company provides network services for recognized brands such as Netflix and Starbucks.

Its Broomfield campus, surrounded by the Omni Interlocken golf course and with sweeping views of the foothills west of Denver, is home to 2,700 employees. The company has a worldwide workforce of more than 10,000.

"There are a number of wholesale providers that operate regionally, or maybe within the U.S.," said Storey, 53. "But there's virtually no one out there that has the scope and scale of our network."

Level 3's network reaches 55 countries, covering North America, Europe, the Middle East, Africa and Latin America.

"I don't think anyone would dispute that they have high-quality assets," Synesael said. "They just didn't quite figure out how to properly monetize them."

Debt load a big factor

From 2008 to 2012, the company lost $2.7 billion combined, including a net loss of $422 million on revenue of $6.4 billion last year. Level 3 shares are still trading near historic lows after factoring in the 1-for-15 reverse stock split from 2011.

Crowe points to several factors that have kept Level 3 from reaching its potential, from the dot-com bust to the financial crisis. He said the telecom consolidation that started about 2005 effectively re-created the old Bell System monopoly with two giants, AT&T and Verizon, making it more expensive for Level 3 to reach local customers.

"If you had to use them, you're going to be in big trouble," Crowe said.

That, in part, pushed Level 3 to compile its own local network connections by acquiring seven companies for nearly $4 billion over a 13-month span. Crowe has acknowledged that Level 3 struggled to put those pieces together.

"We didn't integrate those companies well," he said. "Jeff Storey was brought in to help straighten that integration effort out, which he has certainly done."

Barry McCarver, an analyst with Stephens, said Level 3's debt load of about $9 billion has made it difficult for the company to enter new markets and compete on price.

"The agility of the company, as a whole, to react to trends in the business is significantly affected by their leverage level," McCarver said.

The company's next chapter under Storey is about execution and efficiencies. He's already trimmed management ranks, with the departure of Buddy Miller, Crowe's top M&A executive. He's combined functions, such as corporate communications and investor relations.

"We have looked at areas where we felt we've had too many resources, and we reduced those," Storey said. "Our company will continue to evolve to meet the needs that we see in the marketplace, and we'll make sure we dedicate the executive resources to execute against the strategic plan that we have."

Executions, not acquisitions

Storey grew up in Texas and eastern Oklahoma, where he still owns a ranch. With parents in the construction and airline industries, the self-described geek eyed a career in technology.

A physics and math major, he was offered a job with Southwestern Bell Telephone, now part of AT&T, straight out of college.

"No industry has changed as much from the technology perspective as telecom over the last 30 years," Storey said. "And there's no industry that's changed the world as much as telecom over the last 30 years."

He previously served as CEO of WilTel Communications, one of the local network operators that Level 3 acquired during its spending spree more than a half-decade ago.

Storey is not flashy, a bit reminiscent of Glen Post, the low-key CEO of CenturyLink, which acquired Denver-based Qwest in 2011.

"When I've spoken with investors since April, they've been very impressed with him. It's because he's really just about execution," Synesael said.

Storey spends time at his ranch during the weekends, driving bulldozers, building ponds and fences and working cows. The work gives him a "sense of accomplishment," he said.

"Jim Crowe used to be very black and white and talk about the big picture," said Donna Jaegers, an analyst with D.A. Davidson & Co. "Jeff Storey is much more nuanced, and realizes that there's lots and lots of shades of gray, and execution is more his strong suit."

Jaegers expects Level 3 to post a profit in the fourth quarter and an annual profit in 2014.

Two-thirds of the company's revenue comes from providing services to enterprise customers such as Starbucks and government agencies, the area with the best potential for growth. The other third comes from wholesale contracts with carriers.

To help with revenue growth, Storey pushed the development of a tablet app called Spot. The program allows the company's salespeople to easily scope potential clients, show them the location of the Level 3 network in various markets and provide cost estimates on the spot.

"It's the idea of changing the customer experience," Storey said. "It makes our content very customizable and very personable."

Level 3 completed its largest acquisition, Global Crossing, nearly two years ago. Another major purchase doesn't appear to be in the cards.

"We will be opportunistic when it comes to mergers and acquisitions," Storey said. "But our primary focus is execution with the assets and the people and the resources that we have today."

With the departure of the Qwest headquarters as part of the CenturyLink deal, Level 3 is the largest Colorado-based telecommunications company. Storey welcomes that position, emphasizing community involvement.

"It's very important for us to be an integral part of the communities in which we operate," Storey said. "Colorado is the location where we have more employees than any other place in the world."