In Ingham County, voters will have the ability to renew taxes and allow their local governments to sell public property in local ballot proposals.

Here’s a list of the ballot proposals in Ingham County affecting local governments. For a sample ballot with all state and local ballot proposals, check out the MLive Voter Guide or Michigan.gov/vote.

Ingham County proposals

Trails and parks millage: This is a request from Ingham County to be allowed to levy a .5-mill tax to raise more than $3.5 million for a county system of recreational trails and adjacent park trails.

Health services millage renewal: This is a reauthorization of a .52-mills levy already in effect in Ingham County. This millage funds basic health care services to county residents who are not eligible for Medicaid under the federal Affordable Care Act, and for individuals who make less than $28,000 per year and don’t have medical insurance.

City of Lansing proposals

Authorize the sale of the Miller Road Community Center: The city is asking voters if they can sell the center, located at 6025 Curry Lane.

Authorize the sale of Grand Woods Park: The city is asking voters if they can sell the park, located along the Grand River off Willow Highway.

City of Lansing Board of Water and Light Membership charter amendment: The city of Lansing is asking if BWL should add three advisory, non-voting representatives members of the board who are customers of BWL from municipalities outside of Lansing.

City of Lansing charter amendment: The city of Lansing is asking if the mayor of Lansing should be granted executive and administrative authority of the Board of Water and Light in case of emergency.

City of East Lansing proposals

Request to sell three parking lots: The city of East Lansing is asking if it can sell three parking lots — one at the corner of Albert Avenue and Abbot Road, one located east of Valley Court Park between Evergreen Avenue and Valley Court and the third located across from East Lansing City Hall between Abbot Road and Evergreen Avenue.

City of Williamston proposals

Amendment to city charter: The city of Williamston is asking if the city charter should be amended to state that the procedures for investigating and adjusting claims against the city for injury to persons and property should be made in accordance with state law.

Amendment to the city charter: The city is asking voters if the charter can be amended to delete obsolete references to the justice of the peace and the city justice court in the city clerk’s responsibilities.

Delhi Township proposals

Fire department millage renewal: The township is asking voters to approve a 1.5-mill increase in taxes for the Delhi Township Fire Department that would raise an estimated $1 million per year. The previous millage expired in 2013

Police millage renewal: The township is asking voters to approve a 1.5-mill increase in taxes for police and law enforcement services that would raise $1 million per year. The previous millage expired in 2013.

Kyle Feldscher is the Capitol education and MSU reporter for MLive Media Group. Reach him via email at kylefeldscher@mlive.com or follow him on Twitter at @Kyle_Feldscher. Read more stories here.