Generous benefits help firm stand apart

Goldsmith is CEO of CORE Engineering & Construction, a firm that has grown from about five employees when it started in 2004 to about 27 full-time workers today. CORE does a lot of work for the federal government and military and employs everyone from equipment operators to geologists.

The whole political circus over affordable health care would be rendered moot if more business executives had the mindset of Winter Park's Paul Goldsmith.

But what sets the firm apart is a menu of benefits that, for many workers today, is more elusive than the Florida Skunk Ape.

CORE pays 100 percent of the health-insurance premium for each of its employees and 50 percent of the premium for members of the employee's family. It pays 100 percent of the dental-insurance premium, all the costs of long-term disability and half the costs of short-term disability.

Oh, and it offers a 401(k) plan — in which everyone who's eligible participates — that matches up to 4 percent of an employee's compensation.

"People are kind of shocked when we tell them about the benefits," Goldsmith said. "I see it in their faces."

You don't say?

That's because so many workers have seen their benefits eroded over time, a process that started well before the Great Recession cold-cocked the economy. Each year, health-care premiums seem to go up, and workers are asked to absorb more of that cost — often without any increase in pay.

Today, the National Federation of Independent Businesses estimates that just 40 percent of small businesses pay 100 percent of health-insurance costs.

CORE, which Goldsmith said will generate about $23 million in revenue this year, has done so since its founding a decade ago. Back then, he said, it was a lot easier because the company had only five employees.

"We thought we'd have 10 [employees] when we grew up," he said, "but we just sort of evolved."

The benefits package has landed CORE on the Principal Financial Group's list of 10 best companies in the country for employee financial security (among businesses of up to 1,000 employees). It also has become a powerful recruiting and retention tool. In nine years, Goldsmith said, only three people have left the company because they wanted to work somewhere else.

"The benefits have helped sustain our growth," he said. "Having a core group of people, that's been our backbone."

There's no question it's expensive.

Health-insurance premiums will cost the company $163,000 this year, and annual increases have ranged from 5 percent to 30 percent. Insurance is second only to salaries as CORE's biggest single expense.

But Goldsmith and his business partner — Vice President Harlan Faircloth — remain convinced that the investment helps the company keep talented people and boosts morale.

There's more at work here, though, than dollar signs and measurements of productivity.

Goldsmith said employers have a duty to provide their workers with access to quality, affordable health care. He tended bar while in college and remembers what it's like when money is tight.