"Paris est Charlie" – or Paris is Charlie – is projected onto the Arc de Triomphe in Paris on Friday to pay tribute to the victims of a deadly attack on the headquarters of satirical newspaper Charlie Hebdo. Matthieu Alexandre/AFP/Getty Images

The Charlie Hebdo massacre in Paris and subsequent shootouts with police raised worldwide fears this week, as residents in metropolises throughout the West wondered whether armed gunmen such as the Kouachi brothers could provoke such a prolonged lapse in security elsewhere.

In Washington, London or Rome, for example, would it be possible for extremists with automatic weapons to storm a newspaper headquarters, kill 11 people, get into a shootout with police and kill an officer, and drive away? Could they then stop to hijack another car and hold up a suburban gas station, only to escape from there as well?

That’s to say nothing of the suspects’ evading capture by police and security forces for two days, and ultimately driving as far away as 90 miles before returning toward Paris and engaging in an hourslong hostage standoff on its outskirts.

[READ: Charlie Hebdo Gunmen, Connected Suspect Die in Police Raids]

Photos: France Mourns, Police Corner Charlie Hebdo Suspects EXPAND GALLERY Photo Gallery x of x Full Screen Armed security forces fly overhead in a military helicopter in Dammartin-en-Goele, France, 30 miles northeast of Paris, on Friday. A huge manhunt for the two suspected gunmen in Wednesday's deadly attack on Charlie Hebdo newspaper has entered its third day, with major police activity surrounding the industrial town where the suspects are reportedly holed up with a hostage. Thibault Camus/AP x of x Full Screen Police surround an industrial estate where officials say the suspects linked to the Charlie Hebdo massacre are holding a hostage Friday in Dammartin-en-Goele, France. Christopher Furlong/Getty Images x of x Full Screen A military helicopter flies over Dammartin-en-Goele, France, on Friday. Peter Dejong/AP x of x Full Screen Workers install a giant banner reading "I am Charlie" for victims of the Charlie Hebdo shooting on the Cannes Festival Palace on Friday in Cannes, France. Lionel Cironneau/AP x of x Full Screen A woman views notes left outside the Charlie Hebdo offices in Paris Friday. Antoine Antoniol/Getty Images x of x Full Screen Rome's Capitol Hill, designed by Renaissance artist and architect Michelangelo Buonarroti, is lit with the colors of the French flag on Thursday to express solidarity with those killed in the Charlie Hebdo attack. Andrew Medichini/AP x of x Full Screen People make a cross with pencils in Niteroi, Brazil, on Thursday in solidarity with those killed in the attack at the Paris offices of the weekly newspaper satirical paper Charlie Hebdo. Leo Correa/AP x of x Full Screen Journalist hold up their press cards during a minute of silence outside the Charlie Hebdo newspaper in Paris Thursday. Francois Mori/AP x of x Full Screen People gather to pay their respects to victims on the first night after the Charlie Hebdo attack in Paris Wednesday. Thibault Camus/AP x of x Full Screen People gather around candles Wednesday at the Republic Square in Paris. Aurelien Meunier/Getty Images x of x Full Screen People gather during a vigil for victims of the Paris massacre Thursday at Federation Square in Melbourne, Australia. Wayne Taylor/Getty Images x of x Full Screen People gather for a moment of silence Wednesday in Lyon, France, to pay their respects to the victims of the deadly attack at the Charlie Hebdo offices. Laurent Cipriani/AP x of x Full Screen Journalists hold up their press cards during a minute of silence outside the Charlie Hebdo newspaper in Paris Thursday. Francois Mori/AP x of x Full Screen A heart formed by melted candles lies on the ground of the Old Port to pay tribute to the Charlie Hebdo victims in Marseille, France, on Thursday. Claude Paris/AP x of x Full Screen Flowers and banners are placed on the ground where French policeman Ahmed Merabet was killed by the two gunmen who attacked the Charlie Hebdo offices Wednesday in Paris. Marc Piasecki/Getty Images x of x Full Screen A demonstrator holds a sign of a Charlie Hebdo front page reading "Love is stronger than hate" during a gathering at the Place de la République on Wednesday in Paris. Dominique Faget/AFP/Getty Images x of x Photo Gallery x of x Armed security forces fly overhead in a military helicopter in Dammartin-en-Goele, France, 30 miles northeast of Paris, on Friday. A huge manhunt for the two suspected gunmen in Wednesday's deadly attack on Charlie Hebdo newspaper has entered its third day, with major police activity surrounding the industrial town where the suspects are reportedly holed up with a hostage. Thibault Camus/AP x of x Police surround an industrial estate where officials say the suspects linked to the Charlie Hebdo massacre are holding a hostage Friday in Dammartin-en-Goele, France. Christopher Furlong/Getty Images x of x A military helicopter flies over Dammartin-en-Goele, France, on Friday. Peter Dejong/AP x of x Workers install a giant banner reading "I am Charlie" for victims of the Charlie Hebdo shooting on the Cannes Festival Palace on Friday in Cannes, France. Lionel Cironneau/AP x of x A woman views notes left outside the Charlie Hebdo offices in Paris Friday. Antoine Antoniol/Getty Images x of x Rome's Capitol Hill, designed by Renaissance artist and architect Michelangelo Buonarroti, is lit with the colors of the French flag on Thursday to express solidarity with those killed in the Charlie Hebdo attack. Andrew Medichini/AP x of x People make a cross with pencils in Niteroi, Brazil, on Thursday in solidarity with those killed in the attack at the Paris offices of the weekly newspaper satirical paper Charlie Hebdo. Leo Correa/AP x of x Journalist hold up their press cards during a minute of silence outside the Charlie Hebdo newspaper in Paris Thursday. Francois Mori/AP x of x People gather to pay their respects to victims on the first night after the Charlie Hebdo attack in Paris Wednesday. Thibault Camus/AP x of x People gather around candles Wednesday at the Republic Square in Paris. Aurelien Meunier/Getty Images x of x People gather during a vigil for victims of the Paris massacre Thursday at Federation Square in Melbourne, Australia. Wayne Taylor/Getty Images x of x People gather for a moment of silence Wednesday in Lyon, France, to pay their respects to the victims of the deadly attack at the Charlie Hebdo offices. Laurent Cipriani/AP x of x Journalists hold up their press cards during a minute of silence outside the Charlie Hebdo newspaper in Paris Thursday. Francois Mori/AP x of x A heart formed by melted candles lies on the ground of the Old Port to pay tribute to the Charlie Hebdo victims in Marseille, France, on Thursday. Claude Paris/AP x of x Flowers and banners are placed on the ground where French policeman Ahmed Merabet was killed by the two gunmen who attacked the Charlie Hebdo offices Wednesday in Paris. Marc Piasecki/Getty Images x of x A demonstrator holds a sign of a Charlie Hebdo front page reading "Love is stronger than hate" during a gathering at the Place de la République on Wednesday in Paris. Dominique Faget/AFP/Getty Images x of x ×

“Could this happen in America? Yes. Absolutely. And it will, in time,” says Dan Emmett, 21-year Secret Service veteran who worked in the agency’s elite Counter Assault Team before serving on the protective details for Presidents George H.W. Bush, Bill Clinton and George W. Bush. He was also previously a counterterrorism officer with the CIA’s Clandestine Service. “In a free society it is impossible to completely stop crimes like this from occurring.”

Emmett credits the likelihood of these attacks to the ease with which modern insurgents can gain access to weapons and training; foreign nationals, for example, can legally purchase weapons in the U.S. And anyone can read materials such as al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula’s online “Inspire” magazine, which provides how-to instructions on building weapons such as a car bomb and encourages followers to engage in so-called lone-wolf attacks.

They key to preventing another string of incidents reminiscent of this week in France lies squarely on intelligence agencies’ ability to learn about and deter them. And if that fails, law enforcement agencies must communicate with one another immediately and effectively after such an attack takes place.

French President Francois Hollande said this week that France recently had received a higher number of terrorist threats, and had successfully thwarted imminent attacks.

But the French counterterrorism system is not up to the same level as its American counterpart's, Emmett says. He routinely worked with local law enforcement and across federal agencies in his previous jobs as detailed in his book, “Within Arm's Length: A Secret Service Agent's Definitive Inside Account of Protecting the President.”

[ALSO: Charlie Hebdo Massacre Prompts Defense of Freedom of Speech]

“Paris and the French police in general are not overly aggressive in their methods, and Paris is an easy city to become lost in,” he says. “It is also relatively easy to execute a border crossing into another country in Europe and disappear in that manner.”

“In America, all law enforcement agencies are tied together by an Internet system and work together very well,” he adds. “In Europe there is still a great deal of dislike and mistrust between some of the countries there, and cooperation is not the best.”

Extremism in Paris is also exacerbated by France’s historical open-door policies to residents of former colonies such as Algeria, where the Kouachi brothers' parents reportedly were from. Many of these immigrants live in second-class urban housing in the neighborhoods that surround Paris, creating an environment where crime – and extremist recruitment – could flourish.

Both Europe and North America now find themselves caught in the virtual crossfire between al-Qaida affiliates like the Yemen-based al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula, or AQAP, and the even more violent Islamic State group, which are vying for recruits and the reputation of the most lethal extremist organization.

A member of AQAP said the group directed this week’s attack in Paris, according to The Associated Press.

[MORE: Charlie Hebdo Attack in Paris Professionally Orchestrated, Experts Say]

Making up roughly two-thirds of AQAP’s top “hit list” are journalists, according to some reports. And there are as many as 2,000 French passport holders currently in Syria or Iraq fighting for extremist networks. Meanwhile, ultranationalist, right-wing political movements that have risen in countries such as Norway, Greece, Germany and France likely will use this week’s tragedy to feed into their narrative that Christian Europe is under siege.

So the chances of another attack on an organization like Charlie Hebdo are almost certain. Whether such an attack could be carried out in the U.S., though, is less clear.

“Could this happen in the U.S.? It could. Is it likely? Probably not,” says Colin Clarke, a political scientist at the Rand Corp. who specializes in international security policy. He finds fault in the way European security forces plan for extremist attacks. “French counterterrorism and police forces may be prepped to respond to a bombing or some kind of mass casualty. Too often with jihadists, we assume they’re going to commit suicide somehow.

“There’s less planning that goes into the ‘chase’ aspect of it – what you do if these guys get away,” he says. “You’re looking for this chaos, this chaotic scene. But these guys blended right back in with traffic. By the time authorities set up checkpoints, they were clearly far outside Paris.”

An American city also struggled with its ability to track down terror suspects in 2013, when the Tsarnaev brothers detonated homemade bombs at the Boston Marathon. The city essentially went on lockdown as security searched for the pair. Tamerlan Tsarnaev was killed while being pursued four days after the bombing, and Dzhokhar Tsarnaev was found later that evening hiding in a stored boat. Jury selection in his trial began this week.

The Boston Police Department, assisted by the FBI and local authorities, had the skills and training to lock down area neighborhoods and establish the dragnet that ultimately nabbed the perpetrators. Smaller jurisdictions, however, likely do not.

It’s unclear how much of the post-shooting events the Kouachi brothers had planned. But both Emmett and Clarke believe they could have disappeared, either in hiding or into a foreign country, if they had prepared to do so with outside help.

Instead, the brothers confronted police and claimed they wished to die as so-called martyrs.