Topics: AlterNet, Barack Obama, Communism, New Orleans, Raul Castro, Sanctions, Politics News

This article originally appeared on AlterNet

The Obama Administration’s Wednesday announcement that it will take steps to end a half-century of diplomatic and economic warfare against Cuba is a very big deal. It has far-reaching implications for the 2016 presidential election, the White House’s ongoing battle with Congress over executive branch authority, and even for the Gulf Coast’s economy, where cities like New Orleans slipped into poverty after losing ties with Havana.

Let’s go through some of the ripples that are going to dominate the discussion in coming days, starting with the predictable opposition from anti-Castro hawks in the Republican and Democratic parties, especially in Florida, which is an increasingly influential state in the emerging 2016 presidential election landscape.

1. Obama’s Worsening Relationship with the GOP Congress. The new Cuba policy clearly has been months in the making, as the White House’s briefing papers detailed a long list of executive actions that will be taken to reestablish diplomatic relations, reopen embassies, roll back economic sanctions, and pave the way for major investments by American corporations, from Internet service providers and telecoms to the travel industry.

But the White House has now given Republicans even more reasons to fume about the adminstration, coming after the ongoing implementation of Obamacare and the latest executive actions that allow 4.3 million undocument immigrants to stay in the country free from the fear of deportation. Florida GOP Senator Marco Rubio, the incoming chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee said Wednesday that he would “make every effort to block this dangerous and desperate attempt” next year.

Some conservative Democrats also more than cringed, including the current Senate Foreign Relations Committee Chair, New Jersey’s Robert Menendez. “President Obama’s actions have vindicated the brutal behavior of the Cuban government,” he said, which makes one wonder how the upcoming GOP-majority Congress will react if Obama announces a deal with Iran early next year to curtail its nuclear arms program, end economic sanctions and reestablish diplomatic relations.

The White House and Congress will be at each others’ throats over Cuba and executive branch authority, not just because of clashing ideologies but because the punitive 1996 Helms-Burton Act, signed by President Clinton, gives Congress “authority to override an executive branch cancellation of the embargo,” as one bill summary noted.