MEDINA, Ohio - Five years ago, Medina’s Natoma Canfield became the face of President Obama’s Affordable Care Act push.

A cancer survivor, Canfield wrote the president in late 2009 to say because of skyrocketing health insurance premiums, she could no longer afford her insurance and now lived in fear of getting ill and losing her home.

The president not only wrote Canfield back, but took the letter with him and read it to a group of health insurance executives during a meeting at the White House.

A week later Canfield collapsed, her cancer was back.

“She was very sick, she needed two blood transfusions,” President Obama told a crowd in Strongsville that week in 2010. “Doctors performed a battery of tests and on Saturday, Natoma was diagnosed with leukemia.”

Natoma was in the hospital for that presidential visit, her sister Connie stood in for her then and two weeks later at the White House when the ACA was signed into law.

Five years later, Canfield is marking the ACA’s anniversary for a different reason, she’s five years cancer free.

“This is like a special celebration,” Canfield said Monday.

“I’m doing fairly well, I have a good shot at living through this. I now have a 50-50 chance of survival,” she said of hitting the five-year mark. “That’s huge after the 33 percent.”

The letter she wrote to the president now hangs in the Oval Office and she herself has had the opportunity to travel to Washington D.C. to see it, something that seemed unimaginable five years ago as she fought the cancer again.

“I never thought this would happen, this is wonderful beyond belief, but I didn’t think it would come to pass,” she said.

Five years later she still gets letters from some of the 16 million Americans now insured because of the ACA, including more than 700,000 Ohioans, many like Natoma, enrolled in the state’s Medicaid program.

“I have strangers in Medina come up and say how this has helped them, how they didn’t want it but yet they found out how good it is,” she said. “It was a long, long five years and yet I’m so happy that things have worked out the way they have.”

---

Follow John Kosich on Facebook and Twitter

Follow @KosichJohn