Arvada, CO, USA, 05/12/2015 /SubmitPressRelease123/

The Arvada Chamber of Commerce in partnership with the Arvada Visitor’s Center launched the first annual Sand in the City ® “See Yourself in Sand” contest today. The contest encourages Coloradoans to enter to win the opportunity to have their personal photo transformed into a giant sand sculpture on Saturday, June 27 at Colorado’s premiere beach party.

To enter, contestants need to complete an entry form by May 31, 2015. One winner will be selected by a random drawing no later than June 5, 2015. The master sculptor, Arvada Visitor’s Center and Arvada Chamber of Commerce will work with the winner to select a personal photo to be recreated during the event. Event organizers want to ensure design feasibility, guidelines and artistic visions are met. Community members and media are invited to attend and watch the winning photo transform into a larger-than-life sand sculpture.

“What is better than having your photo created as a larger-than-life sand sculpture?,” asks Arvada Chamber president Kami Welch. “Our Colorado community is creative and we are excited to see what fun photos could turn into the best holiday card ever, a priceless anniversary gift or original way to propose; the possibilities are endless!”

Photos and theme selection are subject to Master Sculptor approval to ensure the feasibility of the design. Contestants must register by May 31, 2015 to be eligible to win. For complete details, visit http://visitarvada.org/events/sand-in-the-city/win-see-yourself-in-sand/ contact Kami Welch at kami@arvadachamber.org or call 303-424-0313.

About Sand in the City Arvada

The Arvada Chamber of Commerce’s 3rd annual Sand in the City Festival® is Colorado’s premiere beach party, expected to attract 15,000+ visitors. The two-day festival taking place June 27-28, 2015, and offers fun for the whole family! The event raises funds and awareness for the Arvada Chamber of Commerce and the city’s many business, nonprofit, and community offerings. Visitors can expect to see giant sand sculptures, enjoy local food and artisan vendors, a beach luau, a kid zone with buried treasure, live music, craft beer and more. For more information, visit http://visitarvada.org/events/sand-in-the-city/.

About the Arvada Chamber of Commerce

Founded in 1925, the Arvada Chamber of Commerce is a membership organization committed to growing and supporting the Arvada business community. Through educational programs, networking opportunities, business resources, strategic partnerships and legislative advocacy, the Chamber empowers businesses to succeed. The Chamber provides leadership and support to members through its leaders’ collective expertise in the areas of business ownership, sales and marketing, finance and public outreach. To become a member or learn more, call 303-424-0313 or visit www.arvadachamber.com.

Social Media Tags:Arvada Chamber of Commerce, Sand in the City Arvada, Arvada events, Denver summer events

Newsroom powered by Online Press Release Distribution – SubmitMyPressRelease.com

Like Us on Facebook