Music City Modern Quilt Guild and sewers from around the country created smocks for NICU babies at Vanderbilt and other local hospitals. (Photo: Submitted)

By Oct. 29, Lindsay Conner was used to receiving packages filled with smocks, specially sewn for neonatal intensive-care unit (NICU) babies.

She inspected each stack, documented and photographed them.

But this package was even more special; it was from a former Vanderbilt patient.

"This was really important to me just because I was a NICU baby and my mother had her first surgery with you guys," Eagle Scout and Utah native Nathan Porritt's letter read.

His package was filled with 150 smocks, just a portion of the collection of handmade gowns to be delivered to Vanderbilt's NICU mid-December.

"It goes beyond your wildest expectations of what might be possible," Conner said.

The handmade outfits fold crossways over the baby's torso, with Velcro on the sides to close them. This way, medical staff can easily access IVs and tubes attached to the child.

"But the biggest impact is for the parents," said Vanderbilt NICU manager Belinda Mathis.

Mathis and her staff see roughly 1,300 babies come through the unit each year. Many patients are tiny babies born premature, or those with heart, gestational or other problems so severe they need surgery.

"It really brightens the parents’ day to go in and see their baby in clothes," she said. "It’s no longer this cold, sterile hospital environment."

Lindsay Conner received several donations of NICU smocks to give to Vanderbilt and other local hospitals. (Photo: Submitted)

Music City Modern Quilt Guild has donated smocks to Vanderbilt's NICU for three years as just one of its many philanthropic efforts. For the past two years, Conner has asked for donations through her blog, Lindsay Sews.

Last year, the group donated 247 smocks.

This year, the group is donating 1,082, including the 96 created by the quilting group.

Because of the large amount, the group will split the gowns between Vanderbilt, Centennial and Saint Thomas Midtown, bringing warmth and fashion to babies all around Nashville.

How to help

Music City Modern Quilt Guild's smock drive is over this year, but Conner encourages interested sewers to donate smocks to Gracie's Gowns, which accepts them year-round.

Contact: 540-287-0143, info@graciesgowns.org

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1jlH0cP