Back when ObamaCare launched in 2014, exchange shoppers were shocked by the exchanges’ lower-cost bronze-plan deductibles that typically ranged from $5,000 to a maximum of $6,350.

That shock hasn’t really worn off, as the maximum bronze deductible has climbed to $6,850 this year, on the way to $7,150 in 2017. But what’s even more shocking is how high supposedly mid-level silver-plan deductibles have gotten.

This year, Ambetter plans from Centene (CNC) broke new ground with a $6,500 silver-plan deductible as it sought to underprice the competition. The strategy seems to be paying off for the company, which is among the relatively few insurers making solid profits on the exchanges. Not only has Centene’s exchange enrollment surged, but it has manged to attract a relatively healthy group of customers. That’s not entirely surprising, since people expecting to have surgery, for example, would tend to choose a lower-deductible plan.

Now, a regulatory filing for 2017 plans shows that Blue Cross of Idaho is set to push the envelope even further with a $6,850 silver-plan deductible and a maximum of $7,150 on out-of-pocket spending on medical services, excluding premiums.

The filing includes an example of what a plan member can expect in benefits if they have a baby with a regular delivery and no complications. The good news is that the plan will cover nearly 80% of qualifying expenses. The bad news is that the help won’t kick in until after the $6,850 deductible is exhausted. The bottom line: The new mother pays $7,010 out of the $7,540 in costs.

That doesn’t exactly scream “affordable care” — especially after a couple earning $40,000 forks over about 8% of their income, or $3,200, for a silver plan. Still, the $6,850 deductible isn’t as bad as it sounds because some benefits are provided before the deductible is met, including certain prescription drugs.

In another example, Blue Cross of Idaho details a case showing that routine maintenance of type 2 diabetes would result in $5,400 in medical expenses, with the policy holder on the hook for just $2,000.

By comparison, someone with the $6,500-deductible Centene silver plan this year would pay $3,080 for the same diabetes treatments. In other words, the fine print matters a lot.

Centene’s high deductibles may be one reason that the company, unlike UnitedHealth (UNH), has said it didn’t experience any problems with people signing up for coverage mid-year and running up big bills.

ObamaCare was supposed to balance risk among all insurers by transferring funds from carriers which attract low-cost customers to those that are a magnet for the sick, but risk-adjustment hasn’t worked as intended for a variety of reasons, including the failure to consider customer use of prescription drugs in weighing an insurer’s risk. Now the Obama administration is focused on making risk-adjustment work better, with uncertain implications for insurers’ profitability.

Blue Cross of Idaho’s highest silver-plan deductible this year is $4,000. But after hiking premiums about 22% last year and being underpriced by competitors, the company may be turning to a much higher deductible as a way to hold down premium price hikes for 2017.

Yet holding down premiums, while it may sound consumer friendly, can actually turn out to be the opposite when it comes to ObamaCare’s subsidized customers. That’s been evident in Centene markets like Miami, Atlanta and Jackson, Miss., where the after-subsidy cost of a bronze plan is more than 20% more expensive than in the average HealthCare.gov market.

That’s because offering silver plans with bronze-like deductibles, and scrunching down the cost of silver plans closer to those of bronze, shrinks the size of the available subsidies for all plans. Subsidies are based on the cost of the second-cheapest silver plan in each market.

This seems to be an issue particularly in Centene markets, because the company offers not just one, but two low-priced silver plans with bronze-like deductibles of $5,500 and $6,500. Early filings for 2017 suggest that Centene plans to stick with that strategy next year.