Joanne McCloskey was flabbergasted when she received a bill for $99.81 for a routine doctor’s visit. She had already paid $77.11 for the exam. The new bill was for use of the office facilities.

Buy Photo John and Joanne McCloskey with the bills they received from McLaren Greater Lansing. (Photo: Judy Putnam/Lansing State Journal)Buy Photo

LANSING — Retired music teacher Joanne McCloskey was flabbergasted when she received a bill for $99.81 for a routine doctor’s visit. She had already paid $77.11 for the exam. The new bill, she was told, was for use of the office facilities.

The Haslett woman and husband, John, both 77, had been forewarned about new “facility fees” in a January letter, sent when their doctors at Mid-Michigan Physicians changed from a doctor-owned group to part of the hospital-based McLaren Greater Lansing.

But $100 more for walking through the same door to see the same doctor?

“That’s ridiculous,” McCloskey fumed, adding that she didn’t get so much as a Band-Aid.

When I reached Brian Brown, vice president of planning and marketing at McLaren Greater Lansing, he said the facility fee sounded high to him, too, and that the fees should range from $25 for visits such as routine checkups to several hundred dollars for outpatient surgeries.

“Billing for health care services, whether they’re delivered in a physician’s office, urgent care or a hospital setting can be very confusing. However, that’s the model and the rules that the industry has to follow,” he said.

According to the January letter, Mid-Michigan Physicians’ offices were now viewed as outpatient facilities. Patients receiving Medicare, such as the McCloskeys, would get two bills, one for medical services and another for a facility fee.

McCloskey called me after she said two calls to McLaren yielded little information about her $99.81 facility fee. She said $77 is about what she regularly pays for well visits so the additional facility fee more than doubled the cost.

I first spoke to Brown on Wednesday. On Thursday, McCloskey got a call from a hospital official telling her that she had been overcharged. But the official couldn’t tell her the new amount and Brown said he couldn’t comment on a specific patient, even with her consent.

McCloskey has good health insurance as a retired teacher but said she has to pay the facility fee out of her own pocket because her deductible hasn’t been met this year.

The McCloskeys want more transparency, and I have to agree that doesn’t seem like a lot to ask. They see four doctors between them at Mid-Michigan Physicians. What will be the charge for each visit?

“Transparent to me would be that they would send a list of prices that you would use when you went into the building so you could say ‘OK, we’re going to have a fee charge and this is the fee,’” Joanne McCloskey said.

McLaren is working to make costs more transparent as required under the Affordable Care Act, Brown said. He said McLaren would be adding more informational links to cost information on its website.

McLaren Greater Lansing employs about 100 physicians in outpatient settings, Brown said. He said about one-third of patients receive government-sponsored insurance, Medicaid and Medicare, and are being charged the facility fees.

Several years ago, some members of Congress tried to end the facility fee payment for non-hospital settings such as urgent care and doctor’s offices but they lost those battles, said Kevin Kavanagh, board chairman of the HealthWatch USA, a health policy nonprofit based in Kentucky.

“This is now very common, and it’s probably the motivating factor that has gotten physicians to leave private practice and enter hospital employment,” Kavanagh said in a phone interview. “It’s impossible to run a business when you have a competitor that gets paid twice as much.”

Jo Murphy, executive director of the Lansing-based Michigan Medicare-Medicaid Assistance Program, a nonprofit, grant-funded program that assists patients, said the joining of doctors groups and hospitals is a growing trend.

“As a result of that, oftentimes, Medicare beneficiaries will see additional out-of-pocket costs. This is unfortunate for people who are retired on a fixed income, but it seems to be the wave of the future,” she said.

Not all are charging the fees in mid-Michigan, however. The other large hospital system in the area, Sparrow Hospital System, which employs 250 doctors, tries to avoid separate facility fees and does not charge them at any urgent care or primary care doctors’ offices, Liz Foley, communications specialist, said in an email.

Contact Judy Putnam at (517) 267-1304 or at jputnam@lsj.com. Write to her at 120 E. Lenawee St., Lansing, MI, 48919. Follow her on Twitter @JudyPutnam.

For help with Medicare plans

Open enrollment for Medicare is between Oct. 15 and Dec. 7. For help choosing a plan, call the Michigan Medicare-Medicaid Assistance Program toll-free at 1-800-803-7174.

Read or Share this story: http://on.lsj.com/1UP8Gmt