Bacon-wrapped jalapeños might not be traditional Mexican cuisine, but the appetizer at Lunada Eatery & Cantina in Lafayette sure is tasty. ( Jeremy Papasso / Daily Camera )

Lunada Eatery & Cantina Food: 3 stars Service: 3 stars Ambience: 3 stars Price: $-$$ Address: 400 W. South Boulder Road, Suite 2900, Lafayette Contact: 720-612-7315 or lunadaeatery.com Hours: 10 a.m.-8 p.m. Sunday-Thursday, 10 a.m.-9 p.m. Friday-Saturday Credit cards: Accepted Noise level: Moderate. Despite the hard surfaces and somewhat sizable dinner crowd, I couldn't pretend not to hear my dining companion's questions about why I was so fascinated by the taco holder.

Hidden away in a strip mall near South Boulder and Public roads in Lafayette, Lunada Eatery & Cantina is another venue joining the ranks of this crossroad's collection of affordable and ethnic eateries. A casual and warmly colorful space, Lunada serves brunch, lunch and dinner daily. The place was reasonably packed during a recent weeknight dinner, and one gets the sense Lunada sees a fair amount of return business.

While this spot unabashedly embraces a Mexican focus, both north- and south-of-the-border items populate the menu. Half-pound burgers with fries, a barbecue pork sandwich and mini sliders are on offer. Fusion-oriented choices include smoked Southwestern chicken wings and chili cheese fries topped with salsa. Traditionalists will gravitate toward the tacos, enchiladas, chimichangas and stuffed poblano peppers. Veggie preparations include a taco stuffed with mushrooms and sliced poblano, and many dishes are available without meat.

As we studied the menu, my dinner companion and I agreed her $4 house margarita was too sweet, although it was a deal at only a buck more than a bottle of Mexican Coke. We also noticed the service reflected the friendliness of a family-run business, with our server consistently acting in a hospitable and attentive manner. Later in the meal, other staffers checked in to see how we were doing. Yet we were mildly disappointed to learn the kitchen was out of tamales and chicharones, made here with chicken thighs, a healthier alternative to the more typical pork-rind foundation.

Lunada's enchiladas de crema verde are available with ground beef, chicken, onions and cheese or smoky pulled pork, above. (Jeremy Papasso / Daily Camera)

Although an appetizer trio of $6.50 bacon-wrapped jalapeños might not be the most textbook Mexican dish, stemming in no small part from its cream-cheese filling, it was nevertheless a pleasure to eat. These fresh peppers packed considerable heat, making me happy I had both a Coke and a glass of water. However, the thick pork jacket offered up a mellow and smoky counterpoint, enhanced by the sharpness of cheddar and chive in the filling.

A $7.50 guacamole starter was darn near everything this avocado dip ought to be. Served in a molcajete-style vessel, this favorite tasted unquestionably fresh, and warm, thick tortilla chips did much to enhance our enjoyment. The fruit's spot-on ripeness made for an appealingly creamy consistency, and simple but just-right seasonings of cilantro, lime, chile, onion and tomato made this dish a guacamole purist's delight.

Lunada's $10.49 shrimp tacos consisted of beer-battered seafood dressed with perky pickled red onion and bright cilantro aioli. The tacos arrived upright in a small metal stand, lest the filling fall out. While my initial reaction was that the holder resembled something you'd find in an office supply store, I found it a nice touch that distinguished this eatery from less thoughtful places. Although part of me wondered if this serving tool was actually some sort of culinary inbox.

Back to the taco. Clean-tasting seafood and a correctly crunchy Baja-style coating made this dish stand out, as did sides of fluffy rice and beans. Lunada's side didn't resemble the chalky and tired refried beans that are all too common. Instead, theirs were closer to good homemade pot beans possessing texture that wasn't overdone and relying on the beans' flavor, rather than lard, to carry the dish.

The $9.50 enchiladas de crema verde are available with ground beef, chicken, pork or onions and cheese. I opted for the pulled pork, which is nearly the same thing, plus smoke, as that most venerable Mexican meat filling, carnitas. Regardless of what side of the border this pig came from, the end result was terrifically appealing, with tender, moist and suitably smoky meat highlighting this dish. The only flaw was a below-par serving temperature; otherwise, the tomatillo sauce's subtly tart qualities were an ideal foil to the pork's deep meaty flavor.

Desserts were simple and affordable. A $4.99 slice of passion cake combined chocolate and fruit flavors in a moist package and possessed an endearing homemade feel. The $2.99 churros, presented as bite-sized chunks and garnished with chocolate sauce, contained a custardy center and were acceptable, though not quite up to the level of the cake.

Lunada comfortably straddles the line between a humble joint inspired by home cooking and a restaurant taking a more rarefied culinary approach to Mexican cuisine. Happily, prices are closer to more inexpensive locales, while the quality of preparation and ingredients matches up with more costly eateries eager to show off their gourmet credentials.

In short, Lunada's warming fare makes for a low-key, strip-mall treasure on a chilly night.