What’s often left unstated by telemedicine supporters is that the ACA and Part D still added billions in federal spending, even if CBO overestimated their costs. | Getty Telemedicine fans point to CBO's history of cost overestimates

Telemedicine’s advocates, frustrated by the Congressional Budget Office's lack of enthusiasm for increasing payment for their technology, are crying foul at the federal budget keepers. They charge that CBO routinely overestimates the cost of new Medicare services — and there’s some evidence they are right.

To date, CBO's estimates for telemedicine expansion have produced a resounding thumbs down. Senators, led by Hawaii's Brian Schatz, are preparing to introduce a bill to expand Medicare services paid for the technology, but like all other pieces of legislation, its fate lies in CBO's hands.

Story Continued Below

Congress created CBO four decades ago to put a layer of penny pinchers between the federal government and its checkbook. Critics note that since then the office has severely overestimated the costs of four landmark changes to Medicare — creation of the prospective payment system, the Part D drug program, the Affordable Care Act and the Balanced Budget Act.

The office prides itself on evidence-based, independent observations, but says there's no way it can foresee everything that will affect its predictions, and denies that it always overestimates.

“I think it is incorrect to say that CBO always overestimates the cost of health care proposals,” said Doug Elmendorf, who ran the office from 2009 until March. “But certainly it is difficult to estimate the cost of health care proposals and CBO will often turn out to be high or low in its estimates.”

CBO's track record with telemedicine isn’t very positive.

In 2001, Congress added limited coverage of the technology by inserting the current restrictions into section 1834(m) of the Social Security Act, which the telemedicine community is trying to purge.

At the time, CBO predicted telemedicine would cost Medicare $150 million in the first five years. But the program has spent a mere $57 million over 14 years, according to the Center for Telehealth and eHealth Law. Telemedicine advocates point to that fact as exhibit A in CBO’s tendency to overestimate costs.

There are other, bigger examples.

— CBO said the insurance-related provisions of Obamacare would cost $710 billion from 2015 to 2019, but a March revision placed that cost at $506 billion. The budget office did not take into account either the 2013 Supreme Court decision that made Medicaid expansion optional for states, or the slowdown in health spending soon after the law’s passage. It also assumed an overly high number for private health plans sold under the ACA.

— CBO estimated that Medicare Part D, which created a prescription drug benefit in 2003, would cost $552 billion over a decade, but the bill ended up at $358 billion, nearly one-third less. CBO overestimated the number of people who would sign up for Part D.

— A 2010 study, published by the Commonwealth Fund, found that an early 1980s change in how hospitals are paid — the prospective payment system — produced twice as many savings (about $21 billion over the first four years) as CBO first predicted.

— The 1997 Balanced Budget Act, estimated by CBO to save $112 billion in federal spending between 1998 and 2002, saved 50 percent more by 1998 and 113 percent more by 1999.

“The problem lies not with the competence or integrity of CBO, but with its cautious methods,” Jon Gabel of the National Opinion Research Center wrote at the time.

“They tend to overestimate the cost of this legislation because they’re trying to be conservative, so you are not sticking the federal government with liability it didn’t anticipate,” said Dan Mendelson, chief executive of D.C.-based health care consulting firm Avalere Health.

Congress created CBO in the mid-1970s to reassert its authority over federal spending. “That’s why it’s there, to make it harder for the government to do anything,” says Bruce Vladeck, who ran Medicare in the early years of the Clinton White House and now works for New York consultant Nexera. “The bias is to overestimate the cost and underestimate the savings.”

There has never been a thorough academic review of CBO’s work, Mendelson notes.

Such a task would be thorny. It’s impossible to know the number of doctors’ visits, for example, that would have occurred had a policy change not happened. So many things factors influence a hospital’s payments that it’s hard to disentangle them or attribute a particular quantity to a change Congress mandated several years before.

“It’s very hard to figure out after the fact how accurate CBO has been with respect to the scoring of most legislation because most legislation represents a marginal change to something that’s already happening,” said Phil Joyce, a public policy professor at the University of Maryland who wrote a 2011 book on CBO.

The creation of Part D is an exception, because it is a mandatory spending program with a clear before and after, rather than an adjustment to an existing program.

But CBO's defenders say it would have been impossible to predict the historic slowdown in drug spending that resulted in lower Part D costs. (It was caused by fewer new drugs than expected, and increased use of generics). In fact, some at the time accused CBO of low balling Part D's cost; CBO's prediction was lower than that of the George W. Bush administration.

The 1997 Balanced Budget Act was passed at a time of low Medicare spending, which took off after the law was passed, creating greater savings than predicted, says Paul Van de Water, a senior fellow at the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities.

Those pointing to CBO’s off estimates are “cherry picking” examples based on their views, says former CMS administrator and MedPAC chair Gail Wilensky. There are also plenty of examples of CBO underestimates, she says.

Covering end-stage renal disease is one. The CBO's 1974 estimate was $100 million a year, but the program cost $229 million that year alone.

CBO wrote in January 2009 that the HITECH Act, which has given doctors and hospitals nearly $32 billion to adopt electronic health records, would reduce inappropriate tests, paperwork and administrative overhead, reducing costs in the health care system by 0.3 percent between 2011 and 2019. Medicare would save $4.4 billion and Medicaid $7.3 billion as the result of wider EHR use, CBO said at the time.

Most of those who follow the meaningful use program and the world of EHRs would doubt HITECH has saved billions in federal spending. But how much money it has saved — or cost — is nearly impossible to determine, health IT researchers say.

What’s often left unstated by telemedicine supporters is that the ACA and Part D still added billions in federal spending, even if CBO overestimated their costs.

Expanding preventive services, except in rare circumstances, doesn’t save money, says Van de Water, who led CBO's budget analysis division during his 18 years there.

Take an increase in federal cigarette taxes as an example. While higher taxes on cigarettes cause fewer people to smoke and cut tobacco-related disease claims, in the long term they raise federal spending on Medicare and Social Security for the healthier, longer-lived population that results.

“We would never say it’s a bad thing for those people to be living longer, but it is a bad thing for the federal budget for those people to be living longer,” Joyce said. That dichotomy is often difficult for advocates of a particular benefit — a cigarette tax or telemedicine, for example — to wrap their heads around.

“CBO’s bias is, it is pretty sure people are trying to get a free lunch,” Joyce said. “So it tends to be skeptical of claims that something is going to save money unless it has been proven that it will, which creates a potential bias against new technologies or new approaches.”

For years, CBO wouldn’t recognize the savings associated with prescription drug use, or the idea that seniors taking their medication would be healthier and need fewer doctors’ visits or hospital stays. While such a claim made logical sense, it took several years to generate the scientific evidence.

“[CBO] would change their mind if someone published any evidence to the contrary,” said Loren Adler, research director at Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget.

The Alliance for Connected Care, a two-year-old telemedicine lobbying group that’s been driving congressional interest in the industry, has produced multiple studies that it says show the technology can save Medicare money.

In a July blog post outlined shortcomings in telemedicine proposals, however, CBO pointed to the lack of telemedicine data from seniors or within a fee-for-service payment model. The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality said in a draft report this month that more studies on the technology’s use within primary care or alternative payment models would be helpful.

CBO isn’t unfair, nor are its standards too high, says former Pennsylvania Rep. Allyson Schwartz, a lawmaker noted for her work in health policy who now runs a Medicare Advantage advocacy group.

If anything, advocates need to find better ways to show CBO their proposed changes work and will save money. “They do seek to be fair, but they’re also careful,” Schwartz said.

Authors: