3945162

Blue Cross Blue Shield, which has been partnering with the White House on Obamacare implementation, admitted that people would lose their existing health insurance plans under Obamacare, despite the president’s claim to the contrary.

“It depends on when you bought it and how,” according to a “Frequently Asked Questions” page on health care reform hosted by Blue Cross Blue Shield of California. “If you were enrolled in a plan PRIOR to March 23, 2010, you may have the option of keeping that plan when new plans are rolled out for 2014—this is known as a ‘Grandfathered Plan.’ Any plan purchased or changed AFTER March 2010, would be considered a ‘Non-Grandfathered Plan.’ Grandfathered plans are exempt from certain health care reform provisions whereas non-grandfathered plans must comply with all health care reform mandates.”

“It is important to note that not all carriers chose to grandfather their plans. At Blue Shield we have grandfathered plans for individuals and families who purchase plans themselves and not through their employers. If you purchase insurance through your job, your employer may decide to change the insurance plan it offers to you. For more information please visit our website,” according to Blue Cross Blue Shield of California.

“If you like your health-care plan, you’ll be able to keep your health-care plan, period. No one will take it away, no matter what,” President Obama said on June 15, 2009.

As The Daily Caller reported, Obamacare is creating health insurance monopolies in a number of states that heavily favor Blue Cross Blue Shield.

At least five Blue Cross Blue Shield executives joined President Obama for a closed White House conference in April on Obamacare implementation, accounting for approximately half of the executives present.

Blue Cross Blue Shield plans are even engaging in community organizing efforts in Louisiana, where the company is leading the state’s education campaign about enrollment in the unpopular health care exchanges.

The Obama administration changed key language in a draft of Obamacare regulations in 2010 to conceal its knowledge that people would lose their existing plans under Obamacare.

Follow Patrick on Twitter