Before you go, we thought you'd like these...

Presidential hopeful Rick Santorum admitted Sunday his race may be approaching its final hour.

He told USA Today and The Des Moines Register, "You reach a point when you realize that you aren't going to accomplish what you're going to accomplish and you have to look out for the greater good."

SEE MORE: COMPLETE 2016 ELECTION COVERAGE FROM AOL.com

Yet, he also said he didn't need to win in Iowa to continue his campaign, only to "finish ahead of the pack that's sitting in single digits."

See more of Santorum on the campaign trail:

Rick Santorum admits his campaign may be coming to a close GARNER, IOWA - AUGUST 24: Republican Presidential candidate Rick Santorum continues to campaign through Iowa on August 24, 2015 in Garner, Iowa. Here he stops at Stellar Industries for an informal 'town hall' style meeting with locals and employee's. (Photos by Charles Ommanney/The Washington Post via Getty Images) Rick Santorum, former senator from Pennsylvania and 2016 Republican presidential candidate, waits to speak at a news conference on the immigration system at the National Press Club in Washington, D.C., U.S., on Thursday, Aug. 20, 2015. Santorum discussed the need to secure the border, reform visa programs, reduce current legal immigration levels by 25% and create a workable program for America's agricultural sector. Photographer: Andrew Harrer/Bloomberg via Getty Images UNITED STATES - August 15: Republican presidential candidate Rick Santorum mans the grill as he cooks pork chops at the Iowa State Fair in Des Moines, Iowa, on Saturday, August 15, 2015. (Photo By Al Drago/CQ Roll Call) Rick Santorum, former senator from Pennsylvania and 2016 Republican presidential candidate, holds a glass of beer he poured during a campaign stop at Confluence Brewing Co. in Des Moines, Iowa, U.S., on Wednesday, Aug. 12, 2015. Santorum will speak at Iowa State Fair's politics soapbox on Aug. 15. Photographer: Andrew Harrer/Bloomberg via Getty Images Republican presidential hopeful Rick Santorum speaks during the Republican presidential primary debate on August 6, 2015 at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland, Ohio. Seven candidates are debating before the top 10 candidates face off during prime time. AFP PHOTO/MANDEL NGAN (Photo credit should read MANDEL NGAN/AFP/Getty Images) Republican presidential hopeful and former Pennsylvania senator Rick Santorum is seen at the Quicken Loans Arena ahead of the Republican presidential primary debate on August 6, 2015 in Cleveland, Ohio. AFP PHOTO/MANDEL NGAN (Photo credit should read MANDEL NGAN/AFP/Getty Images) NEW YORK, NY - JULY 22: Republican candidate for USA President and former Senator from Pennsylvania , Rick Santorum visits 'Cavuto: Coast To Coast' at FOX Studios on July 22, 2015 in New York City. (Photo by John Lamparski/Getty Images) AMES, IA - JULY 18: Republican presidential candidate and former Pennsylvania Senator Rick Santorum fields questions at The Family Leadership Summit at Stephens Auditorium on July 18, 2015 in Ames, Iowa. According to the organizers, the purpose of The Family Leadership Summit is to inspire, motivate, and educate conservatives. (Photo by Scott Olson/Getty Images) WASHINGTON, DC - JUNE 19: Republican U.S. presidential hopeful and former U.S. Sen. Rick Santorum (R-PA) speaks during the 'Road to Majority' conference June 19, 2015 in Washington, DC. Conservatives gathered at the annual event held by the Faith & Freedom Coalition and Concerned Women for America to discuss politics and address current events. (Photo by Alex Wong/Getty Images) Rick Santorum, former U.S. senator from Pennsylvania and 2016 Republican presidential candidate, speaks during an appearance on Bloomberg Television's 'With All Due Respect' in New York, U.S., on Thursday, June 11, 2015. Santorum, whoÂ opposes a path to legalization for the estimated 11 million undocumented immigrants in the U.S., stopped short last week of calling for their deportation. Photographer: Louis Lanzano/Bloomberg via Getty Images CABOT, PA - MAY 27: Former U.S. Senator Rick Santorum (R-PA) announces his candidacy for the 2016 Republican nomination for president at Penn United Technologies May 27, 2015 in Cabot, Pennsylvania, This is the second run for Santorum, who finished runner-up in 2012 to nominee Mitt Romney. (Photo by Jeff Swensen/Getty Images) of SEE ALL BACK TO SLIDE SHOW CAPTION + HIDE CAPTION –

So, is that likely? Ben Carson is the most popular candidate still in single digits. In the latest Fox News poll, he leads Santorum by 6 points. But in the most recent CBS poll, he leads by only 4.

Beyond Iowa, though, Santorum ranks last in a Real Clear Politics average of statewide polls.

More from AOL.com:

Ted Cruz answers Trump's Sarah Palin plug with Rick Perry endorsement

Tennis officials interview players over mixed doubles match

Authorities seek 3 inmates and answers about their escape