Buy Photo Katherine Estelle Woodruff of Manalapan, who turns 107 years old today , claps her hands as the candles are lit on her birthday cake during a birthday celebration thrown by the staff of Taylors Mills Family Medical before her doctor’s appointment. (Photo: Tanya Breen/Staff Photographer)Buy Photo

Katherine Woodruff is 107 years old today. To celebrate, her family doctor threw her a birthday party Tuesday at her annual physical.

"Other than her high blood pressure, she's doing very good," said Dr. Alexander Goldberg, medical director at Taylors Mills Family Medical.

Woodruff has been Goldberg's patient since she was 95. He credits her longevity to "very good genes."

MORE: Learn the secrets to living to 100

"I'm part Irish and part English," Woodruff said, adding her secret was "keeping well" and watching her cholesterol.

She got a little teary-eyed Tuesday, but clapped and gave the thumbs up after a family member and the Taylors Mills staff sang "Happy Birthday."

"I really feel good. I'm so happy, it's nice to see everybody," Woodruff said.

They gave her a cake, as well as a corsage and a birthday crown to wear.

"It's the first time in my life I bought three numbers for cake candles," said Debbie Alfonso, clinical practice administrator at Taylors Mills.

Woodruff was born Katherine Estelle Edmonds on Aug. 27, 1907, in Phillipsburg. She was the youngest of 10 children. Her family moved to Bayonne and that is where she met and married her husband, Robert Woodruff.

They had two daughters, both living: Barbara Russell, 73, of Manalapan and Mauline Befuma, 78, of Staten Island. She now has four grandchildren and two great-grandchildren.

Her husband passed away in 1990. She still watches reruns of "The Lawrence Welk Show." It was their favorite television show.

The Monmouth County Office of Aging was not able to confirm whether Woodruff is the oldest person in the county, but they believe she might be.

"As far as we know that's the oldest. We have not heard of anyone older than that age in Monmouth County," said Gloria VanHouten, principal clerk in the county's Office of Aging.

Woodruff has trouble hearing, however, she was at ease answering questions written down from a reporter. When asked who her favorite author is she didn't hesitate to reveal it was romance novelist Danielle Steele.

"I like her. Where I am now there's a lot of activities so I don't read as much anymore," Woodruff said.

Her son-in-law Jim Russell said Woodruff lived at her Marlboro home until a year and a half ago when she moved into Pinebrook Care Center in Manalapan.

Dan Radel: 732-643-4072; dradel@app.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1peW5y8