Ingalls Memorial Hospital in Harvey, one of the few independent hospitals remaining in the Southland, is seeking an affiliation or partnership with a larger hospital system to improve its negotiating position with health insurance companies.

According to Andy Stefo, the chief financial officer of Ingalls Health System, the parent company of the hospital, Ingalls is not looking for a buyer or a merger with another health care system.

Sue Fine, a spokeswoman for Ingalls, said the hospital is not even sure what form the partnership or affiliation would take at this time, saying Ingalls had sent letters to "a handful" of other hospital systems in Chicago and some outside the state requesting offers to affiliate and expected to narrow the field of potential partners over the course of the summer.

"This is definitely not a sale," Fine said, saying Ingalls has a long history of profitability that has continued in recent years. She said Ingalls officials have no specific ideas of the sort of relationship that would come out of such a deal and no specific ideas about what such a structure would look like, suggesting that the final relationship would be determined by the creativity of the hospital systems making the offers and the determination of an Ingalls affiliation committee about what would work best within the hospital's mission to serve the south suburban community.

Stefo said one of the major reasons Ingalls is seeking an affiliate is to gain leverage with private insurance carriers who have voiced a reluctance to negotiate reimbursement rates with the hospital because its customer base is so small.

He explained that shifts in Medicare and Medicaid have given private insurance carriers an expanded role in determining medical reimbursement rates for government-funded programs. Illinois has moved to a managed care system for Medicaid and the federal government is promoting Medicare Advantage, which is also a managed care system.

As a result, where Medicare used to set reimbursement rates for medical suppliers, the private insurance companies under Medicare Advantage negotiate rates with hospitals.

"It's a lot more like dealing with commercial insurance carriers than it is dealing with the government," Stefo said.

In addition to making it easier to deal with health insurance companies, Ingalls is also seeking an affiliation that might expand its access to physicians, reduce its costs and provide more health care options to people in the community, Fine said.

"We're looking four to five years down the road to avoid problems that could occur instead of being reactionary," Fine said. "That's the sort of forward thinking that has allowed this hospital to remain profitable while continuing to meet the needs of our community throughout the years."

Stefo said the Ingalls Health System had a net operating revenue of $350 million in fiscal year 2014 and operating income of $1 million. Ingalls net income was $20 million, primarily the result of investment returns, Stefo said.

The hospital, licensed for 478 beds, has an occupancy rate of 72 percent and 65 percent of its clients benefit from Medicare or Medicaid.

In addition to the hospital, located on a 37-acres campus, the Ingalls Health System includes outpatient family care centers in Calumet City, Flossmoor and Tinley Park; a same day surgery center in Tinley Park, an outpatient rehabilitation center in South Holland and a wellness center in Flossmoor.

The hospital owns 24/7 urgent aid centers in Flossmoor, Tinley Park and Calumet City. It also operates a home nursing care service and a hospice facility.

Because of its varied medical offerings, Fine said, Ingalls believes it would be a more attractive partner for a hospital system than a stand-alone hospital.

Mergers and hospital sales have been occurring with increasing frequency in recent years as government reimbursement rates for Medicaid and Medicare patients have failed to keep pace with the increasing cost of health care. In addition, private health insurance companies have become more aggressive in their negotiations over rate structures, and hospitals without the ability to push back are getting pushed around.

Silver Cross Hospital in New Lenox signed an affiliation agreement last year with Advocate Health Care. Silver Cross officials insisted that deal was not a merge but was intended to improve its negotiating position with health insurance companies by leveraging its affiliation with the 12 hospitals in the Advocate Health Care system.

St. James Hospitals in Chicago Heights and Olympia Fields also announced they were actively seeking an affiliation last year, but their parent company, Franciscan Alliance was actually seeking buyers for the two hospitals. But instead of pursuing such a deal the two hospitals remain under the Franciscan umbrella after cutting costs and turning a profit for the first time in years, according to officials there.

St. Francis Hospital in Blue Island faced closure in 2008 after its parent company, SSM Health Care, a non-profit Catholic-owned system, determined it could no longer sustain financial losses that had mounted over the years and said it could not find a buyer for the hospital. A cooperative effort by political leaders, doctors and business leaders eventually resulted in the hospital reopening as MetroSouth.

Changes in the Illinois Medicaid program this year shifted 2.3 million people into managed care programs run by a handful of private insurance companies.

Nationwide, Medicare Advantage has gone from serving 10 percent of the population to 30 percent, with the Chicago metro area lagging behind that trend at about 20 percent, according to Stefo, but the numbers are likely to continue to grow.

I've mentioned before in this column that private health insurance companies exert more control over how health care is provided in the United States than any other industrialized nation in the world.

In most other nations, governments not only set the rates for medical reimbursements, but also the cost of prescription drugs. Private companies, motivated solely by profit margins, control health care in this nation and have actually increased their influence since the passage of the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare.

While Obamacare is called a national health insurance program, it is far different from the single-payer national health care plans in other countries, where government entities control the costs and often the delivery of medical treatment.