Doctors were much more willing to take on poor and low-income patients when the federal government temporarily boosted Medicaid payments, according to the study published Wednesday.

The study, published in the New England Journal of Medicine, suggests the two-year increase in Medicaid reimbursements as scheduled in the Affordable Care Act helped bring health care to more of the poor and low-income people who are enrolled in the program.

But the findings leave some concern the access to care problems those enrollees had before the program began will resume again, since New Jersey is among 35 states that let it expire on Dec. 31.

The study, funded by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, said the availability of primary care appointments for Medicaid patients increased from 58.7 percent to 66.4 percent. The rate is a measure of how often a new patient was able to book an appointment.

During the two years of the program, the federal government pumped an extra $317 million into reimbursements for New Jersey providers, according to the state Department of Human Services.

The study included the results of hundreds of calls for appointments in New Jersey, one of 10 states in the survey. Callers, who were trained staff members simulating patients seeking a new-patient appointment, called primary care offices in two cycles – before the pay increase occurred and during the time it was in effect last year.

Among those 10 states, the pay increase had the biggest impact in New Jersey. Researchers thought the greatest increase would occur in states that had the largest bump in reimbursement rates, a theory that proved correct in the study.

New Jersey, which saw reimbursements more than double for the two-year period, had the availability of appointments for Medicaid patients increase from 70.6 percent to 81.5 percent, more than any other state in the study.

The study also showed that the availability for appointments for people in New Jersey reporting to have private insurance decreased from 92.7 percent to 88 percent, it said.

Physicians’ willingness to take on more Medicaid patients during the pay bump period shows the two-year trial program in Obamacare worked as planned, a foundation official said.

Kathy Hempstead, director of the health insurance coverage team, said doctors in New Jersey have limited their Medicaid patient load because the reimbursements typically are below their costs.

“Doctors will say it’s difficult to make a living seeing Medicaid patients,” she said.

New Jersey’s reimbursements for Medicaid are low for a variety of factors, including the formula the federal government uses to set rates and the state’s contributions into the program.

In 2013, a New Jersey family physician averaged $23.50 for an office visit from a Medicaid-covered patient. In other parts of the country, that same visit could be reimbursed up to $111, the foundation said.

Few doctors who had not been accepting Medicaid patients before the reimbursement increase began taking them on once the program began, so the researchers concluded that the improvement in availability was not linked to an increase in the number of doctors.

Indeed, the study found, the overall rate of availability for private insurance patients generally stayed the same across the states, it said.

The question now is, will access to primary care for Medicaid patients slide back to 2012 levels?

Larry Downs, CEO of the Medical Society of New Jersey, thinks it will slide, but not back to 2012 levels. Small primary care practices might scale back on their availability, he said, while those who are in big hospital practices might not have to cut back.

Doctors who brought in new patients during the two-year program feel compelled to maintain the relationship, he said. “It’s hard to say no to that patient,” Downs said.

Since Medicaid expanded in 2013, 300,000 people were added to its rolls in New Jersey.

Daniel Polsky, a University of Pennsylvania researcher who co-authored the study, said it’s unclear how the increase in Medicaid-covered patients will affect doctors’ decisions to accept more enrollees.

“We did not see an impact from the Medicaid expansion on the availability of providers,” Polsky said in an e-mail. “ What may happen, but not measured here, is that the places that see lots of Medicaid patients may end up having to expand.”

Downs said he hopes the success of the payment program will spur a long-awaited discussion about reforming Medicaid. They key, he said, is to redirect the Medicaid patients from using expensive hospital emergency departments as their primary care providers to more affordable community-based practices.

The paper was published in the journal Wednesday evening.

Tim Darragh may be reached at tdarragh@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @timdarragh. Find NJ.com on Facebook.