FORT WORTH — Presidential contender Ted Cruz came home Thursday, telling more than 2,000 supporters at the Fort Worth Stockyards that he was the “consistent conservative” needed to move America forward.

“All across this country, Americans are waking up. And let me tell you, help is on the way,” the Republican senator said as boisterous supporters waved the Cruz campaign fans given to them to help beat the outdoor heat.

Since he was elected in 2012, Cruz has become the most popular Republican in Texas and the face of the state’s tea party movement.

He wants to expand his following nationwide in hopes that a hard-right conservative can win the GOP nomination, fire up the base and claim the White House.

For about 30 minutes, Cruz thrilled the home-state crowd with promises to repeal the Affordable Care Act, reverse President Barack Obama’s pending Iran nuclear agreement, rebuild the military and abolish the IRS.

Cruz said that if he’s elected, the IRS would become unnecessary because he would develop a simple flat tax for all Americans. Then he joked about what to do with the 90,000 IRS employees left without an agency.

“We need to padlock that building and take all 90,000 and put them on our southern border,” he said.

Cruz also promised to end the practice of allowing cities to provide sanctuary to people in the U.S. illegally, and he said he would strip all federal funding to Planned Parenthood.

“When I tell you I’m going to do something, I’m going to do exactly what I say I’m going to do,” Cruz said.

Polls show that Cruz, while well-funded and organized, is significantly behind businessman Donald Trump and others in the GOP race.

But unlike other candidates, Cruz has embraced Trump. He even invited the front-runner to join him next week at a rally against the proposed deal aimed at curbing Iran’s nuclear program.

Cruz said before his speech that Trump is helping, not harming him. He contends that it was Trump’s presence at last month’s GOP debate that helped draw an audience of 24 million. While viewers may have tuned in to see Trump, he said, many came away liking Cruz, boosting his fundraising.

Trump, Cruz said, has also forced the media to focus on illegal immigration.

“A lot of the other Republican candidates have gone out of their way to smack him with a two-by-four and say really nasty vicious things about him,” Cruz said of Trump. “I think that’s foolish. I think that’s a mistake. I’ve gone in the other direction and sang his praises.”

In previous presidential election cycles, a campaign rally in Texas would have been unnecessary because the state’s primaries were held too late to shape the race’s outcome.

But in this election, the March 1 primary is expected to be critical because of the high number of candidates and the belief by many observers that the early contest won’t produce a clear front-runner.

So Cruz will battle primarily against former Gov. Rick Perry for Texas delegates. Other candidates with ties to the state include former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul and former Hewlett-Packard CEO Carly Fiorina.

Cruz, who also had stops in Tyler and Kingwood, said Thursday that he was confident he could do well at home.

“Our support in Texas is tremendous,” he said. “But it’s our intention to compete hard to win this state and to win states across the country.”

Follow Gromer Jeffers Jr. on Twitter at @gromerjeffers.