By BRIAN PALMER, Slate

Sensory processing disorder is one of those peculiarly modern diseases caught in the purgatory between legitimacy and quackery.

It's widely accepted that some children have difficulty handling external stimuli. Kids diagnosed with autism and ADHD have trouble managing sensory experiences others deal with easily. They cover their ears on the playground, for example, or complain that their clothing is intolerably scratchy. That much is uncontroversial.

In the 1970s, a UCLA psychologist claimed that sensory processing failure is not merely a symptom of other disorders but is more often a freestanding disease with its own neurologic basis. After 40 years of debate, we still don't know whether she was right.

This debate sounds like a medical technicality, but the distinction between symptom and disorder matters a great deal. It matters because tens of thousands of parents are convinced their children's behavioral issues are the result of sensory processing difficulties. They don't believe, or can't believe, that the real problem is anxiety, ADHD, or autism.

It also matters because barrel-loads of money are on the line. Advocates claim that up to 16 percent of American children suffer from SPD, but few insurance companies will pay for therapy until mainstream doctors are convinced the disease is real and treatment works.

Recognition seems distant, however. Two years ago, the American Academy of Pediatrics issued a position paper concluding there was insufficient evidence that sensory processing challenges represent an independent disorder. The organization warned pediatricians against diagnosing children with the disease and advised parents that there is limited evidence to support existing therapies.

SPD experienced a more significant setback in 2013, when the fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders excluded the disease on the basis of inadequate evidence.

The rejections have set up a battle between the medical "establishment" and angry families. The standoff is a good example of why the Internet is a terrible medium for debating medical issues. The stakes are highest, and the need for a resolution most urgent, for the people least able to understand the science.

That's not a dig at families struggling with major behavioral problems. A brief look at the literature reveals why these issues are impossible for laypeople to adjudicate. Dozens of papers address the disorder in peer-reviewed journals. Quality and quantity are not the same thing, though.

Even Lucy Miller, director of the Sensory Therapies and Research Center and a leading advocate for SPD, acknowledges that the early research was "not rigorous." Those shortcomings put advocates in a hole, as major journals and many medical experts came to think of SPD research as unscientific.

SPD research has unquestionably improved in recent years. The National Institutes of Health have funded some of the research, granting it no small degree of legitimacy.

Last year, a paper in the journal Neuroimage: Clinical purported to identify structural brain abnormalities in children with clinical evidence of sensory processing issues.

Many hopeful parents think that means victory, but it's not even close. Despite 40 years of discussion, SPD researchers have yet to agree on a proven, standardized diagnostic tool. This undermines researchers' ability to define the boundaries of the disease.

It also makes it impossible to test the effectiveness of the therapies, many of which look a little loopy to scientific types. Spinning? Swinging? If you can't prove the therapies work, insurance companies are not going to pay for them.

Larry Desch, a pediatrician and co-author of the 2012 report that declined to recognize SPD, acknowledges that some of the recent research is of a high quality. But, he muses, "Has there been enough clear data to determine that what we are seeing in some children is truly a disorder and not just a temporary issue or a variation of normal?"

That question will take many more years to answer.