By of the

Cincinnati — Matt Garza's best performance in a Milwaukee Brewers uniform came in his first start for them on April 2.

Until Saturday, that is.

The right-hander dominated the Cincinnati Reds, tossing a complete-game, two-hit shutout to lead the Brewers to a 1-0 victory in front of 38,754 fans at Great American Ball Park.

Garza (6-5) threw 111 pitches and his nine innings bested his April 2 effort when he took a no-hitter into the seventh against the Atlanta Braves at Miller Park. He pitched eight innings overall only to see the Brewers lose, 1-0.

On Saturday, he also struck out nine in what was only the 15th 1-0 game in the history of the extremely hitter-friendly ballpark.

"That was really nice," manager Ron Roenicke said. "We were talking earlier today that we needed one of our pitchers to have a big game. That was a big game."

Garza began the ninth inning at 102 pitches and needed only nine to record just the seventh complete-game shutout by an opposing pitcher in the 12-year history of Great American Ball Park.

He got Billy Hamilton to fly out to right, Todd Frazier to fly out to center and Joey Votto on a swinging strikeout to finish what he started and stop Milwaukee's season-high-tying losing streak at four games.

"I just kept attacking," said Garza, who now has 10 career complete games and four career shutouts. His last complete game came Aug. 3 at Oakland, when he was pitching for the Texas Rangers.

"I had a plan and just stuck with it — me and (catcher Jonathan Lucroy), like we talk before every game — and the plan just worked. We went after these guys and we challenged them. Like I said last start, some days are better than others."

There was some discussion about whether he'd come out to pitch the ninth. Garza was due up fourth in the top of the ninth, and with the Brewers nursing their slim one-run lead, they might have considered using a pinch hitter had someone gotten on base.

Reds reliever Jumbo Diaz came in throwing gas, however, and retired Milwaukee in order.

"It wasn't a big discussion," Garza said. "It was a normal discussion, 'If we get a guy on, if we score runs, do you want to go out there?' And I just said, 'Whatever you think is best for the team. If we need runs, let's get them.'"

The Brewers scored the game's lone run in the first inning thanks to some clutch two-out hitting by Aramis Ramirez.

Lucroy got things going with a double to left and Carlos Gomez followed by drawing a walk against Homer Bailey. That brought up Ramirez, who singled to left to plate Lucroy and give the Brewers their first lead of the series.

"With those weird shadows that came on, and the way those two guys were locked in, it was definitely going to be a low-scoring game," Lucroy said. "It worked out for us."

The Brewers then made an unexpected lineup change midway through the second, lifting Ryan Braun due to lower back spasms and replacing him with Logan Schafer.

"Felt it today in BP," Roenicke said. "Thought he was going to be able to get through the game, and obviously he couldn't do it."

The Brewers managed to get a base runner on against Bailey every inning until the fifth but couldn't pad their lead any further.

Garza, meanwhile, was untouchable through four innings.

Cincinnati made only solid contact once over that span — on a Brandon Phillips drive to right that was run down by Schafer in the second. The right-hander didn't allow a base runner until the fifth, when Phillips led off with a single to center.

Jay Bruce followed with a rocket to first base that Mark Reynolds gloved, starting an easy double play as he stepped on the bag to retire Phillips as well.

In the sixth, Ramirez singled to right with two outs. Khris Davis followed with a drive to right-center that hit off the base of the wall, leaving third-base coach Ed Sedar to wave Ramirez around third.

The Reds executed a terrific relay, with Bruce hitting shortstop Zack Cozart, who then made a great throw home to a waiting Devin Mesoraco for the third out.

Cozart doubled to left with one out in the bottom of the sixth to give Cincinnati its first runner in scoring position on the day, but Garza struck out both Bailey and Hamilton to get out of the jam.

Garza struck out Hamilton on a 96-mph fastball, eliciting a little extra emotion from him as he walked off the mound.

"Yeah, the ball was coming out of my hand," Garza said. "But that could also be seven days off from my last start. We needed a break and we needed to win, and we came through today. Bailey threw the ball well, too. Shoot, he had that one hiccup in the first and then it was just a straight street fight between the two teams."

The bottom of the seventh was almost an instant replay of the sixth, which was bad news for the Brewers.

Reynolds drew a one-out walk, and then with two outs, Scooter Gennett doubled down the right-field line. Sedar, again being aggressive, waved Reynolds around third.

Bruce this time hit Phillips, who in turn made a great throw home to Mesoraco. Reynolds tried scoring on a headfirst slide but was also out, firing up the big crowd once again.

"You need to do it," Roenicke said. "It's going to be tough to score runs. It's going to be tough to put together a lot of hits in a row off Bailey. When you get the opportunity, you make them have to make a good play, and they did. The first throw was Cozart right on the money. Then when Phillips gets the ball in his hands you aren't real comfortable either.

"Two close plays; it's not like they are blowing us up easy. They were close."

The Brewers have played three 1-0 games and won the last two — both on the road. They previously won in Pittsburgh on June 8 behind Yovani Gallardo.

Garza Saturday

2

hits

2

walks

9

strikeouts

111

pitches

Garza's career

3

previous shutouts, including a no-hitter for Devil Rays in 2010

9

previous complete games

Brewers this year

1

previous complete game (Lohse, June 5 vs. Cubs)

1

previous two-hitter (Estrada, Kintzler and Figaro, June 25 vs. Nationals)