“Government does work,” she says. “It works really well for those who can hire armies of lobbyists … lawyers … make big campaign contributions”

Senator Elizabeth Warren was very passionate about the midterm elections that swept Republicans into greater power during an appearance on “Late Night with Seth Meyers” Tuesday evening. The Democratic Senator from Massachusetts talked about the need for accountability on both sides of the political aisle, referencing the government shutdown and the Affordable Care Act.

See photos: The Scene at TheWrap's Power Women Breakfast 2014

“What Mitch McConnell said just a couple of days ago is he wants to go to Congress and loosen the regulations over the big banks,” Warren said. “Now I don’t think very many people went to the polls and said, Boy, I am casting my vote to make sure that Wall Street has better chances to make bigger profits off the backs of the American people. I just don’t think that’s what was going on.”

When asked why the Democrats are struggling to get their message across to voters, Warren didn’t answer it directly. Instead, she talked about what she thinks is the overall perception of government right now.

Also read: Obama Grilled by Media Over Crushing Democratic Defeat: Let the Pundits Pick Through the Results

“People today, a lot of folks are feeling really discouraged, and part of that is because government is not working for them,” she said. “Let’s all be clear. Government does work. It works really well for those who can hire armies of lobbyists. It works really well for those who have armies of lawyers. It works really well for those who can make big campaign contributions. It’s just not working for American families.”

“Late Night with Seth Meyers” airs weeknights at 12:37 a.m. ET on NBC.

The Scene at TheWrap's Power Women Breakfast 2014 (Photos) Special guest Salma Hayek spoke about her activism to prevent domestic violence. Getty Images

Sharon Waxman, TheWrap Editor in Chief, welcomed guests to the event and interviewed speakers. Getty Images

All proceeds from the silent auction went to the International Women Media Foundation, which supports brave women journalists around the world Getty Images

Ferragamo donated a black leather handbag to the charity auction to raise funds for the IWMF

CNN Foreign Correspondent and Courage Winner Arwa Damon spoke about her experience reporting from the Middle East. Getty Images

Gail Berman, Chairman and CEO of The Jackal Group, was the keynote speaker. Getty Images



Guests were treated to breakfast from The Montage Hotel in Beverly Hills before the speakers hit the stage. Getty Images

Old friends meet at the breakfast - producer Paula Wagner, Gail Berman, Sharon Waxman, Janet Janjigian

Jon Borland of Ferragamo with Sharon Waxman

Hayek told stories of her mischievous years at a Catholic boarding school. Getty Images

Hayek got her start on a Mexican telenovela before moving to America to pursue an acting career. Getty Images

The crowd applauded after hearing stories from the speakers at the breakfast, including Jill Calcaterra, marketing chief at Cinedigm Getty Images

The 2014 Power Women's Breakfast brings together some of the most powerful women in entertainment, politics, media and business. Getty Images

Abigal Spencer introduced CNN's Arwa Damon



Arwa Damon told moving stories about helping a young boy who had been brutally burned in Iraq



The audience was riveted by the speakers' stories

Fox news anchor Christine Devine in the audience



Actress and Women in Film board member Sharon Lawrence

Kathy Connell, Screen Actors Guild Awards Executive Producer and Executive Producer of Awards and National Programming for SAG-AFTRA, listens to the keynote interview

Abigail Spencer











Management consultant Beth Gulas







An auction winner enthuses over her buy of a wine-tasting event

Armani's Wanda McDaniel talks to Waxman after the event

TheWrap Editor in Chief Sharon Waxman welcomes actresses Abigail Spencer and Sharon Lawrence. Getty Images Previous ; Next 1 of 36 The sixth annual event is an intimate gathering of Hollywood’s leading women executives Special guest Salma Hayek spoke about her activism to prevent domestic violence.