BANGOR, Maine — Mount Desert Island senior forward Hannah Shaw had never beaten Presque Isle during her exemplary basketball career. She was 0-9 entering Saturday’s Eastern Maine Class B championship game at the Cross Insurance Center.

But she didn’t allow the Wildcats to end her career, pouring in 25 points and hauling down 16 rebounds, both game-highs, as Mount Desert Island ended defending two-time state champ Presque Isle’s 64-game winning streak with an impressive 63-51 victory.

“We didn’t make it this far to lose,” said Hannah Shaw whose 19-2 Trojans will take on 20-1 Lake Region of Naples in Friday’s 7:05 p.m. state final at the Cross Center.

It is the MDI girls’ first EM B title since 2003.

Presque Isle, with just one senior on its roster, wound up 20-1.

The Trojans used a 19-6 spurt spanning the first and second quarters to build a 26-14 lead they would never relinquish and they were able to withstand some runs by the determined Wildcats in the second half to notch the triumph.

Kelsey Shaw, Hannah’s sophomore sister, had 13 points, nine rebounds and three assists and and junior guard Sarah Phelps had 12 points, seven rebounds and two assists.

Wildcat sophomore guard Taylor Williams scored 16 points and standout junior guard Hannah Graham wound up with 13 points, five rebounds and three assists. All of Graham’s points came in the second half. Freshman Emily Lagerstrom came off the bench and hit three 3-pointers for her nine points and Regan Nelson had a team-high eight rebounds to go with five points.

Presque Isle rattled off 12 straight points in the fourth quarter to pull within 51-47 with 2:40 remaining.

Graham had a hand in all 12 points with two 3-pointers and assists on 3-pointers by Lagerstrom and Williams.

But Hannah Shaw fed sister Kelsey under the basket for what turned into a traditional three-point play with 2:26 left and, after Phelps grabbed a defensive rebound and Molly Carroll made a steal, Carroll sank a foul shot and Sierra Tapley hit two more to make it 57-47 with 1:10 left.

MDI outrebounded Presque Isle 25-12 in the first half en route to manufacturing a 13-point halftime lead and finished with a 38-21 edge.

“They were on a mission and played better than we did,” said Presque Isle coach Jeff Hudson. “They made a lot of shots. We knew if they made a lot of shots and Hannah Shaw stayed out of foul trouble, we’d have a hard time. And we didn’t rebound.”

The Trojans also did an exceptional job defensively, extending on their 2-3 zone to contest most of Presque Isle’s shots.

“We changed our philosophy since we played them last during the regular season,” said MDI coach Brent Barker. “We were getting beat on our man-to-man so we went to a 2-3 zone. We wanted to pack it in and close out on their shooters. We did a great job of that today.

“Hannah Graham still got her points but she had some tough looks [to earn them],” said Barker who credited Carroll with doing an outstanding job against Graham when Graham ventured to her side of the zone.

“I just tried to play real tough defense on her and faceguard her,” said Carroll. “But I couldn’t get too close because she’d go by me. She’s an amazing player. It was a real good challenge.”

“Molly Carroll and Sierra Tapley were on me just about all the time and they did a good job,” said Graham who admitted her team came out “flat” in the first half.

Phelps had four 3-pointers in the first half to help build the lead. She had 13 points, four assists and two steals in the semifinal loss to PI last year.

“For some reason I get so motivated to play Presque Isle in the tournament. They’re real good competition so they bring out the best in our team,” grinned Phelps.