“It was poor judgment," Torricelli says of accepting gifts from a donor. "But it doesn’t define my life.”



His hair is white now, his suits are more expensive, and he drives a fancy electric car with a console that looks like the cockpit of a fighter jet.

But Bob Torricelli has a hole in his soul, and he doesn't hide it. He misses being a United States Senator, and he still winces when he remembers the day he dropped out of his re-election campaign in 2002 after being "severely admonished" by his fellow senators on ethics charges.

"What I went through changed me as a person," he says. "It makes you less arrogant, more understanding of the difficulties of others."

Torch, as he is known, wants back in to the political game. He has nailed it as a real estate developer over the last decade, building a fortune that friends put at more than $30 million. He lives in a restored antique home on plush estate in Hunterdon County, and recently bought an undeveloped small island off the coast of Maine for kicks.

But he's not in the Big Game. And this is a guy who was built for it, a super smart and aggressive advocate for liberal causes and a vigorous global role for America since he was a kid Congressman at age 31.

"There's unfinished business in my life," he says. "I've always been a person whose life is about public service and public policy, and I do still think about it as part of my future.

"My life has had two halves. In the first half I did nothing but public service and I felt I did it well and gave it every ounce of my energy. I've now given 12 years to make my family secure and have a good quality of life.

"I've got one more act in life. And I think about it a lot."

What office would he seek? The only real possibility is a return to the U.S. Senate. He says he doesn't want to run for governor, and would seek only statewide office.

But Torricelli can't connect those dots without giving offense. Because the only plausible way a Senate seat could open before 2018 is for Sen. Robert Menendez, who faces trial on corruption charges in October, to be convicted and removed from office.

"I think Bob Menendez has a very good chance of being acquitted, and I'm actively helping him raise money for his legal fund," Torricelli says.

Sure. But remember, deep down Torricelli is still a politician. My money is on Menendez being forced from office within a year. That would allow Gov. Chris Christie to appoint a replacement, and set up a special election.

The first question is whether Democrats would welcome Torricelli back from exile and hand him such a plumb.

"I think Bob is brilliant," says state Sen. Loretta Weinberg (D-Teaneck). "But people will say 'It's my turn.' Several members of Congress will say that."

And what about the public? Is New Jersey ready to embrace a man who was forced to resign from his own re-election campaign?

It might be fatal in some sissy place like Vermont. But this is Jersey, where the impact is tougher to predict.

"We've seen time and again that voters put somebody back in office who is under the taint of corruption," says Patrick Murray, who runs the Monmouth University Polling Institute.

What drives Torricelli nuts, then and now, is that his sins were relatively minor. A businessman and donor, David Chang, claimed that he gave Torricelli a slew of lavish gifts worth more than $20,000. But federal prosecutors filed no charges, and Chang, was discredited. He served time in federal prison for making illegal donations to Torricelli, and later died of liver cancer in 2012.

Still, he did inflict wounds. Torricelli faced a steady drip of damaging leaks about Chang's allegations during the 2002 campaign. And the Senate admonished him after finding that he did indeed accept small gifts for himself and others, and that he used his office to advocate for Chang's business interests.

"I have enormous regret that after such long public service, and working so hard, that I made a mistake in judgment over $2,500 in gifts that went to my staff and family," he says. "It was poor judgment. But it doesn't define my life."

Torricelli, 64, is now in a romantic jet-setting relationship with Ingrid Betancourt, 54, a former Colombian senator who ran for president in 2002 and was kidnapped by leftist rebels, who held her for six years before she was rescued by a joint operation of Colombian and American special forces. She wrote a best-selling book about the ordeal, and lives now in France.

"Like everyone in the Baby Boom, I have a final act," Torricelli says.

He's raising money for Hillary Clinton, and says he would consider taking an appointed position in her administration, if offered. But his heart seems to be in elected office.

If indeed Menendez goes down, it's a safe bet that Torricelli will throw himself back in the game. And if there is a smarter politician in this state, on politics or policy, then we have yet to meet.

Tom Moran may be reached at tmoran@sarledger.com or (973) 836-4909.

Tom Moran may be reached at tmoran@starledger.com or call (973) 836-4909. Follow him on Twitter @tomamoran. Find The Star-Ledger on Facebook.