Eighty-seven percent of all non-elderly Louisiana adults living in poverty will not have access to government subsidized health insurance in 2014 despite a new national health-care law that was designed to extend coverage to more people.

That’s according to Kaiser Family Foundation, which Wednesday (Oct. 16) released a new state-by-state analysis of health-care coverage in the 26 states that have so far declined to expand Medicaid to their poorest residents.

Nearly 5.2 million poor, uninsured Americans — 242,150 of them in Louisiana — will not have access to insurance provided for under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act signed into law in 2010.

The law, often called Obamacare, originally anticipated all states would expand Medicaid to people who currently make too much to qualify for the government health-care program. Under the Affordable Care Act, the government in 2014 will provide tax credits to those with incomes between 100 percent and 400 percent of the federal poverty level to help offset the expense of insurance premiums.

But for those who make even less than 100 percent poverty — $11,490 for an individual — the options are slim. They are unlikely to be able to afford the insurance and they are ineligible for tax credits.

Thirty-four percent of Louisiana’s entire uninsured non-elderly population do not qualify for either due to their income, according to the Kaiser analysis. That’s the third highest rate in the nation behind Mississippi (37 percent) and Alabama (36 percent).

“It makes it more important to continue to fight to have Medicaid expansion in the state of Louisiana,” said Jacqueline Jones, a lead organizer with Jeremiah Group, a coalition of area churches and faith organizations that have petitioned Gov. Bobby Jindal to change the state’s stance. “We were clear from the very beginning that the exchange would not benefit thousands of people.”

Like governors in many Republican-led states, Jindal has opposed the expansion largely on grounds that it is too expensive. He says it will cost the state more than $1.7 billion over 10 years and would leave more people dependent on the government for care.

In a July opinion piece for NOLA.com | The Times-Picayune, Jindal put the total percentage of low-income Louisianians left without insurance at 6 percent. He also cited the state’s system of charity hospital, arguing that Louisiana and other states should be left to create their own methods of caring for its people.