The Food and Drug Administration says that a potato genetically engineered to resist the pathogen that caused the Irish potato famine is just as safe as other potatoes on the market. The FDA also says, in a letter to Idaho based J.R. Simplot Co., that the potato is not substantially different in composition or safety from other products already on the market and there aren’t any issues that would require the agency to do more stringent premarket vetting. The U.S. Department of Agriculture approved the potato in August. The potato must also be cleared by the Environmental Protection Agency which is expected to happen in December.

The genetically engineered potato is known as the Russet Burbank Generation 2 and is the second generation of Simplot’s “Innate” brand potatoes. It includes the first version’s reduced bruising, but less of a chemical produced at high temperatures that some studies have shown to cause cancer. This second generation potato also includes a trait that will allow the potatoes to be stored at cooler temperatures longer to reduce food waste. The potatoes have already been sold to consumers. The potatoes were mostly grown in Idaho and Wisconsin and are being sold in supermarkets across the nation. However, one of the J.R. Simplot’s oldest business partners, McDonald’s, has rejected using any of Simplot’s genetically engineered potatoes.

The fact that McDonald’s has refused to use any of these potatoes should send up a red flag to consumers. McDonald’s has been subjected to much backlash over the years for allegations that their food contains non-based food substances. If McDonalds’ is refusing to use the potatoes, consumers should also be weary of buying these potatoes.

For years, consumers have been guinea pigs for new foods and new pharmaceuticals. After new foods and drugs are introduced to the market, all seems well. Ten years down the line the class action lawsuits begin to ensue as a result of the large amount of consumers becoming sick or dying, due to a new food or drug that was not properly tested, or released upon the market knowing there was a risk involved. But because the risk is so low, the company is willing to risk a few lives to turn a profit.

Genetically engineered foods seem to be a wave of the future. Some grocery stores have been selling genetically engineered lettuce for quite some time now. Consumers should be on alert to start harvesting their own vegetables because soon, buying naturally grown foods will either be too expensive or non-existent.

Source: FDA gives OK for company’s genetically engineered potato

Join the Discussion