The Copperas Cove City Council held a planning session Tuesday at the city’s Economic Development Corporation to begin the process of deciding what will make it into the budget for 2016.

This year, city staff will begin planning budgets for two years at a time, which requires the council to prioritize long-range projects in order for staff to build them into a proposed budget, said Ryan Haverlah, city budget director.

The budget for the 2016 fiscal year is expected to be nearly $10 million and about $9.5 million for 2017.

“I have to present a balanced budget — that means the revenues and expenses are either equal or the revenues are more than the expenses,” said City Manager Andrea Gardner, who is the budget officer for the city. “So if the council takes out anything that I included in there, you have to keep it balanced per state law. In other words, you can’t add in any fluff.”

Some of the priorities discussed were possibly raising the city sales and property tax rates; raising water, sewage and solid waste prices to cover rising service costs; building practice baseball fields for use while fixing the fields at City Park; restroom replacements at the parks and golf course; city government vehicle replacements; approval of the number and salaries of city employees to include a 1 percent cost-of-living adjustment; and the rising cost of health care for city employees as required by the Affordable Care Act.

Budget items discussed not only pertained to the 2016 and 2017 fiscal years, but took into account what the budgets will look like out to 2020. Items included the capital improvement plan, capital outlay plan, personnel improvement plan, municipal services, economic development and the library technology plan.

Each of the council members highlighted key projects, such as fixing the ball parks for Councilman Kirby Lack.

Councilman George Duncan wants to save the city money by hiring a new employee to inspect new building facilities and homes instead of hiring specialized contractors.

“The silver lining behind this, what I’m really glad to hear, is that we’re not having an outside agency come in and tell you what you need,” Duncan said. “You wind up cutting your own throat because that’s a self-serving, self-licking ice-cream cone when they come in and try to figure it out for you. We can figure it out.”

Hiring a new inspector would allow the city to expedite opening new homes or businesses, which will ultimately bring in greater tax revenue for the city, Gardner said.

Once a proposed budget is submitted to the council, public hearings will be scheduled prior to approval. The budget must be finalized and ready for the council to vote on by Sept. 1 to allow time for implementation Oct. 1, the beginning of the fiscal year.