Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan posted strong results for 2014, both in terms of financial performance and member growth.

Across all business lines, including for-profit subsidiaries, Blue Cross Blue Shield reported net income of $272 million on total consolidated revenues of $23.1 billion. The results compare with net income of $265 million in 2013 on total consolidated revenues of $21.3 billion.

In its core health insurance business, Blue Cross Blue Shield made $83.3 million on revenues of $7.4 billion. In the prior year, Blue Cross Blue Shield lost $85.9 million for its health insurance business on revenues of $6.6 billion.

Executives attributed the 2014 results to carefully managing investments and the solid performance of subsidiaries.

“Our financial performance reflects that of a nonprofit company that is true to its purpose,” said President and CEO Dan Loepp. “Our model is to have strong investment and subsidiary performance that helps offset low margins on health insurance. Blue Cross delivered this in 2014.”

With the financial performance from 2014, Blue Cross Blue Shield planned to contribute $50 million in 2015 to the Michigan Health Endowment Fund that was created by in 2013 when the Legislature converted the corporation to a nonprofit mutual insurer.

Under the law, Blue Cross Blue Shield will contribute $1.56 billion to the Endowment Fund over nearly 20 years to support programs aimed at improving the health of state residents. The insurer put $100 million into the fund last year.

Blue Cross Blue Shield solidly increased membership during the year. By the end of 2014, membership grew by 115,376 members to 4.53 million, which includes the HMO subsidiary Blue Care Network. The year was the fourth straight that Blue Cross Blue Shield grew membership.

The insurer scored decidedly better results in the individual health insurance market, an area that has historically generated deep losses. Under the Affordable Care Act that requires all insurers to sell a health policy to everyone who seeks coverage, Blue Cross Blue Shield was “very close” to breaking even in the individual insurance market in 2014, the first year individuals can buy policies from a public exchange at healthcare.gov.

“We’re very satisfied with those results for the first full year of healthcare.gov,” Vice President of Finance Paul Mozak said.

Prior to the ACA, Blue Cross Blue Shield was the only health insurer in Michigan that was required under law to offer a policy to anyone who applied, regardless of their health, creating what’s known as “adverse selection” and leaving it with a risk pool that was the costliest to insure. In 2013, the Blues had a net underwriting loss of $267.9 million on its health insurance business, all of which came in the individual market.