LANSING, MI — State Sen. Roger Kahn, R-Saginaw Township, has been a local doctor a lot longer than he has been a state lawmaker.

Kahn, a cardiologist, said for years he saw firsthand how a lack of adequate medical insurance prevented people from getting the medical treatment they needed.

"That was at the top of the list of reasons I ran for office in the first place," he said.

Gov. Rick Snyder recognized the second-term state senator during his State of the State address Thursday, Jan. 16, for a major accomplishment in that very area.

Snyder credited Kahn and other state lawmakers for their work on the "Healthy Michigan" plan which, he said, will provide access to healthcare to more than 400,000 Michiganders who need it.

"That was gratifying, to tell you the truth," Kahn said. "I feel privileged to have worked on this and to make it happen."

The federal government in December approved Michigan's plan to reform the state's Medicaid program, expanding eligibility low-income residents using funds available through the Affordable Care Act. The plan allows expansion of Medicaid eligibility to up to 133 percent of the federal poverty level.

That means, to be eligible, annual income must be less than roughly $15,000 for an individual or about $31,000 for a family of four.

Medicaid expansion is a key pillar of the Affordable Care Act and was originally required under the law, as signed by President Barack Obama in March of 2010.

The federal government has pledged to cover the full cost of state-based Medicaid expansion for three years, beginning in January. But Michigan will have to wait three months to implement its plan because the Republican-led Senate did not have the two-thirds majority needed to give the law immediate effect.

Kahn said he is very proud of the work he has done since 2013, but said it felt particularly good to be part of something that will impact so many Michigan residents.

"Mostly I'm happy for the 400,000 people in Michigan who now have access to healthcare," he said.

The lawmaker was elected to his first term in the Michigan Senate in 2006. Before that, Kahn served in the Michigan House of Representatives from 2005-2007 and also served two years as a Saginaw County commissioner.

He cannot run for reelection in the Senate due to term limits. A handful of candidates from both political parties have announced intentions to run for Kahn's seat, including State Rep. Stacy Erwin Oakes, former State Rep. Ken Horn and local business owner and former university administrator Garnet Lewis.

Mark Tower covers local government for MLive/The Saginaw News. Contact him at 989-284-4807, by email at mtower@mlive.com or follow him on Twitter, Facebook or Google+.