BOULDER — Nobody could blame Colorado players and coaches if the frustration is getting to them. For the second straight week, CU came agonizingly close to defeating a Pac-12 team, only to trudge into the locker room without a reason to smile.

This time, Oregon State held off the Buffaloes 36-31 on Saturday in front of 36,415 fans at Folsom Field.

Even Colorado’s second-year head coach, Mike MacIntyre, appeared to reach a boiling point after the game. MacIntyre, who has acknowledged that he wears his emotions on his sleeve, ran across the field and chased an official, presumably to express his thoughts about a noncall made on a third-down incompletion from Buffs quarterback Sefo Liufau to wide receiver Nelson Spruce on CU’s final possession, with one minute and 55 seconds remaining.

There appeared to be some contact by an Oregon State defender covering Spruce at about the Beavers’ 30-yard line. But evidently the officials did not see enough contact to rule it pass interference. Then on fourth-and-6 from the 40, Liufau was flushed from the pocket and missed senior wideout Tyler McCulloch down the middle.

CU (2-4, 0-3 Pac-12) was coming off what MacIntyre had described as a “gut-wrenching” double-overtime loss at California.

“The kids are in there hurting, really hurting,” MacIntyre said.

MacIntyre declined to address the officiating afterward, following conference rules. CU players said they loved seeing a coach who fights for his team and is so invested in them.

“You leave every game like this with a sick stomach,” CU’s McCulloch said. “I can’t even sleep. We have to find a way.”

As it turned out, Oregon State (4-1, 1-1) gained enough cushion with a 12-play, 85-yard touchdown drive that put the Beavers up 36-24 with 5:09 remaining. Still, CU had an opportunity to pull out its first conference win of 2014.

The Buffs answered with a 17-yard touchdown pass from Liufau to McCulloch with three minutes to go to cut the deficit to five points. Then, the CU defense did its part, forcing a three-and-out. Oregon State’s half-shanked punt sailed only 30 yards, where it was downed at the Beavers’ 44.

Colorado had one timeout in its pocket and, with the clock showing 2:08, plenty of time remained for a winning drive. But the Buffs moved just 4 yards in four plays. And that was the game.

PHOTOS: Colorado vs Oregon State in PAC-12 Football, Oct. 4, 2014

“There were just little setbacks here and there,” Liufau said of CU’s final possession. “I’ll take responsibility for that and put that on my shoulders. It’s just a matter of executing.”

Oregon State senior quarterback Sean Mannion is considered an NFL prospect, and the 6-foot-5, 220-pounder played to his billing. Rarely making risky throws, Mannion passed for 278 yards and a touchdown without an interception.

Colorado’s Liufau also put up big numbers with 308 yards and two touchdowns. But Oregon State’s secondary all but took away Liufau’s favorite target. Spruce entered the game topping the nation in three statistical receiving categories. He did catch six passes Saturday, but for a total of only 35 yards and a long of 11.

Spruce failed to extend his school record of seven consecutive games with at least one touchdown catch.

“Not everyone’s going to have a big game every week, even the pros,” Liufau said. “That’s just how life goes.”

In no surprise, Colorado defensive backs struggled all afternoon to measure up to Oregon State’s massive tight ends, senior Connor Hamlett (6-foot-7, 266 pounds) and junior Caleb Smith (6-6, 269). Mannion connected with Smith for a 24-yard touchdown in the left corner of the end zone to put the Beavers up 30-21 with 14:20 remaining in the game.

Colorado’s offense operated without its top running back, Christian Powell, who suffered a concussion a week earlier during the 59-56, double-overtime loss at California. In Powell’s place, sophomore Michael Adkins II and senior Tony Jones ran with conviction, both accumulating valuable yards after the first contact.

Tom Kensler: tkensler@denverpost.com or twitter.com/tomkensler

Game balls

Sean Mannion, Oregon State, QB: The 6-foot-5 senior showed his NFL potential with 27-of-37 passing for 278 yards and a touchdown.

Sefo Liufau, Colorado, QB: Buffs sophomore continues to put up impressive numbers, this time going 32-of-49 for 308 yards and two TDs.

Oregon State secondary: Helped limit Colorado’s Nelson Spruce to six catches for 35 yards, with a long of 11 yards. Entering the game, Spruce led the nation in three statistical categories.

Tom Kensler, The Denver Post