SANDUSKY

The two local health departments that have won early accreditation have shown they are dedicated to providing good service for local taxpayers, the state's top health official says.

Rick Hodges, director of the Ohio Department of Health, spent Tuesday touring the Erie County Health Department offices in Sandusky and Huron County Public Health in Norwalk.

Although all 125 of Ohio's local health departments are supposed to become accredited by 2020, the two local departments are among just eight statewide that already have won accreditation from the Public Health Accreditation Board. In addition, the state health department also has become accredited.

While it's been a longtime practice for hospitals and other health care agencies to seek national accreditation, it's only recently been a concern for local health departments, Hodges said.

"Ohio is still I think the only state in the country that requires local districts to be accredited by 2020," Hodges said.

The fact that the local health districts are one of only a small fraction of local health districts in the U.S. to become accredited is "a real testimony to the leadership of Tim Hollinger and Pete Schade and their boards and the local community here," Hodges said.

"It's a very difficult process, especially here in the early stages with the first groups that go through it. What it demonstrates is that the local health district is leading, they're planning strategically, they're listening to their community, they're listening to the stakeholders in the community, identifying the issues that face Huron and Erie counties, and are coming up with effective strategies and implementing effective strategies for dealing with those issues," he said. "It really is the stamp of approval from national peers."

Hollinger, health commissioner in Huron County, and Schade, Erie County's health commissioner, both met with Hodges during his visit and showed off their department. Hodges seemed to be interested in how a small department such as Huron's was able to get accreditation, Hollinger said.

Hodges, who was executive director of the turnpike commission before Gov. John Kasich asked him to run the health department, said dealing with drug addition and working on infant mortality are two of the state's top health issues.

"We're also very interested in the quality of water in Lake Erie," he said. "The governor has placed a high priority in that."

Hodges said his department spends much of its time trying to support local health districts.

"The health care landscape is changing dramatically, between the president's Affordable Care Act, the governor's Medicaid expansion program and just the whole recognition that we spend a lot of money on health care in this country and in Ohio, and our results should be better," he said.