As states prepare for the third open-enrollment period for the Affordable Care Act in November, governors and legislators should assess how well their state health insurance marketplaces has performed.

Connecticut was one of 14 states (plus the District of Columbia) to establish a state-based marketplace in which the state designed and operated an online insurance marketplace, certified qualified health plans and assisted consumers through outreach and education efforts. My recent article (co-authored with Erika May) on "Measuring the Performance of Health Insurance Marketplaces" in the Journal of the American Medical Association offers policy-makers and the public a chance to benchmark their state against others in New England and around the nation.

Around the U.S., many state-based marketplaces have struggled with high costs and lackluster performance. In contrast, Connecticut's marketplace — Access Health CT — stands out as an example of successful policy implementation. Connecticut spent less than many other states to establish its marketplace, experienced significant enrollment growth from 2014 to 2015, and signed up a larger percentage of the eligible population than many other states. In addition, premiums for Access Health CT rose at a lower rate than the U.S. average in 2015.

Four New England states — Connecticut, Massachusetts, Rhode Island and Vermont — opted to establish state-based marketplaces. One way to assess the administrative efficiency of these marketplaces is to compare how much each state spent (in federal grant dollars) per enrollee. Connecticut received more than $164 million in federal grants to establish and operate its online marketplace and provide outreach and educational services for consumers. Access Health CT signed up 109,839 subscribers in 2015, for a per enrollee cost to date of $1,497. Massachusetts has the lowest spending per enrollee ($1,310), but both Rhode Island ($4,481) and Vermont ($5,460) spent significantly more than Connecticut per enrollee. Connecticut's cost per enrollee was also lower than marketplaces in the District of Columbia, Hawaii, Kentucky, Minnesota and Oregon.

Notably, Access Health CT outperformed many other state-based marketplaces that spent much more per enrollee on the critical task of signing individuals up for coverage. The number of subscribers purchasing coverage from Connecticut's marketplace increased 39 percent from 2014 to 2015, outpacing enrollment growth in California (1 percent), Rhode Island (10 percent), Colorado (12 percent), Kentucky (29 percent), Minnesota (23 percent) and New York (10 percent). Marketplace enrollment declined 17 percent in Vermont during the same period — one of only two states in the U.S to sign up fewer subscribers during the second open enrollment period. Nationwide, marketplace enrollment increased 46 percent from 2014 to 2015.

The "take up rate" — or the percentage of eligible individuals who ultimately opt to purchase coverage — also offers a key indicator of marketplace performance. Nationwide, 42 percent of potential marketplace enrollees signed up for coverage in 2015. Although other New England state-based marketplaces in Vermont (70 percent), Maine (60 percent) and New Hampshire (51 percent) outperformed Connecticut on this measure, Access Health CT exceeded the national average by signing up 49 percent of eligible residents.

The impact of health insurance marketplaces can also be assessed by their success in limiting the rate of premium increases for subscribers. Data from the Urban Institute compared prices for the lowest cost silver plan (for a 40-year-old non-tobacco user) in each state marketplace. Health insurance premiums grew an average of 2.9 percent among all health insurance marketplaces. In Connecticut, premiums increased less than 1 percent — well below the national average.

State-based marketplaces in California (plus 4.9 percent), Hawaii (plus 10.4 percent), Kentucky (plus 2.5 percent), Maryland (plus 3.2 percent), Oregon (plus 5.9 percent) and Vermont (plus 8.3 percent) all experienced significantly higher premium growth than Connecticut, although premiums fell for marketplaces in Massachusetts (minus 1.5 percent), Rhode Island (minus 10.9 percent) and Colorado (minus 12.5 percent).

Connecticut's implementation of the Affordable Care Act is a demonstrable success compared to many other marketplaces in New England and around the nation. At a time when state officials in Hawaii and Oregon recently decided to abandon their troubled state-based marketplaces, Access Health CT signed up a larger proportion of eligible subscribers than many state-based marketplaces while minimizing the rate of premium growth.

Robert B. Hackey is a professor of health policy and management at Providence College, a visiting fellow at the Pell Center for International Relations and Public Policy at Salve Regina University and a member of the ACA Implementation Research Network.