A Letter From a Less-Hungry Future America

JOANNE CHANG: A letter I hope a 5th grader from today will be writing to her current teacher 20 years from now.

April 28, 2035

Dear Mr. Taylor,

It’s been about 20 years since I was in your 5th grade science class and you may not remember me. I will never forget you and I wanted you to know the impact you had on me as a 10-year old. I know you retired a few years back and I hope you are enjoying a full and happy retirement.

Every morning I came to first period in your classroom and you had a big bowl of granola bars, trail mix, sometimes even bagels on your desk for anyone to grab from. Every morning I took at least one of each, sometimes two, and that was my breakfast. Before your class, I’d always been pretty hungry during my morning classes and most times I couldn’t really pay attention to my teachers because I was just waiting around for lunchtime. My mom worked two jobs to keep food on the table for me and my little brother but breakfast was one area that often got skipped. I was OK taking part in the school free-lunch program–the food was always pretty decent. Your snack bowl helped me each morning and I want to thank you for that. What a difference that made for me that year! While I wasn’t the most math savvy kid, I was able to focus and pay attention each morning after you gave us all a few minutes at the start of class to eat our breakfast and to this day I remember your sing-a-long jingles (“I Will Divide…!” “Simplify then Multiply….!”) to help us learn fractions. In fact I’m teaching them to my own kids. I loved your class and looked forward to it each morning. Even after 5th grade I often made a pit stop to your classroom and the bowl was always full and your door was always open. I can never thank you enough for that.

I wish I could say that the breakfast you provided me made me into a brilliant mathematician! I don’t have the gene for math that you do but I did learn to love learning, and now I’m proud to say I’m a schoolteacher like you, working in Dallas teaching English to 8th graders. You were a huge influence on me because of that simple but incredibly important gesture of understanding that if kids are hungry they can’t learn.

I don’t know if you’ve heard the latest news in public schools. In the past 20 years we as a country have realized the futility of offering a free education to kids if they don’t have the fundamental necessity of food in their bellies to take full advantage of their schooling. It’s like offering someone a great car but not giving them gas. What’s the point? You can’t go anywhere without gas and you can’t learn anything if you’re a kid and your stomach is growling.

In my school we offer free breakfast to ALL students, regardless of need, which eliminates any shame factor that might discourage low-income kids from participating; we offer summer-meals sites during the summer for the kids to get breakfast and lunch while their parents are working; we have a weekend pick-up program at the school for anyone who wants to come by for breakfast and lunch. And the best part of this is that this program is not just limited to my school: All public schools in the U.S. are following this program using funds that were always already allocated to low-income kids. We just got smart about how to get kids access to the food they need. My students are alert and attentive to the very last one and I get to focus on what I love–teaching them how to think. It’s amazing what the difference is when these young bodies and minds have their basic needs met.

When you were my teacher back in 2015, most of my friends who were on the free-lunch program didn’t have breakfast–they were all jealous of my being in your class. Now every child has access to the food they need to learn better, concentrate more, engage more…and grow to become strong members of our community, like I’m proud to say I’ve become.

We’ve ended childhood hunger in the U.S. as a country—what a long journey it’s been. I want you to know that you ended it for me that year with your generosity and I’ll always be grateful.

Thank you Mr. Taylor.

Joanne Chang (@jbchang) is the owner of and chef at Flour Bakery + Café and Myers + Chang in Boston.