Timothy Jost

June 5, 2014

Editor’s note: This post was updated on June 9 to conclude with instructions released by CMS in late May for insurers who are applying to offer qualified health plans for 2015.

Throughout the spring of 2014, the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) has issued monthly reports on enrollment in the federal and state exchanges (marketplaces) and on applications, eligibility determinations, and enrollment in the Medicaid program.

With the close of the 2014 exchange open enrollment period, HHS has ceased issuing exchange enrollment reports, even though exchange enrollment continues to fluctuate as new enrollees join through special enrollment periods and current enrollees terminate their plans or are terminated, for example, for nonpayment. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), however, continue to issue Medicaid reports.

On June 4, 2014, CMS released the April 2014 Medicaid and CHIP Monthly Applications, Eligibility Determinations and Enrollment Report. As has been the case with earlier reports, the data are subject to so many qualifications as to offer only a rough approximation of current Medicaid enrollment or activity.

The report, for example, states that 65,016,775 individuals were enrolled in Medicaid and CHIP as of the end of April. This number, however, does not include enrollees from Connecticut, Maine, and North Dakota. It is also a preliminary number, subject to adjustment as Medicaid applications continue to be processed, since enrollment in Medicaid is retroactive once approved.

A June 3, 2014 report from a state survey conducted by Roll Call found that 2.9 million Medicaid applications remain pending. As these applications continue to be processed, actual enrollments will continue to climb.

Lessons learned. At least three lessons can be garnered from the report, however. First, Medicaid enrollment continues to grow relative to enrollment prior to the Affordable Care Act (ACA)’s Medicaid expansion. April enrollment for the 48 reporting states exceeds average monthly enrollment for the baseline pre-ACA months of July through September, 2013 by over 6 million, a 10.3 percent increase.

This number does not count nearly 950,000 individuals who gained coverage under the ACA prior to 2014 in states that expanded eligibility under the ACA’s “early option” or a demonstration waiver. It also understates the total growth in the Medicaid program, because the baseline numbers are final adjusted numbers while the current enrollment numbers continue to be adjusted as pending applications are processed.

Second, enrollment has grown much more rapidly in Medicaid expansion states than in states that have not expanded Medicaid. Compared to the 2013 baseline, enrollment has grown by 15.3 percent in expansion states; 3.3 percent in non-expansion states. Nine of the 24 states that had Medicaid expansions in effect in April of 2014 experienced an enrollment increase of 25 percent or more.

Ironically, included among the states with the largest Medicaid enrollment growth are states with the most dysfunctional exchanges: Oregon, which experienced a growth rate of 49.4 percent; Nevada, with 41.1 percent growth, and Maryland, with 29.7 percent growth. Some non-expansion states have seen enrollments shrink in 2014, but most have seen some increase, with South Carolina at 14.4 percent and Montana at 10.4 percent leading the pack.

Third, applications and determinations were down in April from March. States received a total of 3,376,129 applications for financial assistance (which includes applications in state exchange states for premium tax credits and cost-sharing reduction payments) in April, down by 963,145 from March. The 2,614,763 individuals determined eligible for Medicaid or CHIP coverage in April decreased from 2,985,273 in March.

These numbers are preliminary and, again, are subject to all sorts of qualifications (some states, for example, include renewals in determinations and the totals do not include federal exchange Medicaid eligibility determinations). They do indicate, however, that, not surprisingly, Medicaid and CHIP enrollment is growing more slowly as the exchange open enrollment ends, even though enrollment in Medicaid and CHIP are continuous and not subject to an open enrollment period.

Data verification issues. The ACA continues to provoke controversy (and probably will at least through the November elections). The ACA controversy de jour concerns verification of eligibility for premium tax credits and cost sharing reduction payments. The AP and a number of other news sources reported on June 5, 2014 that 2.1 million individuals enrolled through the federal exchanges had one or more data discrepancies, including 1.2 million with discrepancies related to income; 505,000 with immigration issues, and 461,000 with conflicts related to citizenship information.

The House Energy and Commerce Committee Republicans have also released documents suggesting a total of over 4 million data inconsistencies in exchange applications. There is no indication as to the extent to which data inconsistencies are resulting in incorrect payments.

On June 4, 2014, HHS issued a blog post explaining its data inconsistency resolution process. It also posted at the healthcare.gov website a notice informing enrollees of their need to cooperate with the verification process. The blog post, by Julie Bataille, CMS Director of Communications, notes that during the 2014 open enrollment period, the exchange took steps to verify 160 million individual pieces of information, about 21 separate pieces of information for a family of four.

In most instances, information was verified immediately, but in many instances, immediate verification was not possible. For example, the most recent tax return submitted by an individual might not reflect income from a subsequent change in employment. The Notice urges applicants and enrollees to scan and email or mail requested documents as soon as possible to facilitate final eligibility determinations.

The ACA itself and implementing regulations provide a process for premium tax credit eligibility determinations. Under section 1411 of the ACA, individuals applying for premium tax credits or cost-sharing reduction payments must establish that they meet citizenship or lawful alien, income, and residency requirements; are not incarcerated; and do not have an offer of adequate and affordable employer coverage. Applicants provide this information under penalty of perjury. Negligent provision of false information can result in a civil fine of up to $25,000, while intentional provision of false information can result in a civil fine of $250,000, in addition to criminal liability for perjury.

The exchange verifies citizenship information with the Social Security Administration and claims of lawful alien status with Homeland Security. Income information is verified through the IRS. The exchanges also use private credit reporting agencies and other data sources to verify information. The ACA expressly gives HHS flexibility to “modify the methods used under the program established by this section for the Exchange and verification of information if the Secretary determines such modifications would reduce the administrative costs and burdens on the applicant.”

If the information the exchange obtains through the verification process is inconsistent with the information provided by the applicant, the exchange must resolve the inconsistency. Under the ACA, the applicant has up to 90 days to provide information necessary to clear up inconsistencies. During this 90-day period, the applicant is eligible for coverage based on the information contained in the application.

If the inconsistency cannot be cleared up during the 90-day period, the application will be processed based on the official records available, which could result in denial of the application. Applicants found ineligible must pay back tax credits improperly received. No doubt based on an anticipation of the difficulties of starting up the verification system, the ACA specifically provides that HHS may extend the 90-day verification period for 2014 enrollments. HHS has chosen to do this. Although many of the inconsistencies being verified are for applications within the 90 day timeframe, many (45 percent according to the documents released by the House Republicans) have been unresolved for more than 90 days.

The difficulties that CMS faces with verifying eligibility are to a large extent a problem of its own making. The documents released by the House Republicans show that systems were not in place for electronic eligibility verification when the exchanges were launched in 2013, and much of the information is still apparently being processed manually. CMS may also be going further with verification than is really required under the flexibility granted HHS under the statute. Apparently intimidated by repeated demands from House Republicans, HHS continues with “Double, Triple Checking Consumer Information,” as the heading of the CMS blog post reads.

Verification issues need to be kept in perspective. It is important that eligibility determinations be accurate. It is particularly important that premium tax credit amounts be accurate, because individuals who receive tax credits are responsible for paying back overpayments when the recipient files a tax return for the coverage year.

But premium tax credits are only one of many forms of tax credits, and deductions and exclusions, granted by the IRS. In most instances, no effort is made to verify deduction or credit claims. The most recent IRS estimate of the “tax gap,” from 2006, is nearly $400 billion. Underreporting or underpayment of corporate income taxes accounted for $71 billion and underreporting of business income for $122 billion. If Congress is serious about ensuring the integrity of our tax system, there are much bigger fish to fry than health insurance premium tax credits.

Risk adjustment. On June 2, HHS released an updated version of its HHS risk adjustment model algorithm software instructions and technical details, as well as updated SAS risk adjustment software instructions at the CCIIO website. HHS is providing this software as supplemental guidance to help insurers better understand and simulate the calculation of risk scores for their 2014 enrollees. Use of the software is not a prerequisite to submitting claims data to the EDGE server for calculating actual risk adjustment charges or payments, nor is it a requirement of the risk adjustment program.

In late May, CMS released instructions for insurers who are applying to offer qualified health plans for 2015. As these instructions were intended specifically for insurers rather than for the general public, this release was not publicized and is deeply hidden on the CCIIO website. Nevertheless, it does contain information that could be of wider interest.

The instructions cover the 13 areas of requirements that QHP applicants must meet, including, for example, licensure, accreditation, actuarial value, network adequacy, prescription drugs, plans and benefits, and others. Also included in the release are rating tables and rating business rules insurers must follow, as well as forms to be used for insurers to provide justifications if issues arise from their application, such as cost sharing or formulary outliers. The instructions are based on the 2015 benefit and payment parameters and letter to issuers, and there is little in them that is new. They do lay out in detail not otherwise available, however, the elements that QHP applicants must address.

Of most general interest is probably the 65-page section on plans and benefits. In particular, subsection 5-9 of this section sets out the elements that CMS expects will be shown to consumers in “plan compare” on healthcare.gov for 2015. Significantly, although the instructions contain a section on network adequacy in which insurers must identify QHP network providers, plan compare will apparently direct consumers to the insurer’s network URL rather than list providers itself.