Kenneth Faried still wears No. 35. He still pulls his braids back in a ponytail. He still wears wristbands and white socks that come midway up his calves. And he’s still the most energetic guy in the room.

But this isn’t the Kenneth Faried that the NBA saw last season.

For starters, he now has a gold medal around his neck.

The Nuggets forward recently returned to Denver — for the start of training camp Tuesday — after spending the summer in Spain with Team USA in the FIBA World Cup.

Few people thought he had a chance to make the U.S. team, let alone star.

But on the heels of a breakout couple of months last season with the Nuggets — he averaged 18.8 points and 10.1 rebounds after the all-star break — Faried continued his streak overseas, averaging 12.2 points and 7.7 rebounds in nine games at the World Cup.

The numbers were important — for Team USA, but especially him. The numbers were validation to his ever improving game.

“I believed I was going to do it and everybody that didn’t believe me said, ‘You’re selling a pipe dream to yourself. Snap back to reality,’ ” Faried said. “Well, this is reality. I have this medal around my neck and I’m proud of that.”

It also may have also helped his contract negotiations.

Nuggets general manager Tim Connelly said Monday that he’s hopeful the sides can agree on a contract extension before the Oct. 31 deadline, at which point Faried would have to play out the season and enter restricted free agency next summer.

“There’s no gun to our head,” Connelly said. “We’ve been talking to Kenneth’s representatives and we’re hopeful we can get a deal done prior to the deadline, but I don’t think it’s a distraction. We have plenty of time. I think he knows how much we value him.”

But earlier last season, that wasn’t the case. Faried said he questioned just how much the Nuggets really did want him.

“I thought as though I wasn’t in the bigger plan for this team,” Faried said. “That the team didn’t want me here or want me to be a part of the bigger plan that they had.”

Now he says he would love to be a Nuggets lifer, but that he’s also a realist, that “if things don’t work out then I have to move on.”

Faried, who said he has played the underdog role much of his life, finally got the recognition he sought with Team USA — and from a guy whose praise carries significant weight.

“Coach K (Mike Krzyzewski) was talking to me and said I needed to be that leader in practice and on the court, he needs me to bring that energy to be that leader that I should be,” Faried said.

“To hear it from one of the greatest coaches in the world, a Hall of Famer … it just registered like, ‘Hey, you can do anything, Kenneth. You can go out there and win a gold. You can go out there and compete with these guys, and in the NBA, you can do the same thing.’ “

Nuggets coach Brian Shaw said he’s had several conversations with Faried about how to improve his game at both ends of the court. Shaw also wants Faried to convert his high-energy style into something sustainable. They talked about former NBA star Dennis Rodman, an undersized power forward Faried idolizes, and how he would hop on a treadmill after a game to stay in shape for his style of play.

Among the other notable conversations the two had: attacking the defensive boards as hard as he does the offensive ones.

“I don’t know if you remember or noticed — but the second half of the season I (told) Kenneth, ‘If you get the defensive rebound, you can bust out and push it yourself. As long as you’re making the right choices at the end of it and it turns into something positive for us, I’ll allow you to do it,’ ” Shaw said.

PHOTOS: Denver Nuggets Media Day

“And I think he started to take off, and that made him go as tenaciously after defensive rebounds as he did after offensive rebounds, and gave him the freedom to use that raw energy and athleticism to get our break going.”

Faried’s summer abroad reinforced that mentality, but the added time on the court comes at a cost. He said he’ll ease his way into training camp to avoid injury or fatigue later in the season, a plan that doesn’t really mesh well with his mind-set.

But he knows what’s at stake. And he knows there are still those doubters.

Nicki Jhabvala: njhabvala@denverpost.com or twitter.com/nickijhabvala