SPRINGFIELD ‒ Although Bernie Sanders' Democratic presidential campaign is making a big push in Massachusetts in the lead up to the state's primary, local backers of Hillary Clinton's White House bid said they remain optimistic about her chances on Election Day.

Supporters, who gathered to officially open the Clinton campaign's new Springfield organizing office Saturday morning, contended that while Sanders plans to stop in Western Massachusetts and deploy surrogates Ben Cohen and Jerry Greenfield across the state next week, his visibility can't match the former first lady's record and vision.

Massachusetts Democratic Party Treasurer Nicole LaChapelle said she expects the Vermont senator's Monday campaign stop at the University of Massachusetts Amherst to slightly boost his support, but questioned how his message will resonate with voters in more urban parts of Western Massachusetts.

Issues facing Amherst-area voters, she argued, are different from those in Springfield.

"I'm sure the media from Sen. Sanders' appearances, I'm sure that Ben and Jerry's is (going to have) a fantastic impact, but being president isn't about a college rally and ice cream," she said in an interview. "It's about making solid policy decisions, domestically and internationally, based on clear plans."

LaChapelle, who hosted a fundraiser for Clinton at the Delaney House in Holyoke last fall, said she supports the former secretary of state's policies and trusts her to "look at the whole picture."

She, for example, pointed to the Democrat's efforts to help create the Children's Health Insurance Program -- something which LaChapelle said helped her as a young mother -- as well as Clinton's focus on women and children as secretary of state.

"We feel very strongly, our folks with Hillary in Massachusetts, that she's the one who can get things done and follow up on President (Barack) Obama's initiatives, to strengthen the Affordable Care Act, which comes into full-fruition in 2016," she said. "To go back and start again with the Congress that we have, just seems like we're giving up too much in the interim."

State Sen. Eric Lesser, D-Longmeadow, the Massachusetts director for Clinton's campaign, said despite Sanders' efforts, he believes the former first lady will win Massachusetts on so-called "Super Tuesday."

"I think she's going to win, I'm very optimistic. She's got a great ground game, she's doing the work -- her people are excited," he said. "I've sensed a palpable increase in excitement and intention just in the last few weeks. That's going to continue to build until March 1."

While Lesser acknowledged Sanders' large base of support in Western Massachusetts, he said as more voters really begin to think through what's at stake in the presidential contest he believes they'll come to support Clinton.

"This is supposed to be a tough process and voters deserve every right and opportunity to weigh-in and to scrutinize these candidates and to ask tough questions. I think that's a good thing and that's part of how the process is supposed to work," he said.

"I think that once that process moves forward and people really start to ask themselves in a serious way, 'okay, who really is the best equipped to make progress on income inequality? Who really can bring Congress together and move forward on advancing climate change?'...I'm confident that as most people look through the records of the candidates, look through the histories on those issues, they'll follow Hillary Clinton."

In the run-up to Election Day, Lesser said his focus will be on spreading that message to voters across Western Massachusetts.

The new organizing office, located at 20 Maple Street in Springfield, is one of six Clinton's campaign planned to open in the state this week.

The Hillary for MA Holyoke office, which will be located at 295 High St., meanwhile, will open Sunday morning. Holyoke Mayor Alex Morse is expected to be on hand for the event and subsequent canvass.