Related Flash floods in Texas, Oklahoma kill 2; 100s of homes gone

Updated at 9:20 p.m.: The Trinity River crested at 40.12 feet around 8 p.m.

Updated at 6:45 p.m.: At 6 p.m., the Trinity River in Dallas was cresting at about 40 feet, the level defined as “major” flood stage. The last time the Trinity River rose to 40 feet was June 28, 2007, when it crested at 40.25 feet.

“In terms of the impacts, they’re not as dire as they may seem,” said Anthony Bain, a meteorologist with the National Weather Service. “There are still going to be impacts, but not catastrophic flooding.”

City and law enforcement officials as well as Bain encouraged people not to go too close to the water or walk near the flood-way levees at the river.

“At major flood stage, the water is going to be flowing pretty quickly so if you slip and fall in you have the chance to be carried downstream,” he said. “It may look cool, but it’s definitely not a good idea to get close.”

Greg Guthrie, an emergency management specialist with the city, said there is no risk of the water rising to a level that shuts down the Margaret Hunt Hill Bridge. He said the water is expected to rise another 8 to 10 inches, but then it will go back down.

Dallas Flood Control officials are operating flood stations off the levee and pumping off excess water, and there is still “plenty” of capacity in the river channel, he said.

“It’s not at any risk of over-topping the levees or coming up over the [bridge] road ways at all,” Guthrie said.

But Guthrie reiterated that people should not go into the levee water-way or otherwise put themselves at risk for being swept away with the current.

“Just got to stay away from it,” he said. “It’s not a lake. Not like going out to a lake and sitting by the shore. It’s moving water, it’s a river.”

Can’t emphasize this enough. PLEASE don’t ignore warning signs/barricades – and please don’t go for a walk on the levee. #besafe @DallasOEM — Sana Syed (@dallaspiosana) May 24, 2015

On Sunday afternoon, throngs of people gathered along White Rock Lake to watch the rushing water.

The lake was at about 73.31 feet around 6:45 p.m. The heavy rains overnight pushed the lake into minor flood stage, which is recognized as 85 feet, but the water was receding as night approached, Bain said.

From midnight until 7 p.m., 3.30 inches of rain fell at Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport, breaking the record of 3.28, which was set in 1908.

In just five months, the city has topped the total rainfall for all of 2014. Last year, 21.32 inches of rain fell in the area. So far in 2015, 26.12 inches have been recorded.

Updated by Claire Cardona at 6:25 p.m.: National Weather Service survey crews found evidence of two EF-1 tornadoes that blew through Dallas County overnight.

The first began in Dallas about 2:34 a.m. and damaged trees and power lines near Walnut Hill and Marsh Lane before continuing north toward Interstate 635. As it crossed the highway toward Farmers Branch, it damaged the roof of an apartment near Josey Lane, the weather service said.

Winds were between 100 and 105 mph and the tornado was at its strongest as it moved through Farmers Branch, damaging a warehouse roof near Interstate 35E and Valwood Parkway. It dissipated near Tommy Standridge Stadium about 2:39 a.m.

The Irving tornado touched down at 2:34 a.m. and lasted two minutes, but was slightly stronger than the Farmers Branch tornado. Most damage was to trees, power lines and businesses along North Macarthur Boulevard, between Corporate Drive and West Walnut Hill Lane, the weather service said.

The tornado reached wind speeds of 105 to 110 mph and began just north of a golf course in Las Colinas.

Updated by Jeff Mosier at 4:17 p.m.: A storm that produced at least one small tornado was responsible for damaging homes and businesses, crushing cars, and splitting trees from Midlothian to Flower Mound early Sunday morning, the National Weather Service determined.

Weather service staff studied a small section of Las Colinas where the most dramatic damage was found. The amount and some telltale signs indicated this was an EF1 tornado, the second smallest with a wind speed starting at 86 mph.

“If things are twisted or laying in different direction, that’s a strong indication of rotation,” said Joe Harris, a weather service meteorologist.

He said downed trees facing the same direction would have been evidence of straight-line winds. The storm’s damage was scattered among mostly rural areas in the south to more densely populated suburbs to the north.

The tornado did not appear to be responsible for any serious injuries or deaths.

Updated at 12:41 a.m. by Jeff Mosier:

Repair crews were busy this morning with clean up from high-winds that cut through Las Colinas overnight. Those hit hardest suspected a small tornado rather than damaging straight-line winds.

At the MacArthur Center office complex, trees were split, a flag pole was toppled, windows were shattered, and pink insulation was scattered in a few spots. Staff pointed out that felled trees were pointing in a variety of directions.

“If it was straight-line winds, you would have had the trees pointing the same way,” said one building staffer, who asked that his name not be used.

He and others in the areas said the winds arrived about 3 to 3:30 a.m. along with city emergency sirens. By mid-morning, workers at MacArthur Center were replacing windows and starting to clean a second-floor office that was littered with broken glass.

They were expecting most repairs to the office building on MacArthur Boulevard near State Highway 114 to be completed by the end of the day.

Less than half block away, crews were replacing a traffic signal on MacArthur that collapsed. Around the corner, a light pole in the Walnut Hill Lane median was leaning perilously over the roadway and seemed in danger of falling.

Cars were totaled by falling trees in the parking lots of at least two area apartment complexes.

Daniel Cervera, who lives at the Villas at Beaver Creek, suffered no damage but was shaken when he went outside this morning. Covered parking structures were crushed. The columns and wood planks creating a covered walkway collapsed in front of the office. And part of a tree crashed into the pool.

“This is new to me,” he said, shaking his head at the damage. “I do feel lucky.”

Christy Mendez, the complex’s manager, said residents also told her they suspected a tornado, although there were no official reports of one. She said she had walked the complex all morning and couldn’t find any injuries or damage to the apartments.

But the property is adjacent to a creek that’s been rising. She said she doesn’t think there will be any danger of flooding for now.

“We’re hoping,” she said with a forced smile.

Wind damage was also reported in Denton County.

Roy Schindler, property manager of Sunshine Boat Storage in Lewisville, said about 25 sheds were damaged overnight. The corrugated metal roofs collapsed and were laying flush with the ground in some spots. A piece of lumber was lodged in one of the walls.

In different parts of Denton County, creeks were flooding, high water stood on roads and lakeside parks were closed.

Rob McDonald, a 20 year Highland Village resident said: “I live on Lake Lewisville and I’m worried about erosion. I’ve already seen some. I’ve only seen it like this once before. They really should close the lakes to boating.”

Dylan Mayfield with the Army Corps of Engineers said “we already closed the gates at Ray Roberts and Grapevine [lakes]. It could go over the dam at any minute now. Slowly at first then it will star pouring over ”

Staff writer Adam Schrader contributed to this from Denton County.

Original post at 10:41 a.m.: Finally — finally – the rain is trying to move out of the area. But don’t be fooled: Another round slowly approaching from the southwest is likely to give Dallas-Fort Worth another soaking by late morning or early afternoon, says the National Weather Service. And, the damage has been done.

In Northwest Dallas, near Royal and Marsh Lanes, the sound of chainsaws can be heard in neighborhoods dealing with giant trees that fell into homes and onto yards around 2:30 this morning, when tornado-sirens sounded after circulation was spotted on radar in storms climbing north through western Dallas County. The National Weather Service says there have been no reports of tornadoes in Dallas or in Irving, where there are similar reports of downed trees.

“But depending on the extent of the damage, we might be sending out a survey team at some point to diagnose what happened,” says NWS meteorologist Matt Stolley in Fort Worth. “We did have a couple of reports of straight-line winds over 60 mph.”

Phone lines are also down all over Northwest Dallas, says AT&T, while Oncor is reporting only 14,144 outages throughout all of North Texas.

Since midnight alone, Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport has picked up more than three inches of rain — and many areas across Dallas-Fort Worth have received significantly higher amounts. Add that to the .61 inches the official recording station picked up Saturday, and, yes, with 11.37 inches of rain so far this month we’re now living in the Fourth Wettest May of All Time. (And not too far from the 13.66 May record.)

.@wfaaweather In Sparkman (Marsh & Royal) – there’s a path of this that runs about a mile in a straight line. pic.twitter.com/xWBArLl9M1 — David Steinbach (@davesteinbach) May 24, 2015

California Cross Rd. closed on Dallas-Irving border, 2 rescued from floodwater @JoshAultNBC5: http://t.co/RaXp4SpJVh pic.twitter.com/Bd5tlBE7Ha — NBC DFW (@NBCDFW) May 24, 2015

Damage at MacArthur Center near MacArthur and 114. Staff thinks it was a small tornado. pic.twitter.com/aMaT09i7qe — Jeff Mosier (@jeffmosier) May 24, 2015

After this next round of rain, Stolley says, “we’ll see a break through tomorrow — it doesn’t look like anything tonight.” Which is decidedly good news. “We’ll be pretty clear heading into tomorrow,” he says. “But we’ll have another round starting Monday afternoon and evening of additional widespread storms, some severe, with additional heavy rains.” The Trinity River near downtown Dallas is now expected to crest at 40.30 feet — just above “major” flood stage — around 1 a.m. Monday. City officials didn’t expect it to top 40 as of Saturday night.