In a recent edition of his column, Kevin O'Brien suggested that the key to regaining control of the United States' escalating health care costs was to make individual consumers more directly connected to their health care purchases. It's a popular theory; one espoused at various times by individuals throughout our political spectrum.

There is just one problem with this theory. It doesn't hold water.

Don't get me wrong. Health care can certainly be improved by increased consumerism and by patients who actively engage in their own care. It just won't result in any significant reduction in health care costs. To understand why I'm so certain that active consumerism will have little impact on health care spending, we need to understand some basic facts.

First, health care spending is not evenly spread throughout the population. In fact, it is dramatically skewed, where just 5 percent of our population accounts for 50 percent of health care spending.

Who are these people who spend so excessively on their health care? For the most part, they are individuals within the last 18 months of life. An additional 20 percent of our population accounts for another 25 percent of spending, largely individuals with long-term chronic disease. There are not many consumer-driven decisions to be made in the care for these people.

So that leaves the 75 percent of the population spending roughly 25 percent of our collective health care dollars. This is the cohort where consumerism could have some impact, but also the place where cost increases are most restrained. As an example, since 1960, the cost of an uncomplicated delivery of a baby has grown at roughly the same rate as the price of today's Plain Dealer. Even a significant reduction within this group has little overall impact on health care spending trends.

Second, health care expenses are not a static commodity. The health care we bought in 1950 is very different from the health care we buy today. How different? In 2008, the Congressional Budget Office estimated that fully 50 percent of our health care expenses resulted from advances that allow us to treat injury and disease more effectively than in the past. Just as an example, compare the cost of care received today for severely arthritic joints to the care our grandparents received for the same injury – a $30,000 surgery versus a cane – and we begin to understand the cost impact of medical advances.

Third, just as advances in medical treatment have driven a substantial increase in health care spending, our insufficient focus on public health is only serving to compound the problem. The relationships between poverty, obesity and poor health and chronic disease are firmly established. A 2012 study in the Journal of Health Economics estimates that obesity now accounts for more health care spending than smoking. In the early part of the 20th century, we understood that addressing our health care problems required investments to improve living conditions. It's a lesson we seem determined to forget.

What is ironic in all these discussions about controlling health care spending is that we are willing to ignore the single primary factor driving our health spending trends.

The rest of the world controls spending by controlling price. Meanwhile, in the United States, we pay a premium because we are not a nation that believes in setting price. Essentially, the price for health care is the price we're willing to pay for it.

And while our anti-price-setting mentality most certainly contributes to higher health care spending, it also allows for investments in research and new medical technologies that improve not only the lives of Americans, but the lives of people throughout the world. It may not be fair that the United States foots the world's bill for medical innovation, but it's what has allowed us to advance beyond a cane to treat debilitating arthritis.

Kevin O'Brien, like many before him, suggests increased consumerism is the fix we need to curb rising health care spending. Yes, consumerism may help some patients become more engaged; however, when you think about the facts, truly addressing health care spending is much more complex.

Bill Ryan is the president and CEO of The Center for Health Affairs in Cleveland.