States that expanded Medicaid saw better health outcomes and higher insured rates. (Photo: Getty Images / iStockphoto)

When the Tennessee General Assembly reconvenes Tuesday, Jan. 12, the health and well-being of the state’s working poor will be far down its priority list, again.

In a February special session and again in March, the legislature decisively rejected Gov. Bill Haslam’s Insure Tennessee plan, which he thought had been carefully crafted to meet legislators’ objections about how Tennessee should accept federal Medicaid expansion funding, which would be about $1.4 billion a year, to provide health insurance options for up to 500,000 working poor in the state. The plan would provide insurance coverage for Tennesseans who make too much money to qualify for Medicaid but not enough to qualify for federal tax credits that lower the cost of insurance plans on the federal health insurance exchange (healthcare.gov).

Last week, USA Today outlined how the U.S. Supreme Court decision in 2012 that stripped the Medicaid expansion mandate from the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act left millions of Americans with virtually no options for health insurance, as 20 states elected not to expand their Medicaid programs.

Falling through the cracks

USA Today found that, particularly in the states that did not expand Medicaid, “millions of Americans have fallen through the cracks without insurance from their employers, the money to buy it themselves or the safety net from Medicaid.”

The USA TODAY examination looked at how the Affordable Care Act impacts the working poor — especially in the 20 states that haven't expanded Medicaid — and found:

Companies are increasingly using contract workers for whom they're not required to provide insurance so they can avoid rising health care costs. State and local governments are also contracting out more jobs to small businesses that are not required to provide coverage for their workers.

Surveys show up to 20 percent of businesses have cut or plan to cut workers' hours to avoid paying for health benefits. Employees often say their hours are clearly kept right below the 30 hours needed for them to qualify for health insurance. The companies can cite downsizing or restructuring as the explanation that prevents the cuts from being a violation of labor laws.

Large corporations with a lot of minimum-wage workers, including fast food restaurants, often leave insurance decisions up to franchisees, who only have to offer insurance if they have 100 employees (a number that is dropping to 50 as of Jan.1). That means the lowest-paid employees do not receive the generous benefits given to workers in the corporate offices.

Many employers offer coverage that's affordable only by the letter of the law — which says the monthly contribution for individual coverage can't be more than 9.5 percent of annual household income — but in reality is too expensive for people earning near-poverty wages.

Tennessee’s working poor deal with their lack of insurance options by not going to the doctor for checkups and by flooding emergency rooms when they are sick. The bills for the emergency care most often go unpaid.

Tennessee hospitals are partially covered for uncompensated care through Medicaid section 1115 waivers, but those waivers are expiring and state hospitals stand to lose up to $500 million in federal funding this year.

The uncompensated care waivers were to be eliminated as the ACA became fully implemented, and there was no need to pay hospitals for treating the uninsured.

Inaction, again?

The governor’s Insure Tennessee plan would provide affordable insurance and incentives for well checkups to reduce overall health care costs for those caught between Medicaid assistance and insurance exchange credits, but after the way the legislature treated the plan, Haslam is not willing to go back for more of the same.

He has consistently said that there will have to be a significant change in the political calculus for the renewed push for the plan, and so far it has not happened.

“There’s been a statewide effort to rally the cause, but I haven’t noticed a changing public opinion and definitely haven’t seen a change in our legislature,” Haslam said in November. “My sense is there will be a lot of people waiting to see what happens in the ’16 presidential election — just, again, to be as honest as I can — before they’ll do that. We would still love it to happen. We still think it’s the right thing to do. Nothing I’ve seen since then has changed my mind.”

The governor is not willing to push his plan, and the legislature has not presented any alternatives that give the working poor some dignity and relief.

Meanwhile, Tennessee hospitals face as significant reduction in revenues to pay for healing the uninsured.

Reach Frank Daniels III: fdanielsiii@tennessean.com, 615-881-7039, or on Twitter @fdanielsiii

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1OBgB33