The Cadillac tax has nothing to do with cars. Kevork Djansezian/Reuters

Congressional lawmakers are gaining traction in a bid to get a two-year delay a tax on expensive employer health plans, a levy known as the “Cadillac tax.” The tax that was part of the 2010 health law is a big money maker for the federal government, but employers are saying it will cause them to scale back or drop offering benefits to their workers. Here’s what’s important to know about the tax and the current efforts in Congress to scale it back.

* * *

What is the Cadillac tax?

The Cadillac tax, named after the iconic luxury car, is the planned levy on high-cost health-benefit plans provided by employers to their employees. A central piece of the Affordable Care Act, it imposes an excise tax of 40% starting in 2018 on health plans whose value is more than $10,200 for individual coverage and $27,500 for a family (the tax only applies to the amounts that exceed the threshold). The excise tax would have the effect of discouraging companies from offering high-cost health plans to employees as they trim their spending on plans to get under the excise-tax cap. For instance, an employer offering an employee $10,200 in health benefits in 2018 would pay $10,200 to the insurer, while an employer offering a plan valued at $11,000 would not only be paying $800 more to provide the plan, but would also have to eat a an excise tax of 40% of $800, or $320.

Why do some economists and policy makers like the idea?

The Cadillac tax counteracts a long-standing feature of tax law — the fact that employer-sponsored health insurance doesn’t count as taxable income.That system encourages companies to spend on tax-free benefits instead of taxable wages. Economists say the tax would help constrain health care costs by giving companies and workers a greater reason to limit their spending and to spend more efficiently. They also argue that, over time, removing that tax distortion would increase take-home pay.

“The magnitude of these increases in workers’ take-home pay will be quite large,” Jason Furman, chairman of the White House Council of Economic Advisers, said earlier this year on the Cadillac tax impact, pointing to estimates that it will be about double the benefit of increasing the minimum wage from $7.25 per hour to $10.10. “Compensation packages take time to adjust and labor markets take time to reach equilibrium, so it would not be surprising if savings were passed through to wages only over the course of a few years, particularly during periods when the economy falls short of full employment.”

What effect is the Cadillac tax already having on employers and employees?

Despite its name and reputation, the tax is set to affect many workers, not just CEOs and unions with top-notch benefits. Companies don’t want to hit the threshold that triggers the tax, so they are starting now to pare back the value of benefit plans. For employees, that means higher deductibles, elimination of some covered services, caps on health savings accounts, and other changes. It’s not just expensive health plans such as those enjoyed by unions that will be affected by the tax. The number of companies affected will grow over time because of the way the tax is indexed to inflation.

The International Foundation of Employee Benefit Plans in October released a survey that found 60% of employers in 2018 will trigger the Cadillac tax unless they make changes, with an additional 10% in 2019, 12% in 2020, and 11% in 2021. Also, companies can have a variety of reasons why they may meet the threshold – they may be in a geographic area such as New York with high health care costs, for example, or they may have an older population.

Why do members of Congress want to repeal or delay the tax?

Both Republicans and Democrats are rallying around proposals to curb the tax because there’s been significant push back from employers and unions. Unions have pressured Democrats, and businesses have lobbied both but largely found a receptive audience in Republicans. True, the tax is a big revenue generator – projected to bring in more than $90 billion over 10 years. But employers say the tax could be the death knell of employer-sponsored benefits. They don’t believe the argument that employers will respond to paring back benefits by boosting workers’ wages. They also doubt the estimates of how much revenue the tax will bring in because they say many employers will cut benefits more than expected rather than pay the tax.

How likely is it that the tax will ever take effect?

It’s looking less likely every day. The Senate voted 90-10 Dec. 3 to repeal the tax and more than two-thirds of House members support eliminating it. The potential loss of revenue had been an obstacle, but that’s becoming less of a concern. Lawmakers are discussing delaying the tax for two years as part of a bigger deal to revive and extend dozens of tax breaks. A two-year delay would push the issue deep into the term of the next president, and the Republican candidates, along with Democratic front-runner Hillary Clinton, support repeal.

More

‘Cadillac’ Health Tax Fight Heats Up

Congress Pushes for Delay in ‘Cadillac Tax’ on Health Plans

From Think Tank: Why the ‘Cadillac Tax’ Is Really Under Fire