Buy Photo Centennial High School student Olivia Cleveland, 17, left, is graduating on Saturday. Her birth mom, Haley Gibbs, right, flew in from Texas to see Cleveland graduate. (Photo: Shelley Mays / The Tennessean )Buy Photo

When Centennial High School senior Olivia Cleveland graduates Saturday, both her moms will be there.

Cleveland, 17, was adopted at birth by Tammy and David Cleveland of Franklin, both of whom have made a point to maintain a relationship with Olivia's birth mom, Haley Gibbs.

Gibbs, 32, now married with two children of her own, flew in from Texas to be a part of the graduation festivities.

"It's been our lives for 18 years. I was included in everything," Gibbs said, getting misty-eyed. "Just to be included in this pivotal moment in her life, I'm so utterly grateful."

The Clevelands and Gibbs say it may be unusual for adoptive families to remain as open as they have been over the years. But both say the experience has been natural and they encourage more families to approach adoptions this way.

Many adoptive parents want to adopt and move on, said Mary Baker, CEO of Monroe Harding, Inc., a nonprofit that recruits and trains foster families and works with kids from birth through age 26. In some cases, the birth mom can't handle being part of the family, she added.

Monroe Harding's mission is to help the child, and nurture the biological family if at all possible. "It helps the young person in the developmental ages."

But there was a special connection between Gibbs and the Clevelands even before Olivia entered the world.

Tammy Cleveland said 17 years ago — after miscarrying four times — she and her husband were on the path to adopting a child internationally when another agency called and asked their thoughts on an open adoption. This form of adoption means the adoptive families hold legal rights and may allow some access to the child, whether through letters or visits.

Cleveland said she and her husband visited Gibbs, who was 14 years old at the time, and they had an instant connection. "It was a connection you can't even describe. She said, 'I wish you could adopt me, too.' "

And, in a way, the Clevelands did adopt Gibbs.

Gibbs' father died in 2004 — she never knew him very well — and her mother died in 2007 after having battled addiction. Her mother-in-law died the same year.

"What Haley did was out of an abundance of love; she wanted so much more for Olivia," Cleveland said. "For her to see beyond herself is so sacrificial."

So, it made sense when the Clevelands became Gibbs' children's godparents. "They are my only true consistent family," Gibbs said.

The Clevelands have two biological children, Catherine, 14, and Joshua, 12. They also have another adoptive son from the Ukraine, Jake, 16, who is at Centennial High.

Olivia, who loves reading and writing and wants to study pre-law at Maryville College in fall, said she feels like her birth mom is her sister or some part of her extended family.

"It's something so natural. It's just easy," she said. "Without them (the Clevelands) this wouldn't have really worked. They've really been open and that made the difference for me and Haley."

Reach Maria Giordano at 615-771-5425 or on Twitter @MariaGiordano.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1gYwdUi