Reuters

Clayton Dubilier & Rice’s planned sale of drug-compounding company PharMEDium Healthcare Holdings Inc. for $2.58 billion stands to land the private equity firm a nice return on its investment.

It also reflects revived interest in compounding pharmacies, which mix or dilute pharmaceutical agents to create hospital-grade dosage forms that aren’t commercially available.

The industry faced regulatory and media scrutiny three years ago when New England Compounding Center Inc.’s steroid injections were linked to a deadly meningitis outbreak. Ultimately, 751 patients were diagnosed with a fungal infection after receiving injections of medications produced by the drug-mixing pharmacy; of that total, 64 people died. Westborough, Mass.-based NECC and its sister business, Ameridose LLC, were shut down in 2012.

IBISWorld said in a report while the compounding pharmacies “experienced negative media attention,” the industry still “proved to be indispensable” in catering to patients’ medication habits. The data provider said it expects revenue for the compounding pharmacies to increase at an annual rate of 3.6% in the next five years from a base of $7.9 billion in revenue this year, partly because a “burgeoning elderly population has stimulated demand for prescriptions, including compounded medications.”

Drug wholesaler AmerisourceBergen said Tuesday it agreed to acquire PharMEDium in an all-cash deal valued at $2.58 billion. New York-based CD&R acquired a majority stake in PharMEDium in January 2014 at a valuation of $900 million, said a person familiar with the situation.

CD&R declined to comment on the returns of its investment.

Baird Equity Research described AmerisourceBergen’s deal for PharMEDium as one in which the publicly traded company paid a “high valuation for a high-quality asset.”

In a research note issued Tuesday, Baird said the nearly $2.6 billion sale price translates to 22.1 times PharMEDium’s projected earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization of $116.5 million for 2015 and 18.9 times its $136.5 million Ebitda estimate for 2016.

The high price multiple PharMEDium garnered reflects “a growth renaissance” in the compounding pharmacy sector “as hospitals more aggressively outsource compounded sterile needs in wake of new government regulations,” Baird analysts Eric Coldwell, Evan Stover and Michael Polark said in the note.

In response of the meningitis outbreak, President Obama signed the Drug Quality and Security Act in November 2013 and enacted an overhaul of compounding oversight, forcing hospitals to have a more stringent oversight over the quality of the compounded sterile preparations they use.

From October 2012 to September 2014, the Food and Drug Administration inspected nearly 150 compounding pharmacies, according to IBISWorld, which added a number of industry operators have exited the industry or “have contended with costs related to complying with FDA standards.”

Lake Forest, Ill.-based PharMEDium—one of the largest providers of outsourced compounded sterile preparations to U.S. hospitals—has experienced increasing Ebitda despite the industry turmoil.

According to a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission in August, when the company was pursuing a listing on the public market, PharMEDium reported adjusted Ebitda of $71.2 million for 2013, up 77% from $40.1 million for 2012. Net sales for 2013 rose 42% to $293.1 million compared with year-earlier results. The company posted net sales of $209.5 million for the first six months of 2015.

The exponential increase in revenue benefited PharMEDium’s previous private equity owners. Baird Private Equity—which in 2003 acquired PharMEDium from Baxter International Inc. and subsequently sold a majority stake of the company to Oak Investment Partners—expected a 44-times return upon its full exit, LBO Wire reported at the time.

Indeed, drug-compounding businesses are drawing investors.

Bain Capital in August formed a new platform called QuVa Pharma Inc. and acquired the assets of the compounding pharmacy services division of Healix Inc.

Belgian company Fagron NV, which counts more than a third of its business from compounding services in Europe, the U.S., Colombia and South Africa, said this month it received indications of acquisition interest and has hired investment bank J.P. Morgan Chase & Co. as its financial adviser.

Write to Amy Or at amy.or@wsj.com