SCOTTSDALE, Ariz. — Rockies fans screamed about last summer’s blockbuster trade that sent star shortstop Troy Tulowitzki to Toronto in return for pitching prospects and veteran shortstop Jose Reyes and his $22 million annual salary.

Pundits scratched their heads this winter when the Rockies swapped slugging young outfielder Corey Dickerson to Tampa Bay for reliever Jake McGee, who likely will be gone after the 2017 season.

Skeptics look at the Rockies’ track record and question whether the franchise — unwilling or unable to add quality starting pitching via free agency or trade — can develop a rotation good enough to turn the Rockies into a winner.

After watching the Rockies average 93 losses over the past five seasons, it’s understandably difficult for those outside the offices at 20th and Blake to grasp it, but general manager Jeff Bridich insists he has a vision for the club’s future. The plan is centered on acquiring young, hard-throwing pitching prospects, building a bulletproof bullpen and relying on a rich pipeline from the minor leagues.

The Harvard-educated Bridich, 38, has been on the job since October 2014, when he took over for Dan O’Dowd, his longtime mentor. Despite the Rockies’ losing tradition, Bridich sees no need to blow things up and start from scratch.

“It’s funny,” Bridich said last week. “The little that I do read about this whole rebuilding thing, the assumption by a lot of people is, the only way to do it, or the only right way to do it, is some sort of nuclear tear down. In my opinion, our farm system is incredibly strong.

“While we have a lot of growth and a lot of improvement to do in terms of our results at the major-league level and our process at the major-league level. But we have a lot of talented baseball athletes. We have high-impact (players) and we have depth of those players in our system. It’s not like we have to build at the major-league level and build at the minor-league level all at the same time.”

Powerful young arms

There is promise growing down on the farm, with the Rockies’ minor-leagues system ranked in the top 10 by most observers, including Baseball America.

Bridich has especially high hope for a stable full of powerful young arms, including right-handers Jeff Hoffman, Miguel Castro, Jesus Tinoco, German Marquez and Antonio Senzatela, and lefties Tyler Anderson and Kyle Freeland.

“There is certainly a renewed focus on pitching,” manager Walt Weiss said. “Probably to the degree that I haven’t seen it before here, and this is my 15th year with the organization in some capacity. That’s definitely a part of it.”

Weiss also said the Rockies are intent on “getting the right type of guy,” meaning clubhouse leaders such as catcher Nick Hundley or new free-agent outfielder Gerardo Parra, who “plays baseball with an edge.”

Since taking over as GM, Bridich has largely steered clear of setting out any kind of timetable for turning the corner. At his first general managers meeting in November 2014, he said, “Our goal is just to get us back to playing meaningful games in September.”

Now, nearly 18 months into the job, and after enduring 94 losses in 2015, Bridich declined to talk wins and losses this season, nor will he project if his plan will yield results in 2016, 2017, 2018 or further down the line.

“What’s the point?” Bridich said. “Why limit ourselves? So if I were to come out and say something that’s pleasing to the ear of you, or a fan here or a fan there, and I say, ‘We’re not going to win for ‘X.’ So what?

“It’s about people. It’s about process. And it’s about how well can we do that together. If a lot of that or most of that comes together for us this year, wonderful. Why say something where it’s got to happen X-number of months and years in the future, where really a lot of good things can happen this year?”

Going out to win

Most observers would be surprised if the Rockies played .500 baseball this season, and downright astounded if they were to contend in the tough National League West. USA Today recently predicted the first 100-loss season in Rockies history. In other words, rooting for the Rockies requires the patience of Job, because even if they do have quality arms coming up through the system, history tells us it’s extremely rare that Colorado pitchers thrive in the majors.

Kansas City’s Dayton Moore knows all about patience. He has been the Royals’ GM since June 2006, and his team had losing records in his first six seasons, including five seasons of 90-plus losses. Then K.C. put together three consecutive winning seasons for the first time since 1987-89, culminating in a World Series title last fall, its first in 30 years.

“In 2009 or 2010, I think it was, I had a radio interview and I said that building a winner is an eight- to 10-year process,” Moore said. “That made a lot of people upset. It’s the truth, but I could have probably phrased it a little bit differently, because our fans had been patient since 1985.”

When Moore’s story was passed on to Bridich, he chuckled and then said, “He’s right though.”

Moore, who was aware of the long, steep climb ahead of him, says he’s glad he didn’t try to hide how far the Royals had to go.

“Like I said, I knew it was going to take at least eight years, but we always felt we had to be very transparent with our fan base,” Moore said. “We aren’t going to fool them anyway. They are smart people, the people in the media are well-informed and pay attention, so we said what we said and just went ahead with our plan.”

The Rockies’ problem, however, is that there doesn’t seem to be light at the end of the tunnel, although they dispute that.

“I go out expecting to win every night,” said Weiss, who’s entering the final year of his three-year contract. “That’s my mentality and I hope that’s our players’ mentality. What other people say about us really has no bearing on it for me.”

Bridich says the same thing, but he wouldn’t mind a little payback this season.

“My hope is that we are surprising all of the doubters and all of the naysayers; most of the interested parties in this baseball industry,” he said. “It’s easy to prognosticate now with everything on paper. But we are getting closer to it not being on paper, which is fun and exciting.

“But our goal every single year is to compete our butts off and play good baseball. The winning and the losing, a lot of that is dependent on the details and how you play the game.”

Bridich’s moves

Denver Post baseball writer Patrick Saunders takes a snapshot of the major moves made by Rockies general manager Jeff Bridich since he replaced Dan O’Dowd on Oct. 8, 2014:

TRADES

OF Corey Dickerson and 3B prospect Kevin Padlo to Tampa Bay Rays for LHP Jake McGee and RHP prospect German Marquez (Jan. 28, 2016): Gave up a potential star slugger for a back-end reliever for two years and Marquez’s great promise.

LHP Rex Brothers to Chicago Cubs for LHP prospect Wander Cabrera (Nov. 25, 2015): If Brothers gets right, this will be a steal for Chicago.

SS Troy Tulowitzki and RHP LaTroy Hawkins to Toronto Blue Jays for SS Jose Reyes, RHP prospects Miguel Castro, Jeff Hoffman and Jesus Tinoco (July 28, 2015): One of biggest trades in franchise history that could well define Bridich as a GM. Trading Tulo for future pitching makes some sense, but the $48 million the club owes a declining Reyes is hard to swallow.

Catcher prospects Jose Briceno and Chris O’Dowd to Atlanta Braves for RHP David Hale and RHP Gus Schlosser (Jan. 30, 2015): Hale looked like he might provide rotation depth, but now looks like a 4A pitcher.

2B Josh Rutledge to Los Angeles Angels for RHP Jairo Diaz (Dec. 12, 2014): One of Bridich’s first deals looks like a winner. Diaz has chance to be a power arm in back of bullpen.

FREE-AGENT SIGNINGS

OF Gerardo Parra, three years, $27.5 million (Jan. 20, 2016): Cleared way for Dickerson trade, and Parra strengthens the defense at Coors Field, but did the Rockies need to spend big bucks on a nonslugging outfielder?

1B Mark Reynolds, one year, $2.6 million (Dec. 16, 2015): Rockies needed depth at first base and a right-handed bat. A low-cost solution for one year.

RHP Chad Qualls, two years $6 million (Dec. 8, 2015): Bullpen needed immediate help and Qualls brings it. A likely seventh-inning arm.

RHP Jason Motte, two years, $10 million (Dec. 8, 2015): If McGee can’t close, Motte will. A solid acquisition if he can recapture some of his 2012 magic when he saved 42 games for the Cardinals.

RHP Kyle Kendrick, one year, $5.5 million (Feb. 4, 2015): A disastrous marriage between a pitcher and a ballpark. Kendrick posted a 7.72 ERA and gave up 21 homers in 13 starts at Coors Field.

C Nick Hundley, two years, $6.25 million (Jan. 5, 2015): Bridich struck gold with Hundley, who hit a career-high .301 last season and provided needed stability behind the plate and leadership in the clubhouse.

RHP John Axford to a minor-league contract (Jan. 30, 2015): Made the team, became the closer and notched 25 saves despite roller-coaster 2015 season. The Rockies considered re-signing him, but a likely $6 million arbitration figure was too steep.

INF Daniel Descalso, two years, $3.6 million (Dec. 14, 2014): Veteran utility infielder provides some depth, but he hit just .205 with a .283 on-base percentage last season.