Tax freeze to boost AngioDynamics development, CEO says Sen. Charles Schumer wants to make the freeze permanent in Glens Falls factory visit

Glens Falls

Last week, Latham-based medical device maker AngioDynamics, Inc., signed a contract with an external research and development company.

The move funded a program to incorporate a new technology into the market, CEO Joseph DeVivo said Thursday.

This deal was finalized mere weeks after a freeze on a 2.3 percent tax on the sale of medical devices was signed into law.

Freeing millions of dollars for jobs and research and development, the law enabled the company to make that deal six months to a year more quickly than it originally planned, DeVivo said.

Legislation passed in December temporarily lifted a controversial tax that helped pay for the Affordable Care Act. Manufacturers and importers of medical devices, like AngioDynamics and others in the so-called Catheter Valley of upstate New York, have had to pay the tax on sales since 2013.

DeVivo's announcement, which followed a tour of the Glens Falls facility with U.S. Sen. Charles Schumer, was a bright moment Thursday for AngioDynamics, which on Thursday reported a second quarter net loss of $400,000, compared to last year's second-quarter earnings of $1.3 million. Net sales for the quarter were $89.2 million, compared to last year's $92.1 million. Additional information was not available by press time.

AngioDynamics did not expect the legislation's success in Washington, DeVivo said.

"The probability of this happening — I don't think there was a betting man who said we could pull this off," he said.

Industry trade groups said the tax harmed research, development and continued medical progress. In the 12 months ending in May, the tax cost AngioDynamics $4.14 million. Since 2013, the company has spent more than $12 million from its operating budget on the tax, DeVivo said Thursday.

He said he expected the tax freeze to encourage manufacturing companies to launch products domestically instead of abroad.

The freeze runs until Dec. 31, 2017, and Schumer said the next step would be to eliminate the tax — which he said "cut the industry off at its knees".

"We're not going to rest at that — we're going to figure out a way to undo this tax permanently, because it's so important," Schumer said.

Schumer said the freeze would not affect funding for the Affordable Care Act, though he did not specify how. The tax would have provided $29 billion for the Affordable Care Act from the device industry over a decade.

Earlier in the afternoon, Schumer and DeVivo toured the company's new factory, where employees in a fluorescent-lit room assemble laser fiber catheters that treat varicose veins. The factory opened in January at the Glens Falls campus.

lellis@timesunion.com • 518-454-5018 • @lindsayaellis