The only decisions I made were that I'd fish somewhere I hadn't fished for a long time and I would go light.

The reason for going light had to do with my lack of self-discipline. I knew I'd be traveling within easy range of all three South Platte River tailwaters, and it would be tempting to just go fish that familiar water with the same small flies that always work this time of year.

"Going light" meant taking one fly box containing mostly small-stream dry flies and a few nymph patterns, a 7-foot split bamboo fly rod for a 4-weight line and no waders. I did take my wading boots so I could at least wet wade wherever I ended up. This tackle wasn't so light that I couldn't catch a trout or two from one of my usual tailwater haunts, but I knew I wouldn't be tempted.

So with all the possibilities dancing through my head, I unfolded a Pike-San Isabel National Forest map and took a look. I almost immediately zeroed in on Tarryall Creek. I'd fished there many years ago when the Colorado Division of Wildlife had a lease on the section of meadow water directly below Tarryall Reservoir. My most vivid memory of the fishing there was the gorgeous meandering creek itself and the bulls in an adjacent pasture that I needed to cross to get to it.

Advertisement

I'd also fished a plunge pool and riffle stretch of the Tarryall that ran through a spruce-fir forest quite a way farther downstream from the dam. I don't remember ever catching a lot of trout or any large trout anywhere on the Tarryall, but I did hear rumors of large trout lurking in the deep bend pools. A verifiable number of large brown trout did end up in the mostly private water below the dam when the reservoir was drained for repairs a number of years ago. That, by all accounts, was some great fishing for a while.

Ed Engle (PAUL AIKEN)

There was a bit of public water upstream from the reservoir that I had never gotten around to fishing. It was sandwiched between two parcels of private land. The map indicated there was a road into it on the south side and somewhat easier access on the north side from a parking area on County Road 77.

I decided to try finding the south-side road, which looked easy enough on the map. I figured, how hard can it be? It's South Park. You can see for miles.

Of course, things always look easy on the map.

Needless to say, I ended up driving the South Park back roads for two or three hours trying to find a turn that should have only taken me 15 minutes from the looks of the map.

A Tarryall Creek brown trout (Ed Engle)

It got to the point where I finally accepted that being lost might be all that happened on this fishing trip. There's a popular phrase from a J.R.R. Tolkien poem, "Not all those who wander are lost." Well, I was wandering and I was lost and I couldn't have enjoyed it more.

I was never in any real danger of not eventually finding my way back out to U. S. Highway 24, and I got to see some wonderful new country. I never did find the turnoff down to Tarryall Creek, although several hours later I realized I'd passed a faint trace road that must have been it.

Eventually I turned back toward the reservoir, drove for another 30 minutes and found the parking lot off the county road on the north side of the creek. It was past noon when I finally walked into the upper end the state lease.

The creek looked great. Some recent improvements included instream rock placements and strategically placed logs along the banks to prevent erosion and preserve the bend pools. It was the quintessential meandering meadow stream with all the trimmings. It also had signs of some moderate to heavy fishing pressure from the just-ended Labor Day weekend.

With that in mind, I hiked downstream to the middle of the public water, where I planned to start fishing my way back upstream to where I'd parked. It's a trick I learned fishing the South Platte River above Spinney Reservoir. If you hike directly to the middle of a section of public water, you usually find that fewer anglers have disturbed it simply because it's farther away from their car. There's often more trout and sometimes larger trout.

I hiked down Tarryall Creek for about 45 minutes before I stopped. I'd passed a bunch of good-looking water and couldn't wait to fish. I tied a size 14 yellow stimulator to the tippet and cast it up tight against the opposite bank. It couldn't have been sexier water, but it yielded zilch.

I then decided to fish the riffles more thoroughly where an 8-inch brown trout attacked the dry fly. For the rest of the day I assiduously fished the banks and never did get a strike. I even tried trailing a beadhead hare's ear nymph behind the stimulator, figuring I'd be sure to hook up on the nymph, but that also failed. I tried other dry fly patterns, too, but to no avail.

It was perplexing for other reasons, too. Although I saw mayfly hatches throughout the afternoon, I never saw a single trout rise. I did finally catch and release two smaller brown trout when I switched back to the size 14 yellow stimulator, mostly because it was the only fly pattern that had produced anything.

I guess I should have been disappointed, but I wasn't. I thought, next time I'll get here earlier in the day instead of when the sun is high overhead. I'll swing streamers through the bends. I'll look for the less obvious lies that the other fly-fishers haven't picked apart.

I'll get to know this water, and the trout will come.

Check EdEngleFlyFishing.com to see Engle's new blog, "The Lone Angler Journal."