It was an emotional week for friends and family of Dr. Teresa Sievers. The Bonita Springs doctor was found dead inside her home on Monday. We spoke with Dr Siever's nurse and close colleague on Saturday.

"Sometimes she would show up 10 seconds after nine. Heals greased, she was ready to roll...sliding into the first patients," said Sandra Hoskins, Dr. Sievers' nurse of seven years.

On Monday, the doctor failed to show. Hoskins knew something was wrong.

"The phone rang. The girl in the front office picked it up and said there's crime tape. Her block is taped off, and there's police everywhere," said Hoskins.

Hoskins immediately drove to the doctor's home and spoke with a deputy.

"He said she's passed," said Hoskins. "I called Mark, and I said I know what's going, but I don't know what's going on. He was hysterical."

"I said where are you. He said I'm on my way home. I said Mark I'm headed back to the office to take care of things."

That's exactly what Hoskins did. Her first instinct as a care provider was to care for her patients.

The practice was special. It was a place of comfort.

"It wasn't a place where you sat in a traditional physician's office with outdated Better Homes and Gardens magazine," said Hoskins. "We serve tea. We had a soft, fleshy couch. There were drapes. It was a family [and] you were coming into the living room. It wasn't a waiting room."

Dr. Sievers was the traditional or clinical side, and Hoskins was the Zen.

"I had to pack up seven years, and leave there for the last time," said Hoskins. "I took her stethoscope out of the room, and I hung it on her door."

When it comes to a motive...

"I don't know of anybody or any incident that would even come close to doing harm to her. You loved her. I did. I do," said Hoskins.

Hoskins was quick to establish a connection with the doctor's office right next door -- which includes Dr. Richard Wilson and physician's assistant Joy Sensakovic.

They will help handle hundreds of patients, and Hoskins will stay on as a familiar face.

The funeral service for Dr. Sievers will be held on Monday.

----------

Related Stories:

- Get more: Dr. Sievers homicide investigation