The story of telecommunications is often one of two different worlds.

For most Americans, the broadband Internet is an everyday miracle. Internet providers have invested $1.3 trillion in the last two decades and continue to invest about $70 billion each year to keep it that way. Despite occasional scare stories about supposedly faster speeds in some neighborhood in Latvia, average peak U.S. speeds, according to Akamai Technologies Inc.'s State of the Internet report, are now 50 megabits per second.

Our entry-level broadband options remain the most affordable in the 57-nation Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe. American companies built the backbone through which most of the world's data travels and are the platform for services such as Facebook, Apple, Google, and Netflix that dominate the new, digital economy.

But a handful of doomsayers see the glass as empty and, in an effort to remake the Internet as they think it should be, have urged the Federal Communications Commission to "reclassify" the Internet and apply the stringent rules used for yesteryear's telephone system to your broadband.

On its surface, that's like defining a car as a horse-drawn cart with an engine. But worse, "reclassification" demands a U-turn on the decisions that led to today's remarkable Internet.

In 1996, the Clinton administration -- including, yes, Vice President Al Gore -- realized that the "information superhighway" was about to be born and sought to create a policy framework that would spur its growth.

An intense battle of ideas resulted. In one camp were those who called for rigid government supervision of the nascent Internet by applying the Depression-era rules developed for the Ma Bell telephone monopoly. In the other camp were those -- including myself and most other members of the administration -- who recognized that the Internet was something different, and could become something spectacular, if we let companies compete to produce it.

In the bipartisan Telecommunications Act of 1996, the blueprint of the Internet era, our more humble view won the day.

The new "Information Superhighway" would be free of old-school phone regulation so that competition would allow it to be widely and affordably deployed, but guaranteed consumer protection as it happened. And the result has been the incredible growth and innovation we enjoy today online.

Would we have been off regulating it? Europe largely went in that direction, and now regrets it. Europe now massively lags the United States in access and investment. Just 60 percent of European homes can access speeds of 25 megabits per second or more, compared to more than 85 percent in the United States. Rural American homes have four times the access to high speed broadband as their European counterparts (including the Latvians).

And that's largely because the United States has different technologies competing to provide service -- we have not only fiber, but we also are a global leader in cable and in 4G/LTE wireless -- while Europeans put their faith in the remnants of their old phone companies, extending their antiquated monopolies. In short, the Europeans decided what the Internet was supposed to look like, while we allowed users and providers to determine what it would look like.

Is it any wonder we ended up better off?

None of this denies the importance of strong rules to ensure all consumers and innovators have full and equal access to the Internet. But "reclassifying" the Internet -- relabeling it "telephone" instead of "information services" -- is wholly unnecessary to get there.

That decision is now being predictably challenged in court, and will be there for some time to come. But in the interim, we could lose a generation of investment and innovation.

Instead, let's bring back humility to the telecommunications debate. Congress should pass legislation that preserves the necessary consumer protections but rolls back the FCC's reintroduction of telephone monopoly regulations.

To make this happen, the political right would have to abandon its instinctive opposition to reasonable government rules protecting the open Internet, and accept that extending it to all Americans isn't wasteful or unmerited. The political left would need to abandon its unspoken flirtation with the fantasy of imposing public ownership or control over the many competing technologies that make up the Internet.

Those of us -- on both sides and in both camps -- who were there 20 years ago have a duty to remind today's policy-makers of how the Internet came to be. It is the product not just of R&D and investment, but of patience and humility on the part of the policy-makers of that era. Before both sides go political head-hunting about the Internet, they might consider that example.

Ev Ehrlich was an under secretary of commerce in the Clinton administration.