Click To View Gallery

A century ago, a doctor’s visit meant the doctor came to you and managed everything from lumps and bumps to minimal surgical procedures. Going to the hospital happened only when all other options were exhausted.

In today’s healthcare environment, with its spiraling costs and downward pressures from the Affordable Care Act, it’s no wonder the question’s been raised whether that old-fashioned approach might be updated for today’s needs. Some industry leaders are saying yes—and they point to the medical home delivery model as a possible solution.

A medical home is any place where an integrated team of providers can meet the gamut of a patient’s primary healthcare needs without sending the patient to a more expensive, specialty hospital. Taking a leaf from the pediatric world where parents must often coordinate immediate, ongoing, and follow-up visits for young children, the medical home setting offers both the staff and the patient a variety of healthcare and social services, either on-site or in another immediately accessible department. “It’s coordinated care for a patient within that 60- to 90-minute visit,” says Brenda Bush-Moline, associate principal at VOA Associates Inc. (Chicago).

This means medical homes can be located wherever there’s an urgent need for primary care, says Suzy Cobin, senior vice president of HSA Primecare (Chicago). She sees medical homes in rural areas ranging from Alaska, North Dakota, or the Adirondacks in upstate New York to regional health systems in Chicago and California, where hospital officials are thinking through outpatient centers in retail strips, standalone buildings, or in conjunction with an existing specialty practice.

Such facilities are also a creative boon to architects, presenting them with a golden opportunity to radically rethink healthcare delivery through sites capable of both general wellness maintenance and specific illness treatment. “The doctors are the ones who say, ‘Here is our concept, design something around it,’” says Martin Valins, principal at Stantec (Philadelphia). “It’s a blank design slate influenced primarily by the operational policies of the healthcare practitioners.”

A closer look

Chase-Brexton Health Services in Baltimore is one example of a patient-centered medical home design. Offering services for HIV-positive patients and the local lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender population, the facility was designed by NBBJ (New York) to re-interpret how care is brought to the patient, not vice versa. As a result, a care suite approach, where everyone works in one location—the doctor, case manager, behavioral health expert, nutritionist, nurse, and financial adviser—was created.

“All care providers work in what we call teaming spaces,” says Kris Krail, senior associate/healthcare planner at NBBJ. Medical staff examines patients in the bays surrounding the teaming space. If a private discussion is needed, connected rooms are available, but otherwise there’s no need for the patient to leave the suite.