Sunday brought an uptick of intensity to the Broncos’ training camp .

On the eve of the first padded practice of training camp, the first “fight” broke out between defensive end Derek Wolfe and offensive tackle Ryan Harris. Wolfe appeared to give Harris a late shove prompting some pushing back-and-forth, but no punches were thrown.

Later on, Wolfe got physical again with another offensive lineman before being calmed down by quarterback Peyton Manning.

“It was a good start with our pads,” coach Gary Kubiak said. “It’s what it ought to look like if you’re a good team.”

Kubiak said quarterback Brock Osweiler will run with the starting group Monday to give Manning a break.

“It’s important that (Osweiler) walks out of that locker room and it’s his team for the day,” Kubiak said. “If his feet improve, he’ll be a better player, and it’s something I’m staying on him about.”

Receiver Jordan Taylor is quickly becoming a camp standout. He had another good practice Sunday, highlighted by a terrific sideline grab.

Kubiak made a point to the team to end practices better. He said the team tends to lose focus when they tire toward the end.

“If you don’t make those plays in a game when you’re worn out in the fourth quarter, it’s going to be tough on you,” Kubiak said. “I want them to feel it, not just me.”

The 3,786 fans in attendance got a treat from the linebackers early on. A cat-and-mouse drill in front of the hill of fans drew a chorus of cheers when DeMarcus Ware was turned loose to chase Von Miller.

After practice, Kubiak praised Miller embracing a leadership role on and off the field.

More cheers erupted when Manning unleashed a deep rocket pass to Emmanuel Sanders for a touchdown during 11-on-11 drills. Manning spent his series off throwing balls to kids in the stands, stealing most of the eyes away from ongoing second-team snaps.

Receiver Demaryius Thomas started practice off sluggish with a couple of early drops. But by the end, he knocked off a bit of the rust with three catches in team drills.

The 1986 Denver Broncos mascot Michael Hancock showed up to camp. But now he’s more known for being Denver’s mayor.

The lifelong Broncos fan served a stint as “Huddles” when he was 17 years old and still considers it one of the crowning moments of his life.

“It’s good to be the mayor today,” Hancock said. “Growing up we used to go up to Greeley every year and it’s a lot different now.”

Mayor Hancock said the Broncos look more focused than in recent years, and he expects an impressive season.

Injury updates. Tight end Marcel Jensen was unable to practice Sunday after experiencing soreness from being stepped on Saturday. Kubiak said he expects him to return to practice Monday.

Defensive end Malik Jackson (calf) and running back Jeremy Stewart (hamstring) were limited in practice.

Offensive tackle Connor Rains (foot) missed his second straight day of practice.

And veteran defensive Antonio Smith, who missed Saturday’s workouts for a funeral, returned to resume his work with trainers and limited participation in drills.

Cameron Wolfe: 303-954-1891, cwolfe@denverpost.com or twitter.com/CameronWolfe