Mercer projects lower employer medical cost growth as companies prepare for 'Cadillac' tax in 2018

Employer health benefit costs for active employees are projected to rise next year by 5.9 percent in Michigan, according to a new survey by Mercer, a human resource consulting firm based in New York.

But changes to employers' plan designs and vendor selection could keep the increase limited to 3.7 percent, said Jerry Konal, Mercer’s principal business leader in Detroit.

The projections come in lower than this year's 5.3-percent increase in total health benefit cost for active employees, or $11,123 per employee.

Nationally, employer health care costs are also projected to rise about 4 percent in 2016, after increasing 3.8 percent this year to $11,635 per employee, according to Mercer.

Fear over the 40 percent excise tax related to the so-called “Cadillac” tax on expensive health benefit packages appears to have led to more aggressive cost cutting, Mercer officials said.

“For employers that want to maintain current benefit levels for their employees, there are a range of strategies to explore that can help control cost over the long term,” Konal said. "There are strategies worth pursuing that may help employers to remain below the established excise tax thresholds."

For example, employers are working to improve workforce health, restructuring provider payments to reward quality and value, and providing more support to employees to restrain costs and find quality providers, said Mercer.

The Mercer survey was conducted late summer of 2,486 public and private employers with at least 10 employees, according to the 2015 National Survey of Employer-Sponsored Health Plans. Mercer surveyed 86 Michigan employers, including 48 from metro Detroit.

Only 5 percent of Michigan employers said in the survey they are likely to terminate their medical plans within the next five years and send employees to the public health exchange to seek coverage.

Several years ago, other surveys predicted more than half of employers would likely terminate their medical plans because of the Affordable Care Act of 2010, or Obamacare.

However, Mercer reported in its 2011 survey that 10 percent of Michigan respondents said they are likely or very likely to terminate their health benefit plans. Nationally, some 9 percent of large employers and 19 percent of small employers say they are likely or very likely to terminate their plans, the previous Mercer survey found.

Other findings this year for Michigan include the following: