It should not be a burden to have a primary care provider; people should see it as an advantage to have someone as their primary care provider -- especially someone with whom they can have a good relationship, good communication.

Beginning November 1, 2015, AFC/Doctors Express Cherry Creek will provide primary care to its patients in order to improve its quality of care and meet increased demand for primary care in the area.

Shideh Kerman, COO, says more people are seeking out primary care physicians since the Affordable Care Act has gone into effect.

"More and more insurance plans require patients to choose a physician to serve as their primary care provider," Kerman says. "Choosing a provider is beneficial to the patient if they have a designated primary care provider. Not only will we be the ones to take care of them for various issues; we can also refer to specialists when necessary."

Dr. Johnny Shen will oversee primary care at AFC/Doctors Express Cherry Creek. With his extensive background in urgent care and experience as a family physician, Dr. Shen was the perfect candidate to lead the new clinic, Shideh Kerman explains.

"He has been working in this area and at this clinic for a while now, so he already has existing patients but is also open to accepting new patients," Shideh Kerman says. "He is board certified in family medicine, which is very important. All of our doctors and physicians are certified so we can provide our patients with the best care possible."

Dr. Shen will also begin accepting new patients starting in November. People interested in enrolling as a new patient should call now, as slots are limited.

"If people currently don’t have a primary care provider or aren’t happy with their current one, they should contact us," Kerman says. "It should not be a burden to have a primary care provider; people should see it as an advantage to have someone as their primary care provider -- especially someone with whom they can have a good relationship, good communication."

Offering primary care will allow Doctors Express Cherry Creek to develop an even better relationship with its patients, boosting patient satisfaction and improving the quality of care significantly.

“According to recent research, people who have a strong relationship with their primary care provider report greater satisfaction with their care and enjoy better health," Kerman says. "Good communication and collaboration with the doctor that oversees your care ensures that everything necessary gets done with ease.”

About AFC/Doctors Express Cherry Creek

AFC/Doctors Express Cherry Creek has a physician on-site seven days a week. Their urgent care service offerings include family care, x-rays, lab testing, flu shots, sinus pain care, physical exams and more. Patients visiting Doctors Express Cherry Creek can get quality medical assistance and treatment for common illnesses without having to experience the long wait times and costly bills of an ER visit. To learn more, visit http://www.doctorsexpresscherrycreek.com