In a sign of how desperately the administration needs to boost Obamacare numbers – or how poorly planned this whole operation was in the first place – the White House has released a video of President Obama pitching his “signature” achievement to Hispanics.

The spiel is in English — except for three or four words to let the audience know Obama cares enough about their “amigos, familia and vecinos” to learn how to say them in Spanish.

That was probably smart as far as it goes, since December’s rollout of the Obamacare website in Spanish was so embarrassing that critics asked if the translation had been done by a computer.

But it underscores – no matter what the MSM cheerleaders are saying about enrollment – that numbers are so far behind in general that the Obama administration has had to broaden the base of the population it’s lying to to sell the president’s “signature” achievement.

(“Peace of mind for less than a monthly cellphone bill,” the line goes.)

SNL’s hilarious Valentine’s Day ad every man must watch

So far, Hispanics aren’t buying. In California, almost half of the Hispanic population is eligible for Obamacare, but only 20 percent of those enrolled who have identified ethnicity are Hispanic, according to Bloomberg.

That means a lot of friends, families and neighbors — amigos, familia and vecinos, as Obama might say – aren’t lining up.

Besides the problems with the website, Obamacare is having trouble appealing to Hispanics because immigrants in the country legally fear seeking public assistance will hurt their citizenship chances (don’t they know Democrats love citizens on the dole?). Others are afraid information they enter to enroll in Obamacare could get relatives who are here illegally deported, according to Bloomberg.

They don’t need to worry, since the essentially lawless Obama administration is in charge of Immigration and Customs Enforcement. In an October memo cited by Bloomberg, the agency said it “does not use information about such individuals or members of their household that is obtained for purposes of determining eligibility for such coverage as the basis for pursuing civil immigration enforcement action.”

In other words, as el senor presidente might say, “If you like your illegal alien familia, you can keep your illegal alien familia.”

Gracias.

H/T: Weasel Zippers