Physician groups grow Palo Alto Medical Foundation Santa Cruz July 2014: 175 physicians 32 part-time physicians, 40 nurse practitioners and physician assistants. November 2015: 200 physicians, 32 part-time physicians, 50 nurse practitioners and physician assistants. Dignity Health Medical Group Dominican February 2014: 35 doctors, 2 nurse practitioners. November 2015: 70 doctors. Salud Para La Gente November 2015: 18 physicians, one on call; 14 nurse practitioners and physician assistants, one on call; two lactation consultants, one parent educator, two behavioral health therapists, one optometrist. Coming: One pediatrician, 2 obstetrician/gynecoloists 2016: One family practice physician, one pediatrician, one family nurse practitioner

CAPITOLA >> Dr. Elizabeth Baskerville’s office plans a party Friday afternoon from 2 to 5 p.m. to say goodbye to her patients.

After 33 years in the same location, she is closing Capitola Pediatrics, her practice specializing in infants, children and teens at the end of the year. She’ll retire to Washington state where she will do volunteer work.

Baskerville, who got her medical license in 1969, wishes she could stay open but in a letter to friends and families, she said she tried without success to attract new pediatricians to take over.

“It is very difficult to bring in and retain new physicians because of the high cost of living and especially the high cost of housing,” she said.

The median single-family home price in Santa Cruz County topped $715,000 in July, August and September, making this the most expensive market in the nation behind San Francisco and the San Jose-Sunnyvale area.

Small private practices such as Capitola Pediatrics are shrinking.

Accenture, which periodically surveys independent physicians, reports the number declined from 49 percent in 2005 to 37 percent in 2013 due to lower reimbursement rates and overhead costs, and predicts further shrinkage in 2016 to 33 percent.

Some physicians are joining larger medical groups where they can focus on medicine without the challenge of running a business.

Few of those coming out of medical school expect to run their own practice, according to Marvin Labrie of Physicians Medical Group of Santa Cruz County, who hears about the trends from his stepson who is in his fourth year of residency and working as a hospitalist in Seattle.

“They like the pace. They like the intensity. They like knowing when they’re off duty, they’re off duty,” Labrie said.

Medicare reimbursement rates for doctors in Santa Cruz County have lagged behind those in Santa Clara County by more than 10 percent. A fix is due in 2017, thanks to Dr. Larry de Ghetaldi of Palo Alto Medical Foundation Santa Cruz, who worked on this issue for 14 years.

Large medical groups are in a better position to have capital for new technology and equipment but for solo and small practices, the cost is daunting.

In Watsonville, several doctors who owned private practices have joined the nonprofit Salud Para Le Gente, which is growing with federal grants under the 2010 Affordable Care Act.

Advertisement

They are Dr. Jordann Loehr, who practices obstetrics and gynecology, and Dr. Michelle Simon and Dr. Linda Shaw, both pediatricians.

Dori Rose Inda, Salud’s executive director, said 45 new staffers were hired in five and a months. In September Salud was awarded a $318,000 federal grant to support a new physician, pediatrician and health coach to serve 1,055 new and existing patients, numbers that are growing as the state-funded Medi-Cal program expands.

Salud’s new addition for providers seeing women and children is expected to open in January.

Loehr practiced with Dr. Dennis Chamberlain until he retired; they were affiliated with Coastal Health Partners, a medical group affiliated with Watsonville Community Hospital.

Dr. Jill Parello and Dr. Cory Parello, who were practicing at Capitola Pediatrics, moved to an office in Aptos and affiliated with Coastal Health Partners.

Musical chairs?

“Absolutely,” said Labrie.

As the sun sets on Baskerville’s career in medicine, Capitola families say she will be missed.

Among her patients was Tyler Smith, now 33.

“Going to the doctor was something I never feared or dreaded,” he wrote his mom after hearing of Dr. Baskerville’s retirement. “I actually liked it because I knew she was going to help me and with such a calming aura. She is such an incredible person.”

Physician groups grow

Palo Alto Medical Foundation Santa Cruz

July 2014: 175 physicians 32 part-time physicians, 40 nurse practitioners and physician assistants.

November 2015: 200 physicians, 32 part-time physicians, 50 nurse practitioners and physician assistants.

Dignity Health Medical Group Dominican

February 2014: 35 doctors, 2 nurse practitioners.

November 2015: 70 doctors.

Salud Para La Gente

November 2015: 18 physicians, one on call; 14 nurse practitioners and physician assistants, one on call; two lactation consultants, one parent educator, two behavioral health therapists, one optometrist.

Coming: One pediatrician, 2 obstetrician/gynecoloists

2016: One family practice physician, one pediatrician, one family nurse practitioner

Editor’s note: A previous version of this story had Tyler Smith’s name and age incorrect.