Well, it’s settled. Come November, the Republican Party will have as its standard bearer a man who a year and a half ago was best known in political circles for financing efforts to prove that the current president was born in Kenya.

The post mortem on how Trump’s success seemingly snuck up on everyone has already started, mostly in the form of snickering at people who made loud, public pronouncements that he’d never win. It’s an easy, and warranted laugh. As my great aunt Ethel used to say, “The man who makes political predictions with any certainty is really applying for the job of national court jester.”

While the reasons for Trump’s success are complex and rooted in economic and demographic change, it shouldn’t surprise anyone. While everyone expected the Republican Party to eventually nominate one of its adults, the truth is that the adults lost control of it a long time ago.

Symptoms of this have were left out in public all over the place. It was probably most evident back in 2010, when the Republican Party rode the Tea Party wave to control of the House of Representatives and a bunch of state governments, including Michigan.

Advertisement

The new majorities showed little interest in political tradition, rules or compromise. They are also openly hostile to their party’s establishment. The party that took over the House in 2010 and voted to defund Obamacare more times than most people can count also connived with Ted Cruz to shut down the federal government while stabbing the Senate’s establishment leaders in the back.

Meanwhile, prodded by the worst impulses by rightwing talk radio and a media echo chamber, the party base fermented in a toxic stew of faction, resentment and fear. Someone, everyone, was out to get them. They needed guns and they needed lots of them. They also needed to take their country back.

Or, in the words of the vulgar talking yam, they need to make America great again. The same slogan that mysteriously turned up when a black man took the oath of office was slightly repurposed when applied to the Chinese and hordes of Mexican rapists running roughshod over California.

Trump’s victory is a mirror held up to the Republican Party. The uneasy alliance between country club elites and rightwing evangelical Christians have finally given birth to the most insane nomination since Goldwater.

Prospects of a Trump candidacy prompted predictions that it would cleave the party apart. True enough, the rise of Trump also prompted some Republican operatives and media figures to say they would not support a Trump nomination. Some of them shared on social media pictures of change to party affiliation on voter registration cards.

There is an alternative possibility, that the same self-styled adults who pretended to be in control will rally behind the vulgar talking yam. Rather than leave the party they will make peace with what it’s become.

The evidence, just as the evidence for the radicalization of the party base, out there in the open. Not only have past episodes of bigoted, misogynistic behavior been met largely with silence, party leaders have already started to rally around Trump. That includes Jon Huntsman, 2012’s moderate darling, and John McCain, whose war prisoner experience was mocked by Trump.

Doing so carries with it the unfortunate side effect of tacitly endorsing the bigotry and misogyny he rode to the nomination, alienating everyone else along the way. If that happens, a Trump nomination doesn’t need to destroy the GOP by breaking it up. It could destroy it through simple attrition of numbers.

Eric Baerren is a Morning Sun columnist. He can also be found at the website Michigan Liberal, and can be reached by email at ebaerren@gmail.com or on Twitter at @ebaerren.