WICHITA FALLS — With five weeks to go before the primary, tea partiers are still grumbling about Sen. John Cornyn. But grumbling isn’t the same as spitting mad.

After a dozen years in the Senate and his climb to become the party’s deputy leader, he’s the definition of the “establishment” many of them despise. He’s not aggressive enough, they say. He abandoned Sen. Ted Cruz in the fight to defund Obamacare, they say.

“Yeah, I hold it against him. Doesn’t mean I won’t vote for him, but I hold it against him,” said Wayne Pharries, 48, a commercial banker who came to hear Cornyn address the chamber of commerce over lunch Wednesday at Wichita Falls Country Club.

Against a weak field of seven challengers, that’s likely enough for Cornyn to survive. Unlike Senate Republican leader Mitch McConnell of Kentucky and some others, he doesn’t face a stiff tea party assault, and no outside groups have swooped into his state to make life miserable.

With that maneuvering room, Cornyn is warning against a purity movement that threatens to take hold within the party. He laments the impulse among conservatives of varying temperaments to let tactical disputes boil over — making his primary something of a test case for the ideological struggle simmering in races across the country.

“I get the fact that people are scared and angry. I share that same feeling,” Cornyn told a group of 15 Republican women, meeting privately in a wood-paneled salon at the country club after his chamber speech. “Sometimes you can’t do everything you want to do at one time.”

He faced pointed questions. Several of the women voiced concern about schisms within the GOP — in particular, the attacks leveled at Cruz during the government shutdown.

“We’re all trying to fight Obamacare. We had some disagreements on tactics,” Cornyn said, explaining for the umpteenth time that his resistance to using a government shutdown for leverage doesn’t mean his heart is in the wrong place.

One of the women on hand, Lisa Talley, a candidate for county clerk, liked his focus on long-term victory through party-building and winning back the Senate, rather than turning each legislative fight into a death struggle.

“Sometimes you do need changes but … some things are tried and true,” she said of Cornyn. “There’s a lot of common sense there, and with experience comes wisdom.”

Among active tea partiers, patience, cooperation and compromise aren’t key goals, though. And Cornyn isn’t their ideal.

A former judge, he’s more measured than blistering in his rhetoric.

When he won the Senate seat in 2002, gentle sincerity was a huge asset. Now, the look and demeanor that made him a senator from central casting, as he was often described, is more of a mixed bag to GOP voters.

Top conservative rankings and backing from groups such as the National Rifle Association don’t necessarily help.

“I will walk till my feet bleed to defeat Cornyn,” said Margaret Casiraghi, 48, an administrative assistant from Houston. “He talks out of both sides of his mouth. … It’s beyond me how he’s worked so hard to sabotage Cruz and still has a possibility to get re-elected.”

She was among the several hundred members of the King Street Patriots gathered in northwest Houston last Monday night for a debate between Lt. Gov. David Dewhurst and his three challengers.

One of the state’s most active tea party groups, King Street gave Cruz a hero’s welcome after the government shutdown.

Cornyn was hardly the only Senate Republican to resist Cruz’s hardball tactics on Obamacare. On the key vote to prolong a filibuster, only 18 colleagues sided with Cruz. But Cornyn is the only one who shares the same 26 million-person constituency, which makes Cruz the de facto benchmark.

King Street founder Catherine Engelbrecht won’t speak ill of the senior senator. When the group was targeted by the IRS, he pushed back. He’s also strong on gun rights and promoting the military, she said, but it’s no secret that some activists aren’t thrilled with him.

“When Ted Cruz stepped away from the pack and did what he did on Obamacare — those moments aren’t going to be easily forgotten: Who stood with him, who didn’t,” Engelbrecht said. “That said, John Cornyn has been extremely helpful to our organization, and he’s been good for Texas.”

This sort of blunted criticism bodes well for Cornyn in the primary, especially combined with her assessment of U.S. Rep. Steve Stockman — Cornyn’s best-known challenger.

“To be very honest, I don’t know that much about him,” she said.

Stockman’s challenge

Cornyn, who turns 62 next Sunday, is seeking a third six-year term.

Stockman, R-Clear Lake, is the only challenger in the primary who has run statewide. Despite a huge fundraising gap — $32,000 in the bank at last report, compared with $7 million for Cornyn — the challenger has a knack for getting attention. His antics have included offering “Obama barf bags,” and “If babies had guns, they wouldn’t be aborted” bumper stickers.

Stockman held a House seat for one term two decades ago. He made an improbable comeback in 2012. He’s run a low-budget guerrilla campaign, blistering Cornyn via Twitter as a backstabber to Cruz and other conservatives.

The operation exists almost entirely in the virtual world. Stockman doesn’t meet with voters or grant interviews. The address on his campaign website is a UPS store in Friendswood, near his old house.

At the Kroger a few doors down, a dozen patrons said they’ve never heard of Stockman. One who had, Rebecca Herder, 61, said the congressman “was just obviously here from another planet or something.”

Husband Richard Herder, 65, a retired program manager for a NASA contractor, also can’t fathom Stockman representing Texas in the Senate.

“If you vote for an idiot, you’re going to have an idiot there for a long time,” he said.

A longtime GOP voter, he said he’s concerned about growing extremism in the party. He views Cornyn as plenty conservative, and a healthy counterweight.

“Cornyn is more level-headed and reasonable than Cruz. Cruz is scary,” he said.

Implicitly, that’s the sort of attitude Cornyn is counting on to get him through the primary.

“There are some loud voices out there, but I haven’t met anyone who’s really, truly, honestly questioned his conservative record,” said Cornyn campaign manager Brendan Steinhauser. “It’s a question of tactics and demeanor.”

His last employer, FreedomWorks, provided tea party ground troops for the Cruz insurgency of 2012. This time around, that and other groups such as the Senate Conservatives Fund are staying on the sidelines in Texas’ Senate race.

Steinhauser asserts that’s because the grass roots simply haven’t been clamoring for someone to take on Cornyn.

“There’s just not that opportunity here. The senator’s done a good job,” he said.

‘Impossible standard’

Cornyn has used his maneuvering room in the primary to push back against demands for ideological purity.

Someone who agrees with you 98 percent of the time can’t be a “2 percent traitor. That’s an impossible standard. That’s really unhealthy,” he said during an hourlong meeting with editors and reporters at The Dallas Morning News.

He echoed that message the next day in Wichita Falls, urging collaboration among the party’s many factions.

“We’ve got to get back to that sort of solution-oriented thinking instead of saying it’s got to be my way or the highway. That doesn’t work in politics, it doesn’t work in marriage,” he told the GOP women. “That can’t be the standard. That’s part of the conversation we need to have during the primaries.”

As a campaigner, Cornyn lacks Cruz’s electrifying edge. But he hits themes that appeal to tea partiers and business Republicans alike.

At Wichita Falls Country Club, he called Obamacare “an epic failure” and predicted a GOP takeover in the Senate in November, thanks to backlash against “this experiment in big government.” He pitched tax reform and spoke with dismay of federal power grabs and the administration’s refusal to green-light the Keystone XL Pipeline.

He’s careful not to beat up on the tea party and instead to call for inclusion.

“I don’t see a whole lot of difference in terms of policy between the tea party and the rest of the Republican Party,” he said in a brief interview. “There’s room for debate and discussion over those tactics but those will be pretty much settled on March the 4th.”

Follow Todd J. Gillman on Twitter at @toddgillman.

AT A GLANCE: Conservative rankings

Activist groups and some media organizations rank senators as conservative or liberal, based on key votes. Here’s a sampling of where Sen. John Cornyn falls:

National Journal: The public-policy magazine rated Cornyn the second-most conservative senator in 2013. Two years before, he was 14th.

Heritage Action for America: The political arm of the conservative think tank gave him an 86 percent rating. (Average for GOP senators: 67 percent.)

FreedomWorks: The tea party group gave him a 76 percent rating. (Colleague Ted Cruz: 100 percent.)

National Rifle Association: A+ rating and endorsement from the gun-rights group.

Party loyalty: Cornyn voted the party line 89 percent of the time last year, ahead of all but 15 GOP senators, including Cruz (86 percent).