Thumbs Up to Appleton Christmas Parade, Toys for Tots Facebook campaign.

Buy Photo Runners get ready for the Santa Scamper before the Downtown Appleton Christmas Parade on Tuesday night. (Photo: Joshua Bessex/Post-Crescent Media)Buy Photo

Thumbs Up: To everyone who had a hand in Tuesday’s Downtown Appleton Christmas Parade.

On a cold but not-too-cold night, thousands came to College Avenue to see the floats, displays, groups, bands and, of course, Santa Claus kick off the holiday season.

PHOTOS: Downtown Appleton Christmas Parade

VIDEO: Watch the replay of the parade

We’re always impressed with the efforts of all who participate, with a special shout-out to the bands and, in particular, those who travel from some distance to come to Appleton and entertain us.

Thanks to all of them — and grateful thanks to the people who devote their time to organize the parade.

Thumbs Up: To a Menasha man who’s trying to put a smile of kids’ faces at Christmas.

Brian Duncan has started the Toys for Tots Facebook Challenge, which encourages people to buy a toy for the Toys for Tots campaign, take a picture of it and post the picture on Facebook, with a challenge for friends to do the same.

It’s a takeoff of the ALS Ice Bucket Challenge — and it’s a great idea.

The Toys for Tots campaign runs through Dec. 11. New, unwrapped toys can be dropped off at any of the program’s locations, including Post-Crescent Media’s office at 306 W. Washington St. in downtown Appleton. The campaign also is looking for volunteers.

Thumbs Down: To the House Intelligence Committee’s report on the 2012 attack in Benghazi, Libya.

Released late last Friday — a time when news gets released that the releaser doesn’t really want publicized — the report said what other reports and committees have said about this tragedy: There wasn’t an order to “stand down” and there were no intelligence failures, nor was there a cover-up conspiracy.

“Based on the testimony and the documents we reviewed, we concluded that all the CIA officers in Benghazi were heroes. Their actions saved lives,” the committee’s chairman, Rep. Mike Rogers, R-Mich., said.

It was the seventh investigation of Benghazi, all of which came up with many of the same conclusions. Unfortunately, there’s another investigation coming, by a House Select Committee that House Speaker John Boehner appointed in May.

Thumbs Down: To the growing number of near-collisions of commercial planes on airport runways nationwide.

A USA Today study of federal data showed that the close calls grew two-thirds between 2003 and 2013. It might be expected that the number of flights overall has grown in that time frame but it hasn’t. Instead, more airlines are using larger airports as hubs, leading to more traffic at those airports.

The Federal Aviation Administration attributes the growing number of incidents to a better system for reporting the incidents. But some aviation experts say it wouldn’t account for the increase entirely. And Congress and the Department of Transportation are asking questions of the FAA’s Runway Safety Group, which is responsible for overseeing runway traffic.

We hope the added attention will curb a bad trend.

Read or Share this story: http://post.cr/1xVRmQP