Seattle cyclist Ian Crane is lucky to be alive after suffering life-threatening injuries in a crash on the final day of the USA Pro Challenge, and I love his attitude.

He’s not feeling sorry for himself. He’s not blaming the tour or the cars that stopped abruptly before he crashed through the back window of a team car. He’s grateful to be alive, grateful for the care he received. And he’s doing everything in his power to return to the sport he loves.

“I’m not dwelling on the accident,” Crane said. “It was something that happened. It’s kind of the cards I was dealt. I’m making sure I control everything I can, to the best of my power, to help me heal and get back to where I want to get back to.”

He’s even concerned about the impact his crash has had on other people, so he projects this incredible attitude intentionally.

“I think that will help a lot of people who have some emotional issues with this,” Crane said. “I’m all right and I’m progressing and I’m on my way back to normal. It’s an incredible sport, and the community of cycling has been absolutely incredible in supporting me through all this. I’ve had some racers who I don’t even know reach out to me, and cycling fans have reached out to me with their support. It’s a sign of how special this sport is. I am really grateful for all of the support I’ve gotten.”

Crane has surprised doctors with the pace of his recovery, but his sister Tela — also a cyclist — says he has a “long road ahead of him” in rehab. Among his injuries were a broken bone in his skull and a deep brain injury.

“What is helpful for me is to see that old side of Ian, he’s stubborn and he wants to get back to where he was,” Tela said. “He’s working really hard at his rehab. He recognizes it is a long road, but he is committed to doing the best possible at his rehab training. He can’t quite ride his bike yet but he can get really good at doing all of this rehab work so he can be in the best possible place when he can get back on his bike.

“It’s going to be while before he’s cleared to ride outdoors and drive and things like that, just because of the brain injury, but he’s already making plans with his coach for his indoor training this fall. He’ll be spending a lot of time on the trainer, it sounds like, just to make sure he can be in a place where he could resume his career next season. That’s the goal right now.”