Stock market news:

Stocks sold off sharply today, with the main indexes ending the week lower. The Dow Jones Industrial Average dropped 368.59 points to 17,128.39, its largest one-day drop since Sept 1. The S&P 500 fell 36.41 points to 2,005.46 and the Nasdaq Composite ended the day down 79.47 points at 4,923.08. (MarketWatch)

European markets closed lower today as the sharp rally from the day before lost steam and investors remained cautious on the price of oil. (CNBC News)

Oil prices fell about half a percent today after the U.S. oil rig count unexpectedly rose for the first time in five weeks, pressuring a market already at seven-year lows. (Reuters)

Business news:

With the Christmas countdown ticking into single digits, retailers are extending their sales, deepening their discounts and keeping stores open 'round the clock to pull still-reluctant shoppers into their stores for Super Saturday. (cleveland.com)(TIME)

Target is in the early stages of developing its own mobile wallet, three people familiar with the matter said, joining Walmart in posing a threat to recent entrants like Apple Pay. (Reuters)

Citigroup plans to cut at least 2,000 jobs starting next month as Chief Executive Officer Michael Corbat restructures some of the bank's businesses. (Bloomberg News)

JPMorgan Chase will pay $307 million to settle two U.S. government cases that charged the bank with failing to disclose certain conflicts of interest to some of its wealth management clients, U.S. regulators said today. (Reuters)

Nearly 6 million Americans have enrolled in insurance for 2016 through HealthCare.gov, President Obama announced today, touting a big increase over last year he said is an indication the Affordable Care Act is succeeding. (Washington Post)

Anheuser-Busch InBev, the largest beer brewer in the world, has acquired Arizona-based Four Peaks Brewing Co. in the latest shakeup in an industry remade in recent years by a series of similar sales. (Arizona Republic)

Isis Pharmaceuticals announced today it is finally changing its name to something people won't confuse with the terrorist group that took credit for the recent Paris attacks and other deadly episodes of violence. (Fortune)

Technology news:

The CEO of Apple, the world's biggest and richest company, says the notion his company is avoiding taxes on overseas profits is just "political crap" coming from politicians who refuse to change an antiquated tax code. (CBS News)

Keeping a phone charged all day can be a task, but Sony has announced plans for a new battery that could carry 40 percent more energy than the traditional lithium-ion batteries. (Daily Mail)

BlackBerry is planning to push its QNX real-time operating system into the Internet of Things at CES, the giant consumer electronics show held in Las Vegas each January, and hopes it will be a break-out success. (IDG News Service)

Facebook says it now gets around 8 billion video views on its platform each day, and the social network has made no secret of its plans to make it an even bigger part of the experience in the future. (TechCrunch)