NEW YORK, Oct. 29, 2014 /PRNewswire/-- Health Republic Insurance of New York (Health Republic) announced today the results of its inaugural Member Director election to its Board. This marks the first time in New York State history that health insurance members voted for fellow members to represent them on a Board of Directors. In January 2015, the newly elected "Member Directors" will make up a majority of the board, holding nine of the seventeen seats.

Health Republic is a Consumer Operated and Oriented Plan (CO-OP), whose member-led model is shifting the health insurance landscape in New York by offering affordable access to high-quality healthcare to more than 150,000 members. This unique model ensures that Health Republic members have a voice in their health plan as they are at the center of the Board leadership structure.

"I want to thank each of our fantastic nominees for their commitment to the organization's mission and to their fellow members. I am grateful to all of our members that stepped forward, and am excited for the leadership that our new Member Directors of the Board will bring to Health Republic," said Debra Friedman, President and CEO of Health Republic Insurance of New York. "Having such engaged members is a positive step for the future of the organization and a true testament to the innovative, member-oriented model that we are developing at Health Republic."

The nine new Member Directors hail from all across New York State and represent a diverse sample of the membership. Tasked with supporting the organization's mission and providing organizational oversight, Health Republic Member Directors will bring their skills and expertise to shape policies that will continue to put Health Republic's members first.

In accordance with the Affordable Care Act (ACA), there are 23 health insurance CO-OPs operating in 27 states in 2015 across the country. These not-for-profit health plans were created to bring competition to the state's health insurance market, while maintaining a consumer-oriented strategy.

Health Republic is the largest individual health plan on the New York State of Health Marketplace, as well as on the State's Small Business Health Options Program (SHOP) Marketplace.

All members 21 and older were eligible to nominate themselves as Member Directors during the month-long nomination process. The Board's Nomination Committee reviewed the nearly 200 submissions to ensure the final ballot included a diverse set of nominees with a variety of experiences and skill-sets that would provide strong leadership for the organization.

More than 7,500 votes were cast by members 18 and older for the final slate of candidates, both online and in-person at the Health Republic Annual Meeting. The election was administered by an outside, independent organization, Election Services Co. of Long Island, New York.

The new Board members are:

Laurel Pickering , MPH

Laurel has 25 years of experience in public health with expertise in community wellness, accountability, and the health insurance industry. Currently, she serves as the President and CEO of the Northeast Business Group on Health (NEBGH), a 175 member business coalition representing more than two million people. Laurel is committed to mobilizing the business community to drive improvements in healthcare, providing access to health insurance for small businesses, and organizing health plans to work together to improve quality.

Laurel has 25 years of experience in public health with expertise in community wellness, accountability, and the health insurance industry. Currently, she serves as the President and CEO of the Northeast Business Group on Health (NEBGH), a 175 member business coalition representing more than two million people. Laurel is committed to mobilizing the business community to drive improvements in healthcare, providing access to health insurance for small businesses, and organizing health plans to work together to improve quality. Sherrie Dulworth

Sherrie has 35 years of experience in the healthcare industry, working as a registered nurse, medical management consultant, and as a health-industry journalist. Sherrie serves as the Senior Vice President of Medical Integration and Member Engagement at Health Republic Insurance of New York , where she brings her experience to ensure high quality healthcare is available to all members.

Sherrie has 35 years of experience in the healthcare industry, working as a registered nurse, medical management consultant, and as a health-industry journalist. Sherrie serves as the Senior Vice President of Medical Integration and Member Engagement at Health Republic Insurance of , where she brings her experience to ensure high quality healthcare is available to all members. Chris Keeley

Chris has more than 15 years of experience with political advocacy and member-led governance models. Chris serves as the Vice President of Government Relations at Health Republic Insurance of New York . In addition, he volunteers his time to sit on the State Advisory Committee of Citizens Union Foundation and the Advisory Team of New Yorkers for Social Justice PAC. Chris has extensive political, electoral, public relations, and policy research experience.

Chris has more than 15 years of experience with political advocacy and member-led governance models. Chris serves as the Vice President of Government Relations at Health Republic Insurance of . In addition, he volunteers his time to sit on the State Advisory Committee of Citizens Union Foundation and the Advisory Team of New Yorkers for Social Justice PAC. Chris has extensive political, electoral, public relations, and policy research experience. Alfonso Chang , CFA

Alfonso is a Managing Director of Relativity Healthcare Partners, an investment group providing growth capital to emerging healthcare companies. In addition, Alfonso is a Co-Founder and Managing Director of The AC3 Group, a boutique strategy consultancy where he advises companies, mainly operating within the healthcare industry, on financial and strategic topics, including corporate finance, marketing, product development/management, and strategic planning. He also serves on the Board of Directors of BioAnalytix. He is a member of the New York Society of Security Analysts.

Alfonso is a Managing Director of Relativity Healthcare Partners, an investment group providing growth capital to emerging healthcare companies. In addition, Alfonso is a Co-Founder and Managing Director of The AC3 Group, a boutique strategy consultancy where he advises companies, mainly operating within the healthcare industry, on financial and strategic topics, including corporate finance, marketing, product development/management, and strategic planning. He also serves on the Board of Directors of BioAnalytix. He is a member of the New York Society of Security Analysts. Lauren R. Fleshler

Lauren is a business strategist with more than 20 years of communication, engagement, and education experience, specializing in simplifying and improving the customer experience within the healthcare and financial services industries. She recently left her position as Partner, Education & Engagement Strategy at Keen Production, Inc. to expand her own consulting practice as a simplified communications expert to diverse for- and not-for-profit clients.

Lauren is a business strategist with more than 20 years of communication, engagement, and education experience, specializing in simplifying and improving the customer experience within the healthcare and financial services industries. She recently left her position as Partner, Education & Engagement Strategy at Keen Production, Inc. to expand her own consulting practice as a simplified communications expert to diverse for- and not-for-profit clients. Nancie E. Celini , DrPH

Dr. Nancie Celini is President and Chief Health Technologist at CAB, Inc., an independent healthcare technology and services consultancy. She guides the bio/pharmaceutical industry, and healthcare professionals in the use of enabling technology and systems to improve healthcare access and affordability. Nancie is an adjunct professor at New York Medical College in Valhalla, New York , as well as a frequent lecturer at academic and healthcare conferences.

Dr. is President and Chief Health Technologist at CAB, Inc., an independent healthcare technology and services consultancy. She guides the bio/pharmaceutical industry, and healthcare professionals in the use of enabling technology and systems to improve healthcare access and affordability. Nancie is an adjunct professor at in , as well as a frequent lecturer at academic and healthcare conferences. Rachel Abramovitz, Esq.

Rachel, the founder of Abramovitz & Co, is a seasoned corporate attorney with more than 18 years of experience counseling public and private companies. Rachel brings expertise on corporate governance, HIPAA, healthcare and pharmaceutical related issues. She is a member of the NYU Langone Medical Center Institutional Review Board (IRB), she presents frequently at industry conferences on clinical research and pharmaceutical regulatory compliance, and has published articles on HIPAA in clinical research and regulatory compliance for Phase IV studies.

Rachel, the founder of Abramovitz & Co, is a seasoned corporate attorney with more than 18 years of experience counseling public and private companies. Rachel brings expertise on corporate governance, HIPAA, healthcare and pharmaceutical related issues. She is a member of the NYU Langone Medical Center Institutional Review Board (IRB), she presents frequently at industry conferences on clinical research and pharmaceutical regulatory compliance, and has published articles on HIPAA in clinical research and regulatory compliance for Phase IV studies. Antoinette "Anton" Forth

Anton is the Owner and President of RT Enterprises of NY, LLC. She has more than 20 years of leadership experience in business process outsourcing (BPO) and customer relationship management (CRM). Throughout her career, she has served as a trusted advisor for clients, navigating business issues such as changes in consumer loyalty, new communication channels, and process improvements/cost reduction. Anton has served as a resource for business leaders who want to explore ways to achieve improvements in efficiency and customer buying behavior.

Anton is the Owner and President of RT Enterprises of NY, LLC. She has more than 20 years of leadership experience in business process outsourcing (BPO) and customer relationship management (CRM). Throughout her career, she has served as a trusted advisor for clients, navigating business issues such as changes in consumer loyalty, new communication channels, and process improvements/cost reduction. Anton has served as a resource for business leaders who want to explore ways to achieve improvements in efficiency and customer buying behavior. Eileen Miller, RN /BC, MS, ANP

Eileen is a full-time registered nurse. For more than 30 years, she has worked at hospitals in Queens and is currently a case manager at Greater New York Homecare. In addition, Eileen is a member of numerous community and nursing organizations, including the New York State Nursing Association, the Community Alliance to Retain Equitable Services, and the Board of Directors of the Bayside Hills Civic Association.

Health Republic Insurance of New York is a true not-for-profit organization and New York's only Consumer Operated and Oriented Plan (CO-OP). CO-OPs are private, member-governed health insurance companies created across the country as part of the Affordable Care Act's effort to increase competition in the healthcare market. Health Republic Insurance of New York is the largest of the 23 CO-OPs nationally and has the largest health market share on the New York State of Health Marketplace.

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20141028/155041LOGO

SOURCE Health Republic Insurance of New York