MacIntyre says 2-2 Ducks 'extremely talented'

Here's the MacIntyre embed code:

CU opponent at a glance Opponent: Oregon Ducks Game time: Saturday, 8 p.m., at Folsom Field Coach: Mark Helfrich, 3rd season Record: 2-2 Last week: Lost to No. 10 Utah, 62-20 Key players: QB Vernon Adams, Sr. (43-of-71, 581 yards, 4 TD, 2 INT); QB Jeff Lockie, Jr. (33-of-51, 367 yards, 3 TD, 2 INT); RB Royce Freeman, So. (69 carries, 450 yards, 5 TD); WR/PR Bralon Addison, Jr. (16 catches, 216 yards, 2 TD; 1 punt return TD); LB Joe Walker, Sr. (29 tackles, 2.5 tackles for loss); DE DeForest Buckner, Sr. (21 tackles, 4 tackles for loss); DT Alex Balducci, Sr. (12 tackles). Donovan Lee says he "try to look at rankings too much" after Oregon, which CU plays Saturday, tumbled out of the Associated Press poll. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer) Notable: Oregon is 26-6 under Helrich, the former offensive coordinator of the Buffs (2006-08). ... Oregon is off to its worst start since going 1-3 in the first four games of 2004. ... The Ducks are unranked for the first time since the Sept. 20, 2009, poll.

After crushing Nicholls in their final tune-up for Pac-12 play, the Colorado football team settled in to watch their next opponent, the Oregon Ducks, on Saturday night.

What the Buffaloes — and everyone else — saw was nothing like the national powerhouse that Oregon has been in recent years. The Ducks were humbled by Utah in a 62-20 loss, a defeat which dropped Oregon all the way out of the Associated Press Top 25 rankings.

Advertisement

More than at any time in the past six years, Oregon (2-2) looks vulnerable. Saturday's results didn't change CU's view of the Ducks, though.

"Oregon is extremely talented," CU head coach Mike MacIntyre said. "They just had a bad night. And, Utah had a good night.

"I just think sometimes things snowball. They've got speed, they've got athleticism, they've got a lot of good football payers. Oregon is still an excellent, excellent football team."

Colorado (3-1) will host the Ducks at 8 p.m. on Saturday night at Folsom Field. It's the first time Oregon has been unranked since the Sept. 20, 2009, poll. The Ducks had been in the top 15 every week since October 2009.

In each of the last three years, Oregon has been in the top three and in the thick of the national title hunt when facing CU.

Although the Ducks have sputtered in the early going of the season, CU is preparing to face a top-10 caliber team.

"I don't really know if ranking has much to do with it," Buffs safety Ryan Moeller said. "Just because they fell out (of the rankings) doesn't mean we're not going to be playing the best that they have. Maybe they're unranked, but I don't think that really changes much for them. We're expecting to get their best shot and we should.

"You have to be ready for their speed — that's what they're known for — and their ability to execute on all aspects. We're expecting to play a real well-rounded team. We have to play our best game as well."

Oregon still features some of the best players in the country, and that's what CU is preparing to face this week.

"I don't really try to look at rankings too much," running back Donovan Lee said. "We're just breaking down players and schemes and everything and going out and doing our best to beat that."

CU has done a nice job against the competition to this point. The Buffs dominated an overmatched Nicholls squad on Saturday to run its winning streak to three games. It's CU's first three-game win streak since a 3-0 start to 2008.

"I sure hope they're confident in every game we play; I really do," MacIntyre said. "Winning football games gives you more confidence."

While the Buffs do have more confidence — and more wins — than in previous years, they realize the schedule gets much tougher from here on out. Because of that, they are eager to test themselves against the Pac-12.

"I'm excited," Lee said. "I think the whole team is excited to finally get to Pac-12 play."

Notable

The Buffs had a light practice at Folsom Field on Sunday evening. ... MacIntyre said he won't know until later in the week if tailbacks Michael Adkins II and Patrick Carr will play against the Ducks. Both missed Saturday's game with injuries. ... As of Saturday, CU said nearly 43,000 tickets had been sold for the Oregon game.

Brian Howell: howellb@dailycamera.com, on Twitter: @BrianHowell33.