A cyclist and son head east on the path along Dry Creek, just west of Hover Street, on Saturday. By next year at this time, cyclists will be able to pass underneath Hover Street. ( Johnnie St. Vrain / Longmont Times-Call )

Hi Johnnie: Having just moved across town to enjoy easier bike access to the LoBo trail, I am wondering if there might be a pedestrian/bike underpass planned for Hover near the mall, similar to the underpass planned for Highway 119. Something near the Valvoline oil change would be very convenient.

Even though there is a signal at Bent Way, this is a very busy intersection. Also, can you comment on the sense of humor of the person that named the street intersecting Hover? — Bent Way Hover

Dear Bent Way ...: To your first question, the answer is yes.

"The City is in the process of completing the plans for a new pedestrian underpass that will be located along the Dry Creek Greenway, which is just south of Bent Way," Nick Wolfrum, the city's director of Engineering Services, said in an email reply. "Construction of this new underpass of Hover Street is scheduled to begin this winter and be completed in the spring of 2016. It will allow pedestrians and bicyclists to pass under Hover Street and will connect the Dry Creek Greenway on the west side of Hover Street to the new Village at the Peaks Retail Center."

Wolfrum said that the city applied for and received funding from the Denver Regional Council of Governments to assist in funding the construction of this project.

Advertisement

The underpass originally was to be planned in 2013 and completed in 2015. I didn't ask Wolfrum about the delay, but I'll go out on a branch and suggest that the flood of 2013 had a lot to do with the delay.

About your second question: It's possible that the developer who named that road pronounced Hover as "Hoover," as some are known to do, and thereby never considered that anyone would find humor in the resulting phrase.

Or maybe the developer had no sense of humor at all, and — limited by municipal code to name the street at "lane" or "way" — went with "Bent Way," and then went on his way.

There's one more possibility, though.

He or she might have known the developer in West Chester Township, Ohio, who named Grinn Drive, which intersects Barret Road.

Send questions to johnnie@times-call.com.