A health care revolution took place last month right here in Waco, and the battles occurred in local hospital boardrooms.

A group of emergency room (ER) physicians left their respective hospital systems in order to open up a private, free-standing emergency room called Premier ER Plus. In doing so, they fired the shot heard round the Brazos and opened up a whole new emergency and urgent care model that plans to compete with the existing hospitals on the basis of quality and value.

Why was this revolutionary? It’s not because the concept of a private, stand-alone ER is new. Anyone driving to Houston or Dallas has seen plenty of them along U.S. Highway 290 or Interstate 35 in the suburbs. But for Waco, the idea of a hospital-based service like an ER being privatized and uncoupled from the major health care systems is absolutely unique and unprecedented. Here’s why.

The basic concept behind Premier ER Plus is that patients with insurance are looking for a better alternative. Let’s face it: As good as both hospitals are, if you need to be seen in the ER on a weekend, you may have a longer wait time than you can stand sitting next to someone who hasn’t bathed in a week. The private ER promises to be a cleaner, better, faster alternative to the main hospitals without the wait or hassle. In fact, Premier ER Plus has a waiting room so small it defies logic, simply because they don’t expect people to spend much time there.

The caveat is that not everyone who needs an ER can be treated at Premier ER Plus, and this is a major point. With rare exceptions, those with government health care of any type (Medicare, Medicaid, CHIPS, VA or TriCare) are ineligible and will still have to go to the hospital. Thus, the two-tiered health care system often lamented as a consequence of Obamacare is no longer just a concept but is suddenly here, sitting across from an H-E-B in Woodway. Sound the alarm!

You might expect such exclusive care to be expensive when compared to the hospital, but that’s the most revolutionary part. Premier ER Plus can undercut the hospital price by a lot. A whole lot. For instance, the average work-up of an appendicitis can run $10,000 in the hospital ER, but Premier ER Plus charges $1,600. A urinary tract infection work-up is around $800 at the hospital, but at the private ER it’s $250, or $125 if treated in their urgent care clinic.

Across the board, the cost of going to the private ER can be half to even an eighth the price of the traditional emergency-room care, cheaper if you pay on the spot. And they’ll do something the hospital has never done: Tell you the price upfront. Good luck trying to get the hospitals to do that.

How is this possible? The hospitals must treat everyone who shows up, including the 25 percent of our county residents who have no insurance and the 42 percent who have a government form of payment, which barely covers the cost of providing the care. That means the hospitals have to survive on the payments they get from the 33 percent with insurance who cover the tab of the other 67 percent. Hence, $10,000 bills for an appendicitis work-up.

Premier ER Plus gets paid for every patient it sees and can charge each patient only what it costs to treat them, plus a profit margin. So the “true” price of care is much more transparent and easier to calculate than in the traditional hospital ER.

If all of this sounds too good to be true, there is a downside. Not every patient will be appropriate for a private ER. Those having a heart attack, major trauma victims and individuals who are critically ill should go directly to the hospital. And, of course, if your appendicitis workup reveals that you need your appendix out, you will have to go to the hospital for the surgery. But you won’t have to go through their ER, as both local hospitals have agreed to use the private ER’s workup as if it was their own, and directly admit patients from Premier ER Plus to the hospital without an additional visit to their own ER. (The six appendicitis cases treated so far have “seamlessly” been transferred to the hospital for definitive treatment, I’m told).

The other downside is the negative impact this may have on our hospitals’ bottom line. As you can imagine, if Premier ER Plus is skimming the cream of patients, that only leaves the indigent and lackluster-governmental payers for the hospitals, and they will undoubtedly feel the economic pressure. It remains to be seen how much of the market Premier ER Plus will draw and to what extent the two hospitals can survive on government and charity care. (Full disclosure: Even though both hospitals do millions of dollars of charity care each year, they get some federal subsidies as incentives for treating Medicaid patients and the indigent.) But there is no question that our hospitals will continue to do an incredible amount of work for free — and that the loss of a portion of the top payers might put them in a bind.

What will the hospitals do? Well, if you look around, the logical next step taken in many surrounding areas is to form a hospital taxation district, which would collect money as a tax to cover the cost of indigent care. This would have to be approved by the voters and is, at best, a long way off. So far, both hospitals are cooperating with Premier ER Plus because they need the referrals of those who require admission or surgery. But since both hospitals operate on very slim margins, anything that hurts the bottom line will have negative repercussions.

As with any disruptive paradigm shift, Premier ER Plus will change the way patients are treated in Waco. Hopefully, the new model will provide competition to the Baylor/Scott & White and Ascension systems in a positive way that will improve quality and offer lower cost for all of us at each of the three institutions. And maybe this trend will expand to other areas of health care. Who wouldn’t want upfront pricing for surgery too?

With the trend toward mergers and acquisition of private practice medicine into large health care conglomerates, Premier ER Plus is bucking that trend and competing on the small, local and independent scale. But most revolutionary is the concept that Premier ER Plus plans to compete with our hospitals on one parameter previously unheard of in Waco health care: the price.

Waco, welcome to free-market medicine.

Bradford Holland, M.D. FACS, a Waco otolaryngologist, is on the medical staff of both local hospitals. He is a board member of the McLennan County Medical Society and the McLennan County Republican Club. He has no financial interest nor association with Premier ER Plus.