New data out from the Obama administration on Tuesday seemed to suggest that all the hand-wringing over double-digit ObamaCare rate hikes in 2016 was much ado about not that much: The average exchange premium on plans selected via HealthCare.gov rose a less-jarring 8.4% from 2015.

Yet a close look at the data shows that HealthCare.gov rates actually did rise at least 10% after all, with the average premium rising less, in part, because people were buying less coverage for their money.

The average premium on plans selected (but not necessarily paid for) via HealthCare.gov as of Feb. 1 was $386 a month, $30 per month more than the average policy selected during the 2015 open enrollment period, the Department of Health and Human Services said.

There are three main ways that the reported 8.4% increase understates reality. First, new enrollees were somewhat more likely to opt for catastrophic and bronze coverage, while most people with platinum coverage dropped it. The effect of people choosing, on average, a slightly lower-level plan was to reduce premiums by nearly three-fourths of a percent, an IBD analysis finds.

The second way that premiums understate the apples-to-apples increase in rates is harder to detect but may be significant. Consider that Florida, ObamaCare’s largest exchange with 1.75 million members, saw just a 2.7% hike in premiums, meaning the rest of the HealthCare.gov states saw an average 9.7% hike.

Now take a look at Miami-Dade County, Florida’s largest market and the largest in the county. Centene‘s (CNC) Ambetter unit has the two lowest-priced silver plans, including one with an eye-popping $6,500 deductible that is 6.2% cheaper than the cheapest rival plan from Molina Healthcare (MOH).

As explained at HealthCare.gov, a silver plan is designed to pay 70% of the total cost of covered expenses by all members. Yet that’s not quite true — especially in markets like Miami, Atlanta, Seattle and Jackson, Miss., where Centene’s Ambetter is the low-cost provider and covers as little as 68% of total member costs.

A primary reason that premiums didn’t rise as much as feared, HHS says, is that consumers were active shoppers and swapped out of plans with big premium hikes. Yet many of these plan changers may have been swapping into plans with higher deductibles, lower cost-sharing and less coverage — even if they didn’t shift from, say, silver to bronze.

Among silver plans in the biggest HealthCare.gov markets of each state, the average deductible of the second-lowest-cost silver plan rose 11% from 2015, IBD found.

The third reason that the HHS spin doesn’t quite add up is that sign-ups among children under age 18 jumped by more than 21% vs. the overall gain of just under 9%. While it’s good that more children have insurance, they cost a whole lot less to insure. Including children in the mix has the effect of lowering the 2016 premium increase by about two-thirds of a percent.

There’s a good reason that signups in 2016 grew so little — despite the ramping up of the penalty for going uninsured. Millions and millions of people are finding that the plans provide too little and are too costly — even with subsidies that held down the effective premium hike to just 4% for the vast majority of exchange shoppers who qualify. While the new HHS data on premiums is misleading in a number of ways, the real problem is that the Obama administration is missing the forest for the trees.

In coming weeks, insurers will begin to provide an early look at 2017 premiums, and the picture could get worse. One of ObamaCare’s fiercest defenders, Covered California Executive Director Peter Lee, has predicted big premium increases across the country. Meanwhile, UnitedHealth (UNH) has already told Arkansas and Georgia that it’s bailing on their exchanges.