: Bill Stead — creator of the Reno Air Races — was a World War II flying ace.

The background:

A reader called Fact Checker twice regarding a September 2013 story in the Reno Gazette-Journal that called Bill Stead “a World War II flying ace.”

The Associated Press and USA Today picked up that story and repeated the claim. This particular story seems to be the source for the flying ace claim on numerous other websites. One of these — as of this writing — is a Wikipedia article on the Reno Air Races, which is now called the National Championship Air Races.

But the claim goes back a little earlier. An information box included with a 2011 Reno Gazette-Journal story said, “The Reno Air Races were first organized in 1964 by World War II flying ace Bill Stead.”

Before going any further, you might be wondering what exactly is a flying ace? The accepted definition seems to be a pilot with five victories in encounters with enemy pilots. This is stated in numerous places, including a 1997 book about World War I flying aces called “Above the War Fronts” by Norman L.R. Franks, Russell Guest and Gregory Alegi.

Time spent at the Nevada Historical Society with its helpful staff and historian Philip Earl turned up numerous stories about Stead.

One was a full-page sports story on Stead’s retirement from hydroplane racing in the Feb. 14, 1960 edition of the Nevada State Journal (a precursor to the Reno Gazette-Journal). There’s zero mention of him being a flying ace.

Stead died when an 85-horsepower “midget” plane he was piloting crashed in Florida. The April 28, 1966 issue of the Journal contained a front-page obituary. Again, no mention of him having been a flying ace.

A lengthy tribute story about Stead appeared in the Sept. 2, 1979 issue of the Journal. No flying-ace mention.

Many other stories also revealed no mention of flying-ace status.

Fact Checker reached out to Reno writer Harry Spencer. Spencer not only knew Stead, he flew with him once to Sacramento in a little four-seater. Also on the flight was hotel-casino owner Charles Mapes.

“(Stead) didn’t submit a flight plan so we went to Sacramento through the Truckee River canyon, and the mountains were higher than we were,” Spencer said.

Stead decided to give a show to the guys in the air traffic control tower at Sacramento. The landing featured several circles of the airfield with the plane perpendicular to the ground and the wing’s tip just five feet above the ground. Mapes weighed nearly 300 pounds, Spencer said, and “if his seatbelt broke, he would’ve taken Stead out the door.”

Spencer took a Greyhound bus back to Reno.

“Bill was not a fighter pilot,” Spencer said, and never mentioned having been a flying ace — “and he would’ve.”

A 1966 obituary written by the Associated Press said of Stead’s military flying history: “Stead tried to join the Chinese air force and the Canadian air force in 1940, but was drafted before he could get into either unit. After two years as an infantryman, he was transferred to the Air Corps and directed an air-sea rescue unit in Panama.”

In other words, he wouldn’t have had the opportunity to become a flying ace.

Bill’s brother Croston Stead was referred to as a flying ace in a 2005 RGJ-affiliated advertising product:

“Stead Air Force Base was named for Croston, a World War II flying ace, who was killed when his plane crashed in the area while he was flying for the Nevada National Guard. Bill Stead is recognized as the founder of the Reno Air Races, which began in 1964.”

Perhaps their names and the flying-ace label got conflated over time.

Although not the subject of this column, Fact Checker doubts Croston was a flying ace either.

Reno Army Air Base’s name was changed on Jan. 1, 1951 to Stead Air Force Base in honor of Croston. A vintage base magazine and resource guide found at the Nevada Historical Society included an article called “The Story of Lieutenant Croston K. Stead.”

It has no mention of him having been a flying ace. It does say, “At the time of his death he was flying with the 192nd Fighter Squadron of the Air National Guard.”

In the Reno Evening Gazette’s Dec. 13, 1949 news story and obituary about Croston’s crash shortly after takeoff at the base, no mention of flying-ace status was mentioned.

Wikipedia states there were 1,297 aces from the United States during World War II and lists each one. Neither Stead is mentioned.

The website Air Aces (aces.safarikovi.org) lists flying aces around the world with extensive sources cited. It’s the creation of Czech academic Jan Safarik, who has written aviation history articles for the Czech magazine Revi, “a bimonthly magazine about planes and pilots.”

Some of the rarer wars chronicled by Safarik during which pilots took out enemy aircraft are the Nigerian-Biafran Civil War and the “Soccer War” of 1969 involving El Salvador and Honduras. This is mentioned to point out the depth of flying-ace information on the site.

Air Aces lists every known aerial combat victory for the United States from World War I through the war in Afghanistan, where a U.S. Air Force pilot flying an F-15E shot down an Mi-24 Hind helicopter.

The site catalogs each pilot’s name, his number of victories and what branch of service he was with. It even includes pilots who had zero in-air victories but who took out enemy planes on the ground. Neither Stead is mentioned.

The verdict:

Bill Stead was a pilot who flew during World War II, he was a rancher, he started the Reno Air Races, he was a world-champion hydroplane racer — and he most definitely was not a World War II flying ace.

Truth Meter: 1