At first glance, a window of opportunity appears to have opened in the National League West in 2016.

The Dodgers, winners of three division titles in a row, look vulnerable. They not only came up short in the postseason again, they parted ways with manager Don Mattingly on Thursday. Los Angeles looks like a rich franchise searching for answers, wondering why all of that money it’s spent has been to some degree an empty investment.

Most ominous of all, Zack Greinke, the Dodgers’ co-ace along with Clayton Kershaw, will likely opt out of a contract that has $71 million over three years remaining. As a free agent, Greinke can be expected to get multiple offers for $125 million to $150 million over five years.

San Francisco — World Series champions in 2010, 2012 and 2014 — was a worn-out team by the end of the 2015 season. With all of the changes they’ve endured, the Giants seem ready for a prolonged fall.

But remember, I said “at first glance” it looks as if there is an opportunity for a team other than the Dodgers or Giants to win the NL West. A longer look reveals something else.

First, only the Diamondbacks have a realistic shot to unseat the Big Two next year. The Padres and Rockies, two of baseball’s most dysfunctional franchises over the past five years, have too many issues to even think about contending next year.

Arizona, meanwhile, is talented, athletic and getting better. After finishing 64-98 in 2014, the Diamondbacks improved to 79-83 this past season. However, to get over the hump, they need much better starting pitching, and I’m not sure they’ll pony up to sign it.

A strong free-agent class, headlined by Johnny Cueto, David Price and Greinke, will soon hit the open market. Other pitchers such as Mike Leake, Jeff Samardzija, Brett Anderson, Yovani Gallardo, Scott Kaz mir, Ian Kennedy and Jordan Zimmermann will also be available.

But will the Diamondbacks, with a projected payroll of about $100 million next season, be willing to pull the trigger on an ace? It’s doubtful.

“If you want to go after one of the top-tier guys, it’s probably going to limit anything else we can do in the offseason,” team president and CEO Derrick Hall recently told The Arizona Republic.

The Giants, however, with a projected 2016 payroll of about $170 million, seem poised to make a big addition. And, keep in mind, the Giants no longer have to pay salaries to pitchers Tim Lincecum, Tim Hudson and Jeremy Affeldt or to infielder Marco Scutaro.

CEO Larry Baer recently told the San Francisco Chronicle that the Giants will take a “pretty exhaustively” look at free agency to boost a rotation anchored by Madison Bumgarner.

“We’ve shown over the years we’re in the deal flow, so to speak,” Baer said. “We may or may not push the button. They may or may not be the right fit in terms of years, dollars, culture. … We want to get ourselves right back there in 2016. Anything’s possible, but it has to be the right fit.”

Given the winning culture in San Francisco, and given that Bruce Bochy is one of the game’s elite managers, I think the Giants will retool and be a World Series contender again next year.

In other words, I don’t see a changing of the guard in the NL West.

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@denverpost.com or @psaundersdp