When you’re in a hole, stop . . .

Howard Beach: I work for the DOT and, after reading Voicer Irene Goldsmith putting us down, need to respond. Filling a pothole with asphalt will last as long as a snow plow will allow it to. Think concrete streets are the solution? Take a ride down College Point Blvd. and tell me how smooth your ride is. Instead of bashing us, try supporting us. Sal Decicco

Flushing: The solution to the pothole problem is to develop a cheap, durable and indestructible substance to use on new roadways. In this day of technological advances, we should be able to do this. Dennis Gavarian

Brooklyn: Mayor de Blasio: I am sure that you will be a fine mayor. But as a car-driving New Yorker whose vehicle is taking one heck of a beating this year, please make it one of your early goals to patch up these craters that are plaguing our roads. Jim Shaffer

Dear John

Manhattan: Poor John Bolton (“Obama is weak, clueless and indecisive on Ukraine,” Op-Ed, Feb. 20). His greatest contribution to world diplomacy seems to be criticizing President Obama for the most poorly considered and inane reasons imaginable. Bolton, as we all remember, once criticized the UN by suggesting that the top 10 floors of the UN building be removed. Has he not forgotten his involvement in the most inept presidency in U.S. history, which started two wars and had no clue on how to end them? John Noonan

Fallon your sword

Clark, N.J.: Now that Jimmy Fallon has taken over for Jay Leno, can the show be referred to as the “Goodnight” show? It’s what a large percentage of its audience will be saying to it. James E. Lukridge

Don’t win friends with salad

Brooklyn: I am a cook for the NYC Dept. of Education. I just can’t understand how salad bars are allowed in schools. They are disgusting. We do so much work preparing, and at the end of the day we find objects, spit and other filthy stuff in them. Salad bars carry many germs and disease and should be removed immediately from all NYC public schools. Mary Ann Greenberg

Cold comfort

Bronx: I started school back in the 1950s. I don’t remember ever not going to school because of the snow. My brother, sister and I walked a few blocks to the elementary school. Then we walked further for junior high school and took public transportation for high school. Both my mother and father worked and used public transportation. I remember the buses had chains on the wheels and did just fine. I also remember going out to play in the snow. We had so much fun, we didn’t know that we were freezing until we went back home to warm up. It’s sad that the adults of tomorrow won’t have the same memories! Debbie Darmiento

Up in smoke I

Levittown, L.I.: After reading Harry Siegel’s column re: marijuana (“Cuomo’s marijuana copout,” Feb. 19), I cannot see the benefit of legalizing this drug — especially since reading about Colorado and what goes on in San Francisco. I can’t help but think: Do I want my pilot smoking one or two marijuana cigarettes before we take off or my doctor doing the same before a big operation? Winifred Larkin

Up in smoke II

Ozone Park: If marijuana is legalized like alcohol, how many more people are going to be killed by stoned drivers? How about mothers forgetting babies in bathtubs? How about young children being influenced by parents who use it casually around the home? Josephine Ambrosio

First, do no harm

Oakland Gardens: It amazes me how many doctors are refusing to take on new patients since Obamacare’s inception. I don’t blame the doctors and patients for feeling Obama doesn’t care. Sally Waldman

Feeling blue?

Bronx: Bill Bratton, you gave up a lot to become police commissioner. Did you know the job required you lying for an incompetent mayor? Linda Ranallo

Blue line

Brooklyn: According to a lawsuit, new NYPD Internal Affairs Chief Joseph Reznick called a cop who accused fellow cops a “rat.” Nothing has changed at the NYPD. Charles Haigler

The needle and the damage

Bronx: To Voicer Scott Silverstein, who said that his heroin addiction is a sickness: Let me ask you a question. Did anyone put a gun to your head when you took heroin for the first time? Doris Festante

Collar this mutt

East Patchogue, L.I.: I would like to get the savage who threw the beautiful dog out of the car window, put him in a cage, drive him to the middle of the desert, leave him there and say “bye.” Catherine Lo Curto

Hell in a handbasket

North Merrick, L.I.: Re “Proud pop takes home tot” (Feb. 17), about Simon Cowell and his girlfriend’s new baby: Not too long ago, news like this would have been swept under the rug. Today, it is a headline. Times have changed. The sixth commandment, “Thou shall not commit adultery,” is now obsolete. Alice Furey

Bullet points

Pleasant Valley, N.Y.: In an establishment the other day, I saw a sign on the wall: a gun with a red line through it, indicating a gun-free zone. I pointed out to the lady that this sign is a clear invitation for a gun nut to come in and shoot up the place, knowing that law-abiding people would not be armed. She said that New York State law requires these signs to be posted in certain buildings. When will liberals realize, as Wayne LaPierre, head of the NRA says, that “The only thing that stops a bad guy with a gun, is a good guy with a gun”? Fred Niessen

The need for speed

Brooklyn: I would like to go 20 mph on the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway instead of the usual 10 mph every morning. When is it going to happen, Bill? Anthony Cerullo

Get it?

Linden, N.J.: Looks like Mayor de Blasio is “de blase” about breaking traffic rules. Ron Jackowski

Sticks and stones

Greenlawn, L.I.: If we are going to penalize players for using the N-word, then we should also penalize them for using all other racial slurs. Richard Volino

Itinerary for Alec

Glendale: Is this the same Alec Baldwin who threatened to move to Europe if Bush won? Listen, Baldwin — follow-up on something, will ya? Maybe you and Dennis Rodman could move to North Korea. Michael Slack

Global dumbing

Mount Sinai, L.I.: Wow! A supposedly “educated” fellow like Charles Krauthammer can’t believe that heat melts ice (“The myth of ‘settled science,’” Feb. 20). His ignorance about climate change is appalling. Karl Bean

The war after the war

Valley Stream, L.I.: Although I support everyone’s right to free speech, I was greatly disappointed to see the Daily News afford a spot to such a bigoted opinion by Voicer Dominick Battaglia. Are you really discriminating against today’s Japanese-American citizens because of what happened 60 years ago? How did your ancestors like it when they, too, probably suffered from racism when they first arrived here, especially with a last name ending in a vowel? This is America, where anyone can come and succeed. And although the national language may be English, America has no official language. While I applaud the unmatched courage and bravery of you and our country’s greatest generation, your bigoted remarks reveal cowardice and fear. Don’t use baseball as a means to propagate your prejudice! Gary Hewitt

Memories of Mike

Yorktown Heights, N.Y.: To those of you who thought that Bill de Blasio would be good for New York City and voted for him: Don’t you wish Michael Bloomberg had run for a fourth term? Bloomberg is probably thinking, “Do you miss me yet?” Cue the song: “Who’s Sorry Now?” William J Griggs