Loveland resident Carolyn Goldsberry, left, drops off items to volunteers Doug Proctor and Erin Proctor on Saturday inside King Soopers, 1275 Eagle Drive, in southwest Loveland as part of food drive for the Disaster Relief Center. ( STEVE STONER )

At the door of King Soopers, Thompson School District teachers Andy Crisman and Staci Schmidt passed out shopping lists to many of those shopping at the grocery store Saturday afternoon.

Inside the store, a few more district employees boxed up items on the lists, thanking the shoppers for spending the time gathering and then donating the items, as well as money, to flood relief efforts.

"Some people have money. Some people have time," Crisman said, adding that he had the time. "I just like smiling at people and being able to do my bit for the community."

Crisman responded to the district's callout to staff to help with a one-day food drive through Adventist Community Services, a humanitarian agency of the Seventh-day Adventist Church that provides disaster response services.

Erin Proctor, a school psychologist, volunteered right away when she saw the callout.

"I knew immediately I needed to be here to support the kids and the community," Proctor said. "It's not like it was a second thought. It was like I had to do this."

Nearly 70 staff members volunteered to work in shifts to collect non-perishable food, toiletries, paper products, and cleaning and school supplies at five Loveland grocery stores, including the two Safeway stores, the two King Soopers stores and Albertsons. District food delivery trucks picked up what they collected to deliver to the Northern Colorado Donation Center at the former Agilent campus.

"They need stuff that will last like canned food," Schmidt said.

The non-perishable food items on the list included peanut butter, noodles, breakfast cereal and canned fruits and vegetables.

Those who donated brought in their own food and other items or purchased them in the store and dropped them off at tables set up inside near the entrance.

"People have such generous hearts and don't know what to do," said Dee Ann Wilson, an intensive learning center teacher. "And so they're here shopping, and it's something that speaks to them."

Jennifer Miramontes, left, and Jamie Burgdorf chat with volunteers Andy Crisman and Staci Schmidt about a food drive on Saturday outside King Soopers, 1275 Eagle Drive, in Loveland. Adventist Community Services was seeking donations of household items for the Disaster Relief Center for people affected by recent flooding. ( STEVE STONER )

Carrie Proctor, 16, volunteered alongside her mother, Erin Proctor.

"I've been waiting for something to do to be helpful," Carrie said. "I like seeing how generous people are. Everyone wants to help out anyway they can."

The food drive was among several events Saturday focused on donating proceeds to the relief effort or generating donations to give to those affected by the flood.

Fifty percent of the proceeds from Loveland Loves Literature at the Feed and Grain Saturday and Sunday will benefit the American Red Cross to aid in flood relief efforts. Performers gave readings and hosted activities to celebrate literature, coinciding with the "Install: My Story" exhibit inside building.

A portion of the proceeds from SWAY -- Belly Dance and Drummers Extravaganza at the Rialto Theater Center Saturday evening went to aid in flood relief efforts.

And the Korean Academy of Taekwondo hosted a multifamily, indoor yard sale with fifty percent of the proceeds going to the House of Neighborly Services to provide food for flood victims.

Shelley Widhalm can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 531, or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com.