Did the stimulus work? Is Obamacare working or failing? Sign in and add your facts below.

WASHINGTON, D.C. -- President Barack Obama's trip to Cleveland on Wednesday brought a lot of critics to cleveland.com, with hundreds of reader comments. The absolutes were intriguing:

"Obama did nothing to save the economy."

"Obamacare is a failure."

Obama "raised taxes on every American."

Really? Let's see, with facts, figures and civility.

"Obama did nothing to save the economy."

Let's reframe this claim in a way that reasonable people can discuss. Did the economic stimulus plan, called the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, work? Congress passed it in February 2009, weeks after Obama's inauguration.

Using the best source we know of for nonpartisan economic analysis, we turned to the National Bureau of Economic Research, or NBER. The answer there was three-fold: Yes. And some parts of the stimulus worked better than others. And, relative to what?

The latter is speculative because the stimulus is all that the country had. But as for the other two, economists James Feyrer and Bruce Sacerdote, both Dartmouth College economists, concluded in a research paper for the NBER that the stimulus was effective, although somewhat less so than predicted by the Obama administration.

Different parts of the stimulus had different effects. Money sent to states to support education and law enforcement "appear to have little effect," the economists wrote, noting that states "may have used the money to lower borrowing or limit tax increases."

But "support for low income households appear to have been extremely effective." Almost as beneficial was spending on highway projects.

This study came out in 2011. The Washington Post's Wonkblog in 2012 looked at the same sort of claim and examined 15 studies on the question. Twelve of the 15 said the Recovery Act worked, two said it didn't and one said it might have worked.

Critics had a counter-argument: By spending so much money, the government pushed up debt, and government spending can push down private spending, which is needed to really rev up the country's economic engines. These are subjects of debate among economists, but they are academic and in response to a different question: Was Obama's stimulus the right approach?

The answer cannot be known definitely; Obama's approach was the one the nation got.

"Obamacare is a failure."

How do you define failure?

Under the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, 16.4 million more people than before have health coverage -- 14.1 million through insurance and expanded Medicaid, and 2.3 million young adults whom the act allowed to stay on their parents' plans, according to the White House. The ranks of the uninsured have shrunk to 13.2 percent from 20 percent, the Obama administration says.

Some people have lower premiums than before the act kicked in -- because insurers can no longer push up their rates, or reject someone altogether, due to poor health or preexisting conditions. Some people pay less in premiums because insurers can no longer charge older people massively more than younger people. For every $1 dollar a young person is charged, an older person cannot be charged more than $3.

And the federal government subsidizes most of the people buying ACA policies.

On the other hand, some people pay higher premiums than before, especially if they are younger, because of the way Obamacare balances out the overall insurance pool. Some people resent having to pay for any coverage they don't want or won't use, and resent the fines they'll have to pay if they go uninsured.

And some businesses -- and even state and local governments, including Ohio's -- don't think it's fair that they have to pay fees and taxes used to set up this new insurance system.

Obamacare still has challenges. Latinos now have an uninsured rate of 29.5 percent, which can seem like a failure -- until you know that the rate was 12.3 percent higher before Obamacare kicked in. Similarly, the administration's 16.4 million number, which comes from statistical modeling of data from the Gallup-Healthways Well-Being Index, pales compared to a figure Obama used in 2009, more than half a year before the act passed: he said there were 47 million people without insurance at that point.

So is the cup half empty or half full? Sylvia Mathews Burwell, the health and human services secretary, described the 16.4 million figure as the biggest drop in the uninsured in four decades. She used that timeframe because Medicare and Medicaid began in 1965.

Calling it a dramatic change, and perhaps the biggest social change in decades, is accurate. Calling it a new entitlement is, too, whether you're against it or for it. But "failure" is a political judgment.

Obama "raised taxes on every American."

There were variations on this claim. Let's start with the payroll tax, applied to wages and used for funding Social Security and Medicare. The employee's share is 6.2 percent on most wages, although the tax ends for higher earners.

In 2011 and 2012, Obama and Congress cut the employee's share of the tax to 4.2 percent. That gave workers an extra 2 percent in take-home pay -- an extra $1,000 for someone making $50,000 a year -- during those gloomy economic times.

But on the eve of 2013, with Obama and Congress playing a game of chicken over government spending, the president let the tax holiday expire.

It was never intended to be permanent anyway, but it hit workers -- and was described by some in the media -- as a tax hike.

The same "fiscal cliff" deal, agreed to by Congress, caused capital gains taxes to rise on couples earning $450,000, to 20 percent, the same rate as under President Bill Clinton.

There were more taxes. At the beginning of his presidency, Obama signed a bill to reauthorize the Children's Health Insurance Program, paying to keep children healthy by raising taxes on cigarettes.

Then the Affordable Care Act applied a 10 percent tax on indoor tanning services, and a penalty, or tax, on people who can afford health insurance but refuse to buy it. The health care law also imposed new Medicare taxes on high earners.

When Obama in 2011 said, "I didn't raise taxes once," PolitiFact rated the claim "False."

Obama does not hide his continuing desire to end more tax breaks for high earners and for companies that shield profits in overseas shelters.

He wants to raise capital gains taxes some more, this time for couples earning $500,000, to 28 percent, the same as under President Ronald Reagan. He wants to end the "trust fund loophole" that lets wealthy families protect capital gains from taxation.

Does that make Obama a tax raiser on all Americans? A low-to-moderate-income retiree (no payroll taxes) who neither smokes nor visits the tanning booth might disagree.

But if Obama raised your taxes, don't forget his tax cuts.

The 2009 stimulus gave a "Making Work Pay" tax credit, worth $800 to most couples. When this expired, Obama turned it into the aforementioned payroll tax break -- and then got slammed when that expired. Though not a tax cut, Obamacare provided savings for senior citizens who hit Medicare's prescription drug coverage gap.

As also noted by PolitiFact, Obama passed numerous tax cuts for small businesses, using the stimulus, Obamacare, the Hiring Incentives to Restore Employment Act, and the Small Business Jobs Act.

They included the exclusion of up to 75 percent of capital gains on key small business investments; a tax credit for the cost of health insurance for small business employees; new tax credits for hiring Americans out of work for at least two months; bigger deductions for business start-up expenses, and a hike in the small business expense limit, to $500,000.

And as he said in January, he wants a "second earner" tax credit of $500 to help two-earner couples, and he wants to extend the earned income tax credit for workers without children.

So is Obama a tax cutter or a tax hiker?

The record shows both.

When the Bush-era cuts ended, the liberal Center on Budget and Policy Priorities noted that Obama allowed 82 percent of Bush's cuts to become permanent . But as the conservative Heritage Foundation believes, "President Obama is still wrong on taxes."