KALAMAZOO, MI -- Douglas neighborhood resident Erin Knott has announced she will seek a seat on the Kalamazoo City Commission in the Nov. 3 election.

Knott, 40, is the Michigan director of Enroll America, a national non-profit that works to maximize the number of U.S. citizens who receive health care under the Affordable Care Act. She previously served as the Michigan political director for America Votes and as deputy director for Michigan Citizen Action, according to a press release issued by Knott.

During her time with Michigan Citizen Action, Knott said she worked with members of Congress, the state legislature, and volunteer teams across the state.

Knott said she'd like to utilize the skills gained from these positions to help impact Kalamazoo.

"Getting involved civically is important to me as I train grassroots activists each day to share their skills and talents in their own neighborhoods or communities," Knott said. "It is time that I too take this step and do more locally to shape public policy."

Knott said she began her professional career as the crime prevention specialist for the Vine Neighborhood Association and later spent eight years with the Local Initiatives Support Coalition, where she said she worked to connect residents, business owners and community stakeholders with resources to revitalize the city's urban neighborhoods.

"Kalamazoo's neighborhoods are what make our community a special place to call home," she said. "If elected to the city commission, I will prioritize their unique heritage while strengthening them for generations to come. Our families spend the majority of their time in our neighborhoods and that's where the city should focus investments."

Commissioners are elected on an at-large, non-partisan basis.

Knott joins three newcomers and incumbent city commissioner Jack Urban as the candidates who have publicly announced bids for the city commission. Kalamazoo Mayor Bobby Hopewell and Milwood neighborhood resident Kris Mbah are the only two candidates who have declared they will run for mayor.

Commissioners Bob Cinabro and Barb Miller have announced they will not seek re-election, meaning there will be at least two new faces on the seven-member commission this fall.

The Nov. 3 election will mark the first time Kalamazoo residents elect their mayor separately from the other six commissioners after approving five amendments to the city's charter during the November 2014 election.

The most significant change calls for voters to elect the mayor to a two-year term separately from the city commission, but does not grant the position any additional powers. Other changes included lengthening commissioners' terms from two to four years, calling for the vice mayor to be the top vote-getter in the commission election, allowing voters to fill commission vacancies within the first two years of a term and requiring any active commissioner who elects to run for mayor to step down from office.

The top three finishers in the Nov. 3 election will serve four-year terms and the next three finishers will serve two-year terms. Starting with the 2017 election, all commissioner terms will be for four years.

In previous years, commissioners were elected every two years with the top vote-getter becoming mayor.

City residents interested in running must submit nominating petitions and affidavits of identity to the city clerk's office by 4 p.m. July 21.

Alex Mitchell is a reporter for the Kalamazoo Gazette. Email him at amitche5@mlive.com or follow him on Twitter.