The Obama administration is aware of the issue and hopes to fix it -- but not for this year.

WASHINGTON, D.C. – They just wanted to get affordable health coverage for their family, like more than 3 million other Americans have so far through the Affordable Care Act.

But Alfred Cowger Jr. and Anthony Wesley Jr. of Gates Mills, Ohio, are gay. Despite their marriage vows, exchanged in New York, and a family life that includes a 7-year-old daughter, this appears to mean they don't qualify as an Ohio family for insurance purposes.

The Affordable Care Act, or ACA, has a loophole, it seems, that keeps some families in states like Ohio, where gay marriage is not recognized, from getting family coverage with tax subsidies. The subsidies are available to traditional families, making insurance more affordable for many.

Regulations covering the federal law known as Obamacare ban discrimination in the marketing of insurance. Yet the same regulations, issued in February 2013, say that the states have the right to determine their own "family coverage practices."

"Ohio determines our marital status, and federal regulation defers to Ohio's determination," said Cowger, an attorney.

This appeared to be news to a number of authorities contacted for this story. But the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services acknowledged it, telling The Plain Dealer that it will work on fixing the problem by 2015.

Cowger, 53, and Wesley, 57, aren't waiting that long.

On Tuesday, they filed a lawsuit against the federal and Ohio governments in U.S. District Court in Cleveland. Along with their daughter, Catherine, whom they adopted shortly after her birth, they asked in their lawsuit that they immediately be afforded the same right to buy subsidized insurance as other American families.

They named the United States and Ohio governments, Ohio Gov. John Kasich, and Lt. Gov. Mary Taylor, who directs the Ohio Department of Insurance, as defendants.

The U.S. Department of Heath and Human Services and its Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services would not comment on the lawsuit but acknowledged late Tuesday that some families are running into similar problems.

"We recognize the importance of all Americans and their families having access to quality, affordable coverage that they can count on," said HHS spokesman Fabien Levy. "CMS is aware that same-sex married couples in some states are experiencing issues in obtaining family plans and is looking into ways to address this for the 2015 plan year. While we work to address this situation, same-sex married couples can use their tax credit to buy individual policies for each spouse if they are unable to obtain a family plan in their current state."

The out-of-pocket costs, however, are generally higher for a family of three in individual plans, even if one plan covers a child, than in a single plan for the whole family. Combined premiums are often higher as well.

This is not the first time that ACA discrimination against gay households has come up. In January, Blue Cross and Blue Shield of North Carolina was accused of refusing coverage to gay and lesbian households. The insurer and the state pointed fingers at one another because of policy language defining marriage as a union of the opposite sex, but the insurer amended policy language amid controversy and the issue faded.

Last September, HHS Secretary Kathleen Sebelius said that "starting in January 2014, it will be illegal for any of the insurance companies who offer coverage through the (ACA) marketplace to discriminate on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity."

But based on HHS's statement to The Plain Dealer on Tuesday, some discrimination may continue through 2014. The problem comes from contradictory state and federal laws and rules.

On the one hand, HHS issued rules in February 2013 that banned discrimination in marketing ACA insurance policies and in a number of insurance underwriting practices.

Similarly, the ACA's tax subsidies are administered by the IRS – and for federal tax purposes, the IRS recognizes gay marriages like that of Cowger and Wesley. Brian Moulton, legal director for the Human Rights Campaign, which fights for gay rights, pointed out these protections.

But the HHS rules also say:

"We recognize that state laws differ with respect to marriage, adoption, and custody and believe that states are best positioned to make decisions regarding family coverage practices. Accordingly, states have the flexibility to require issuers to include specific types of individuals on a family policy and nothing in these final rules precludes this ability."

Ohio voters in 2004 passed a state constitutional amendment banning same-sex marriage. It is unclear how strongly that ban factors into the insurance difficulty faced by Cowger and Wesley.

Ohio Department of Insurance spokesman Chris Brock said he was not prepared to comment on Tuesday, and a spokesman for Ohio Attorney General Mike DeWine said his office could not comment on pending litigation. The state insurance department approves policies and rates, then sends those under the ACA to HHS for final approval.

Policies are sold to individuals and families through computerized and telephone marketplaces, also called insurance "exchanges." Some states operate their own ACA marketplaces, but Ohio uses the federally run marketplace.

Mary Jo Hudson, an attorney with Bailey Cavalieri in Columbus and a former Ohio insurance director, said, "The Ohio insurance code is silent with respect to marriage and marriage equity."

Hudson was Ohio's first openly gay department director. She said insurance companies typically use the same definition of marriage as exists in the jurisdictions where they issue their policies.

Cowger and Wesley, a former chief financial officer, say they have been in a committed relationship for nearly 28 years. They married in Chautauqua, NY, in 2012.

Wesley retired from his job in 2010, and Cowger started scaling back his law practice in early 2013 so he could spend more time with his family, according to their lawsuit. Until then, the family had been covered by an individual family policy from Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Ohio. They became interested in getting an ACA policy sold through the federal website because it might offer lower premiums, as well as provide tax credits to help pay.

Their interest soon intensified, because last November, Cowger got a letter from Anthem saying their existing policy was going to be terminated. The policy did not comply with all the ACA's requirements. The ACA requires broader coverage and fewer exemptions than many old individual policies.

The problem was, replacing the old policy with a new one on the individual market was going to make the premiums double -- to about half the family's joint annual income, Cowger said.

So Cowger and Wesley started trying to get insured on the ACA marketplace, and eventually picked a plan from Medical Mutual of Ohio. In the color-coded hierarchy of ACA policies, it was in the gold tier, providing a relatively high level of coverage.

But the family's every attempt to enroll was thwarted, whether by computer or phone, regardless of whether they spoke directly with the insurer's representative or with an employee on the federal marketplace phone bank.

They were told repeatedly that they should qualify, yet each time the application got kicked back. They were ultimately told they could not get a family plan "since their legal marriage in New York, recognized as valid for federal tax purposes, was not deemed valid to obtain a family policy under the ACA," the lawsuit said.

They wound up getting three separate Medical Mutual policies – one each for Cowger, Wesley and their daughter. This costs about $1,400 a month, Cowger said in a telephone interview.

Based on a calculation from a Kaiser Family Foundation database, other families in the same income range as Cowger and Wesley save thousands of dollars a year thanks to tax subsidies – subsidies that this gay household cannot get.

The ACA's critics question why some taxpayers should subsidize, through various taxes and fees and, in come cases, premiums, the insurance purchases of others. Cowger said he is not seeking anything that other taxpayers are not entitled to. He said he was satisfied with his old policy and would have gladly paid even a 20 percent premium hike. The ACA, he said, made that impossible.

Medical Mutual officials on Tuesday said they were trying to learn more about the specifics of this case. Media relations manager Ed Byers said, "We made an application to the federal government to sell on the exchanges and can only sell what is approved and what we are permitted to sell. If we are given the green light we would sell this product."