WASHINGTON, DC - SEPTEMBER 16: Comedian Jon Stewart (C) joins ill first-responders for a news conference to demand that Congress pass an extension of the Zadroga 9/11 health bill at the U.S. Capitol September 16, 2015 in Washington, DC. The former Daily Show host joined ailing police and firefighters in lobbying Congress for a permanent extension of the Zadroga Act's $1.6 billion health and monitoring effort for the 72,000 emergency responders who worked at Ground Zero. (Photo : Photo by Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images)

Jon Stewart returned to Comedy Central's Daily Show on Monday, for the first time since he left the show in August, to advocate for the Zadroga Reauthorization Act to help protect the health of our first responders. If, after reading this, you want to help Jon Stewart shame Congress into passing the 9/11 Bill you can use #WorstResponders on social media to help raise awareness.

The Zadroga Act was finally passed in 2010 after being introduced five years earlier. The bill is named in honor of a first responder who died after helping with the rescue and clean up at Ground Zero after the 9/11 event. NYC.gov explains, "It ensures that those affected by 9/11 continue to receive monitoring and treatment services for 9/11-related health problems through at least 2015." The Zadrogra Reauthorization Act would ensure first responders receive these benefits permanently.

One of the biggest reasons Congress finally passed the bill then is because Stewart dedicated almost an entire episode of the Daily Show to make people aware of the fact that these heroes were not receiving the health care assistance they deserve. This shamed congress into doing the right thing then. Perhaps it will help again now.

To show just how serious the matter has become, Stewart sat down to interview the four 9/11 first responders he had on that episode in 2010. Stewart poignantly noted three of four of the chairs were empty; two because they were too ill to make an appearance, one because he was dead. They fourth chair was filled by Kevin Specht.

"What message does it send to our first responders if once we're done as a nation with them helping us that we forget about them? That's unacceptable to me," lamented Stewart. By not reauthorizing the Zadroga Act, Congress is essentially telling first responders that we do not care what happens to you once you are done helping us. It is truly a shame.

When Stewart first appeared in the middle of one of Trevor Noah's skits, Noah nervously joked, "Wait, are you here to take the show back? Oh man, I heard about this in American TV." Playing along, Stewart pacified his usurper, assuring him that he was only there to inform viewers of the Zadroga Reauthorization Act.

Stewart also noted that one of the reasons he returned to the Daily Show was because he no longer had a show of his own with which to advocate for things like the Zadroga Act. That will not be the case for much longer, however. As of November, the political satirist has a four-year deal lined up with HBO. As successful and entertaining as John Oliver has been on the network, it will be hard to wait to see what they do with Jon Stewart!

If you would like to help first responders and Jon Stewart ensure the Zadroga Reauthorization Act gets passed, use #WorstResponders on social media to tell Congress to do what is right and enact this bill permenantly.