Art, cooking, experiments all part of scientific sessions

Katie King, 13, gets ready to let loose the bottle of tempera paint hanging on a string to create a pendulum painting at the July 24 session of the 2014 Fort Morgan Teen Summer Reading Program in Fort Morgan City Park. The art project taught the teens science lessons about pendulums and the roles gravity, force and motion play in where the paint winds up when the suspended bottle is left to hang still or gets pushed and then moves back and forth. ( Nicole Meininger / Courtesy photo )

The Robotics Team from Brush High School gives a demonstration of their robot at the July 10 Teen Summer Reading Program session at Fort Morgan Library & Museum. Robotics was just one of the scientific fields the teens in the program learned about this summer. (Nicole Meininger / Courtesy photo)

This summer, the teens in Fort Morgan Library & Museum's 2014 Teen Summer Reading Program got chances to learn about some complex scientific concepts and, in most cases, put them in action.

Beyond experimenting with setting off lots of chemical reactions, they also found out how pendulums work, the theory behind cooking with solar parabolas, and some of the challenges and triumphs that can come from working with robotics.

For studying pendulums, they did an art project.

Merriam-Webster defines pendulum as "a body suspended from a fixed point so as to swing freely to and fro under the action of gravity and commonly used to regulate movements."

Fort Morgan teens check out a "Smart Robot" kit July 10 at a Teen Summer Reading Program session on robotics at Fort Morgan Library & Museum. "The Smart Robot turned out to be not so smart," noted Children's Librarian Katie Holmburg, giving the teens lots of trouble and not working how it was supposed to work. They still had fun, though, she said. (Nicole Meininger / Courtesy photo)

What the teens did was hang a bottle of tempera paint with an open tip on a string from the center of an easel. Below the bottle was a large sheet of paper.

The teens then applied pressure to the bottle to get it to swing back and forth, dropping paint as it swung, and creating designs on the paper.

They did this multiple times with different colors of paint, learning about how fast and long it would swing, depending on how much force was applied, and layering the drops and colors of paint to see how it would turn out.

For parabolas, the idea was to have a solar hot dog cook-out, but the weather and amount of available equipment (shoe boxes) were not in their favor on the day it was supposed to happen.

Instead, Teen Summer Reading Program Coordinator Nicole Meininger explained the concept of making solar-powered hot dog cookers.

After lining a U-shaped (parabolic) piece of cardboard with tin foil, the hot dog threaded spit-style and then hung parallel over the center of it. The reflective parabola underneath the hot dog acts as a focus point for all of the sunlight and sends it through the hot dog, heating it up. (For more on this experiment, check out http://education.com/science-fair/article/solar-hot-dog-cooker/" title="education.com">education.com/science-fair/article/solar-hot-dog-cooker/)

Nicole Meininger, 2014 Fort Morgan Teen Summer Reading Program coordinator, shows off the "Spark a Reaction" T-shirt one of the teens in the program is about to receive at the final session, July 31 at Fort Morgan Library & Museum. Katie King, right, was the winner, having logged the most reading hours over the summer. (Jenni Grubbs / Fort Morgan Times)

"I thought it would work out wonderfully because it has science and food," Meininger said of the solar hot dog cooker plan.

Alas, it was not meant to be, and they wound up cooking the hot dogs in the toaster oven in the Community Room's kitchenette.

But the teens seemed just fine with that; they still got to eat their hot dogs while watching "Cloudy With a Chance of Meatballs 2."

At a different session, they had some of both of those triumphs and challenges that science often brings.

First, they saw a presentation from the Brush High School Robotics Team and heard about the competitions in which the team has participated, as well as getting to see the team's robot in action in the Community Room.

After that, the teens got to check out a "Smart Robot" kit, which they soon found out was "not so smart," according to Children's Librarian Katie Holmburg. It just did not work the way they thought it was supposed to work, she said.

But that's all part of science and experimenting, they learned.

Contact Times Staff Writer Jenni Grubbs at jgrubbs@fmtimes.com, follow @JenniGrubbs on Twitter or check out tout.com/jennigrubbs