*In a written piece for CNN.com, black conservative writer Crystal Wright basically told fellow conservative Stacey Dash to have several seats over her recent remarks about blacks being under the Democratic Party.

Wright, who runs the blog ConservativeBlackChick.com, writes:

Fox News contributor and Republican as of 2012, black actress Stacey Dash proves she really wasn’t acting in the movie “Clueless.” Appearing on Fox News’ “Hannity” show, Dash called all black people in Louisiana government freeloaders who don’t work.

Sean Hannity asked Dash: “Has voting with Obama 95% of the time and Obamacare, has that helped the minority community in Louisiana?”

“No, not at all. It still keeps them stuck. They’re getting money for free. They feel worthless. They’re uneducated. I mean, as long as you are that way, they can keep you under their control …”

“They have a plantation mentality,” Dash said. “As long as they give you this much money, you’ll stay right there. You don’t need to know too much because if you do, you might start thinking for yourself.”

I think Stacey Dash needs to get out more, perhaps visit Louisiana and the rest of America and see that all blacks, myself included, certainly don’t feel “worthless” under President Barack Obama’s administration.

Whether Democratic or Republican, scores of black people — Oprah Winfrey, Allen West, Condoleezza Rice, Ben Carson, Shelby Steele, Bill Cosby, Robin Roberts, and many many others — are highly educated, gainfully employed, paying their bills and frankly doing quite well. Dash is one of them.

Many black people may want Obama to provide more productive policies, but to suggest, as Dash does, that blacks are largely “uneducated” and “getting money for free” is a racist narrative that conservatives need to stop perpetuating. That kind of talk is an offensive nonstarter in getting blacks to consider voting Republican. So is the often repeated meme by some black conservatives that blacks “have a plantation mentality.”

Whether you’re white or black, it’s never cool to invoke metaphors of slavery, which was a gruesome, painful institution protected by Democrats in America that went on way too long. Conservatives should remind Americans of the history of slavery and how the Democratic Party perpetuates policies of paternalism that don’t benefit blacks.

Continue reading at CNN.com.

32 SHARES Facebook Twitter

Want to read more articles like this one? Subscribe to EURnewsletter.

Got A News Tip or Video You Want to Share? Contact us HERE.