Hillary Clinton speaks at Highland Hills church

HIGHLAND HILLS, Ohio — Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton spoke at Mount Zion Fellowship on Northfield Road on Sunday morning, two days before Ohio voters cast their ballots in Tuesday's primary election.

"I'm running for president because I want to knock down every barrier that stands in the way of any American getting ahead and staying ahead," Clinton said.

Republicans have put America in the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression, and Democrats must stay in the White House to pull America out of that hole, Clinton, the former Secretary of State and First Lady of the United States, said.

"I don't think President [Barack] Obama gets enough credit for digging us out of the ditch that we were put into," Clinton said, drawing a standing ovation from the crowd. "I want to build on the progress we have made."

Here other goals Clinton says she will work toward if she wins the White House.

A plan to allow Americans to refinance their student loans, similar to the way home and car loans are refinanced.

Restore trust between police and citizens.

Enhance the Affordable Care Act and bring the cost down.

Offer more early-education opportunities.

Partner with teachers to make public schools better, and add more computer classes.

Eliminate systemic racism in the criminal justice system.

Improve the nation's infrastructure and water systems.

Fix up old houses, so children aren't eating or breathing lead paint.

Create more clean, renewable energy jobs.

Set up tax incentives to encourage more manufacturing jobs in America.

According to Clinton, when her husband, Democrat Bill Clinton, was president from 1993-2001, Americans gained 23 million new jobs and household incomes increased.

Under Republican President George W. Bush, between 2001 and 2009, America lost 800,000 jobs a month and 5 million Americans lost their homes, Clinton said. During those years, a total of 9 million Americans lost their jobs, she said.

"When my husband was president, we were making progress economically," Clinton said. "What happened? A new president came in and dismantled the progress we had made and inflicted upon us a failed economic policy."

Obama has the nation moving in the right direction, Clinton said, and she wants to continue on that path.

An NBC News/WSJ/Marist poll of Ohio voters released on Sunday showed Clinton leading Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders by 20 points in the Democratic race, 58 percent to 38 percent. Recent polling generally has shown Clinton leading Sanders in Ohio by double digits.

Like Chanda Neely on Facebook.

Follow me on Twitter: Follow @ChandaNeely