Topics: Barack Obama, competency, data, Editor's Picks, George W. Bush, Media Criticism, Pew, Polls, presidents, The Fix, Politics News

Yesterday afternoon, the Washington Post’s The Fix blog put up a post titled “On the competency question, Bush has always had Obama beat.” A little while later, this same post appeared with a fresh new title: “On ‘getting things done,’ Bush has always had Obama beat.”

There’s nothing wrong with changing a headline to better reflect the argument of the post. But the content of the post remained the same, and, as with the original headline, uses public perceptions of a president’s ability to “get things done” and “competency” analogously. Are they analogous? Nope. That’s why we’re writing a whole post in response!

The post compiles Pew data from both the W. Bush and Obama administrations on “overall approval rating” and “the percentage of people who say he can ‘get things done’ when he wants to.” For each president, the movements in the two measures track each other in terms of broad ups and downs. Obama’s approval rating and “get things done” percentage have seen their share of ups and downs; Bush’s peak in mid-2003 and then effectively head straight downward for the next three years.

The Fix’s point, though, is that for Bush, there was always a healthy gap between his approval rating and his “get things done” percentage: Respondents always judged his ability to “get things done” higher than they approved of his presidency. For most of Obama’s presidency, on the other hand, the two measures have typically been closer — and recently, the percentage of people who think Obama can “get things done” has actually dipped below his overall approval rating.

Even though The Fix uses polling data regarding a president’s ability to “get things done” and even changed its headline to better reflect that, the piece is still littered with this word — “competency” — as a stand-in. “Obama’s competency has long polled slightly higher than his overall approval rating — until last year,” for example. Then: “A look at Bush’s presidency shows that Americans consistently rated his competency significantly higher than his overall job performance.”

We’re not going to argue that Obama is the most “competent” president in history and George W. Bush is the least. Neither really seems to make the Presidential All-Star team in that respect. But the question about a president’s ability to “get things done” seems more an issue of how well Washington is working and the state of gridlock at any given time than about an individual president’s competency.

There was a fair share of partisan battling and gridlock during Bush’s time. But compared to the way it’s been during most of the Obama administration? It makes the W. days look like a Golden Age of Compromise on the Potomac.

According to the Pew data, the peak of Bush’s overall approval rating, “getting things done” figure, and the gap between the two was in mid-2003. And things sure were “getting done,” then. We launched a fucking ground invasion of Iraq! President Bush and Congress were expanding Medicare to give old people prescription drugs, financed through deficits. A second wave of tax cuts was passing. For better or worse, the Bush administration was getting things done through a relatively cooperative Congress. By 2005-2006, though, the gap between the two measures narrows — as in, Bush’s “getting things done” figure collapses downhill more sharply than his also very sharply collapsing approval rating. (There is this one strange moment in the data, though, right around Hurricane Katrina, where Bush’s approval rating instantly collapses while his “getting things done” figure briefly ticks … upward? Huh? Points for “getting done” the instant destruction of a major American city? We can all agree that if anything represents a failure of competency, it was Bush’s handling of Katrina. So if the “getting things done” figure goes up after that, the two measures can’t be all that analogous.) Aside from that strange Katrina moment, though, the narrowed gap by mid-2006 could represent that Congress was no longer cooperating with him. His second-term domestic agenda, anchored by a partial-privatization of Social Security, didn’t get anywhere, although the government was always properly funded and the debt ceiling was always raised on schedule.