Loveland resident Rick Rak had the prime spot Saturday as he watched the 100 floats go by for the Old-Fashioned Corn Roast Festival parade.

Rak, co-owner of Skimmeez Sweet Shop, sat on an orange stool in front of his shop on Cleveland Avenue. He got one of the shady spots for the parade that lasted about one hour, 15 minutes.

"I thought it was nice as usual," Rak said, pointing out the high school bands as his favorite part. "I like seeing the energy they put into their stuff."

Crowds packed the sidelines along the parade route from Railroad Avenue down Cleveland and ending at Southeast Eighth Street.

Thompson Valley cheerleaders dance and march in the Old-Fashioned Corn Roast Festival parade on Saturday. (Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

The parade kicked off the second day of corn-related activities for the Corn Roast Festival. The festival featured a corn-shucking contest on Friday and a corn-eating contest and the Loveland Rotary Club duck race on Saturday.

Most of the activities took place at a closed-off section of Fourth Street and Railroad Avenue, but the race went to the water at Old Fairgrounds Park to let the yellow plastic ducks swim.

The other activities of the two-day festival included live music, food and artisan wares for sale in booths, and roasted and boiled corn to eat.

The theme of the parade was Tour de Corn in honor of the USA Pro Challenge men's and women's races coming through mid-day Saturday.

Advertisement

Parade participants from schools, dance academies and businesses and a few political candidates drove cars, trucks, tractors and school buses, rode bicycles or on trailers, and walked, danced or marched the route.

Many of the floats had actual or representative cornstalks and hay bales. A couple of the floats brought out Santa, including Loveland Elks Lodge 1051 and Santa Cops Larimer County. The Spellbinders let the crowds know, "We have an earful of stories."

Jennifer Rinn, left, and her family Harper, Mark, Miriam and Chuck came from Wyoming to check out the Old-Fashioned Corn Roast Festival parade on Saturday. (Trevor L Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

"It's just classic, small-town fun. It's nice to see the city come out," Rak said.

Kendra Omlid of Loveland came with her daughters, Karamea, 7, and Kaylee, 5.

"I thought it was fun. It was good to see the community represented, and the schools," Omlid said. "My favorite part, I think, was the marching bands. It was really fun and upbeat."

Kaylee said, with some help from her mother, "My favorite part was the gymnastics and the dancers because they have lots of energy."

Fourteen-year-old Laquin Dawk, who came to the parade with her friend, Laurel Johnson, wished the parade had horses but thought the costumes worn by the participants was the best part.

"There was a lot of interesting stuff," Dawk said. "We came last year. I'd say it was better."

Gerald Peters of Loveland also would have liked seeing horses and didn't like the gaps between some of the floats. Plus, he wanted a sign saying the parade was over.

"There should be a sign saying, 'It's our last float,'" Peters said.

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com; twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm