Scalise goes up on the air

With Kevin Robillard, Elena Schneider and Scott Bland

Because of a publishing error, an earlier version of Morning Score included incorrect sponsorship information. We apologize for the inconvenience.

Story Continued Below

The following newsletter is an abridged version of Campaign Pro's Morning Score. For an earlier morning read on exponentially more races — and for a more comprehensive aggregation of the day's most important campaign news — sign up for Campaign Pro today. (http://www.politicopro.com/proinfo)

BETTER TO BE SAFE — "Scalise airing early reelection ads,” by Campaign Pro’s Scott Bland: “House Majority Whip Steve Scalise began airing early, unannounced campaign ads in his Louisiana district last week, two years after rebellious Republican primary voters ambushed former Majority Leader Eric Cantor and derailed his career. Scalise, the No. 3 House Republican, doesn't have any declared opponents, and he won't face voters in his deeply conservative district for another nine-plus months. Still, Scalise's campaign launched a radio ad hyping his role fighting Obamacare.” More here: http://politico.pro/1PfcQHb

FIRST IN SCORE — Burr brings in $817,000: North Carolina Sen. Richard Burr raised $817,000 in the fourth quarter, a drop from the last quarter, when he brought in $1.3 million, according to Burr’s campaign. He ended the year with $5.3 million in cash on hand. Overall, Burr did well in 2015, even though he’s not known for his fundraising prowess. He’s picked up three Democratic challengers, though, including former state Rep. Deborah Ross, who just got the backing of EMILY’s List. Ross hasn’t released her fundraising totals yet.

FOUR MORE YEARS? — Walker fundraising email hints at 2018 reelection run: Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker indicated he would run for reelection in 2018 in a fundraising email on Monday. "Our re-election campaign may seem like a long way off but the other side is already gearing up for a bruising battle," Walker wrote. Walker, whose approval ratings sank in his state as he ran for president, has already won three governor's races: his initial victory in 2010, a 2012 recall, and his 2014 reelection. While the email is far from an official declaration, it's the strongest hint yet Walker may run for a third term. The message sought help retiring the federal campaign debt Walker accumulated during his presidential run. The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel has more: http://bit.ly/1T28HWK

Days until the Iowa caucuses: 12. Days until the 2016 election: 293.

Thanks for joining us. You can email tips to the whole Campaign Pro team at sbland@politico.com , eschneider@politico.com , krobillard@politico.com , tmeyer@politico.com and kcheney@politico.com .

You can also follow us on Twitter, where we tweet a lot about campaigns and occasionally about North Korean liquor : @politicoscott , @ec_schneider , @politicokevin , @theodoricmeyer and @kyledcheney .

MORE FUNDRAISING NUMBERS — Murphy raises $1.5 million in Florida: Democrat Patrick Murphy pulled in nearly $1.5 million for his Senate run in the fourth quarter, The Tampa Bay Times reports, giving him about $4.3 million in cash on hand. His primary opponent, Alan Grayson, hasn't released numbers yet. http://bit.ly/1OEYQRa

RUNNING WITH SANDERS — Down-ballot Democrats warn against Bernie at the top of the ticket: Some Democrats have started highlighting Bernie Sanders' socialist beliefs as he continues to ride high in the polls, warning "that he would be an electoral disaster who would frighten swing voters and send Democrats in tight congressional and governor’s races to defeat," The New York Times' Jonathan Martin reports. “It wouldn’t be helpful outside Vermont, Massachusetts, Berkeley, Palo Alto and Ann Arbor,” Rep. Steve Cohen (D-Tenn.) said. “I can tell you, as somebody who ran the Democratic Governors Association, that candidates in purple states would face serious problems with him on top of the ticket,” Gov. Jack Markell of Delaware added. http://nyti.ms/1OvCLa7

** A message from Sinclair Broadcast Group: Sinclair Broadcast Group, the largest and most diversified television broadcasting company in the country today, delivers not only TV, the primary medium for reaching potential voters, but also targetable digital (mobile, video, email, social media and native) ad solutions. Contact Alan Brittan @ 703-236-9673. Sinclair, busy - Making Political Ads Work! **

PRESIDENTIAL SPEED READ — "Palin scores moment in Trump's spotlight," by POLITICO's Ben Schreckinger: "Sarah Palin’s Tuesday endorsement of Donald Trump was a big get — for Sarah Palin. Conservative observers questioned just how many votes the endorsement, teased with great fanfare by Trump’s campaign, would move. But it undoubtedly generated buzz and thrust the former Alaska governor in the national spotlight at a time when her star power has been on the wane." And Palin has positioned herself to benefit from it. "Just as her endorsement became public on Tuesday, she updated her Facebook page with a new cover photo promoting Sarah PAC. The group is currently accepting donations." http://politi.co/1OvjG7X

— “The hole in Bernie Sanders’ Iowa strategy,” by POLITICO’s Gabriel Debenedetti in Underwood, Iowa: “Bernie Sanders’ Iowa rise is powered in part by the college towns where he’s killing it in the progressive communities clustered around some of state’s biggest universities. But that won’t be enough for him to carry Iowa in the Feb. 1 caucuses, which explains why the senator who describes himself as a Democratic socialist spent Tuesday in some of the most conservative territory in the state. His goal was simple: to shore up support in rural western Iowa amid concerns that statewide polls are masking a potential geographical vulnerability.” http://politi.co/1OEC1NI

— "Ted Cruz finds eager religious audience in moderate New Hampshire," by POLITICO's Katie Glueck in Plymouth, N.H.: Ted Cruz is going heavy on the Bible verses as he campaigns here. "He isn’t roaring like a preacher here the way he does in Iowa and South Carolina, but the religious rhetoric is virtually the same—and it plays well with a small but increasingly committed group of Christian conservative voters who appreciate the emphasis on faith, or at a minimum aren’t bothered by it." http://politi.co/1NjSvJg

— “Unorthodox playbook is aiding GOP candidate John Kasich,” by The Wall Street Journal’s Reid J. Epstein in Lebanon, N.H.: Could John Kasich take second place — or even win — in New Hampshire? Kasich has come in second to Donald Trump in each of five public polls in the past month by appealing to the opposite of the kind of voters who back Trump. “I’m not sugarcoating anything, but I’m not walking in there as the prince of darkness,” Kasich told The Journal. “I’d rather be the prince of light, the prince of hope.” Asked by a voter on Tuesday about how he would go about deporting illegal immigrants, Kasich was blunt. “I wouldn’t, OK?” he said. “It’s not practical and we’re not going to do that.” http://on.wsj.com/1SvBUdj

IN MEMORIAM — Young Carson volunteer dies after car crash: A volunteer on Ben Carson's campaign succumbed to injuries sustained in a car accident on an icy Iowa road earlier Tuesday," POLITICO's Kyle Cheney and David Cohen report. "The volunteer, 25-year-old Braden Joplin, died late Tuesday afternoon at the University of Nebraska Medical Center in Omaha. Three others in the Carson van were injured in the Interstate 80 crash near Atlantic, Iowa. According to Carson's campaign, they were all treated at a nearby Iowa hospital and released." http://politi.co/1JgqQhl

CODA — QUOTE OF THE DAY: “In hindsight, a few of the thoughts I shared, while well-intended, may have come across as more motherly than what they would expect from their state representative.” — GOP state Rep. Mary Dye of Washington State, who asked a group of high school students on Monday whether they “were virgins and suggested one was not,” The Seattle Times reports. http://bit.ly/20bEwhI

** A message from Sinclair Broadcast Group: The race for influence in the 2016 election cycle is gaining speed. Everyone is looking to reach as big of an audience as possible and get significant portions of that audience motivated and educated enough to vote and mobilize probable supporters. As the pace quickens, more will be trying to find an edge to influence voters their way. Sinclair Broadcast Group, the largest and most diversified television broadcasting company in the country today, can help you break through the clutter. Utilizing both TV, the primary medium for reaching potential voters and targetable digital (mobile, video, email, social media and native) ad solutions, Sinclair Makes Political Ads Work! The bottom line is the bottom line - winning elections. At the Sinclair Broadcast Group, we have the ad tools necessary to help you to persuade, enlighten and activate voters. Contact Alan Brittan, Sinclair’s Director of Political Ads for more details @ 703-236-9673. **

** A message from Sinclair Broadcast Group: News, opinions, and entertainment surround us 24/7, yet a fundamental truth remains, whether for competitive races or impactful ballot measures, the TV commercial reigns as the medium for reaching potential voters. TV helps strongly at the margins. Television is also the easiest way to reach undecided voters. Those passive folks who don't show up at the rallies or ask for email updates, but will be there to pull the levers on Election Day. At the Sinclair Broadcast Group, one of the largest and most diversified television broadcasting companies in the country, we combine TV with targetable digital (mobile, video, email, social media and native) ad solutions, to help your messaging break through the noise. Winning is what matters. At the Sinclair Broadcast Group, we have the ad tools necessary to help you to persuade, enlighten and activate. Contact Alan Brittan, Sinclair’s Director of Political Ads for more details @ 703-236-9673. **