Tucson kicked off Buy Local Month Saturday with festivities to encourage people to do more shopping at local businesses.

Local First Arizona, which exists to remind Arizonans of the impact their holiday spending – and any spending – has on locally owned businesses, teamed up with Tucson Mayor Jonathan Rothschild to launch the campaign Saturday at the 30th Annual Holiday Artisans Market at the Tucson Museum of Art.

"You'll find unique gifts for your loved ones and keep money in the local economy to build vibrant communities we're proud to call home," according to Local First Arizona.

For every $100 spent at a locally owned business, $73 remains in the local economy, and $27 leaves, according to the Local First Arizona web site. For every $100 spent at a non-locally owned business, $43 remains in the local economy, and $57 leaves.

Carlos Valencia has worked at Rustic Candle Co. on Fourth Avenue for five years. His second cousin is the owner of the shop, and without the support of the local community, a small business just cannot succeed, Valencia said.

"More of your dollar goes towards the community," said Valencia. "A lot of the money we do it, we do put back in the community."

The shop is constantly finding ways to give back to Tucson, he said. In October, the shop made a series of unique, handmade skull candles and sold them at the All Souls Procession, and all the proceeds went straight to that organization.

"The community knows they make a better impact for them and their own families too," said Valencia.

With the addition of the Sun Link street car, Fourth Avenue has begun to see more clientele, but Valencia said they still need more support, especially around the holidays.

"It hasn't improved quite like we wanted to," said Valencia. "But we're definitely hoping that in the future people do keep local businesses in mind when they're shopping."

The 'Buy Local Month' campaign runs through Christmas Eve.



For Local First Arizona's directory of locally owned businesses, click here.

Copyright 2015 Tucson News Now. All rights reserved.