April 19: Thousands gather at Beijing's Tiananmen Square to mark the death of former Communist Party General Secretary Hu Yaobang, who had promoted political and social change before being ousted by party leaders in 1987. Associated Press …

April 21: Tens of thousands of people crowd at the Martyr's Monument at Tiananmen Square. Associated Press …

April 22: Several hundred of the 200,000 pro-democracy student protesters sit face to face with police outside the Great Hall of the People in Tiananmen Square as they took part in Hu's funeral ceremony. AFP/Getty Images …

April 27: A day after a front-page editorial in Communist Party's People's Daily denounced the student protests and called the movement a conspiracy to 'plunge the whole country into chaos and sabotage,' soldiers confront the protesters but allow them to pass unharmed. Associated Press …

May 1: Chinese student leader Wang Dan addresses fellow students during a demonstration in Tiananmen Square. His headband reads 'hunger strike.' Associated Press …

May 4: Thousands of students from local colleges and universities march to Tiananmen Square. The date was significant because it recalled the May Fourth Movement, a 1919 student protest against the treatment of China in the Treaty of Versailles that ended World War I. AP ASSOCIATED PRESS …

May 13: Motivated by growing discontent over official corruption, human-rights abuses and societal restrictions, protests continue. Several hundred students begin a hunger strike. Catherine Henriette/AFP/Getty Images …

May 15: Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev arrives for a historic summit to normalize relations between China and the then-communist superpower. The timing of the visit presents the government with difficult questions, including whether to proceed at all, given the hundreds of thousands of students already massing at Tiananmen Square. The large contingent of journalists on hand for the summit provides a publicity bonanza for the protesters, sending images and footage of the square around the world. Associated Press …

May 16: Employees of Central China Television, the country's state broadcaster, flash their press cards as they join student strikers for democracy in Tiananmen Square. AP …

May 18: Beijing magistrates wearing court uniforms join workers demonstrating in the streets in support of student hunger strikers. That same day, Premier Li Peng summons several student leaders for a televised meeting at the Great Hall of the People. AFP/Getty Images …

May 19: Hoping to prevent bloodshed, Communist Party General Secretary Zhao Ziyang goes to Tiananmen Square to call on the students to stop protesting. The hunger strike is called off after the government's plans for martial law in Beijing become public, and students declare a mass sit-in. It will turn out to be the last time Zhao is seen in public. Virtually airbrushed out of China's recent history, he will remain under house arrest, rarely allowed out of his home, until his death in 2005. AFP/Getty Images …

May 20: On the day martial law is declared in Beijing, a Beijing University student reads a list of goals of the Tiananmen Square occupation to People's Liberation Army troops. The troops, en route to the square, are turned back by the crowds. Associated Press …

May 22: Raising a banner reading 'Lift Martial Law and Protect the Capital,' journalists from the People's Daily lead a march toward Tiananmen Square in an authorized demonstration in support of pro-democracy students. AFP/Getty Images …

May 23: Some protesters throw paint at the giant portrait of Mao Zedong overlooking Tiananmen Square, but are seized by other protesters and turned over to authorities. Troops pull back to the outskirts of Beijing. Associated Press …

May 30: The Statue of Liberty-like Goddess of Democracy is erected in Tiananmen Square. Associated Press …

June 1: As the occupation continues, a young girl dances on the square. Associated Press …

June 2: Hundreds of thousands of protesters gather around the Goddess of Democracy in Tiananmen Square. AFP/Getty Images …

June 3: A student asks soldiers to go back home as crowds flood central Beijing. Troops receive an order to reclaim the square at all costs, and at 10 p.m., tanks and armed soldiers began advancing. AFP/Getty Images …

June 4: Some of the hundreds of civilians believed to have been killed in the retaking of Tiananmen Square. There is no official death toll. Associated Press …

June 5: A man confronts a line of tanks passing by the Beijing Hotel. The man's identity and fate are unknown, but his act becomes an iconic image of individual resistance to tyranny. Jeff Widener/Associated Press …

June 5: A Chinese couple on take cover beneath an eastern Beijing overpass as tanks pass above them. Liu Heung Shing/Associated Press …

June 5: Armed troops advance along Changan Boulevard in central Beijing. Associated Press …

June 7: Soldiers march away from the square. Associated Press …

June 14: A handcuffed man is led away by Chinese soldiers, as police and the military round up people involved in the pro-democracy protests. AFP/Getty Images …

June 26: Nearly a month after the crackdown, a People's Liberation Army soldier guards a very empty Tiananmen Square during a tour for foreign journalists. ASSOCIATED PRESS …