Is it time to say, "Told you so?"

Advertisement - story continues below

Democrat pundit and pontificator Paul Begala may have to eat his words regarding voter reaction to Hillary Clinton’s emailgate scandal. But considering the words Begala used in his profane statement, that would certainly not be a tasty meal:

“Voters do not give a sh*t. They do not even give a fa*t…,” recently proclaimed the cocky political operative whose loyalty to the Clintons is apparently undying.

Now, brand new polling shows just how wrong Begala was in his assessment about the impact of the latest scandal to cast its potentially long and lingering shadow over the former secretary of state and likely presidential contender.

Advertisement – story continues below

According to a new tracking poll from Reuters/Ipsos, Hillary’s support among Democrats is going south faster than squawking geese fleeing the cold of winter.

Democratic support for Hillary Clinton’s expected presidential campaign is softening amid controversy over her use of personal email when secretary of state…. Support for Clinton’s candidacy has dropped about 15 percentage points since mid February among Democrats, with as few as 45 percent saying they would support her in the last week…. Advertisement – story continues below

And it appears quite clear from the results of this new survey that even a large percentage of Democrats want investigators to keep digging to learn more about Hillary Clinton’s exclusive use of a personal email account to conduct official government business.

“About half of the adults surveyed, including 46 percent of Democrats, agreed there should be an independent review of all Clinton’s emails to ensure she turned over everything that is work related.”

Add to this the results of a surprising new assessment of emailgate from a focus group of likely New Hampshire voters inclined to support a Clinton presidential bid.

The Weekly Standard points out the bad news for the Clinton camp as it was shared Thursday morning on MSNBC’s “Morning Joe.”

Advertisement – story continues below

By clicking on the video above, you can see for yourself what was said by those focus group participants in the state with the first primary elections in advance of the 2016 campaign.

h/t: The Weekly Standard