By Liz Freeman of the Naples Daily News

Collier County is the second healthiest in Florida for the third year in a row, according to 2016 rankings by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.

The healthiest county is St. Johns County, and it has held that distinction since 2014. The least healthy this year is Gadsden County.

Lee County ranks No. 16 this year, which is an improvement from being No. 20 last year.

The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation looks at a number of health factors, such as longevity, premature death, babies with low birth weight and overall mental and physical health days.

Lifestyle habits such as adult smoking and obesity are considered, which both decreased by one percent in Collier since last year while physical inactivity increased by one percent, according to the data.

The adult obesity rate stands now at 19 percent and the smoking rate is 14 percent. The physical inactivity rate is now 18 percent.

The excessive drinking rate stayed the same both years at 18 percent in Collier.

Stephanie Vick, administrator of the Florida Department of Health in Collier, said the department is elated with the results that the county is the second healthiest.

"Where we live has a large impact on our health, and these rankings show that wellness is more than just health care," she said in a statement. "By taking small steps to improve our lifestyle choices in areas such as healthier eating, increased physical activity, tobacco cessation, safety, and prevention we can together make a big impact on the health of Collier County."

The teen birthrate dropped to 34 births per 1,000 females ages 15 to 19 this year. In 2015, the rate was 39 births for the same group.

Dr. Allen Weiss, president and chief executive officer of the NCH Healthcare System, said the ranking validates a recent finding by Gallup-Healthways that Collier is the healthiest and happiest community in the nation, and another recent report that said it is the best place to retire.

Overall, Collier saw improvement in 18 measurements, 12 were unchanged and five worsened.

"We're still trending," he said, but added there is opportunity to improve.

The decline in teen birthrate is a noteworthy and was something the county and school system worked on.

"I hope that is cause and effect," Weiss said.

It is likely too early to say if any of the improvements can be attributed to the Blue Zones Project to improve longevity and make healthier lifestyle choices more readily available. NCH is underwriting the initiative that will span several years.

"I think we need a little more trending to see what is accurately happening," Weiss said.

Despite the Affordable Care Act which requires the uninsured to get coverage with some exceptions, Collier's uninsured rate increased from 28 percent last year to 30 percent in 2016.

Another unfavorable change is that 26 percent of Collier's children live in poverty this year whereas it stood at 24 percent last year.

"That worries me," Weiss said, adding that a recent speaker at a Greater Naples Chamber of Commerce said 37 percent of residents are one paycheck away from being impoverished.

In Lee County, the adult smoking rate dropped to 16 percent from 20 percent, the obesity rate stayed the same at 26 percent and the teen birthrate dropped to 37 births from 42 births per 1,000 females ages 15 to 19. The child poverty rate declined one percent.

The third healthiest county is Sarasota, followed by Martin and Seminole, according to the rankings. After Gadsden as the least healthy, Union, Putnam, Madison and Hamilton also ranked in the bottom.

Overall, residents in rural counties have the poorest health with higher obesity, smoking and inactivity rates. Rural counties have seen rises in premature deaths and uninsured rates.

Vick said health promotion, disease prevention and control, and health policy are efforts that are shared among community partners and enables Collier to be the second healthiest.

To look at the rankings, go to www.countyhealthrankings.org.