That the Affordable Care Act completely changed the way the majority of health insurance is priced and sold in the individual market is hardly news to most Americans. What many don’t realize, however, is the law injected a huge amount of unpredictability into the market for insurance carriers.

There are several drivers behind this uncertainty. Insurers that offered their first healthcare exchange plan in 2014 had no way of knowing the health status or previous claims history of applicants. Some enrollees may have been uninsured for many years and have a long list of unmet medical needs. Secondly, insurers were limited in how much premium they could charge due to someone’s age (i.e. the oldest applicants could not be charged more than three times the rate of the youngest.)

Finally, insurers had no control over how many individuals would enroll in this new product, which brought with it newly mandated benefits and limits on cost-sharing.

That’s where the 3Rs come in. The Affordable Care Act created three risk management programs intended to protect consumers by stabilizing premiums during the initial years of the law’s implementation. Commonly known as the 3Rs, they are: reinsurance, risk adjustment, and risk corridors.

Consider risk corridors. The ACA contains a provision to provide insurers with a cushion against losses on the exchanges over the first three years of operation (2014 through 2016). This cushion, risk corridors, was based on the understanding that insurers wouldn’t have a good handle initially on how to price their insurance products because of the law’s unprecedented nature.

So risk corridors limit insurer losses: Insurers were to receive a payment from the federal government if their losses exceed a certain threshold, and they pay the government if their gains exceed a certain threshold. Specifically, a target below 100 percent signals that a company is collecting more in premium payments than it is spending on medical care for patients. Risk corridors take a percentage of profits away from insurers whose target falls below 97 percent.

Conversely, a target of more than 100 percent signals a company is collecting less on premium payments than it is spending on medical care for patients. Under the program, insurers with a ratio of more than 103 percent can expect to receive a payment to offset its losses. Understandably, many insurers were afraid to roll out products if enrollees were sicker than expected. Risk corridors were expected to give them at least some assurance they wouldn’t be drenched with losses if enrollment went badly.

Skip forward to 2015 and 2016. The landscape is littered with ailing insurers. More than half of the 23 approved healthcare cooperatives that were created in the wake of the historic law’s passage have announced they are closing up shop because they were simply losing too much money. Some traditional health insurance carriers also report trouble.

The plans that co-ops offered were priced lower than many of their non-coop competitors, and their prices ultimately proved to be too low. In addition, they attracted an adverse mix of sick enrollees.

The bottom line: Insurers are getting help from the federal government to cover their 2014 losses. They requested $2.87 billion worth of help, but a congressional measure has limited payments to 12.6 cents on the dollar. The federal government will use funds from 2016 to repay the remainder, if funds are available.

Some observers believe that once results from the 2015 plan year are tallied up, the losing streak will continue. The question is, will the federal government be able to pay the full balance due? In the end, the interim debate may be moot. Because the risk corridor program will expire with the 2016 plan, only time will tell its impact on the much larger picture of U.S. health care reform.

David Dillon is vice president and principal at Lewis and Ellis Actuaries based in Allen.