A billboard about abortion typically has a single emotional message: An unborn child, at any stage, is God's miracle, and terminating a pregnancy is a sin.

In many communities across the country, these are the terms of the abortion debate.

See also: We don't have to let abortion divide us

But in Cleveland, Ohio, an abortion provider is trying to start a new conversation with its own billboards that demand an end to abortion stigma.

This week, Preterm, a local clinic that offers abortion services, unveiled four billboards and five bus kiosk ads that read, "End the silence. End the shame." They also promote a website called MyAbortionMyLife.org that features dozens of stories from women who've had abortions.

The political climate in Ohio is fervently anti-abortion; the legislature has enacted several laws that activists say restrict women's access to abortion.

A bus kiosk ad in a new anti-stigma campaign from a Cleveland abortion provider. Image: Preterm Cleveland Ohio / Facebook

Women must receive in-person, state-directed counseling before having an abortion and also wait 24 hours before undergoing the procedure. State-based health plans available as part of the Affordable Care Act will only cover abortion in cases of rape, incest or when a woman's life is endangered. Gov. John Kasich, a Republican presidential candidate, has run on his anti-abortion rights record.

In Cleveland, anti-abortion billboards are also a common sight, says Nancy Starner, Preterm's director of development and communications.

The anti-stigma ads are the latest front in Preterm's long-running campaign to change the conventional political and cultural perception of abortion so that it reflects women's personal and diverse experiences.

Those efforts, says Starner, were a response to the murder of Dr. George Tiller, a Kansas abortion provider who was shot to death in 2009, and the intensity of anti-abortion rhetoric and violence.

"We asked the question to ourselves: How could the perception of abortion outside of our walls be so radically different from inside our walls?"

Preterm's billboards aren't the first anti-stigma ads in Cleveland, says Starner, but they are part of an emerging strategy to talk openly about abortion as an experience — not just a question of policy or law.

The 1 in 3 campaign invites women to share their stories in order "to build a culture of compassion, empathy, and support for access to basic health care." Last fall the viral #ShoutYourAbortion hashtag similarly became a storytelling movement with women talking about their abortions on social media and YouTube videos.

The MyAbortionMyLife.org website listed on the billboard offers information about abortion stigma, noting that 1 in 3 American women have chosen to end a pregnancy.

In 2011, the site began hosting personal stories of women who've had an abortion. Their experiences defy stereotype, but there are common themes, including unstable or abusive relationships, financial insecurity, and not being ready to become a parent.

A mother of two children considered herself "pro-life" and reluctantly chose abortion when her relationship ended early in the pregnancy. "I didn't expect to feel relieved, I expected to be extremely guilty and upset, because that's the stigma that we are expected to believe," she writes. "I am 1 week out, and haven't ever felt more empowered in my life. I made the ultimate decision for MY body, to control MY life, to do what was best for ME."

One woman who had an abortion at 22 describes it as the "hardest experience of my life" — but also the "best" decision because she ultimately broke up with her drug-addicted boyfriend. "I finally started school and working to stable [sic] my life so I can finally start a family of my own," she writes.

Starner says the clinic hasn't received much feedback or criticism yet about the billboards and kiosk ads, which she expects to stay up for the next six months. She hopes they help the public reconsider the conventional wisdom on who choses to have an abortion and why.

"We wanted to move away from political black-and-white abstract issue," says Starner, "and look at it as nuanced, rich, complex experience that women and their families go through."

Have something to add to this story? Share it in the comments.