Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Fla., has repeatedly been criticized for missed votes in the Senate. (Photo By Bill Clark/CQ Roll Call File Photo)

One of the highest-circulation newspapers in Florida is calling on Sen. Marco Rubio to resign because he's missed many votes while seeking the GOP presidential nomination.

The Sun-Sentinel, based in Broward County, north of Miami, questioned Rubio's Senate paycheck and Affordable Care Act subsidy, arguing that he's "ripping us off." The editorial board noted that other senators running for president, such as Rand Paul, R-Ky., and Bernard Sanders, I-Vt., have voted far more consistently as they seek the White House. Rubio has voted 66 percent of the time, according to CQ Vote Watch , easily the lowest for any senator this year.

"If you hate your job, senator, follow the honorable lead of House Speaker John Boehner and resign it," reads the editorial . "Let us elect someone who wants to be there and earn an honest dollar for an honest day's work. Don't leave us without one of our two representatives in the Senate for the next 15 months or so."

Rubio has told CNBC earlier that constituent services are a "deeper" part of being a senator , while voting is probably the "fastest part of the job." He said that he's "incredibly proud" of the constituent work that's done through eight offices across the state.

As for voting, Rubio said some votes will be missed, but that he'll do what he can to vote when "my vote is going to make a difference, or an issue of major national significance and importance."

Under Florida law, Rubio cannot simultaneously seek re-election to the Senate next year and run for the presidency so his political ambitions mean there is a competitive race to succeed him in the upper chamber.

A Rubio spokesman did not immediately respond to requests for comment.

Related: Rubio Leads the Field in One Category: Missed Votes

See photos, follies, HOH Hits and Misses and more at Roll Call's new video site. Get breaking news alerts and more from Roll Call in your inbox or on your iPhone.