The Obama administration says the coverage requirement is about health, not religion. Birth control vs. religious liberty

The Supreme Court in early spring will hear two legal challenges to Obamacare’s contraception coverage requirement, a case that addresses a complex question that has never come squarely before the court: Can a for-profit company engaged in commercial activities declare religious beliefs?

Under the women’s preventive health benefit in the Affordable Care Act most employers must provide all Food and Drug Administration-approved forms of contraception with no co-pays. There are exemptions for religious organizations and ways for religious-affiliated institutions to try to work around the requirement. But owners of nonreligious businesses who oppose some or all contraceptives say the government shouldn’t be able to require them to break with their religious beliefs.

Story Continued Below

The Obama administration says the coverage requirement is about health — not religion — and business owners shouldn’t be able to impose their views on their employees. They say the contraception policy is based on recommendations from the Institute of Medicine on the health of all women and their families.

So far, the lower courts have split on the issue, sending it to the Supreme Court. One hour of oral arguments is expected in March, and a ruling will come before the court’s term ends in June. Here are five key questions:

1. Who is bringing these cases?

Nearly 100 companies, nonprofits and religious groups, including several Catholic dioceses, have challenged the birth control rule. The two cases the Supreme Court took involve commercial interests. One case was brought by Hobby Lobby, a national chain store owned by a Christian couple who says it operates its business strictly in adherence to Christian principles. The other was brought by Conestoga Wood Specialties, a furniture store owned by a Mennonite family that employs about 950 people.

“What it shows in taking on both cases is that the court is interested in hearing the full array of issues that were present in both petitions and the diversity in which Americans practice their faith in all types of business,” said David Cortman of Alliance Defending Freedom, which represents Conestoga.

The other cases brought by religious groups and nonprofits have not advanced as quickly through the court system because the Obama administration did not finalize an attempt at an accommodation until the summer. Those groups argue that the accommodation — which allows them to have their insurance company pay for the contraception — is not broad enough. Depending on how the Supreme Court rules, the Hobby Lobby-Conestoga decision is likely to affect those religious and nonprofit cases, too.

2. What will the court review?

Hobby Lobby filed its challenge under the 1993 Religious Freedom Restoration Act, which says that “governments should not substantially burden religious exercise without compelling justification.” The company, which says on its website that “we believe that it is by God’s grace and provision that Hobby Lobby has endured,” was granted an injunction to block the policy.

Conestoga argues that the coverage requirement is invalid under both the religious freedom law as well as the religious liberty protections in the First Amendment. An appeals court ruled that the policy is legal and denied Conestoga’s attempt to block it.

The Supreme Court will most likely have to consider both whether a company that engages in commercial activity can have religious beliefs and whether such religious rights “pass through” from the owners to the business and how it operates.

That will be analyzed through both the Constitution and the religious freedom law.

3. What do the companies object to?