Lusitania coming into port. (Photo: NJ MARITIME MUSEUM)

May 7, 2015 marked the 100th anniversary of the sinking of the Lusitania by a German U Boat.

For Pat Tallon, who divides her time between Manahawkin and Ocala, Fla., it is still a time of sad reflection. Pat’s grandmother and aunt were passengers aboard the Lusitania.

On May 1, 1915, the Lusitania left New York Harbor with much fanfare.

“There was confetti and bands playing,” Pat Tallon said. People were cheering and tugs tooting.

On both the New York and New Jersey sides of New York Harbor, families lined docks to see the mega liner. There was speculation as to whether a German ship might try to sink a British passenger ship; but the overall opinion was that the Lusitania could outrun any U Boat, and would be under the protection of British ships as she approached England.

Among those aboard the Lusitania were Martha Barker, age 39, and her 9-year-old daughter Winnie. Mrs. Barker lived in Trenton with her husband Thomas, and daughters Doris and Winnie.

Thomas had come to the U.S. in the early 1900s for work, settling in Trenton with the Empire Pottery Company, one of six potteries that made up the Trenton Potteries. According to New Jersey Maritime Museum trustee, and porcelain expert Bob Cunningham, “They were at one time the largest makers of sanitary ware in the U.S.”

Martha Barker had received word from England that her mother was dying, and immediately booked passage to England. It was decided that Doris, 15, was too old to keep out of school for more than a month; so Thomas stayed home with her. They lived at 621 Atlantic Ave. in Trenton.

“Granny was a little nervous, but assured it was OK to travel aboard the Lusitania, Pat Tallon says. “However, at the last minute Canadian soldiers came aboard, and it was admitted there was a lot of ammunition in the cargo holds.” This changed the ship from strictly a passenger ship to a war supply ship, and potential target for German U Boats that were in the area between England and Ireland.

In the mid 1980s, local author/writer Tom Farner wrote a five part series on the Lusitania for the SandPaper, and with his permission, excerpts are printed here:

“It would be 50 years before the real cargo of the Lusitania was known. Some of the more interesting items on board were 1,248 cases of shrapnel, 4,927 boxes of cartridges weighing 173 tons, and 3,863 pounds of ‘cheese,’ which was really gun cotton.”

The gun cotton was a highly unstable substance, and could explode under certain conditions. The New Jersey Maritime Museum in Beach Haven applauds Tom Farner’s articles on the Lusitania, which raise questions and answers as to how and why the U.S. entered World War I. It is excellent work, and, hopefully, will be published again.

Pat Tallon has long given programs to Ocean County groups on her family’s loss aboard the Lusitania; and wrote to Tom Farner after his articles were published. “We (family) had always heard rumors concerning the explosives aboard, but never wanted to believe it was true.”

Pat’s Grandmother Martha did not have a life preserver, but miraculously survived. Winnie had one on, but was separated from her mother, and her body was not found. “We were told to never talk to Granny about the Lusitania, and we never did,” Pat relates. “It was a time when people kept a stiff upper lip.

“President Wilson, and later President Roosevelt looked the other way. I think there was a conspiracy.”

After the tragedy, Thomas Barker went to Queenstown, Ireland to bring Martha back to the U.S. A memorial to their daughter Winnie is in the St. James Episcopal Church in the Trenton suburb of Yardville. A few years later, Thomas died. Martha later married a man by the name of Gretton who also worked in the Trenton pottery business.

Pat Tallon lost an aunt she never knew, one who will always be 9 years old in her memory. She wrote to Tom Farner:

“It is so sad to realize that political careers and power were more important than innocent people’s lives, especially when they were your family. I don’t know how to express my feelings. I am both sad and mad; but maybe it is better to know the truth at last.”

Pat says the only time Pat saw her grandmother cry was when the Tuckerton Wireless was being dismantled. Family members went to see it being torn down. Martha Barker remembered the rumors that the words “Get Lucy” were broadcast from the Germans through the Tuckerton Wireless to the German submarine.

The New Jersey Maritime Museum in Beach Haven thanks Pat Tallon, Tom Farner, and Bob Cunningham for their contributions to this article.

A new book by best-selling author Erik Larson, “Dead Wake,” reveals many details about the tragedy from the American, British, and German sides.

Starting on Monday, June 1, the New Jersey Maritime Museum will be open daily from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. For more information call 609-492-0202 or visit the website www.njmaritime museum.org.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1Hn7F3m