When mass shootings happen in other states, legislators often move to tighten gun control measures by proposing new laws aimed at keeping firearms out of the wrong hands.

Connecticut -- which passed some of the most stringent gun control measures in the country following the Newtown massacre -- is the state where gun control advocates have probably had the most success, according to the Wall Street Journal. Colorado also passed stricter laws following the 2012 Aurora theater shooting that left 12 dead.

Nationally, it's been an uphill battle for gun control advocates to pass legislation, no matter how deadly the mass shooting was. President Obama said Thursday (July 24) that failing to pass stricter gun control measures has been a major disappointment of his presidency.

If legislators in Louisiana next year decide to pursue gun control measures in the name of preventing a mass shooting like the one that happened in the Lafayette theater, they're likely to have a far more difficult time than legislators in Connecticut or Colorado did. Many Louisiana legislators are famously uncooperative when it comes to regulating or restricting firearms.

Here's a look back at some of the biggest gun control fights in the state legislature over the past several years.

We'll start with the what was probably the busiest year in recent memory for the gun control debate -- the early part of 2013, in the months following the Newtown massacre.

President Obama had proposed sweeping gun control legislation to the Congress, which was met with protests in Louisiana and a "cool" reception among the state's Congressional delegation. Obama's proposals would ultimately fail.

In February 2013, in some of the first filings for the legislative session scheduled to start that April, Louisiana legislators began filing gun-related bills almost immediately. Of the first eight House bills filed, four were gun-related. One of the bills was a gun control measure; the other three were aimed at expanding the rights of gun owners.

March 2013 brought a court ruling that would strike down a recently passed gun control law when an Orleans Parish judge decided it was unconstitutional to bar felons from owning firearms. But in July 2014, the law barring felon gun ownership was upheld by the Louisiana Supreme Court.

Meanwhile, gun control advocates were organizing to support measures such as universal background checks, but there wasn't much support for such proposals among legislators. In response to the wave of support being heard from gun control advocates, gun control opponents organized demonstrations at the State Capitol.

School safety -- which had its own gun debate surrounding whether to have armed security in schools -- was also a big topic that year in the wake of the Newtown shooting.

Former U.S. Sen. Mary Landrieu that year would ultimately support universal background checks in Congress. But in Baton Rouge, a Louisiana House committee went the opposite direction, passing nine bills that expanded gun rights.

One of the big victories that legislative session in Louisiana was a bill that allowed lifetime concealed-carry permits for guns, which Gov. Bobby Jindal ultimately signed. Jindal would go on to sign six more pro-gun bills into law that year.

After the lawmaking was done in Baton Rouge, Louisiana's gun control opponents -- including some state legislators -- reacted harshly when Starbucks announced it wasn't allowing guns in its stores. State Rep. Jeff Thompson, a Republican from Bossier City, responded by holding "Guns & Coffee" events, telling a reporter, "You won't find me in Starbucks."

The only big victory for gun control advocates came in the form of improved mental health reporting to the federal background check database.

The gun control debate began anew in 2014 with every indication that gun rights would be expanded rather than restricted, with a January bill reintroduced that would allow off-duty police to be allowed to carry guns in bars. It soon became clear there would be more bills filed expanding gun ownership than controlling firearms: By mid-January, the only gun control bill filed was one that would require a safety course for gun owners.

Later in the session, a key gun control bill introduced by New Orleans Democrat Helena Moreno made it easier to take away guns owned by people accused of domestic violence.

There was little appetite for gun control legislation in the most recent legislative session, especially with a massive state deficit dominating the session. Most gun bills sought to expand rights -- many of them involving hunters. The biggest gun news in Louisiana this spring was actually made by Gov. Bobby Jindal, who made a major speech to the NRA that was covered by the national press as he prepared to run for president.

Now the debate about gun control is heating up again, both nationally and locally, in the wake of the Lafayette shooting. But it's not likely to gain much steam in the Louisiana legislature, and it's not hard to see why.

There are consequences for some lawmakers who support gun control legislation. In Colorado, two lawmakers who were seen as big proponents of the state's more strict gun laws following the Aurora mass shooting were ousted by pro-gun challengers.