By Kelsey Landis [email protected]

Glenn and Terri Beaubien are the new owners of State Street Market at 208 State Street in downtown Alton. The couple offers a European-style cafe and market and is easy to find near the foot of State Street. http://thetelegraph.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/08/web1_StateStreetMarket1LEADBIZ.jpg Glenn and Terri Beaubien are the new owners of State Street Market at 208 State Street in downtown Alton. The couple offers a European-style cafe and market and is easy to find near the foot of State Street. John Badman | The Telegraph A chalk board inside the State Street Market, now under new ownership, offers a peaceful message for meal time. http://thetelegraph.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/08/web1_StateStreetMarket2SECONDARYBIZ.jpg A chalk board inside the State Street Market, now under new ownership, offers a peaceful message for meal time. John Badman | The Telegraph

ALTON — The new owners of State Street Market are settling into their new full-time jobs, and say they have brought their passion and drive to the popular downtown lunch spot.

“We have a love of food and a passion for service. As soon as we discovered that passion, we decided we should have a restaurant,” Terri Beaubien said.

Earlier this month, Glenn “Beau” and Terri Beaubien took over ownership of State Street Market in Alton. Kary Lockwood previously owned the restaurant for six years. She started the restaurant and market with the idea of offering homemade, organic food and specialty products.

The new owners have maintained Lockwood’s idea while implementing a few new ideas. Since taking over the restaurant, the Beaubiens have opened up and cleared the back deck, updated the menu with new items and introduced brunch on Saturdays with quiches, sandwiches and specialty items.

The Beaubiens had been looking for a restaurant in St. Louis, but locations were either out of their price range or required too much work to fix up. Just as they were about to give up their search, they a series of uncanny events helped the couple find State Street Market.

One evening in St. Louis when the couple was out at Hammerstone’s bar in Soulard, Terri said she noticed a man she thought looked very familiar. He turned out to be the fiance of Nikki Myers, an employee at State Street Market. It turned out the Terri did not know the couple after all, but they continued to run into each other.

The next weekend, the two couples ran into each other again at The Loading Dock in Grafton. The week after that, Terri met Nikki’s fiance once again in St. Louis.

Finally, Terri’s path lead her to State Street Market, not knowing her new friend, Myers, worked there.

“I stopped because it looked cute, even though I had just eaten lunch. Nikki saw me and came over and said, ‘Terri, how did you know I worked here?’ and I said, ‘I didn’t!’”

Myers, who still works at the restaurant, eventually told Terri about Lockwood potentially closing the restaurant to spend more time with her daughter.

“I said, ‘Oh no, this place is so charming! She can’t close,’” Terri said. A day after speaking with Lockwood, Lockwood sent a proposal, and the Beaubiens accepted.

A month after taking over the restaurant, the Beaubiens continue to use their previous experience and business know-how to develop it into a chic and comfortable brunch, lunch and party spot.

Terri at one time owned a large restaurant with 38 employees in the small southern Illinois city of Herrin, and Glenn worked for many years in upper-level management, training and food inspection for chain restaurants like Pizza Hut, Hardee’s and Burger King.

The couple said their background in restaurants helps them run their small business efficiently. They listen carefully to customer reviews and base their menu on feedback. Because their food is so fresh, they also order products carefully. Everything counts in a small business, Terri said, and the most important thing is attentiveness to the customer and flexibility.

“Nobody should be in this business if they’re not going to be accommodating. I think that’s something that sets up apart. We definitely care, and we realize we are here to serve our guests,” Terri said.

Between the Beaubiens, who do the cooking, Myers and Myers’ daughter, Casey, the small staff keeps the restaurant running 11 a.m. to 2 p.m. Tuesday through Friday and Saturday from 9 a.m. to 2 p.m. They also rent out and staff the restaurant for special occasions.

State Street Market is located at 208 State St. in Alton. They can be reached at 618-462-8800 and found on Facebook under the name State Street Market of Alton.

Reporter Kelsey Landis can be reached at 618-208-6460, Ext. 1396 or on Twitter @kelseylandis.

Reporter Kelsey Landis can be reached at 618-208-6460, Ext. 1396 or on Twitter @kelseylandis.

Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.

Disqus