DEPRESSION A POSSIBLE FORERUNNER OF PARKINSON’S

Depression may be an independent risk factor for Parkinson’s disease, a new study has found.

In a retrospective analysis, researchers followed 4,634 patients with depression and 18,544 matched controls for 10 years. The study, published online in Neurology, found that 66 patients with depression, or 1.42 percent, developed Parkinson’s disease, compared with 97, or 0.52 percent, among those who were not depressed. Researchers found clinical depression was associated with more than three times the risk for Parkinson’s disease.

“Our paper does not convey the message that all depression leads to Parkinson’s disease,” said the senior author, Dr. Albert C. Yang, a professor of psychiatry at the National Yang-Ming University in Taiwan. “But particularly the depressed elderly and those with difficult-to-treat depression should be alert to the possibility of neurological disease and Parkinson’s.”

— Nicholas Bakalar, The New York Times

TESTICULAR CANCER MAY BE PRICE PAID FOR SUN PROTECTION

A genetic variant that increases the risk of testicular cancer may be favored by evolution because it helps protect those with fair skin from the sun’s damaging ultraviolet rays, according to a new study.

The finding could account for white men being more susceptible than black men to this type of cancer.

Gareth Bond, a molecular biologist at the Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research in Oxford, U.K., and colleagues hit upon the unexpected tradeoff while studying inherited genes that influence cancer risk. They were interested in a gene known as p53, which is mutated in more than half of all cancers.

In the new study, Bond and colleagues were looking in p53’s target genes for mutations that had managed to hang on. Finally, the search, reported in Cell, narrowed down to one cancer-causing mutation.

One way a seemingly deleterious mutation can become common over time is if it also has a benefit that outweighs its harm. The benefit, the researchers suggest, is that under normal circumstances, KITLG protects pale skin against damage from sunlight.

Bond adds, “For our ancestors, protection from sun damage was critical to survival. For example, a bad burn can breach the skin’s protective barrier against infection, and our forebears had no antibiotics.”

— Elizabeth Norton, ScienceNOW

STATINS MAY HAVE BENEFICIAL EFFECT ON GUM HEALTH

Statins may have a beneficial side effect: reducing gum inflammation, or periodontitis.

Almost half of adults in the United States have periodontitis, and it is a known risk factor for atherosclerosis, the buildup of plaque in the arteries.

In a randomized trial, researchers assigned 83 people with heart disease or at high risk for heart disease to take a daily dose of either 80 milligrams or 10 milligrams of atorvastatin (both Lipitor and generics) for 12 weeks. Doctors used CT and PET scans to evaluate them for periodontal disease and arterial inflammation at the start of the study and again at the end.

There was a significant reduction in gum inflammation in the group that took the 80-milligram dose compared with those who took the lower dose.

The differences were greatest in those with the most severe gum disease at the start of the study and the changes correlated with changes in artery inflammation.

“It’s surprising, a newly recognized effect,” said the senior author, Dr. Ahmed Tawakol, co-director of a cardiac program at Harvard.

Still, he does not recommend treating gum disease with statins.

The study, paid for by the drugmaker Merck, was published online in The Journal of the American College of Cardiology.

— Nicholas Bakalar, The New York Times