Senator Ted Cruz, in his speech Saturday said he believes this election is focused on three critical

“The heart of our economy is small businesses all across the United States of America.”

Presidential hopeful Ted Cruz spoke to Wyomingites today, with one big message: he will bring back jobs to Americans. He addressed the "war on coal"

“We are going to lift the federal regulators off of small businesses; we're going to lift it off the energy industry. You know, god has blessed America with abundant natural resources and I think we ought to be developing all of the above,” says Cruz. “Oil and gas and coal and wind and solar and nuclear and ethanol and biofuels and everything. It shouldn't be Washington picking winners and losers; we ought to be developing our resources. America is the Saudi Arabia of coal and it is only the radical left-wing agenda, Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton that has been driving the coal industry into the ground. That is going to change.”

Speaking on tax reform, he says if President, we soon will fill out our taxes on a post card. His idea? A simple, flat tax plan.

“For a typical family of four the first $36,000 of income, you pay nothing. No income tax, no payroll tax, no nothing. And above 36,000 dollars, everyone pays the same rate, ten percent, a simple flat fare rate and you fill it out on a post card.”

Senator Cruz says the effect of the tax plan...

“We're going to see millions and millions of new, high paying jobs; jobs coming back to America, manufacturing jobs coming back from China, coming back from Mexico. We are also going to see wages rising again, instead of being stagnant year after year we're going to see wages going up, employers compete for employees and we're going to see young people once again coming out of school filled with hopes and dreams.”

He also touched on the Second Amendment Coalition....something his campaign launched in an effort to protect gun owner's rights.

“Wyoming and Texas, we both love the second amendment. I'm a constitutionalist; I've spent my entire life fighting to defend the Constitution and the Bill of Rights.”

Most delegates say the biggest issue facing Wyoming is job loss due to the struggling energy sector. Senator Cruz in his speech said he would end EPA's reign.

“A politician that will go up against his own people because he believes it’s right, is really the type of politician I want to support,” says Brad Chapman, a Cruz supporter.

“He went to Washington and did what he said he was going to do and that is definitely something that we are in need of,” says Whitney Johnson, another Cruz Supporter.

“I'm tired of hypocrites, I'm tired of people who are willing to take a pat on the back or extra money or bribes of any kind and not actually represent us. And America needs redemption,” says Trinity Lewis, a Crook County Delegate and Cruz Supporter.

“I prefer Cruz, in the end I'm going to support whoever wins the nomination enthusiastically. You're going to think I was behind them 100% the whole time,” says J.R. Riggins, a Natrona County Delegate and Cruz Supporter.

Senator Cruz promised Wyoming delegates if elected, he would abolish the IRS, repeal every single word of the Affordable Care Act, and create almost 5 million new jobs with rising wages for Americans

with his flat tax plan.

Senator Ted Cruz also promised to "take the boot of the federal government off the back of the necks of small businesses" Cruz won 14 delegates at today's convention.