Ich Bin Ein 2016 Candidate: Officially, Jeb Bush is not yet running for president, but two developments on Tuesday made that threadbare bit of nudge-nudge-wink fakery a bit harder to stomach. Bush was in Berlin, kicking off a “burnish my foreign policy credentials” speaking tour through Western Europe on Tuesday – and leading Berliners to question why America, the same country that fought for independence from the British monarchy, seem to have just two families fighting over the White House. The same day, however, Bush shuffled the lineup of his Not Ready For Prime Time campaign-in-waiting back home. U.S. News’ Dave Catanese reports that the change-up also came amid some unlikely good news: a poll showing he’s surging in the polls in New Hampshire. It remains to be seen, however, if the good news is sustainable, since a change at the top generally means a campaign is less seaworthy than it seems. Even one that’s still officially in drydock.

“No Longer Just a Law”: As the nation’s politicians, political journalists and policy wonks breathlessly wait to see if the Supreme Court will take the wrecking ball to the Affordable Care Act, President Barack Obama delivered a forceful if quiet defense of his signature healthcare law, framing it as a moral issue – and dialing up a little pressure on Republicans in the process. In his speech before the Catholic Health Association, the president framed Obamacare as a right and not a privilege, recounted stats and stories of people who had been helped by the law and mocked Republicans who said the ACA would end democracy as we know it. Though millions stand to lose subsidies if the Supreme Court decides they’re invalid on a technicality, the president has gone all-in on the law being preserved: Neither he nor the GOP have a back-up plan if the court rules against him.

Known Unknowns, Now Known: He was one of the principal architects of the 2003 Iraq invasion, he predicted a blossoming of democracy across the Mideast and his legendary, at times pugilistic, press conferences made him a media sensation (and inadvertent creator of a new form of haiku). But The Times of London reports that Donald Rumsfeld, rock-star defense secretary under former President George W. Bush, now says he never really believed in the whole let’s-take-Iraq-and-plant-democracy-seeds thing and just kind of went along with it to keep the boss happy. Never mind that Rumsfeld at the time seemed like one of the biggest of Bush administration hawks, or that, as the man in charge of the Pentagon, a single well-placed objection might have spared the lives of thousands of U.S. troops as well as tens of thousands of Iraqi citizens, and arguably could have prevented the birth of Islamic State group and the broad destabilization of the world’s most dangerous region. What’s clear is that, as the re-litigation of the Iraq war – inspired by a Bush in the 2016 presidential race and squabbling over whether U.S. invasions of sovereign nations are always the way to go – continues, Rumsfeld has joined the newly-developed circular firing squad of W’s former advisers who now agree that mistakes were made, just not by the man in the mirror.