A large group of conservative Republicans will on Friday release proposals, including an alternative to Obamacare, that will influence House Speaker Paul Ryan’s agenda project, set to be rolled out in the weeks before the Cleveland convention. Wednesday, April 13, 2016. (AP Photo/J. Scott Applewhite)

A large group of House conservatives is expected to release a series of recommendations Friday to the panels tasked with crafting Speaker Paul Ryan’s policy agenda, revealing the first clue to what the House-led party platform could look like.

The Republican Study Committee is expected to release ideas, including specific suggestions for the House GOP alternative to Obamacare, according to documents obtained by the Washington Post. The roughly 170 member group is the first to publicly release proposals submitted to the six task forces assembled by Ryan (R-Wisc.) to craft the House-led blueprint for Republicans to run on in November.

The six proposals are expected to be released publicly on Friday afternoon.

[Inside Paul Ryan’s quest to set the Republican agenda]

Ryan is expected to roll out details of the agenda in the weeks leading up to the Republican nominating convention in July. The chairmen of each of the House standing committees have been assigned to draft policy proposals on health care, taxes, national security, regulatory reform, poverty and reasserting Congress’s constitutional authority.

Rank-and-file Republicans have participated in dozens of closed-door meetings since the project began in January but the details of those discussions have remained largely private.

The most closely watched element of project has been the long-awaited Republican alternative to the Affordable Care Act. The RSC recommendations to include many proposals that have been debated in conservative circles for years, including a standard tax deduction for health insurance coverage.

[How would Paul Ryan replace Obamacare? Only time will tell]

The proposal revives portions of a health care replacement bill introduced by the RSC in 2013. That legislation never received a vote on the House floor but included a $7,500 standard tax deduction for individuals and $20,500 for families that would apply to income and payroll taxes to help pay for health insurance. The deduction would be linked to inflation.

The group also recommends reviving previous Republican proposals to provide federally subsidized state-run insurance pools for people with pre-existing conditions or those who would normally be considered too unhealthy or risky to be insured under traditional plans. The RSC proposal would cap premiums at 200 percent of the average premium in each state.

Many of the other recommendations also include previously introduced legislation. If accepted, the proposals would make it easier for leaders to provide detailed assessments of how much the Ryan agenda would cost.

The tax proposal embraces some ideas floated by presidential candidate Sen. Ted Cruz and backed by many businesses like shifting to a territorial system of taxing large multi-national corporations. The RSC would also allow companies to immediately and fully write-off expenditures. The group also favors eliminating the marriage penalty and reducing tax rates.

[Cruz tax plan would cost $8.6 trillion]

The RSC also offered a detailed proposal for overhauling social safety net programs like the earned income tax credit and temporary assistance for needy families, the program that replaced food stamps.

The group backs controversial proposals to require individuals to provide Social Security numbers for every child when filing for the child tax credit and prevent immigrants protected by President Obama’s executive actions on immigration from filing for the earned income credit.