Humans getting a microchip is a sensitive topic, but continues to move forward with amazing advancements in new technology. Some of the leaders in the industry are Microchip Technology Inc., a leading provider of microcontroller, mixed-signal, analog and Flash-IP solutions, who announced its partnership with Silicon Integrated Systems Corp. (SiS) to provide customers with complete projected-capacitive touch (PCAP) and 3D-gesture interface modules, which will lead to faster development and lower costs.

“The modules will make it easier to design multi-touch and 3D gesture displays with Microchip’s award-winning GestIC® technology, which offers a hand tracking range of up to 20 centimeters (cm) from the display surface. Hand gestures are universal, hygienic and easy to learn. In addition, they enhance safety by reducing the need for precise hand-eye coordination,” the press release notes.

“We are excited to be partnering with SiS, in order to meet the growing demand for 3D control displays in the consumer, automotive, home-automation and IoT markets,” said Dr. Roland Aubauer, director of Microchip’s Human-Machine Interface Division. “Microchip is committed to furthering the innovation in human-interface technologies, and SiS’s modules will ultimately allow our customers to integrate these two interface technologies into their applications faster. With this partnership, the next dimension of intuitive, gesture-based user interfaces is now available for a broad range of end products.”

“SiS is honored to have the opportunity to partner with a world-class company such as Microchip,” said Jonathan Shyi, president of SiS. “We are thrilled to have the ability to introduce the very first 2D/3D combination solution to the world. By partnering with Microchip, we foresee a huge increase in demand and market share for these new products. We are committed to continually introducing innovative, intuitive and creative technology to the world, and this partnership is a prime example.”

To learn more about Microchip’s GestIC technology products, visit http://www.microchip.com/GestIC-010516a.

SiS modules with Microchip’s GestIC technology was demonstrated at Microchip’s Consumer Electronics Show (CES) in Las Vegas last week.