If you haven't made a new year's resolution yet, here's one you might want to think about: Make sure your patients get all the new preventive services they're entitled to under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. As of Jan. 1, the ACA requires insurance plans to cover a wide range of clinical preventive services without any cost-sharing measures, such as copays or coinsurance.



What's even better is that the AAFP is providing resources to help educate your patients -- and you -- about the new benefits, along with coding information that should make getting paid for providing the services a sure thing. In the broadest of terms, there are two key points to keep in mind:

All clinical preventive service recommendations that receive an A or B rating (www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org) from the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) are covered with no out-of-pocket cost to patients.



from the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) are covered with no out-of-pocket cost to patients. All immunizations recommended by the CDC's Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (www.cdc.gov) (ACIP) also are covered with no cost-sharing. Visit HealthCare.gov for a comprehensive breakdown of covered services for adults(www.healthcare.gov), women(www.healthcare.gov) and children(www.healthcare.gov).



Story highlights Jan. 1 marked the introduction of mandatory coverage for numerous preventive care services among both publicly and privately insured patients in accordance with the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.



The AAFP has created an online resource that outlines many of these new benefits.



The Academy's Web page also provides clinical and coding information related to three key health issues -- obesity, tobacco cessation and immunizations -- addressed by the Affordable Care Act.



For family physicians, three major health issues stand out when it come to these covered services: obesity, tobacco cessation and immunizations. Obesity and Fitness According to the CDC(www.cdc.gov), the past two decades have seen a dramatic increase in obesity among U.S. adults, children and teens. The agency now estimates that more than one-third of U.S. adults are obese, as are nearly one in five children and adolescents ages 2-19. And it's not just a U.S. phenomenon; a report issued Jan. 3 by the Overseas Development Institute(www.odi.org.uk) stated that 34 percent of adults worldwide now are overweight or obese, thanks, in large part, to rapidly rising rates in developing countries such as Egypt and Mexico.



In an effort to stave off the myriad known ill effects of overweight and obesity, CMS announced in November 2011 that, in accordance with the ACA, Medicare would begin covering obesity preventive services for beneficiaries with no cost-sharing requirements. Specifically, that coverage includes: screening for obesity by measuring body mass index (BMI),



providing dietary/nutritional assessment for patients whose BMI measures 30 kg/m2 or higher, and



providing these patients with intensive behavioral counseling and behavioral therapy to promote sustained weight loss through diet and exercise.



Order AIM-HI Resources According to the AAFP's American in Motion-Healthy Interventions (AIM-HI) initiative, fitness -- physical activity, healthy eating and emotional well-being -- is "the treatment of choice" for the prevention and management of many chronic conditions. Take advantage of the many evidence-based resources and tools AIM-HI offers to enhance your ability to manage patients who struggle in one or more of these areas.



Patients must meet certain criteria to maintain eligibility for the intervention, and Medicare covers a maximum of 22 face-to-face sessions during a 12-month period.

As of Jan. 1, all private insurers also are required to cover intensive behavioral therapy counseling for obesity in adults, and screening and counseling must be covered with no cost-sharing by patients. Health plans will vary in which services they'll cover (e.g., telephone counseling, group visits, visits with a health coach), however, so patients and physicians should confirm specific benefits information beforehand. Cessation of Tobacco Use The AAFP has long had a stake in helping its members assist patients who want to quit smoking, as well as in helping keep patients from starting in the first place. As of Jan. 1, 2011, Medicare began covering tobacco cessation counseling for all its beneficiaries at no cost to them. That coverage includes two levels of tobacco cessation counseling: intermediate and intensive. Evidence-based tobacco cessation counseling is a covered service, and Medicare Part D covers FDA-approved tobacco cessation drug therapies. However, OTC therapies typically are not covered.