The open enrollment period for state or federal marketplace health insurance ended Feb. 15. If you missed the deadline and you don't have qualified coverage on your own, you could face penalties.

The good news: You might be able to avoid a fee if you qualify for one of the many exemptions available in 2015. There are also ways to sign up for coverage outside of the open enrollment period, depending on your circumstances. Here's what to do.

Know what you owe. In 2015, the penalty is the greater of 2 percent of your annual salary (above $10,000) or $325 per uninsured adult in your family (children are $162.50 each).

If you fall under the first calculation, you won't pay more than the national average premium for a bronze-level health plan. In 2014, that was $2,448. (The figure for 2015 will be determined later this year.) In the second category, the fee gets capped at $975 per household.

The penalty is due at the time you file your federal tax return next April. To see what you could owe, use the calculator at taxpolicycenter.org (click on "TPC Calculators," then "ACA Calculator").

Check for exemptions. Even if you don't make a huge salary, the fees can be steep. A single person earning $45,000 this year, for example, would have to fork over about $700.

To avoid the bill, check to see if you qualify for any of a number of available exemptions (for a complete list, go to healthcare.gov.

For example, you may be exempt from paying a fee if the lowest-priced health plan you're eligible for would cost more than 8 percent of your 2015 income. You can also dodge the penalty if you would qualify for Medicaid but live in a state that didn't expand its Medicaid program. And you won't owe the penalty if you're uninsured for two months or less during the calendar year.

Consider alternatives. No exemption? There are still ways to get coverage for 2015.

In fact, according to eHealthInsurance.com a private marketplace for health insurance plans, in 28 states, one or more insurance companies are accepting applications until as late as Feb. 28. Those states include California, Connecticut, New Jersey, New York, Ohio and Wisconsin, among others. Deadlines can vary by state so don't delay. In Massachusetts, for example, residents have only until Feb. 23 to enroll.

You can also sign up outside of the open enrollment period if you experience a life event, say, you get married, move, have a baby or lose your existing health care coverage. These special enrollment periods typically last for 60 days after the event has occurred.

Keep in mind that there is no open enrollment period in Medicaid if you qualify for the program. "Individuals can apply and be found eligible for the program at any time," said Robin Rudowitz, an associate director for the Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured at the Kaiser Family Foundation, during a recent call with journalists.

In states that have expanded their Medicaid programs, you qualify for coverage if you're under 65 and your annual income is effectively 138 percent of the federal poverty level or less, regardless of your family status or other factors normally considered for Medicaid. In 2015, the federal poverty level for an individual is $11,770 in most states.

To date, 28 states and the District of Columbia have expanded their Medicaid programs, and another half a dozen states are considering doing so this year, according to Kaiser. To see your state's status, go to healthcare.gov.

yourmoney@tribune.com