Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas is preparing for a customer backlash: It’s dropping a popular PPO for individual insurance plans and raising premiums on its lower-priced HMO by 20 percent for 2016.

“I believe in setting expectations: You’re hearing complaints; you will hear even more complaints,” said Bert Marshall, president of the state’s largest health insurer. “This will be disruptive — and that made it very hard for the organization to make this decision.”

The move, first revealed to customers in late July, affects about 367,000 Texans, including those who enrolled in a Blue Cross plan through the federal exchange. Most who buy insurance on the exchange get a federal subsidy, so the net price increase will be lower, Marshall said.

Still, they’ll have to accept a narrower network of doctors and hospitals that are a staple of HMOs. Or they can shop for another insurance plan during open enrollment this fall.

The change does not affect policy holders who have coverage through their employer, a large chunk of Blue Cross’ business. Average premiums for Blue Cross employer plans will rise about 5 percent next year, Marshall estimated, although price changes vary depending on plan design and other factors.

The employer-based model is mature and more predictable than the individual market, Marshall said. And the individual segment also was most affected by the Affordable Care Act, which ended medical exclusions and caps on coverage.

As that law went into effect, Blue Cross made a big splash by offering a PPO and HMO in every county in Texas. This year, almost 1 million Texans enrolled in a health plan through the federal exchange and nearly 4 in 10 were in the Blue Cross PPO.

The company said it lost $400 million on that product in 2014. There was pent-up demand among the previously insured; they had more health problems than expected; and Blue Cross priced the insurance too low, leaders said.

They concluded that the PPO was unsustainable. But they believe the HMO can work for the individual marketplace, at least after raising next year’s premiums by 20 percent.

Marshall and other senior leaders met with The Dallas Morning News Editorial Board on Tuesday afternoon. They focused on price pressures in health care, citing a double-digit increase in prescription costs, growing consolidation among hospitals and a surge in free-standing emergency rooms.

“We’ve got a lot of headwinds on costs,” said Dr. Dan McCoy, chief medical officer.

Insurers in other states also have filed for double-digit rate hikes for individual plans. Recently, regulators approved a 36 percent increase in Tennessee and a 25 percent increase in Kentucky.

A survey by Kaiser Family Foundation of a major city in 12 states and Washington found a wide range of offers. In Portland, Ore., the second-lowest priced silver plan rose almost 23 percent. But in Seattle, the premium dropped 10 percent.

Those are early results on pricing trends, and more details will follow soon as insurers finalize prices and regulatory filings are released. Among those surveyed by Kaiser, the average increase so far was 3.1 percent.

“In all transparency, we misjudged the risk,” McCoy said. “But so did a bunch of other people.”