The dog days of summer in Pittsburgh are bringing the heat, both outdoors and onstage at the New Hazlett Theater, where “The Light in the Piazza” is burning with the passion of fresh-faced and veteran actors feasting on a bounty of juicy roles.

Get ready to say a warm benvenuto to Joshua Grosso, the rising senior at Carnegie Mellon University who won the 2012 Jimmy Award as the top male in the national high school musical theater competition. He is perfectly cast as Fabrizio, a 20-year-old Italian overcome by first love. The young actor posses a magnetic energy and a tenor to make young girls like Clara, the object of Fabrizio’s affections, swoon.

‘The Light in the Piazza’ Where: Front Porch Theatricals at the New Hazlett Theater, North Side. When: Through Aug. 30; 8 p.m. Thursday-Saturday and 2 p.m. Sunday; also Aug. 29 at 2 p.m. Tickets: $24-$30; frontporchpgh.com, showclix.com or 1-888-718-4253.

It is oh-so romantico when Fabrizio’s attentions throw into turmoil the lives of a vacationing mother and daughter in 1963 Florence. Sparks fly when he spots the delicate Clara -- redheaded soprano Lindsay Bayer, a New York-based Pittsburgher -- and she is equally smitten. But we are in on a secret that Fabrizio does not know, and the potential for a tragico ending also is in the soapy air.

Keeping constant watch over her daughter Clara and letting the audience in on her innermost feelings is Margaret, a strong Southern woman with a sharp tongue and the air of one who has seen it all, and then some.

Becki Toth, an educator and director when she’s not onstage, is as adept at humor and eliciting compassion as she is projecting Adam Guettel’s most stirring songs.

This is Ms. Toth’s second show for Front Porch Theatricals and a happy reunion with Ms. Bayer and producer Leon Zionts, who all were in Stage 62’s “Sweeney Todd.” Despite the heat projected by the young would-be lovers, Ms. Toth’s Margaret is the beating heart of “Light in the Piazza,” a role that won a best actress Tony Award for Victoria Clark.

Margaret’s at first withering looks at Fabrizio and then his father (the invaluable Jeff Howell), both of whom she suspects of being lotharios, are priceless. It’s no wonder Mr. Grosso’s Fabrizio so convincingly shrinks away when under her gaze. Margaret is fiercely protective of Clara and her secret -- the girl has been rendered childlike by a head injury suffered when she was 12.

Margaret, whose husband has stayed behind to tend to his business, has big decisions to make when Fabrizio asks Clara to marry him. Should her daughter, now 26, be allowed to break out of the safety cocoon set up long ago by her parents? Is the possibility of love worth all the risks of letting go?

Under the direction of Stephen Santa, an expressive cast plays up the much appreciated humor to be found in Craig Lucas’ book, based on the 1962 movie drama. The lighter moments are usually the result of language barriers, and Mr. Santa and music director Carmen Villalpando Rolla have gathered cast members who are convincing as Italians for whom English is a struggle.

Opera singer Antonia Botti-Lodovico as Fabrizio’s discontented sister-in-law, married to the cheating Giuseppe (Patrick Cannon), has the acting down but her unrestrained soprano doesn’t quite fit with the rest of the adept Broadway voices, who are in tune with the music’s emotional and classical range.

These are not songs that will find their way onto the pop charts nor are they giddy with the vulgarity of some recent Broadway successes. Instead, a band with a piano, cello, bass, violin and harp performs a marathon of complex and lovely melodies while the performers infuse emotion into sometimes unwieldy prose.

And unless you know Italian, you don’t always know what Fabrizio is saying or singing, but emotion and intention shine through.

You might say there is no dancing in “The Light in the Piazza,” but movement is the key to the success of choreography by Nathan Hart and Bryce Cutler’s spare production. Empty frames representing the glories of Italian art hang on the edges of the thrust stage and other, movable, door-sized frames are made mobile props, placed with grace and purpose by an ensemble quartet.

The lush Broadway production of the Lucas-Guettel musical was nominated for 11 Tony Awards and won six. Front Porch’s pared-down production sheds light on the humor and drama and hints at the passion made possible by falling in love with Florence and Rome as the backdrop.

“The Light in the Piazza” is the second musical of the summer for Front Porch, the first time the company has done two since it began in 2009 with “Only Me.” Before the opening night performance Friday, co-producers Leon and Nancy Zionts and Bruce Smith promised two more next summer.

With “In the Heights” and “Parade” in recent years, Front Porch’s aim has been increasingly ambitious and now, with the passions at play in “The Light in the Piazza,” the company has added more heat to the dog days of summer.

Sharon Eberson: seberson@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1960. Twitter: SEberson_pg.