Overall rate below state, but students who remain in district well above

2013-14 Graduation Rates Percent of students who graduated after four years of high school. Does not include students who graduate but take more years to complete school. • Thompson School District: 74.5 percent. • Colorado: 77.3 percent. • Berthoud High School: 88.5 percent. • Loveland High School: 77.4 percent. • Mountain View High School: 77.9 percent • Thompson Valley High School: 77.5 percent. • Ferguson High School: 20 percent. 2013-14 Dropout Rates Percent of students who dropped out of high school. • Thompson School District: 2.2 percent. • Colorado: 2.4 percent. • Berthoud High School: 2.0 percent. • Loveland High School: 2.3 percent. • Mountain View High School: 2.8 percent • Thompson Valley High School: 2.6 percent. • Ferguson High School: percent. 17.9 percent SOURCE: Thompson School District

Loveland's high school on-time graduation rate has dropped over the past three years and is below the state average.

However, the number of students who graduate after attending elementary, middle and high school in the Thompson District is well above average.

Reasons for the dropping graduation rate include an increase in required credit hours and the fact that the statistic doesn't include students who take more than four years to graduate, Margaret Crespo, director of secondary education, told the school board Wednesday.

Advertisement

However, the gap between students who complete their entire education in Loveland and Berthoud versus those who transfer in needs attention, Crespo said. The overall graduation rate last year was 74.5 percent, but the rate for those who complete all their years in the district was 90.4 percent.

"Our energies really need to focus on the students that are transitioning in and out," she said. "We need to connect with them early enough to get them caught up."

The challenge is figuring out how to implement intervention programs with the tight budget, said board member Pam Howard, noting that many of these types of programs were cut from the district five years ago because of budget woes.

Thompson's on-time graduation rate, or the students who finish high school in four years, for 2013-2014 was 74.5 percent, below the state rate of 77.3 percent.

The local district rate has dropped since 2012 (77.3 percent), while the state rate has increased from 75.4 percent in 2012.

In that same period, the Thompson District increased the number of hours required to graduate from 22 to 24, leaving some students who did not take full loads early in their career with not enough hours to graduate on time.

To combat this, the schools' staffs have been working hard to make sure students take full loads early on to build up enough hours.

Another factor that contributed to the lower graduation rate was Thompson Online School, an option through which students could take all of their classes from home through the Internet. This did not work for a lot of students because, as Crespo put it, "we are social people," so the district changed the program so more students are in classes.

Another contributor is growing participation in programs that keep students in school for more than four years.

One of these programs allows students to stay in school for five years and graduate with a high school degree as well as an associate's degree from community college without costing parents additional money. This is an increasingly popular program.

To combat the drop in on-time graduation, the district has implemented additional programs including ones that provide support to students before or after school, achievement centers that offer tutoring, a reading program, a study lab, catch-up classes, peer tutoring and extra work that failing students can do to recover their credit hours.

The good news is these efforts are working and the graduation rate has increased since last July, according to Crespo. And the dropout rate for Loveland, 2.2 percent, is lower than the state average of 2.4 percent.

The board and staff will look at different options and needs as they work to improve graduation success rates in coming years.

There is no one-size-fits-all solution because each student is different with different needs, noted Bob Kerrigan, school board president.

"We need to look at how we are educating students for the 21st century," he said.

Pamela Johnson: 970-669-5050, ext. 526, johnsonp@reporter-herald.com, Twitter/@RHPamelaJ.