October may be Fire Prevention month, but firemen stress this is something they do all year long.

This weekend the Panama City Beach Fire Rescue team is sharing tips on fire safety. Firemen want people to be prepared before they face an emergency

"When you catch on fire you just stop, drop, and roll," said Charlie Henry.

Three words we all know well. Charlie is learning about fire safety at this year's Fire Prevention Open House.

Panama City Beach Fire Rescue opened up station one to not just let kids play with the fire hoses, but teach them the importance of fire safety.

"Our goal is to teach you something about fire prevention. We have the trailer here we're teaching kids to get low, crawl through the smoke, crawl under the smoke, they don't want to breath that smoke, and they can do it here in a controlled fun environment, if it were to happen to them at their home they would be a step ahead," Garrett Jackson, with Panama City Beach Fire Rescue, said.

Firemen stress the importance of being prepared ahead of time, because you never know when a fire is going to strike, sharing a few safety tips to stay ahead of the game.

"We're teaching the kids, but the parents as well to check their smoke detectors, the time changes tomorrow we all know and the fire service rule of thumb is to change your smoke detectors when you change your clock," said Jackson.

Parents and kids can also draw a fire escape plan together, but the biggest thing firemen stress is to go home and practice their plan and so their kids know exactly what to do in case of an emergency. Something Mike Henry said he goes over with his son frequently.

"We also tell him to go to a safe place, to go to the neighbors house, to call 911, just if there is ever an emergency hopefully he won't be caught by surprise and he'll know what to do," said parent Mike Henry.

This is Mike and Charlie's third open house and Mike said he appreciates all the work these firemen do not only at this event, but protecting us all year long.

With high fire danger this weekend Florida Fire Service officials are stressing to avoid outdoor burning. This is warning is in effect for Bay, Calhoun, Gulf, Holmes, Jackson, Walton, and Washington counties.