Photo

Good morning.

Here’s what you need to know:

• Militants lay siege to school.

Taliban gunmen attacked a school in northwest Pakistan today, killing at least 145 and wounding more than 100. Most of the victims are children of military families.

Officials say the attack, the deadliest ever by the Taliban in Pakistan, is now over, with all of the militants killed.

• Mourning in Australia.

As flags fly at half-staff, the police began an inquiry today into the operation that ended the 16-hour siege of a cafe in Sydney on Monday.

They want to know whether the two hostages — a cafe manager and a lawyer — were killed by the gunman or died in the crossfire.

Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox. Monday – Friday.

And the prime minister is questioning why the gunman, an Iranian refugee who was a known extremist who faced multiple criminal charges, was not on the country’s terrorism watch list.

• Apple not guilty.

An eight-person jury decided today after about three hours deliberation that Apple did not block songs sold by rival music stores from the iPod in order to monopolize the digital music market.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The class-action lawsuit had been around in various forms for 10 years before it finally went to trial in early December.

• Grace period on health care.

The health insurance industry today is announcing that companies will give consumers more time to pay January’s premiums under the Affordable Care Act.

It is trying to avoid complications as millions of customers renew their plans and new ones come aboard.

• Mideast diplomacy.

Secretary of State John Kerry is in London today, talking to Palestinian and Arab League officials.

A Palestinian-drafted resolution to the U.N. Security Council, calling for Israel to leave the occupied West Bank by November 2016, could be voted on this week.

• For their consideration.

The lame-duck Senate is acting on executive and judicial branch nominations this week.

On Monday, it confirmed the nominee for surgeon general.

• At the White House.

President Obama is meeting this morning with Archbishop Joseph Kurtz of Louisville, president of the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops.

In the afternoon, he convenes a meeting of the National Security Council.

• Fallout from “nut rage.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

South Korean authorities said today that Korean Air will be punished with up to a 21-day suspension of flights or a $1.3 million fine after its handling of a dispute over serving macadamia nuts.

MARKETS

• Wall Street stocks are mixed. Europe shares are higher, and Asian indexes ended mostly lower.

• Russia’s economy edged toward panic despite a middle-of-the-night move by the central bank to prop up the currency by raising interest rates to 17 percent from 10.5 percent.

Plummeting oil prices and Western sanctions over Ukraine are pushing Russia into stagflation, a period of high inflation and low growth.

• One of Britain’s major banks, the Co-operative Bank, flunked the Bank of England’s new stress test, and two others, Royal Bank of Scotland and Lloyds, barely passed.

• Apple announced today that dozens more banks and retailers — including TD Bank North America, Staples and Winn-Dixie — have signed up for its mobile payment service called Apple Pay.

NOTEWORTHY

• The year in search.

Robin Williams, World Cup, Ebola and Malaysia Airlines are 2014’s most searched terms worldwide, Google said today in its annual “Zeitgeist” report.

Others in the top 10 are ice bucket challenge, Flappy Bird and ISIS.

• Teenagers and e-cigarettes.

Seventeen percent of high school seniors have tried electronic cigarettes, while the number smoking tobacco cigarettes dropped to new lows, according to an annual drug-use survey released today.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Marijuana use by teenagers appeared to level off after recent increases, the National Institutes of Health said, while binge drinking of alcohol and abuse of synthetic marijuana and prescription drugs showed declines.

• Rock ‘n’ roll royalty.

Lou Reed, Green Day and the 1970s soul star Bill Withers are among the 2015 inductees to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.

Also to be honored in Cleveland on April 18 are the Paul Butterfield Blues Band, Joan Jett and the Blackhearts, and Stevie Ray Vaughan and his group Double Trouble, the organization said today.

• Free agent signings.

Chase Headley agreed to a $52 million, four-year contract to stay with the Yankees, signaling that New York is not counting on Alex Rodriguez to play third base regularly.

There were other big deals in Major League Baseball on Monday.

• Soccer star calls time.

Thierry Henry, 37, said today that he is retiring after a 20-year soccer career that included star turns at Arsenal, on the 1998 French team that won the World Cup, and for the New York Red Bulls.

BACK STORY

Soon after Thomas Edison patented the first commercially viable light bulb, he strung a few together during the 1880 Christmas season and hung them outside his lab in Menlo Park, N.J.

In 1882, Edison’s partner, Edward H. Johnson, went a step further, tying together red, white and blue lights and wrapping them around his Christmas tree.

The practice didn’t immediately catch on. Electricity was widely mistrusted because people thought dangerous vapors would seep into their homes through the lights and wires.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

President Grover Cleveland is credited with popularizing electric Christmas tree lights after he used them to light the first family’s tree in 1895.

And in 1923, President Calvin Coolidge began the tradition of the National Christmas Tree, adorning it with 3,000 bulbs on the White House’s South Lawn.

We’ve come a long way: This year, 300,000 girls are taking part in a Google project to use computer code to program the White House tree lights.

Tatiana Schlossberg contributed reporting.

Your Morning Briefing is posted weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.

Want to get the briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.