"I'm really depressed," O'Reilly Factor correspondent Jesse Watters said to a man on the street.

Watters had traveled to Hartford, Conn. to ask the folks about last week's midterm elections.

"The Obama agenda got crushed on Tuesday." Watters continued.

The man stared at him, expressionless.

"Did you vote?" Watters asked.

The man explained that he could not, as he was a convicted felon.

Watters later asked the man a number of other questions, including regarding President Obama raising taxes.

The man answered each question similarly: "I don't know, you tell me."

"I don't even know what you're talking about," a pair of women giggled when Watters later repeated his original statement about the midterms.

"A lot of people are happy about what happened, I think," another young woman said, in an uncertain tone

"Why do you think the Obama agenda lost!" Watters asked another passer-by.

"I don't know, the Republicans and that money. That dirty cash. When money talks, [expletive] walks," she replied.



A man wearing a hat and sunglasses over his eyeglasses proposed that the election results were such because of a 'personal animosity' toward President Barack Obama.

Watters informed the man that exit polls indicated the contrary: that the issue in the minds of voters were the president's policies, not the man himself.

"Well, people say what they want to say." the man said.

"Can you disagree with Obama's policies without being called a racist?" Watters asked.

"Yes," the man answered.



"Then how do you know that people that don't like his policies are racist?"

"By their other behavior. It's not always easy to tell," the man said.

"But you can tell," Watters said.

"Sometimes," the man answered.

Watters then asked the man about possible substance use, and removed the man's sunglasses to ostensibly check for pupil dilation

"Have Obama's policies helped you?" Watters asked a young black man.

"No," he responded.

"I thought they were supposed to." Watters pressed.

"You've got to help yourself before you look for other people to help you," the man replied.

"You might be a Republican," Watters said.

"Guess I am," the man smiled.

"Do you think Obama is listening to the people?" Watters asked another young man.

"Honestly, no. I can't afford ObamaCare," the man said matter-of-factly.

Later, another young man, who indicated he was averse to the Republican Party, was somewhat confounded when Watters questioned him about his statements on healthcare.

The man implied that the GOP would take away Americans' healthcare, now that they control both houses of Congress, beginning January 2015.

Watters reminded him that President Obama himself has systematically separated numerous Americans from their policies, a fact with which the man was visibly unfamiliar.

"Well maybe he's really a Republican," the man said of Obama.

The man in sunglasses declared that Obama was more conservative that President Ronald Reagan.

"The Republicans worshipped Reagan; they don't like Obama," the man said, prompting Watters to jokingly administer the visual component of a DUI test.

Watters later took a walk around his alma mater, Trinity College, in the Connecticut capital, pointing out a number of the campus' amenities.

He later told host Bill O'Reilly that, unlike two other prominent alumni: Daily Caller founder Tucker Carlson and conservative author George Will, he has yet to be invited back to campus to speak.

"I'm still waiting: I might need a bowtie," Watters joked of the FOX & Friends Weekend co-host.