Topics: Barack Obama, Ben Bernanke, Editor's Picks, Elizabeth Warren, Great Recession, Paul Krugman, Business News, Politics News

In September of 2011 Occupy Wall Street lit a match to a movement. Today that movement is known for what it did and didn’t do. Occupy connected income inequality to political corruption and put both issues at the center of our political debate. What it didn’t do, by design, was provide a blueprint for economic reform or build a more institutional movement to secure it.

There’s little our political system can’t co-opt and Occupy’s choices made its issues easy targets for acquisition. Three and a half years later politicians still speak of income inequality, but not of corruption, and there’s still no blueprint for reform. In 2014 Democrats promised a more populist ‘message’ but then forgot to deliver it. President Obama has some new populist-hued ideas, but they won’t be enacted or even debated while he’s around to partake in the discussion.

Meanwhile the gap between the superrich and the rest of us grows wider. Big banks are even bigger and able again to fob their biggest losses off on us. History’s most extreme Republicans now control all of Congress, where they boldly seek to shred the social contract that gives life support to the poor and the middle class. And while it’s hard to believe politics could get more corrupt, it has, and by a lot.

America now chooses between two radically opposed paths. One leads to a final consolidation of wealth and power by the oligarchs of global capital; the other to a just distribution of prosperity and opportunity. One leads to the ultimate corruption of our democracy; the other to civic revitalization. One direction heads toward the absolute depletion of natural resources, ceaseless global conflicts and a likely environmental catastrophe; the other to economic and environmental sustainability and the possibility of peace.

What is extraordinary about this choice is its starkness, of course, but also that in a democratic society we are making it without benefit of an informed, full-throated debate. This is a debate Occupy was unwilling — and perhaps unable — to bring and that Democrats seem unable to grasp, at least not fully. The choice it frames is not as simple as that between Democrats and Republicans, or even progressives and reactionaries. It’s a choice between a status quo we know all too well and a future we’ve only begun to imagine; between an all devouring yet lifeless leviathan bent on a single goal and its opposite; a political economy that prizes pluralism and human scaled enterprise; that upholds a higher ethics and seeks our moral as well as material wellbeing.

Progressives must do what Occupy and the Democrats did not: conceive a new political agenda for a new political economy. I won’t pretend to describe it all but we can all see a few shards of the vase. Let me first say what it isn’t. I don’t mean the Republicans’ lethal nonsense but the more enlightened policies now on offer from Democrats, mainly President Obama.

In 2008 Obama often said “I’m a market kind of guy.” It’s an assurance all Democrats make — but he really meant it. Obama’s faith in the system led him to three huge errors. One was to apply free market metaphors to things they don’t fit, like health care, public education and environmental regulation. Another was to draw his top economic advisors from Wall Street. The third mistake was to take their advice.

Obama brought to the financial crisis a faith in Wall Street elites and experts in general. Like New York Times columnist Thomas Friedman, he sees technology and globalization as irresistible forces–Friedman calls globalization a golden straitjacket– to which we can only adapt. He saw the crisis in the abstract, mathematical terms of macroeconomics. Macroeconomic tools are big and blunt; money supply, fiscal policy. An abstract thinker who likes the system isn’t apt to poke around looking for stuff to fix.

Obama thought the crisis arose not from any fundamental market flaw but from speculation and the ebb and flow of the business cycle. He saw but two remedies. One was to curb the excesses and contain the fallout, which is what Dodd/Frank did. The other was to use fiscal and monetary policy to pour mass amounts of free money into the system, which is what he and Fed chief Ben Bernanke did.

It worked as well as it could — and way better than the austerity regimes Republicans are always hawking. It gave us what we now have, an economy that outperforms nearly all other developed nations and a middle class that underperforms the one in Canada. Some people are better off. Unemployment is down. CEO pay rose 37 percent while workers’ wages shrank by 0.6 percent. Never before have average wages fallen as the economy grew. The number of people living in poverty also rose, another first for an economic expansion.