More options: Share, Mark as favorite

With heroin deaths spiking across the country, we desperately need clear thinking on drug addiction.

A January article in the New England Journal of Medicine bolsters what’s come to be known as the brain disease model of addiction. In essence, the model views addiction from the vantage point of brain physiology. Three esteemed researchers, including National Institute on Drug Abuse head Dr. Nora Volkow and National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism chief Dr. George Koob, both of whom work under the auspices of the National Institutes of Health, wrote the article, entitled “Neurobiologic advances from the brain disease model of addiction.”

The article lays out the neural pathways involved in various stages of drug abuse, such as anticipation and craving, intoxication, and withdrawal. It’s a good summary of the latest neuroscientific findings.

In addition to touting the brain disease model – which, notably, the authors fail to clearly define or to delineate core assumptions and predictions that flow from it – they also take aim at those who “question” the brain disease model.

As they begin: In the past two decades, research has increasingly supported the view that addiction is a disease of the brain.… the underlying concept of substance abuse as a brain disease continues to be questioned, perhaps because the aberrant, impulsive, and compulsive behaviors that are characteristic of addiction have not been clearly tied to neurobiology.

Wrong. The model “continues to be questioned” not because the linkages between addiction and biological processes hadn’t always been well established. But rather because those linkages only show, as anyone would expect, that the brain is involved with drug addiction. The linkages do not, per se, make the case that addiction is best defined as a brain-based phenomenon. Indeed, we fully expect more details about the biology of addiction to be uncovered in the near future. But that won’t make it anymore a brain disease than it is now.

But first, it is surely true that addiction is both associated with and leads to brain changes. So what does that mean? It means that brain alterations associated with addiction can make it more challenging for addicts to make certain choices, but those changes do not come close to eradicating the capacity to choose. Volumes of research show that most people who are addicted respond to incentives and consequences, such as small cash payments, opportunity to participate in work programs, threat of an overnight jail stay. We describe the implications for contingencies, choice, and motivation in recovery here and, at length, here.

So, instead of focusing narrowly on neurobiology, as a brain disease model implies, there is greater value in viewing addiction as a multifaceted behavior that operates on several levels at once, ranging from molecular function and structure to brain physiology to psychology to the psychosocial environment and social relations. The lower levels of explanation, particularly those involving the brain, are merely among them—and not necessarily the most informative for most practical purposes, such as the treatment of addiction.

Indeed, emphasizing the neural level of analysis when conceptualizing addiction impedes our progress in treating and preventing it, as it distracts us from considering users’ motives, their unappreciated decision-making capacity, and abilities to respond to incentives – the central psychological players in the theatre of addiction.

To be sure, addiction can be explained according to how it operates at the level of neurons and brain circuits. In this respect, arguably, addiction is a brain disease. But it is also a personality disease, a motivational disease, a social disease, a cultural disease, and so on. Why privilege one level of analysis above all of the others? At every one of those levels, we can find causal elements that contribute to excessive and repeated drug use, as well as to strategies that can help bring the behavior under control.

The NEJM authors contend that the more we understand the neurobiological elements of addiction, the more we come to understand that this condition is a brain disease. But this makes as much sense as concluding that because we now know more about the role of personality traits, such as anxiety and impulse control deficits in increasing addiction risk, we can, at last, recognize that addiction is a disease of personality.

The brain disease model captures only one important part of a remarkably intricate causal story.

To their credit, the authors do mention the social, behavioral, and psychological dimensions of addiction. But they choose to portray them as extensions of brain processes, alluding, generically, to connections between brain and human action. This is a way of bringing the brain back to center stage, but it says little or nothing new. After all, any complex action of the human organism, from composing symphonies to reading this article, is mediated by the brain.

Curiously, the authors credit the brain disease model with the development of pharmacological treatments for addiction, mainly opioids, in addition to several policy prescriptions. The latter include criminal justice policies favoring treatment over incarceration, the provisions within the Affordable Care Act (“Obamacare”) that improve substance abuse treatment coverage, and maintaining drinking age laws at age 21.

This point is unpersuasive. The pharmacological mechanisms underlying almost all medications used to combat addiction were developed decades ago, long before the detailed understanding of neural circuitry we have today. To be fair, they were informed by knowledge of nerve cell receptors. So, yes, knowledge of brain biology played a role in medication development, but this tells us only that the brain is merely one relevant level of analysis for understanding addictive processes and treatment.

As for diversion from jail, the U.S. has employed this strategy for almost a century. In addition, the recent emphasis on treatment over incarceration has little to do with our field’s growing knowledge of brain physiology. It is fueled by “drug war” fatigue, growing prison reform efforts, and perhaps, as has been suggested, by the changing demographics (more new white, suburban young people; fewer inner city minorities) of the heroin-abusing population.

In this election cycle and around the country, drug problems are a major topic of discussion, as they should be. Candidates and politicians should steer clear of simple – and often simplistic – views and prescriptions for addiction. They need to conceptualize addiction as a multi-layered problem that afflicts people and their surrounding social environments, not just their brains.