The battle lines are drawn.

Moves by President Obama and congressional Republican on Tuesday leave little doubt how the parties will seek to fight this year's critical mid-term elections.

Obama signed executive orders that he said would help to eliminate the salary disparities between men and women.

The executive orders are designed to shed light on the pay practices of federal contractors, the first step toward ending any gender gap.

At the same time, Senate Democrats pushed the Paycheck Fairness Act, which would make it illegal for any employer to retaliate against a worker who asks about or discloses their wages.

Republicans will stymie the bill and are also poised to pass a House budget that would slashes $5 trillion in federal spending over 10 years. It includes sharp cuts in health care coverage and subsidies under Obamacare.

It's clear that Republicans will hit the campaign trail to say that Democrats have shown that big government doesn't work and needs to be cut.

Democrats will say that Republicans are indifferent to women and the working poor, also noting GOP roadblocks to hiking the minimum wage.

I think there's no doubt the Democrats will try to use class warfare to divide the electorate, rather than have to defend the Obama Administration's record.

What's fairness to Democrats, of course, is something very different to Republicans.

"I think there's no doubt the Democrats will try to use class warfare to divide the electorate, rather than have to defend the Obama Administration's record," said John McGovern, a Republican consultant in Chicago.

Senior Democrats said they view the pay gap issue and the Republican budget as election issues which they believe will help turn out the Democratic base in November.

"He gave us a gift, Paul Ryan did," Sen. Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.) said, arguing the budget will motivate Democrats to go to the polls.

Democrats said they relish the Ryan budget as a campaign issue because it requires House Republicans to vote on a host of discrete provisions, such as cutting student loan aid and slashing education support that can each be used against GOP candidates.

Seniors, often a tough group for Democrats, "will be motivated" by budget's Medicare cuts, Rep. Chris Van Hollen (D-Md.), the top Democrat on the House Budget Committee, said at a Tuesday breakfast with print reporters.

In New York, Democrats said they plan to highlight Ryan's cuts in infrastructure spending that Rep. Michael Grimm (R-Staten Island) is expected to back as part of the Ryan budget. Infrastructure is especially important to Staten Island commuters.

Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.), accompanied by Sen. Deb Fischer, (R-Neb), talks about the gender pay gap as the Senate begins debate on wage equity on Tuesday. (J. Scott Applewhite/AP)

The Ryan budget also offers openings for Senate Democrats, aides said. Many GOP Senate candidates are House members who will have to vote on it this week.

Sen. Mary Landrieu (D-La.), who is facing a tough re-election fight, said she "certainly plans to point out" the various cuts her opponent, Rep. Bill Cassidy (R-La.), is expected to back as part of the Ryan plan.

Democrats expect to lose a vote Wednesday on passage of their paycheck fairness measure. But Schumer, who heads the party's policy and communications committee, said the party will force additional votes on the bill later this year.

"It really resonates," Schumer said of the issue.

Democrats also say they'll force repeat votes on raising the minimum wage and extending unemployment benefits.

"People turnout to vote for the minimum wage," Schumer said, explaining that was part of the reason Democrats are pushing minimum wage ballot referendums in eight states.

Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) dismissed Democrats talk Tuesday as a sputtering effort to distract voters from Obamacare and the economy.

"You can look for the Democrats all year long to be trying to change the subject to anything else," he said.