SILVERTON — As the early morning dawn broke through thick clouds Sunday, illuminating the mountains towering over this old mining town, and the final moments of the 48-hour cutoff for the Hardrock 100 endurance run drew closer, a steady stream of ragged, bandaged, limping and weary runners trotted into town.

The 122nd finisher came in at 47 hours, 54 minutes, 15 seconds. More minutes ticked by, and bystanders wondered whether he would be the final one. Suddenly, the small crowd that had gathered on the street corner shrieked and cheered, spotty at first, then louder.

Around the bend came Bogie Dumitrescu of Boulder, hunched over, sprinting with the kind of gait and fury only someone who has run nearly 100½ miles can.

PHOTOS: 2015 Hardrock 100 Endurance Run

The crowd grew louder and he touched the Hardrock and fell to the ground in a heap, try to collect his breath. His final time: 47:59:59 — as close as runners can get before officially being disqualified.

“I couldn’t get up the hills without hyperventilating,” said Dumitrescu, who is originally from Romania and waited six years to land a lottery spot in the run. “But I could run downhill.”

WATCH: Bogie Dumitrescu finishes Hardrock 100 with one second to spare

Uphill, he would walk or jog 30 steps, then wait 10 seconds to recover. He didn’t know whether he would miss the cutoff by 10 minutes, an hour or five hours. In the final stretch, his only worry was whether he’d pass out before reaching the finish line at Silverton High School.

“Because of this problem, I was physically running holding my breath (at the end),” he said.

After starting Friday at 6 a.m., runners traversed through snowstorms, rain, thunder, lightning, mud and ice, climbing 33,992 feet, topping out at the 14,048-foot Handies Peak and averaging 11,186 feet of elevation.

One runner wrote about seeing a mountain lion along the course, while others spoke of seeing bighorn sheep, and still another “a pair of green eyes” that followed him for some two hours.

And then the hallucinations — an inevitable side effect of prolonged physical exertion with little or no sleep. On a poster inside the Silverton High School gym, Tyler Curiel wrote about seeing one of his pacesetters jump into the sky, streaming rainbows from his hands as he floated into the clouds. Another wrote of seeing gnomes in the trees, and boats in Grouse Gulch, the aid station around Mile 40.

More than 24 hours before Dumitrescu, 27-year-old Spanish endurance athlete Kilian Jornet (Team Salomon) had won, setting a counterclockwise course record in 23:28:10 — adding to the one he set last year in the opposite direction — despite having gotten lost in deep snow near Oscar Pass. The previous record was 24:25, set in 2013.

Jornet had company from Canadian Adam Campbell — who finished third for the second consecutive year — through 36 miles. Jornet finally passed him when summiting Handies Peak and never looked back, adding to his lead throughout Friday night and into Saturday morning.

“I was falling through the snow,” said Jornet, who blamed himself for getting lost because he had a GPS. “The calves hurt, because the snow was breaking. The ice caught my calves.”

But he said he wanted to return here — that this event was more than just the run, but about the community, its people and the wilderness.

“It’s such a nice ambiance,” he said. “It’s not only just the course. It’s the course, it’s the beautiful, the people you see. The people here, it makes it much more special. “

New Zealand runner Anna Frost (Team Salomon), running just her second 100-miler ever, overcame a difficult middle part of the race, where she lost her lead to Boulder’s Darcy Piceu, before charging ahead and passing her near the 89th mile. She won in 28:22:50 and finished eighth overall.

She kept insisting to her pacesetters that all she needed was a quick nap. But deep down, she knew if she went to sleep, her race would be finished. She called it the most difficult race of her career.

“When I actually thought, ‘OK, let’s just do this’ and just forget about the pain in your legs, and just go for it,” Frost said. “You just get overidden by something. I don’t know what it is. But you see it all the time at the end of a race. … It doesn’t come from your brain. Your brain doesn’t say it. But your body somehow does that. I somehow found that.”

Piceu, who has won this race three times and now finished it six, finished in 28:57, was 10th overall and the second female.

“I think for the most part it was going really well,” Piceu said. “Above 12,000 feet, my respiration went through the roof and my lungs felt really tight. So I just sort of slowly creeped my way up Grant Swamp Pass, and I just turned around and looked down and there she (Frost) was coming up the pass, and I just thought, ‘Oh my gosh.’ “

In all, 123 of the 152 entered runners officially finished the race — three more crossed in the minutes and hours following the cutoff — for an astounding rate of nearly 79 percent. Historically, about 60 percent of runners finish.

Will either top finisher be back? Jornet has nothing left to accomplish — he’s won twice and has course records in both directions, but his appreciation for sheer beauty and ruggedness of the terrain is apparent. Frost agrees.

“Yesterday I was like, ‘Absolutely no way,’ ” she said. “This morning I was thinking, ‘It’s a really bad idea.’ But it’s in my blood.”

Daniel Petty: 303-954-1081, dpetty@denverpost.com, twitter.com/danielpetty

Top 5 Male 2015 Hardrock 100 Finishers

Kilian Jornet (Spain), 23:28

Mike Foote (USA), 25:45

Adam Campbell (Canada), 26:49

Chris Price (USA), 26:52

Troy Howard (USA), 27:03

Top 5 Female 2015 Hardrock 100 Finishers

Anna Frost (New Zealand), 28:22

Darcy Piceu (Boulder), 28:57

Darla Askew (USA), 32:05

Missy Gosney (USA), 33:22

Kari Fraser (USA), in 38:23

Updated July 13 at 5:18 p.m. The following corrected information has been added to this article: Because of an error by a reporter, the fifth place female finisher was incorrect. It was Kari Fraser.