BETHLEHEM — The Bethlehem Area School Board is looking into renewing a contract with a substitute teacher organization that has given the district up to a 96 percent fill-in rate recently.

At Monday's Human Resources Committee meeting, the district discussed renewing the contract with Substitute Teacher Service, of Delaware County, for another two years. The district has been outsourcing its substitutes since February 2014.

The decision frees administrators from managing the hiring of substitutes and allows the district to avoid responsibility for offering health insurance to substitute teachers who qualify under the Affordable Care Act. The district pays a set rate for substitutes to STS, along with a 28 percent fee.

Bethlehem pays $90 a day for the first five days. In November, the board agreed to raise the planning stipend for substitutes from $15 per day beginning on the sixth consecutive day to $25 per day beginning on the sixth consecutive day.

Since contracting with STS, the district has increased its pool of substitutes to more than 200, Russell Giordano, district chief human resources officer, said. Giordano shared the weekly fill-in rate STS has given the district since Jan. 4. The week of Jan. 18 saw the highest fill-in rate with 96 percent. Most recently, STS gave the district an 86 percent fill-in rate the week of Feb. 29.

Superintendent Joseph Roy said the district needs 70 to 80 substitute teachers a day. While the district does have more than 200 substitutes with STS, other school districts also contract with STS. That means substitute teachers have options on where to go.

While STS isn't perfect, "steady progress" has been made, Giordano said.

"I think they really have tried harder," he said.

On the recommendation of the district, STS held a job fair in August 2015 to attract candidates. STS also has done advertising.

Board President Michael Faccinetto showed some frustration with STS. He said he wondered why the company did not start advertising and holding a job fair until 2015. He said he would like to see the company hold at least one job fair a year and do more advertising.

Some schools are still lacking for substitutes, such as Marvine Elementary School on Livingston Street.

"The schools with the greatest needs have the hardest time getting subs to choose them," Roy said.

Roy said if STS can't provide a substitute teacher, Bethlehem Area teachers who are specialists and English for Speakers of Other Languages teachers are the first to be pulled to teach a class.

The Allentown School District also contracts with Substitute Teacher Service.

The Bethlehem Area School Board will vote on the two-year contract at its Monday meeting.

jpalochko@mcall.com

Twitter @Jpalochko

610-820-6613