(Special to the Reporter-Herald)

Before I can talk about Loveland's famous Veterans Day "Bell Ringers," I have to talk to about Armistice Day. But before I talk about that, I have to make mention of Loveland's long-lost flagpole.

In 1918, the town erected a pole in the middle of the intersection Fourth Street and Cleveland Avenue to fly Old Glory. It was a 50-foot reminder that the residents of Loveland bought their share of war bonds. A dedication ceremony took place the second week in October of that year, a celebration of Loveland's success in the Liberty Loan campaign. Loveland raised $381,000 for the campaign, exceeding its goal by $89,000.

Twenty three days later, under a waxing moon, Loveland got word of an armistice. Germany had crumbled. It was 1 a.m. and the town was "mad with joy." Within minutes, according to press accounts, "church bells were ringing, shots were fired into the air and whistles blew to pass the word along. Crowds gathered downtown and a bonfire was made at Fourth Street and Lincoln Avenue. Every noise-producing instrument that could be raked up in the city was soon in evidence." By 1:30 p.m. the next day, a parade had been organized.

Advertisement

One year later, on the first anniversary of the armistice, the celebration got underway the night prior, with shots fired into the sky. In the morning, an enthusiastic crowd cheered as a company of 92 men from the Great War, the Spanish-American War and the Civil War passed by during the parade. All the participants "rode in cars owing to the weather and the sloppy streets, with the exception of the soldiers of World War I who marched on foot and showed they had not lost their endurance by any means."

For the next 35 years, the town would celebrate Armistice Day with events such as races, a tug-of-war between business owners, the BIG football game, and of course, a parade. From 1919 to 1930, ex-servicemen would meet at the flagpole on Fourth Street to animate the townsfolk with reveille played obstreperously on bugles. The flagpole came down in 1937 by order of the Colorado State Highway Department when it was decided that Lincoln Avenue needed to be widened.

The tradition of playing reveille on Fourth Street actually ended in 1932 and the ringing of bells began. The vets opted to rouse their countrymen with a portable church bell as well as a firetruck employed as chariot to transport the troops to the annual breakfast. In 1944, another feature was added; the "bomb squad." If for some reason the clamor of the bell did not stir you from your dreams, the squad would enter your domicile and jerk your weary bones from their cot.

Most of the guys chose to avoid the harsh awakening by being at the ready, standing on their porch. Yet another tactic involved getting the switchboard operators (remember those?) to call all the vets at 4 a.m. In 1954, Armistice Day became Veterans Day, but the routine of rousing individuals out of their slumber remained the same.

In 1956, Wayne and Harry Bath, both veterans, bought a 500-pound bell off a guy in Estes Park. The bell was originally part of an old schoolhouse in Arkansas. The brothers did not have a "plan" exactly. On Nov. 11, at 2 a.m., they drove to the Dude Corral on Eisenhower to pick up some friends. They had loaded the bell into the back of an old Chevy and the idea was to drive around town ringing the bell to let all and sundry, ex-servicemen in particular, know that Veterans Day was upon us. This did not take the place of bugles, foghorns or a firetruck; it was in addition to it.

In the early 1970s, the one truck evolved into two. In 1980, Mayor Harold Kester and the City Council gave the vets official permission to ring bells all over town. In 1981, a variance to the noise ordinance, code number 7.32.060, was made: "All sound emanating from any aircraft, church, warning or emergency signal device used or authorized by any government agency, or program incident to the recognition or celebration of Veterans Day, shall not be subject to the provisions of this chapter." The bell ringers keep a copy of this in their vehicle. It is their "get out of jail free" card.

The bell ringers, in 1986, became fully organized; six bells, six trucks, six sections of town. The firetruck and fog horn and even the "bomb squad" fell to the wayside. Today, the city is divided into 16 sections and the present captain of the bell ringers is Tony Abbott. Abbott is a member of the American Legion, the organization that now governs this custom. He has been ringing for the past 10 years and is completely devoted to making certain every citizen within the city limits hears the bells.

A few things you should know about bells in general and the bells currently on active duty here in Loveland. Bells are measured across the bottom. Abbott's bell measures 14 inches whereas the "Bath Bell" is so large it has to be loaded into the truck with a forklift. If you own a large bell, you too can be a bell ringer. That said, your bell must have excellent resonance or you will not be able to participate. Bells on Veterans Day ring 4-6 a.m., and Loveland is believed to be the only city in the United States that maintains this tradition.

Currently, there is only one woman in this elite group, Jaye Hedgespeth. This will be Jaye's sixth year with the group, and rumor has it she may actually get to ring the original Wayne Bath bell. On her first go she had a homemade bell fashioned from an oxygen tank cylinder with a clapper tied inside. She hadn't driven one block when the clapper fell off. Turning to the Navy man beside her she remarked, "should have had a sailor tie that knot." He replied, "I am a sailor!" Her next bell was made from a propane tank, and the sound did not exactly "resonate" with everyone. Jaye finally acquired a bell with a perfect strike tone and is immensely grateful to play a significant role in our Veterans Day celebration. Jaye admitted she does not see too many people as she drives her appointed route. I decided this was rather unfortunate as we have this unique tradition steeped in history, a custom Loveland should be proud of.

At the eleventh hour, on the eleventh day, of the eleventh month (factoring in the time change between France and Colorado), I will be joining the proud representatives of this singular event. I have to admit, I have been wanting to do this ever since we moved here. And, fingers crossed, I will be riding in the vehicle carrying the Bath bell. If you want to make absolutely certain that one of the bell ringers drives down your street, provided you live within the city limits, email me with your address and I will get it to the captain. I hope to see you.

Side Note: There are five clocks on the west side of the Elks building whose hands are all fixed at eleven o'clock. It symbolizes a long standing tradition of remembrance within their fraternal organization. In 1918 President Wilson gave General John Pershing the liberty to choose the hour at which the armistice would be signed. The General chose 11 o'clock. General Pershing was a member of the Elks.

I'll be back in a couple of weeks ... with more stories ... left to tell.

Olivia Lowe of Loveland writes about local history. "Stories Left to Tell" is sponsored by Wilbur's Total Beverage. Email her at lamplightstudio@gmail.com