The Vilonia Board of Education is considering a proposal to reconfigure the grade level of students that will be taught at the new Intermediate School after being told that the old plan for fourth, fifth and sixth graders to be there may not be sufficient for future growth.

School officials told the board, at the December meeting last week, they have concerns regarding the plan to make the new school, set to open in the fall of 2015, a fourth, fifth and sixth grade campus. They asked the board to consider modifying the current plans and to make it a fifth and sixth grade campus beginning next year. Cathy Riggins, assistant superintendent, said a part of the plan would be to turn the elementary campus into a kindergarten through second grade campus and the primary school into a third and fourth grade campus.

“This would allow each campus to focus on the resources available (for their grade levels) and what is best for our kids,” Riggins said. She talked about “continuity of programs and concentration of resources.” Resources, she said, could be pooled and intervention programs could be implemented. She also talked about aligning curriculum, more instruction time for students and additional student-centered events based on age groups.

Fourth graders, Riggins said, is the breaking point of the elementary school. With fourth graders being at the new school, she said, the sixth graders would have the same recess time as second graders reducing their instructional time.

Dr. David Stephens, superintendent, also expressed his support. The greatest opportunity for growth, he said, will be at the elementary building. Additional classrooms, he said, could be added there in the future. Also, he said, a modular classroom at the junior high can be moved to the elementary next year.

Board members seemed to be caught off guard. They listened, posed questions and offered comments, but did not commit to supporting the proposed change. A couple of times, board vice-president Randy Sanders made mention of “what was said (to taxpayers) when we went out to ask for support for the building.”

“I don’t disagree,” Sanders said, regarding the latest plan. “We’ve just got some explaining to do. It would have been so much easier if you had come up with this in the beginning. It wouldn’t have been a problem then. We all want what is best for the kids.”

Stephens said graphics will be made between now and the January meeting allowing board members to view scenarios and projected numbers. To get teachers in place, he said, a decision regarding the matter would be most beneficial if confirmed by the January meeting allowing teachers to be placed prior to the February meeting.

There was brief discussion regarding shuttling students, staggering start and dismissal times as well as the current numbers. All of those issues, the administrators said, could be worked through. Last week, the numbers by grade were kindergarten 233; first grade, 241; second grade 256; third grade, 252; fourth grade, 247; fifth grade 270; sixth grade, 244; seventh grade, 245; eighth grade, 273; 9th grade 248; 10th grade 246; 11th grade 256; and 12th grade 219 for a total of 3,230 students in the district.

Concluding the discussion, board member Jake Turner said the district could be in worst shape.

“We could be seeing declining numbers,” he said.

The new Intermediate School, measuring 95,000 square-feet, will feature 64,000 square-feet of classroom space, including 30 regular sized classrooms, and administration offices and the rest of the space will be for two gymnasiums, a cafeteria with a kitchen and a band room. It was said the school was designed to take care of the needs of 925 students.

Other business:

• Lance Wright, project manager for Nabholz Construction Services of Conway, presented an update on the rebuilding of the Intermediate School. “Overall, there have been no major issues. We are progressing as we had scheduled,” he said.

Two crews, Wright said, are working on projects at the school including the [filtered word] and roof. With a $12.6 million price tag, the completion date for the school is anticipated to be June 30, weather permitting and it is expected to see its first students in the fall of 2015. Weather plans, Wright said, are in place to deal with the cold temperatures. However, he said, wind could be a problem and stop the work.

The building was about 90 percent completed when the April tornado ripped the structure apart.

• The board approved the submittal of a new resolution to the Arkansas Department of Education asking for limitations to be changed regarding two companies Reed Inc. and Southern Tee’s. The two companies fall under the conflict of interest policy with ties to the school. Under the new proposal, purchases with Southern Tee’s in excess of $2,000 would require board approval and three bids and allow purchases for up to $10,000 per year. The resolution for Reed would allow purchases not to exceed $5,000 per year. The school’s current resolution, with tighter restrictions, stands while waiting for the ADE decision.

• Approved the purchase of diesel from Green and Chapman for $2.86 per gallon.

• Approved changes to the health care coverage and affordable care act.

• Approved a one-year contract with Kellogg and Sovereign as a third party providing services for E-Rate filing at a cost of $6,000 and a three percent commission on savings achieved.

Following an executive session, the board approved the termination of Traci Sudduth. Also, approved the employment of Vincent Rappold as substitute bus driver, Melissa Belote as an extended sub to replace Brian Strandlund for the remainder of the school year. Also, extended Courtney Pruett as a sub to replace Lori Willhite for the remainder of the year and Katie Baldwin to replace Jacob Roper for the remainder of the school year. Also, approved the payment of 16 additional pay for cafeteria manager Sophia Hogan.