Dawn Patrol: Joe Walsh pulled off radio; Roskam out of leadership post?

hello

Joe Walsh tested his radio station, 560-AM WIND, last night after it kept cutting to commercial when he used racially charged language by using or preparing to use racial slurs. The station ultimately ended his show.

Walsh pulled off radio for use of racial language

Former Republican congressman and current radio host Joe Walsh is "off the air until further notice" after he used racially charged language in a discussion about the controversial nickname of the Washington, D.C., NFL football team. Walsh said getting kicked off his WIND-AM radio show last night proved his point. "I don't know how you can have the discussion without identifying the terms," he said. Full story.

Roskam could be out of leadership after losing whip bid

Rep. Peter Roskam, now the Republican chief deputy whip in the U.S. House, could be out of the leadership picture for now as Rep. Steve Scalise -- chosen as majority whip -- gets to pick his right-hand lawmaker and could be expected to reward an ally who helped him rise. Roskam lost the bid for that position yesterday to Scalise. Full story.

Lightning strike causes fire near Glen Ellyn

A reported lightning strike caused a fire on the roof of a house last night in an unincorporated area near Glen Ellyn, authorities said. The Glen Ellyn Volunteer Fire Company responded to the fire on Stratford Court, west of Stratford Road, at about 9:30 p.m. Full story.

Freight train hits pedestrian in Lake Forest

Police late last night were investigating a crash on the Metra Milwaukee District North Line near Lake Forest where a freight train struck a pedestrian. Police responded to the scene about 8 p.m. near Everett and Waukegan roads. Full story.

Two accused of lying about kidnapping friend

Two people are facing disorderly conduct charges after authorities say they lied about holding a friend for ransom in an attempt to get money from her grandfather. DuPage County prosecutors said Deanna Nolan, 19, of Lisle, and Jakarre Brown, 20, of Maywood, were behind the false kidnapping report. Full story.

$1.2 million gift to hospital from West Dundee couple

Presence St. Joseph Hospital in Elgin is on the receiving end of a $1.2 million bequest -- the largest family estate gift in the hospital's history. The gift comes from the late Thomas J. and Barbara A. Galvin of West Dundee. "My parents have always been very generous, especially with organizations that they feel have helped them and the family, as well as the community," said their son, Joe Galvin. Full story.

IDOT advises drivers to stay off the Kennedy again this weekend

IDOT officials are asking drivers to again avoid the Kennedy Expressway this weekend as they gear up for the second phase of bridge demolition at the interchange with Ohio and Ontario streets downtown. From 10 p.m. Friday to 5 a.m. Monday, the westbound Kennedy will be squeezed into two lanes starting at Congress Parkway. Officials said the public took warnings about a traffic meltdown to heart June 13 through 16 while the eastbound Kennedy lanes were closed and gridlock was averted. Full story.

Cook County property tax levies increase

Cook County property tax levies are going up, but not as much as they could. The county's 1,500-plus taxing bodies collectively raised property taxes by more than $122 million, according to the annual property tax report issued by County Clerk David Orr's office. The increase represents a little more than a 1 percent increase from 2012 to 2013. Full story.

World Cup

Uruguay beat England, while Greece held on for a 0-0 draw with Japan on Thursday in World Cup action. The U.S. team plays Portugal Sunday night.