The proposed Welford Sanders Historic Lofts would convert the former Nunn Bush Shoe Co. factory, at 2801-2821 N. 4th St., into 58 apartments and 30,000 square feet of offices. Credit: Michael Sears

By of the

Imagine a pile of free money, albeit with strings attached.

That could describe a federal program that provides tax credits to help finance apartment buildings for low- and moderate-income renters. And, even with those strings, competition for the credits is fierce.

That is highlighted by a new plan to convert a former Milwaukee central city school into apartments. That property is next to a similar proposed development site, and within about six blocks of yet another planned project.

The "free money" is actually the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit program. Sometimes called affordable housing tax credits, the program was created during President Ronald Reagan's administration and has repeatedly received bipartisan Congressional approval over the past 30 years.

The developers that win the taxpayer-subsidized credits sell them to help raise equity cash, while also obtaining private construction loans to finance apartments. In return for the tax credits, developers must lease apartments at below-market rents to people earning no higher than 60% of their local median income.

In Wisconsin, the credits are provided through an annual competition operated by the Wisconsin Housing and Economic Development Authority. In April, the authority awarded $12.5 million in credits to help finance 25 developments totaling 1,293 apartments — including 1,162 units set aside for lower-income people.

That was out of applications seeking $27.9 million in credits for 51 developments totaling 2,585 apartments, including 2,306 set aside as affordable units.

That result, with around half of the applicants obtaining credits, helps explain what happened at Monday's city Plan Commission meeting.

Development firm Gorman & Co. is seeking a zoning change to allow the conversion of the former Fifth Street School, 2770 N. 5th St., into roughly 50 apartments.

The commission voted 4-0 to delay acting on that request, which would need Common Council approval, after commission member J. Allen Stokes said he was concerned about the number of similar developments pending within the surrounding Harambee neighborhood.

Stokes cited the proposed Welford Sanders Historic Lofts, which would convert the former Nunn Bush Shoe Co. factory, at 2801-2821 N. 4th St., into 58 apartments and 30,000 square feet of offices.

Stokes said he's signed a letter of support for that development. It would be the latest phase in King Drive Commons, which features commercial space and 108 rental housing units in an area bordered mainly by N. 2nd and 6th streets and W. Center and Hadley streets.

The Welford Sanders Historic Lofts would be in the former Milwaukee Enterprise Center, which is just north of the former Fifth Street School. It would be created by Wisconsin Redevelopment LLC and Martin Luther King Economic Development Corp.

Other nearby developments mentioned by Stokes were the proposed conversion of Garfield Avenue Elementary School, 2215 N. 4th St., into 29 apartments, with another 30 units planned for a new building to be built just north of the school along W. North Ave.

Also, there are long-range plans to replace the Milwaukee Public Library's Martin Luther King branch, at the northwest corner of N. King Drive and W. Locust St., with a new library and apartments, Stokes said. The planning for that possible project will begin in 2016, and would be among the library's series of redeveloped buildings.

"I'm concerned about all these potential units coming on line," said Stokes, a longtime community developer and neighborhood resident. "You're talking about a very small space."

Community meeting

Stokes and other commission members said Oregon, Wis.-based Gorman & Co. should meet with neighborhood residents about its proposal. Ted Matkom, Gorman's Wisconsin market president, said he would organize a community meeting.

After the commission meeting, Stokes said he was concerned about competition among the various developments for the federal tax credits and how that could affect the Welford Sanders Historic Lofts proposal.

He also said there should be affordable housing projects in other Milwaukee neighborhoods.

But there is strong demand for such apartments in the Harambee neighborhood, Matkom said.

"People like this area," Matkom said, citing the closeness to Milwaukee's east side.

Matkom, in a later interview, said he believes Stokes raised the issue because the neighborhood has three affordable apartment proposals involving redevelopment of historic buildings.

The state housing authority, Matkom said, "is probably not going to award (tax credits for) three deals that are all the same."

"It's kind of a touchy issue," he said.

Gorman is now considering changing its proposal to apartments restricted for older people, in order to differentiate it, Matkom said. He said the firm's 68-unit Sherman Park Senior Living Community, which opened within a former school in 2013 at 3245 N. 37th St., has around 50 people on its waiting list.

However, by proposing only senior apartments, Gorman would have just one- and two-bedroom units, eliminating plans for three-bedroom units that are typically used by younger families.

Not offering the larger units would reduce the number of points on the state housing authority's scoring system for determining which proposals get tax credits, Matkom said.

That system considers a variety of factors, including financial feasibility and economic impact.

Most projects must get at least 300 points to compete for tax credits, he said. This year, proposals with at least 321 points received credits, Matkom said.

A lack of three-bedroom units takes away eight points, Matkom said. And, in a competition where projects can fail to obtain credits because their score is just one point below the winning score, that can amount to a "a big, big deal," he said.

Still, Matkom said Stokes made "some valid points" in his comments at the Plan Commission meeting.

"We're the third person on the block," Matkom said, "so I guess it's kind of our duty to differentiate ourselves."

Different approach

Meanwhile, the developers proposing the neighboring Welford Sanders Historic Lofts also might take a different approach.

They're considering seeking tax credits which do not have a competition, but provide only about half the funds of the main tax credits, said Robert Lemke, who operates Wisconsin Redevelopment LLC.

"It can be competitive," Lemke said. "And we don't want to hurt the economics of any other project."

Also, Maures Development Group LLC and St. Paul, Minn.-based CommonBond Communities Inc. want to create 59 apartments at Garfield Avenue Elementary School and a new adjacent building.

That development, known as The Griot, would include commercial space and a new home for America's Black Holocaust Museum.

That proposal was to be reviewed this year by the Common Council after being recommended by the city's Bronzeville Advisory Committee.

But that review has been delayed while the developers continue to work on the project's financing and other details, said Jeff Fleming, Department of City Development spokesman.

Neither Maures owner Melissa Goins nor Ellen Higgins, CommonBond vice president for business development, could be reached for more information.

Fleming declined to comment on the competition for tax credits. At the Plan Commission meeting, Vanessa Koster, city planning manager, said the department advocates for all such projects.

Ald. Milele Coggs, whose district includes all three proposals, didn't respond to requests for comment.

Meanwhile, the three projects could undergo review by the state housing authority in early 2016, with the annual credits award announcement likely coming in April.

Facebook: facebook.com/JSBusiness

Twitter: twitter.com/TomDaykin