Space Coast Cancer Seminar Focuses On Healthcare Quality

By Cyndi Byars // April 19, 2015

Innovations – Improving Value In Healthcare

Space Coast Cancer Center Presents Innovations Healthcare Conference In Viera

BREVARD COUNTY • VIERA, FLORIDA – Space Coast Cancer Center presented “Innovations – Improving Value In Healthcare” Accent On Cancer Conference, which focused on timely issues that are affecting patients, employees and their employers.

The conference, an important one for Brevard County employers and the community, was held at the Holiday Inn in Viera. It focused on improving value in healthcare, and the changes in care and benefits for oncology patients.

Topics included “Opportunities for Employers and Health Plans in the Oncology Landscape” and “Accountable Care Strategy.”

Nationally recognized experts presented information on the Affordable Care Act and payment reform.

“The Business of Oncology” was presented by Karen Van Caulil of the Florida Health Care Coalition; “The Evolution of Benefit Design” was presented by Leah Burdett of Millennium Pharmaceuticals; and “The American Society of Clinical Oncology Quality Oncology Practice Initiative” was presented by Tracy Wagner, RN, of Space Coast Cancer Center.

Amy Supraner, Strategic Planning Manager for Aetna, presented information about Aetna’s Oncology Medical Home, and then took questions from the audience.

Dawn Holcombe, MBA, FACMPE, DGH Consulting, Speaker/Moderator talked about “Challenges and Opportunities for the Employers and Health Plans in the Oncology Landscape.”

Today’s employers are faced with the tremendous challenge of making prudent business decisions for themselves and providing optimal benefits for their employee base.

The access to quality, state of the art medical care is critical. After job satisfaction health benefits are one of the primary factors in employee retention.

Space Coast Cancer Center is a leader in Florida and the nation offering an oncology medical home. The oncology medical home was developed to meet the challenge of improving quality and access to cancer care. This is a patient-centered system of delivering quality cancer care that is coordinated and efficient.

In today’s ever changing Affordable Care Act landscape even understanding the basic employer health care requirements can be difficult to decipher.

Every patient and their employer, especially those who are diagnosed with cancer, are concerned about the emotional, physical and financial impact of serious illness.

Both the patient and employer are concerned about short and long term disability, reduced attendance and productivity.

Barbie Jacks of Raintree Oncology presented “Physician Dispensing Value In The Community Oncology Setting.”

“Today we discussed the rise of oral oncology in the marketplace and the value of physician-dispensing pharmacies, which have increased in number in the past five years,” said Jacks.

Space Coast Cancer Center is a leader in Florida and the nation offering an oncology medical home.

The oncology medical home was developed to meet the challenge of improving quality and access to cancer care. This is a patient-centered system of delivering quality cancer care that is coordinated and efficient.

Local cancer survivors spoke about a patient’s perspective, and how the Come Home program assisted them in recovery. Come Home is a program for oncology patients that includes team-based care, and services such as a 24/7 triage line, as an alternative to inconvenient visits to the emergency room.

Medical administrators, human resources professionals, home health agency managers and hospice administrators were among those in attendance at the conference.

For more information about Space Coast Cancer Center, log on to SpaceCoastCancer.com or call Diane Petrocelli at 855-894-4673.

Click here to contribute your news or announcements Free