SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Democrats will do anything – anything – to stay in power.

That’s the lesson from the last 24 hours of revelations from the Obama administration, the Hillary Clinton campaign, and the Rahm Emanuel mayoralty in Chicago.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

On Monday, the former head of President Barack Obama’s Defense Intelligence Agency, Lt. General Michael Flynn, openly told CNN’s Jake Tapper that Obama’s White House purposefully ignored alarming intelligence reports about the rise of ISIS. “I think that [the intelligence reports] did not meet a narrative the White House needed,” said Flynn. “I’ll be very candid with you… I think the narrative was that ‘Al Qaeda was on the run, and [Osama] bin Laden was dead… They’re dead and these guys are, we’ve beaten them.’”

That’s an incredible admission. It lends credence to everything conservatives have said about the Obama administration’s manipulation of the Benghazi terrorist attacks, as well as their refusal to take stock of terrorist gains in Libya leading up to those attacks. It also demonstrates that the Obama administration was willing to allow terrorism to rise, to allow thousands of American allies to be slaughtered by ISIS, just so that President Obama could maintain the fiction that he had put Islamic terrorists on the defensive.

In short: Obama lied, people died, Obama got re-elected.

And Obama is still manipulating national security information to defend his narrative of victory in the Middle East.

Three weeks ago, the day before ISIS shot 130 people to death in Paris, Obama said that the terrorist group had been contained. But yesterday, Marine General Joseph Dunford, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, told a congressional committee that ISIS was “not contained.” Yet Obama continues to go with his original story and suggest that climate change presents a graver risk to the world than ISIS, because to do otherwise would be to recognize his own failures – and by extension, the failures of his hoped-for Democratic successor.

Who, it turns out, is quite happy to manipulate information herself for political gain.

The rip on Secretary of State Hillary Clinton over Benghazi was simple: she initiated an invasion of Libya; she then ignored the consequences of that invasion to prevent political blowback. She ignored requests for more security for Ambassador Chris Stevens – and then she covered all of that up by lying about the source of the attacks.

It turns out that all of that was essentially true. Her emails show that she knew right away what was happening in Benghazi, and informed Chelsea Clinton about it; the emails also show that she passed classified material across her server, and that she met with UN Ambassador Susan Rice before Rice went on national television to pretend that a YouTube video had driven the attacks.

The narrative had to be preserved in order to preserve Hillary’s shot at the presidency.

And power must be preserved in Chicago, too, where Obama former chief of staff Rahm Emanuel reigns as mayor.

Emanuel reportedly covered up a dashcam video of Officer Jason Van Dyke’s October 2014 alleged murder of 17-year-old Laquan McDonald. The release of the tape appears to show that Van Dyke shot McDonald unjustifiably, so Emanuel fired police Superintendent Garry McCarthy yesterday. But Emanuel himself refuses to accept responsibility for stonewalling a tape that would have collapsed his early 2015 re-election effort. Now, he says that he won’t resign, because “We have a process. It’s called the election. The voters spoke. I’ll be held responsible for my actions and the decisions I made.”

Of course, that’s a lie. The whole purpose of the coverup was reportedly to keep the voters from holding Emanuel accountable. Claiming that he will be held accountable after his re-election is like Richard Nixon claiming after his 1972 re-election that he’d been held accountable for Watergate, and that the people had spoken.

And so it continues. The media cover for leftists’ consistent lies in order to protect their power grabs. And leftists continue to lie. Hell, why not? So far, it’s been working just fine. What are a few lost lives when leftist power is at stake?

Ben Shapiro is Senior Editor-At-Large of Breitbart News, Editor-in-Chief of DailyWire.com, and The New York Times bestselling author, most recently, of the book, The People vs. Barack Obama: The Criminal Case Against The Obama Administration (Threshold Editions, June 10, 2014). Follow Ben Shapiro on Twitter @benshapiro.