The Kelly Critics is a joint program of the Post-Gazette and Pittsburgh CLO's Gene Kelly Awards for Excellence in High School Musicals, in which students at Kelly schools review musicals at other Kelly schools. Reviews are edited by senior theater critic Christopher Rawson.

Everyone loves a good love triangle. Whether it’s Seymour, Audrey and the dentist or Bella, Jacob and Edward, twisted, tangled romances make for an intriguing plot. This year, Pittsburgh CAPA performed Aida, a show that revolves around a love triangle and ends in tragedy, leaving the audience in need of tissues.

The musical adaptation of Aida has a storyline similar to the opera of the same name. It details the ill-fated romance between an Egyptian conqueror, Radames, and a Nubian slave he captures, Aida; their star-crossed love is further complicated by Radames’ planned marriage to the Egyptian princess, Amneris. The story ends with heartbreak for all, and Radames’ and Aida’s executions.

The plot brings up ideas about the meaning of war, and how, despite cultural and political differences, we are all human beings, capable of love and desire. Though the musical is based on an opera, the music is not operatic; it instead combines tribal with jazz, rock with ballad, never settling on just one genre or flavor.

The staging often forces characters to stand alone on an empty stage while singing their feelings like a Shakespearean monologue. This focus on the singer, paired with the show’s high ratio of songs to dialogue, could have meant boredom, even annoyance; instead, each actor met the challenge and had a chance to show off her or his talents.

When Elexa Hanner came onstage as Aida and sang her first song, I knew that she could handle the demands of the part. Her voice was clear and always on-key, and reverberated against the walls to such an extent that even when her microphone gave out later in the show, her lyrics were comprehensible. Her expression embodied the struggle of her character, torn between love of her people and love of her man. Her body was taut with ambivalence and even in her lover’s arms, she could only smile with sadness and fear in her eyes.

Radames, played by Drew Praskovich, perfectly matched his militaristic persona, commanding the stage alongside his soldiers. Radames had strong presence and paraded around shirtless with definitive steps akin to those of a conquering explorer. Even more impressive, however, was how his effusively-masculine persona melted away as he fell in love with Aida, at first commanding her affection with sharp movements, then, later, softening his eyes and touch as he kissed her.

If their warring homelands weren’t enough, another obstacle to Aida’s and Radames’ love was soon introduced during the most entertaining number of the first act. Amneris, played by Alexandra Illescas, strutted onstage, surrounded by a giggly ensemble. Her purple silk robe and sparkly red stilettos, coupled with the Nautica-themed towel-clad girls surrounding her, created a number similar to Sharpay’s “Fabulous” in “High School Musical 2.”

Amneris was a ditz, concerned only with fashion; but she matured throughout the show, exposing deeper sides of her character. When she emerged from behind the post in the garden, having overheard Radames confess his love for Aida, the audience audibly gasped. Her expression and body language had entirely changed, and would never return to the superficial glances of her first scene.

I had expected the music and the dancing to be good; it is CAPA, after all. But I was surprised that the strongest attribute of this production, in my opinion, was the acting. Everyone truly embodied their characters, taking on distinct movements and postures.

When the curtain artfully lowered over the lovers, enclosing them in their tomb and silencing their soft, sorrowful voices, I felt tears threaten my eyes. I became so involved in the story that by the end, I felt bad for every character: for Mereb, whose funny comments and loyalty had brightened up the first act; for Amneris, whose youthful playfulness was drained by harsh reality; for all of the Nubian slaves, whose voices had echoed their hopelessness; and, of course, for Aida and Radames, whose love was suffocated by their fate.

This compelling, cohesive production is created by the strength of the ensemble and the cooperative nature of all of the performers. I walked into the theater and immediately noticed the musicians tuning up, chatting together and performing like a professional ensemble. The large musical numbers, especially “The Gods Love Nubia,” which closed the first act, swelled emotions throughout the theater.

The energy on that stage made me believe that these people lived together in a community filled with hopes and troubles. This feeling enveloped the audience and left me with the impression that I had seen something uniquely and powerfully human

For more high school musicals coverage, go to http://www.post-gazette.com/ae/theater-dance/ and scroll down.