BOSTON - Voters will go to the polls on Tuesday to choose a new member of Congress to represent Massachusetts’ 5th District, in what is likely to be a low-turnout election.

Secretary of State William Galvin is predicting turnout could be as low as 10 percent, according to Galvin spokesman Brian McNiff.

There will be four candidates on the ballot: Democrat Katherine Clark, of Melrose; Republican Frank Addivinola, of Boston; independent James Aulenti, of Wellesley; and independent James Hall, of Arlington.

The low turnout prediction is unsurprising in a general election that has gotten little attention from the media or the public since the Oct. 15 primary.

The district, which represents the suburbs north and west of Boston, is heavily Democratic. The seat opened up when Democrat Edward Markey, who held the House seat for 36 years, was elected to the U.S. Senate.

Clark, a state senator, defeated six other Democrats, including four elected officials, to win the Democratic primary. With nearly 70,000 votes cast in the Democratic primary, Clark won 32 percent of the vote, or just under 22,000 votes.

Addivinola beat two Republicans to take 49 percent of the Republican ballots cast, with fewer than 10,000 people voting in the Republican race.

Clark, 50, spent most of her career as a lawyer, working as a prosecutor, private practice attorney, general counsel for the state Office of Child Care Services and chief of the policy division for the state attorney general's office. She was elected to the House in 2008 and the state Senate in 2010. She is an advocate for issues relating to women, including abortion rights and pay equity. Her campaign focused on economic issues affecting working-class families including raising the minimum wage, mandating paid sick time and increasing money for early childhood education. She has focused on protecting Social Security and Medicare benefits and passing tougher gun laws.

Massachusetts’ Democratic U.S. Sens. Edward Markey and Elizabeth Warren both campaigned with Clark during the past week. She was endorsed by the national group EMILY’s List during the primary, which supports Democratic, pro-choice, female candidates. She has also been endorsed by several unions and environmental groups.

As of Nov. 20, Clark had raised $1.18 million during the special election cycle and loaned herself $250,000 before the primary. She had spent $1.19 million as of Nov. 20, with all but $140,000 of that spent before the primary.

Clark campaign spokesman Dan Cence said the campaign has been implementing its get-out-the-vote program since Friday, with volunteers making telephone calls and knocking on doors, urging people to vote. He could not provide numbers for how many voters the campaign is reaching out to.

Addivinola, 53, is an attorney and former biomedical researcher who teaches at Northeastern University and owns an educational publishing company. Although he grew up in Malden, he lives in Boston, which is not in the 5th District. He lost a race for Boston City Council at the same time as he was running for Congress. He lost a race for state Senate in 2010 and lost in the Republican primary when he ran for the 5th District congressional seat in 2012.

Addivinola wants to repeal the Affordable Care Act. He wants to limit government regulation of the economy. He has called for lowering individual and corporate taxes, reducing government spending and making government more efficient. He has focused on improving the economy by encouraging small businesses to grow and expand. He has opposed increasing the federal deficit through additional spending to stimulate the economy.

Addivinola declined to talk about his strategy, but said he is in the district every day and is reaching out to voters.

As of Nov. 20, Addivinola had raised less than $40,000 and loaned his campaign just over $60,000. He had spent just $20,000 on his entire campaign.

Clark and Addivinola met for their only debate on Friday. They clashed on guns – Clark wants to expand background checks for gun buyers, Addivinola does not – and on health care, with Clark supporting the Affordable Care Act and Addivinola opposed to it.

Aulenti is a financial adviser. His platforms include increasing Social Security benefits, eliminating government waste and abuse, providing health accounts for the poor and giving greater tax benefits to older workers with disabilities.

Hall is running under the tag "Justice, Peace, Security." His campaign is focused on eliminating nuclear weapons and weapons of mass destruction.

The 5th District includes the cities of Malden, Medford, Melrose, Waltham, Woburn, Revere and parts of Cambridge, and the towns of Arlington, Ashland, Belmont, Framingham, Holliston, Lexington, Lincoln, Natick, Sherborn, Stoneham, parts of Sudbury, Watertown, Wayland, Weston, Winchester, Winthrop and Southborough.

Polls will be open from 7 a.m. to 8 p.m.