Sioux Falls, SD

Two drug arrests at a Sioux Falls day care have some parents and city council members wondering if it's time for tougher rules.

Both the city and the state require a background check before licensing a day care, but they only look back five years. The only exceptions are sex crimes and abuse charges.

Jennifer Darger -- who is accused of selling meth out of her at-home day care -- pleaded guilty to felony drug charges eight years before receiving her licenses, and that has some people wondering whether five years is enough.

Knowing the city does background checks on day care providers puts parents at ease, but hearing that licensed provider is accused of selling meth out of her home has some wondering if the city needs more thorough checks.

"I think you have to look at it from the big picture, that idea that so we say it's five years or we say it's seven years or we say it's 8.6 years or whatever it is, you know that on that X day right after that line we draw, the day after that line, why didn't we go further?" Erpenbach said.

City Council member Michelle Erpenbach believes that shouldn't stop the discussion.

"That would require a lot of really good people that would be able to advise on what would be the right period of time? What's done in other communities? Other states?" Sioux Falls Department of Health Director Jill Franken said.

Tougher rules could also preventing people from getting a second chance.

"There are circumstances where we all know where people have committed a crime, they've paid their debt to society and they have been able to make the changes needed to become productive citizens," Franken said.

Even so, there may soon be talk about whether any felony conviction should be considered enough to ban someone from getting a child care permit.

"It would make it more complex and maybe the answer is yes, maybe we need to look at that and let's delineate then. What are those specific offenses that we really don't want anybody that's had any experience with that involved with our children and day care situations," Erpenbach said.

While the discussion on these background checks continues the Sioux Falls regulations allow parents to make unannounced inspections of these day care homes.

"Anytime. Morning, noon, afternoon, whenever. Walk into that day care and find out what's going on because ultimately, I can write as many laws as you want, but I cannot be there with your child like you can," Erpenbach said.

Erpenbach tells me that she hopes to have a discussion with council members and Franken about these background check policies as soon as possible to ensure the safety of anyone in need of a day care facility.

News

Crime

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.