Topics: Barack Obama, CNN, data journalism, explain the news, Ezra Klein, FiveThirtyEight, FiveThirtyEight.com, george will, Jay Rosen, Jonathan Chait, Lee Atwater, Nate Silver, New York Magazine, Paul Krugman, Peggy Noonan, Race, The New York Times, view from nowhere, Vix.com, Vox, Media News, News, Politics News

During his speech honoring the 50th anniversary of the Civil Rights Act at the Lyndon B. Johnson Presidential Library this week, President Obama touched on one of his favorite themes, the nature of social progress — or, as he likes to call it, history. “[W]e are here today because we know we cannot be complacent,” Obama said. “For history travels not only forwards; history can travel backwards, history can travel sideways. And securing the gains this country has made requires the vigilance of its citizens.” I’ve always considered Obama’s skepticism of the conventional narrative of progress — that things are, as Paul McCartney once sang, getting better all the time — to be one of his most appealing intellectual traits, a testament to his ability to, at his best, reject both despair and blind optimism and to understand that justice is not a given and positive change is not guaranteed. Conservatives, of course, ridiculed the line; children of the ever-cheery Ronald Reagan that they are, ambiguity and nuance is not really their thing.

In that moment, Obama was speaking about political progress and social change. But the insight can be extended well beyond the realm of civil rights and electoral politics. Ask someone who was young in the late ’70s, when punk rock supposedly forever vanquished disco, what they think of “Get Lucky”; or how about someone who thought they’d survived the “mom jeans” trend in the 1990s only to see them dotting college campuses once again, less than 20 years later. Or, to pick an example considerably less sexy than Daft Punk and fashion, look at the recent moves of three of the political press’ most influential writers: Ezra Klein, Nate Silver and Jonathan Chait.

These three men aren’t rolling back civil rights or bringing back the Bee Gees, but they’re doing something almost as bad: Whether they know it or not, they’re bringing back what media critic and New York University professor Jay Rosen has famously called “the view from nowhere,” an awful tic of American journalism that I believed, apparently in error, most smart and thoughtful reporters had abandoned after the blogosphere shook up the industry some 10-plus years ago.

Before detailing these three leading lights’ recent sins, however, let’s take a brief moment to describe the view from nowhere and explain why it’s pernicious and undeserving of rehabilitation. Probably no one has devised a better definition of the phenomenon than Rosen, who describes it as “a bid for trust that advertises the viewlessness of the news producer.” According to Rosen, the view from nowhere “places the journalist between polarized extremes, and calls that neither-nor position ‘impartial.’” As Rosen himself will grant, this inclination to be “objective” is not always bad. Indeed, journalism is impossible if its practitioners don’t acknowledge the existence of at least some kind of baseline objective reality. But the view from nowhere is more often a self-flattering and ass-covering gimmick, one that is intended to protect the journalist from receiving criticism for partiality but often leaves the reader less informed as a result. Paul Krugman has a famous joke headline about the view from nowhere, one that’s only a slight exaggeration of the practice at its worst: “Shape of the Planet: Both Sides Have a Point.”

When the blogosphere was at its most influential and least co-opted, around 10 years ago, an attack on the view from nowhere was one of its greatest and most disruptive critiques. As bloggers rightly pointed out, establishment journalists’ claims to be able to discern the unbiased, objective reality of any political dispute — which invariably turned out to be the midway point between the two extremes — was patent nonsense. Like any other social group, elite journalists had their unconscious biases and unstated assumptions. Figures like former New York Times editor Bill Keller or former Associated Press Washington bureau chief Ron Fournier could tell themselves that their preference for reducing the deficit by cutting Social Security and raising taxes was untarnished by ideology — but that didn’t make it so. Reporters at prestige outlets like the Washington Post or the Wall Street Journal could assume that because none of their friends or sources were globalization skeptics, no one took protectionist trade policy seriously. But the millions of Americans who voted for Ross Perot and Pat Buchanan in the 1990s would beg to differ.

And while it inspired gnashing of teeth and rending of garments from elite journalists more comfortable with the old guard, the ascension of “partisan” media like Fox News, the Huffington Post, “lean forward”-era MSNBC and group blogs on the left (Daily Kos) and right (RedState) was ultimately a good thing. There were drawbacks to ideological news sources, sure; but even if the range of stories covered by a lefty blog was more circumscribed than what you might find at CNN.com, readers could have more of a sense of the biases undergirding any given news source’s reporting and could apply grains of salt accordingly. They wouldn’t have to wonder if a glowing profile of Noam Chomsky gave short shrift to his critics, because they could note the political orientation of the news provider, and get further information from its opposite, before forming their own opinion. It’s not a perfect model, by any means, but it has one huge advantage over the previous standard: It’s honest.

For a while now, this new, more realistic appreciation of every journalist’s limited ability to transcend her own subjectivity was the new conventional wisdom. There were always dissenters and holdouts, to be sure; but the smartest writers on both the left and the right seemed to have internalized this new way of thinking. So imagine my surprise and even dismay when I found out that Ezra Klein — one of the many journalists who built a successful career by coming out of the blogosphere and tweaking old media for its faux-objective habits — began telling people that his much-anticipated new website’s goal would be to “explain the news” to readers. And imagine my disappointment when the site, which came to be known as Vox, had an inaugural post, a self-explainer of sorts, that pronounced that its “end goal” wasn’t “telling you what just happened, or how we feel about what just happened,” but rather to “mak[e] sure you understand what just happened.” Suddenly Klein, the guy who cut his teeth at the American Prospect, was telling readers he could make them “understand what just happened” without “telling you … how we feel about what just happened.” (I should note that Klein has previously disavowed liberalism, telling the New Republic’s Alec MacGillis, “I don’t really think of myself as a liberal. That’s not the project I’m part of, which is to let the facts take me where they do.” Liberals, you see, don’t care for facts.)

Somewhat encouragingly, Klein’s lead-off big piece for Vox was a story about “how politics makes us stupid” that focused on yet more research showing that smart, highly informed people were in fact often more rather than less likely to let their fundamental values and beliefs change the way they interpreted new information. By choosing to get things started with a piece about the inescapable nature of subjectivity, Klein seemed to be making a subtle recognition that no one can “explain the news” without having their own biases color their explanation. Vox just wrapped up its first week ever, though — and there are examples of pieces that both do and don’t embrace the view from nowhere — so only time will tell whether Klein and company understand that we’re all, in Klein’s extremely loaded choice of words, a little “stupid.”

Considerably less encouraging, although far less surprising, has been the new version of FiveThirtyEight, data whiz Nate Silver’s ESPN-backed revamp of what used to be a mainly politics-focused prediction site into a more sweeping general interest stop to learn about the world from what Silver calls the “data journalism” perspective. In a very long manifesto that served as the site’s formal introduction, Silver outlines where he sees flaws in modern journalism practice and why he believes a more data-centric approach is needed in the market. Much of his criticism is fair and some of it is absolutely true (journalists, this one included, are disproportionately innumerate; and his knocks on Peggy Noonan and George Will are spot-on). But while Silver correctly notes that “objectivity” as it’s understood in some newsrooms — such as his former haunt, the New York Times — is “often taken to be synonymous with neutrality or nonpartisanship,” he mistakenly concludes that the biggest problem with the model is simply a lack of statistical analysis. “The journalistic notion of objectivity, however flawed,” he writes, “at least creates some standard by which facts are introduced and presented to readers.” In other words, say what you want about the view from nowhere — at least it’s an ethos.