Senate leaves out HIPAA research changes

HIPAA RESEARCH CHANGES OUT OF SENATE ‘CURES’: A little-talked about section of the House-passed 21st Century Cures Act (H.R. 6) appears dead in the Senate. The language, section 1124, would allow HIPAA-protected information to be shared with researchers. Currently law limits it to treatment, payment or operations. But the Cures language isn’t included in bills to be marked up Wednesday by the Senate HELP Committee and circulated Monday. Supporters of the change, backed by groups like the Association of Clinical Research Organizations, say it would expedite medical research. Privacy advocates say it's a giveaway to drug companies. Of course, it could still be included when the House and Senate bills are conferenced…assuming the Senate passes a bill. HELP Chair Lamar Alexander is pushing for that as soon as next week.

FEEDBACK ON OTHER SENATE BILLS: As the Senate works to give legs to the president’s Precision Medicine Initiative, Health IT Now and its members like Oracle and NextGen Healthcare, have suggestions. In a letter to committee leaders, the groups urge common open-data standards and formats; clearly defined requirements for data sharing and use; and use of a common, volunteer consent form that will protect privacy and lower administrative costs. Their full letter: http://bit.ly/1S4Tvnb

Story Continued Below

Welcome to Tuesday Morning eHealth where your host’s hometown Atlanta Braves lost in extra innings to the Washington Nationals yesterday — probably the first of many to come this baseball season. Send your spring-minded news to dpittman@politico.com and connect with us on Twitter @David_Pittman, @arthurallen202, @DariusTahir @ POLITICOPro, @Morning_eHealth.

eHealth tweet of the day: Melissa M. Martin @martinmelissama: We need better ways to get PATIENTS their data @GetMyHealthData answering #AdvocacyDC

AHIMA TAKES TO THE HILL: Members of the American Health Information Management Association will take to Capitol Hill today as part of its Advocacy Leadership Symposium. HELP Committee Chair Lamar Alexander will talk to them this morning, according to the agenda.

SOME WORK LEFT TO DO: AHIMA still needs more than 94,000 signatures to reach the 100,000 needed for its online petition to have the Obama administration act on a national voluntary patient identifier, a way to spur the accurate matching of patient records as they are increasingly shared. AHIMA launched the online petition March 21 and has until April 19 to get the signatures needed to ensure a response from the White House. However, Congress — not the White House --— continues to leave the ban in place through annual appropriations bills.

TALKING PROVIDER DIRECTORIES: ONC and the Federal Health Architecture will gather in McLean, Va., over two days to discuss ways to further provider directories; a sort of phone book of doctors with which to share patient records when needed. The issues has been a bugaboo to solving interoperability. http://bit.ly/1UJ0zgg

OPTOMETRISTS SEEK FDA OVERSIGHT OF ONLINE VISION TESTS: The nation’s optometry lobby on Monday asked the FDA to take a closer look (so to speak) at an online vision test that Newt Gingrich has touted of late. The American Optometric Association wants Opternative's self-administered, home eye tests to submit pre-market approval, which it doesn’t have to do as a Class I device, as we told you last week. The company’s products are unproven, miss cases of eye disease, and provide inaccurate prescriptions for glasses and contacts, the AOA says. The optometry lobby has twice before asked the FDA to take another look without much apparent luck. Their letter to the FDA: http://bit.ly/1qlEVli

— “The AOA’s claims are false and mischaracterize the proven safety and effectiveness of Opternative’s technology. We are very clear throughout the patient experience that Opternative is not a replacement for an eye health exam. It's on our website, in the exam itself, and repeated to the patient in any necessary follow up care,” Aaron Dallek, Opternative CEO and co-founder, told Morning eHealth. “Opternative’s electronic technology operates under the supervision of trained professional and is registered as a medical device with the [FDA]. All examinations are conducted and all prescriptions are issued basis on the independent clinical judgement of the ophthalmologist consistent with the prevailing standard of care.”

SENATOR WANTS ANSWERS ON HHS DATA BREACH: Wisconsin Sen. Ron Johnson is demanding answers from HHS about the personal information of children’s records contained on a stolen laptop and portable hard drives. The devices in question were stolen from the Office of Child Support Enforcement in Olympia, Washington in early February. "It is unclear from the information HHS provided how many of those children's records were compromised, and the potential risk to those children, despite a statutory requirement that you provide that information to Congress," Johnson said in a letter obtained by The Associated Press. The devices contained between 2 million and 5 million names, Social Security numbers, birth dates, addresses and phone numbers, the AP said. The full story: http://bit.ly/201GEYX

HOW ARE PATIENTS USING GENETIC DATA?: 23andMe co-founder and Chief Executive Anne Wojcicki sat down with this week’s Re/code Decode podcast. She talks about her company’s founding, consumerism in health care, Theranos and FDA regulation. Wojcicki said consumers are most interested in their risk for Alzheimer’s disease. “It was really interesting to me to see all of these doctors talking about consumers, they don’t want their Alzheimer’s [information]. It’s scary for them. But the reality is consumers really want that information,” she said. “What the system is providing isn’t necessarily what the consumers want.” 23andMe isn’t able to predict Alzheimer’s yet. The full podcast: http://on.recode.net/1RYb5ze

— Wojcicki talks Theranos around the 24-minute mark where she says she is pulling for the company. She added that 23andMe worked hard at first to win over the scientific community, knowing it needed to do that before making a bigger splash publicly.

DTC TELEMED COMPANIES GRADED: A JAMA Internal Medicine study published Monday examined the quality of direct-to-consumer telemedicine companies like American Well and MDLive. Researchers reviewed nearly 600 visits from eight companies. Some highlights:

— The antibiotic prescribing rate were similar to in-person settings.

— Naming the correct diagnosis in videoconferencing and telephone care was superior to webchats and furthermore doesn’t appear to support limiting video-based care.

— 14 percent of visits were referred to local brick-and-mortar providers for follow-up.

— Some companies performed considerably better than others.

The full study: http://bit.ly/1qk5Yxq

YELP AS MEASURE OF QUALITY: Yelp hospital reviews correlate to government survey data and may be a reliable source of information missed by traditional hospital quality surveys, a study published Monday in Health Affairs found. In fact, the Hospital Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems may be missing out on key patient experiences that are gathered by open-ended Yelp reviews. Take a look at the study: http://bit.ly/1S4Vx6A This month’s edition of the health policy journal is all about patient’s use of data: http://bit.ly/1Xd6eIV

WHAT WE’RE CLICKING:

The chief medical officer of IBM Watson talks: http://bit.ly/1XcNtp0

Ransomware: Health care’s downfall?: http://bit.ly/1RKqaz7

HITRUST warns about growing ransomware threat: http://reut.rs/1S4qgRk

Two hospitals at New York City Health + Hospitals system switched to Epic EHRs over the weekend: http://bit.ly/20174u6

Washington doctor backs telemedicine for primary care: http://bit.ly/23ahKZ7

Tips, comments, suggestions? Send them along via email to our team: Arthur Allen (aallen@politico.com, @ArthurAllen202), David Pittman (dpittman@politico.com, @David_Pittman) and Darius Tahir (dtahir@politico.com, (@DariusTahir).