» Risks in health insurance plan

People are living longer. As health care costs grow, the St. Johns County School District has had to direct the cash flow toward its insurance plan.

While self-funded plans usually mean lower rates and costs for members, the organization takes all the risk. For firms using outside agencies, they essentially pay for a product, and the risk lies with that outside company.

The district has used a self-funded plan since the mid-1980s. There are between 6,500 and 6,700 members on the district’s plan with $30 million coming in and going out each year.

Tim Forson, deputy superintendent of operations, said any year with more in expenses than revenue can quickly throw the plan off balance.

In the 2010-11 school year there was a nearly $5 million spike in costs.

He said expenses went back down slightly the next year, but the district still has to correct the flow of revenue. The goal is for the health plan to sustain itself.

Into uncertainty

Over the last two years, employees have paid their premium contributions while the school board has paid its share plus $4.8 million and $2.9 million.

“All of this is part of our general operating revenue,” Forson said. “If you displace money into that health insurance plan you’re hurting all extensions of the organization.”

He said increasing expenses can impact salaries, resources for the classroom and the ability to hire additional staff.

“It is a money-in and money-out kind of thing, but the money going out is not what it was based on 10 or even five years ago,” he said.

Medical advances and new treatments and medicines all come at a cost. The district’s insurance premiums increased 12 percent starting July 2014.

“For most of our organization, we control what we spend,” Forson said. “ ... You can control what comes in, but you can’t control what goes out because you don’t know who’s going to be sick.”

Employees have not seen an increase in their premium payments since 2006. But school board contributions have gone up while absorbing numerous expense increases.

Forson said between 2008 and 2012, the district was limited in what it could do in terms of salary increases. As a result of the economic downturn, it held back on increasing premiums.

“We had a period of time where there wasn’t a lot of movement in the premiums that probably set the stage for some of our difficulties,” he said. “But it was the right thing to do for the employees at the time.”

Table manners

The higher rates coincide with shortcomings in salary increases under Florida’s Pay for Performance schedule. Negotiations between the district and the St. Johns Education Association are ongoing.

Michelle Dillon, association president, said premium hikes are not what teachers wanted to see in addition to Pay for Performance changes.

Forson said what they’re dealing with at the bargaining table is how to distribute the rate increases between employees and the board.

“We do realize the plan has some pretty serious issues, so we’re just going to have to go back to the table,” Dillon said.

She added the union’s point is that teachers should not be making about the same amount and none should be earning less. Uncertainties regarding testing, evaluations and wages have added to teachers’ frustrations, particularly toward Tallahassee.

“I think we do an outstanding job,” Dillon said. “Our hands are tied with the duties of this job and we’d like to see that reflected.”

Taking measures

All district employees enrolled in the insurance plan use the same plan.

An insurance committee includes three members from instructional, non-instructional and management staffs. The committee meets each month and makes decisions responding to particular needs.

In recent years, the health plan has adopted a two-tier system, generic and low-cost medications, three clinics, and fees.

Cathy Weber, director for district benefits and salaries, is liaison between the district and the health centers. She also oversees and coordinates the administration of the insurance plan and committee.

One of the newest fees is a spousal fee of $35 per pay period, or $665 per year. Employees with spouses who are able to get insurance elsewhere have to absorb some of their costs to the plan.

Weber said the reason it is $35 is that spouses are costing the health plan 15 percent more in claims than the average employee’s claims.

Another challenge is the Affordable Care Act.

“Affordable health care is something that depends on the participation of everyone,” Forson said.

He added reinsurance fees are of no benefit to the district’s plan. They are paid directly to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services to subsidize the federal program.

The fees cost the district $63 per member last year and will likely cost $44 this year.

Forson said it is still better, however, to operate under the self-funded system.

“We just have to get to where our cash flow in a given year is positive,” he said. “That’s why we’ve made the changes we’ve made. The changes are good changes.”

***

By the numbers

• In the 2014-15 school year, for a basic single employee plan, over 19 paychecks, the employee amount is $56.23 per paycheck or $1,068.37 annually. The board’s share is $279.32 per paycheck or $5,307.08 annually.

• In the 2013-14 school year, for a basic single employee plan, over 19 paychecks, the employee amount was $51.61 per paycheck or $980.59 annually. The board’s share was $247.98 per paycheck or $4,711.62 annually.