Stephanie Teatro (Photo: Submitted) Story Highlights Eight years ago, being pro-immigrant meant that you were opposed to the English-only measure.

The centrality of immigrants and refugees represents just how far we've come as a city.

We have gone from being a tolerant city to one that proudly identifies as a welcoming community.

On June 22, the Nashville mayoral candidates sat on stage at Glencliff High School for the Immigrant and Refugee Mayoral Forum.

The forum, attended by nearly 700 Nashvillians and organized by 30 organizations, was one of the largest to date.

As the forum began, we asked the candidates to look out at and see the new face of Nashville: quickly growing, incredibly diverse and powerfully engaged in the civic process.

While the candidates differed on their preference for Indian naan versus Mexican tortillas and their own family's story of migration, the candidates were united in their commitment to promoting immigrant integration and their unanimous support of forward-thinking policies, like municipal IDs.

Their responses weren't the first indication that immigrants have become an important constituency and key voting bloc in the mayor's race: Candidates have been spotted at mosques, seen covered in colorful powder at an Indian Holi Festival and heard on Spanish-language radio stations.

The centrality of immigrants and refugees and the elevated policy discussion in this year's race represent just how far we've come as a city.

Eight years ago, being pro-immigrant meant that you were opposed to the English-only measure. Since voting down the referendum in 2009, we have moved from being a city that is merely tolerant of changing demographics to one that proudly identifies as a welcoming community.

Nashville has one of the fastest-growing immigrant populations of any major city in the U.S., and under Mayor Karl Dean's leadership the city has increasingly seen this demographic change not as a challenge to be managed but as an asset.

That's not to say that there aren't urgent challenges for the next mayor to address.

The same year that Mayor Dean took office undocumented immigrants lost access to driver licenses and Davidson County began participating in the controversial 287(g) program.

Eight years later, undocumented immigrants still lack access to government-issued identification and still fear any interactions with law enforcement because of ongoing collaboration between federal immigration enforcement and our Sheriff's Office.

Despite the fact that immigrants have high labor participation rates and are twice as likely as U.S.-born Tennesseans to open a business, almost a third of immigrant families with children younger than 18 are living in poverty, and nearly half of all immigrant households spend more than 30 percent of their income on housing.

As the mayoral forum showed us, continuing to build a welcoming and inclusive city must be a priority for any viable candidate. We need the next mayor to actively invest in the growing immigrant population, not only because our city will be stronger today when all residents are able to fully contribute and fully participate, but also because our future depends on it.

Already 20 percent of MNPS students are Latino, and a third come from homes where a language other than English is spoken.

Despite the increased attention on English language learners, state data shows that from 2011 to 2014, the rate that these students are learning English has actually declined every year.

The next mayor needs to ensure accountability, equitable public education for immigrant children and commit to providing additional resources to support immigrant students.

During the next administration, our city needs to move beyond just welcoming immigrants to actively investing in integration and working toward equity and inclusion. We have high expectations for our next mayor and are eager to partner with her or him.

It's clear that immigrant and refugees are among the winners of the August election, but as the next mayor of Nashville should know, that means our whole city is winning, too.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1MoIkVs