Topics: black lives matter, Jamar Clark, minneapolis, Minnesota, Life News, News

I’m a white man living in a white neighborhood of Minneapolis. Like the majority of Minnesotans, my quality of life isn’t rattled by systemic racism and maybe that’s part of the problem. That lack of personal experience leaves white Minnesotans in a dangerous denial about racial inequality in this state.

Although I work only a few blocks from the 4th precinct in North Minneapolis that Black Lives Matter protesters recently occupied after officers shot and killed Jamar Clark, I avoided taking part in the protests. I became an online advocate instead, liking posts that called for action, watching on my computer screen in silence as protesters blocked I-94 and traffic built up for miles. I watched as police moved the tents of protesters at the 4th precinct, how protesters became involved in heated confrontations with officers who used mace and beanbag bullets to subdue the crowd.

Working with homeless youth in this neighborhood, I know the patterns of discrimination and abuse many people of color face at the hands of police, and the general public’s apathy toward that abuse. The social response to the death of Jamar Clark, and the Black Lives Matter protests, are significant, showing a city – a country – divided. As a result Minneapolis has gotten to see itself more clearly. Loyalties are largely secured along racial lines. North Minneapolis, a primarily black neighborhood, responded to growing tensions and the mistrust black residents have toward law enforcement due to allegations of mistreatment. Some white Minnesotans, defying their Minnesota Nice reputation, are rebuking the Black Lives Matter movement and showing their continued ignorance of the obstacles people of color face.

When I saw the video of white supremacists preparing to visit the 4th precinct, flaunting guns and hiding behind bandannas and hateful language, I knew I needed to stand with the protesters. Sitting back and remaining silent felt like an abdication of basic decency. Then news spread that the three white supremacists shot and maimed five unarmed protesters. This neatly kept, polite city seemed to be unraveling.

The next day I followed the smell of burning firewood to the 4th precinct and found a working community. There was an area for warm clothes and gloves to hand out to protesters, fire pits and firewood were stationed down the center of Plymouth Avenue, plumes of smoke rising into the sky; a coffee and snack table was set up next to a crowd of protesters talking to journalists. I asked what was needed, what could I bring that would be useful. The woman refilling the coffee canteens paused, her lips pursed as she struggled to figure out what they currently lacked. “We might need more lids for coffee in a few hours.” The community was supporting the protesters and sharing resources to keep the protests sustainable.

Looking around at the kindness and community on Plymouth Avenue I realized much of my hesitation to participate was due to my unconscious buy-in to media paranoia and panic that perpetuates irrational fear. People have rationalized their hate online, filling Facebook feeds with an utter lack of compassion and vitriol. Some argued because Clark had a criminal history he somehow deserved his fate. Others said black people behaved like animals and needed to learn to be respectful. A common argument against the movement is that the Black Lives Matter tactics are loud and accomplish nothing. Historically, people’s movements—from Gandhi to Martin Luther King—have agitated the status quo yielding long-term change even if the immediate effect was difficult for us to see.

Since the occupation of the 4th precinct, Black Lives Matter Minneapolis has achieved a great deal. They asked for and received an independent investigation by the state and federal governments. They asked for and received the release of the officers’ names. They met with Assistant Attorney General Vanita Gupta, Gov. Mark Dayton, and lawyers from the Department of Justice. They also received a commitment that the tapes of Clark’s shooting will be shared with the family and made public as soon as it will not impede the investigation. The nation has taken notice. Black Lives Matter Minneapolis will be heard. What, exactly, white America hears is an issue of how we use our power and privilege in this country.