A beard has become a facial hair statement many men proudly sport as an accessory to their alpha maleness. However, if left unkempt, there may be some not-so-appealing things hiding under the infinite layers of hair. In a Youtube video uploaded by user “Joe Gross,” the unidentified man documents the tug-of-war process of pulling an ingrown hair from his jawline with his tweezers briefly after he shaved his beard.

“This is the craziest thing. I've had this gigantic black mark on my face for months and it looks like it's literally a pound of hair,” says the man in the video as he caresses it with a pair of pink tweezers. At the 11-second mark, the man gently tugs on the ingrown hair with his tweezers and manages to pull out a chunk of hair as blood oozes out of his pimple. He continues the do-it-yourself ingrown hair treatment until he gets rid of the ball of hair.

The man had a pimple that would ooze every couple of months for the last year or so. According to the YouTube description, his dermatologist told him it was a cyst she would have to cut out. Before embarking on the invasive procedure, armed with a tweezer, he did some exploring of his own to find it was just a disturbingly long ingrown hair.

It is not uncommon for ingrown hairs to develop into cysts. Ingrown hairs arise when hair grows under the skin instead of out of it, causing discomfort and in some cases infection. When the mass thickens the skin this results in a cyst, which will often become red and infected. Improper shaving techniques are the number one cause of ingrown hairs. The Mayo Clinic says it’s important to use a lubricating shave gel, a sharp, single-blade razor, and to shave in the direction of hair growth.

The man’s video, originally uploaded two years ago, was recently rediscovered by Reddit, has over 10 million views. The video has gone viral in the Reddit community with users offering their suggestions to keep beards clean. Reddit user “hawkens85” wrote: “If you have a beard, make sure you're rinsing it every day in the shower and getting down to the skin.” He continued, “After every shower, make sure you're putting some essential oils into your beard, like tea tree oil, argan oil, olive oil, that kinda stuff.”

If you have an ingrown hair, treat it accordingly, and avoid it growing disturbingly long lengths, unless you’re into that sort of thing.