INDIANAPOLIS — Virgil Green remains a favorite to return as a free agent. However, with the increasing likelihood that Julius Thomas won’t be re-signed and Jacob Tamme’s future uncertain, the Broncos cast a wide net in search for tight ends at the NFL scouting combine.

They met with Minnesota’s Maxx Williams, considered the top player at his position in multiple mock drafts. He could still be available when the Broncos make the 28th overall pick.

Williams profiles well for Gary Kubiak’s offense. He learned to run block at Minnesota, but was athletic enough to be flexed out in the passing game. At 247 pounds, he clocked a 4.77 40-yard dash, showed strong hands and ran efficient routes. Williams, 20, left school after his redshirt sophomore season.

“The toughest question to answer (when meeting teams) is why did you leave? Personally I can answer it because I want to be the best, and to be the best you have to play against the best,” Williams said. “Competition is what makes you better.”

Williams will attempt to follow in his father’s footsteps. The New York Giants selected Brian Williams with the 18th overall pick in 1989.

The Broncos also met with Oklahoma’s Blake Bell, a later-round projection. He ran a 4.8 40, showing commitment by practicing his dash on the carpeted floor in the convention center adjacent to Lucas Oil Stadium.

Tackling a need. The Broncos need a right tackle. If they don’t sign a free agent — the Texans’ Derek Newton is worth keeping an eye on — they will draft one. They might anyway. The Broncos talked with Louisiana’s La’el Collins, a likely first-rounder, Colorado State’s Ty Sambrailo and Utah’s Jeremiah Poutasi.

“I think the system they are going to run is great,” said Collins, who also talked with the Broncos at the Senior Bowl. “I feel like I can fit in any system. That’s just the type of player I am.”

Thompson’s knee fix. Undrafted rookie Juwan Thompson turned an eye-opening training camp into a roster spot. He averaged 5.0 yards a carry on 54 attempts during the season, but a knee and hip injury left him inactive for the final regular season game and the playoffs. Thompson’s knee required an offseason arthroscopic procedure.

General manager John Elway said last week that Thompson, a sturdy 225 pounds, could compete for a fullback spot in Kubiak’s offense.

Footnotes. Colorado State quarterback Garrett Grayson did not participate in quarterback drills Saturday because of a hamstring injury, but believes he will be healthy for his pro day next month. … Georgia receiver Chris Conley delivered the performance of the week, tying the combine record in vertical jump (45 inches) and broad jump (11-7) and ran a 4.35 40.