Phil Robertson Defends Anti-Gay Comments: 'All I Did Was Quote From the Scriptures'

Phil Robertson is standing by his controversial statements.

A&E suspended the "Duck Dynasty" star last week after his inflammatory comments in a GQ interview, calling homosexuality a sin, saying the Nazis needed Jesus and that he never saw the mistreatment of any black person growing up in Louisiana before the civil rights era.

"I will not give or back off from my path," he reportedly said Sunday.

The Daily Mail said it was granted access yesterday while Robertson, 67, spoke to a small Bible study group in West Monroe, La.

During the group's meeting, Robertson defended his comments, adding that they were quotes from the Bible. "I didn't think much of it at all, but it seems a lot of other people did," he said.

(Photo Credit: A&E)

READ: 'Duck Dynasty' Suspends Phil Robertson After Anti-Gay Comments

He continued, "I love all men and women. I am a lover of humanity, not a hater. … I have been immoral, drunk, high. I ran with the wicked people for 28 years and I have run with the Jesus people since and the contrast is astounding."

He spoke to the group for about 45 minutes.

"I tell people, 'You are a sinner, we all are. Do you want to hear my story before I give you the bottom line on your story?'" he preached, according to the Daily Mail. "We murder each other and we steal from one another, sex and immorality goes ballistic. All the diseases that just so happen to follow sexual mischief."

RELATED: Phil Robertson's Other Controversial Quotes From His GQ Interview

Robertson admitted that he too has committed sexual sins and offered advice to the group at White's Ferry Road Church.

"So what is your safest course of action?" he asked. "If you're a man, find yourself a woman, marry them and keep your sex right there. … You can have fun, but one thing is for sure, as long as you are both healthy in the first place, you are not going to catch some debilitating illness. There is safety there."

He continued, "Commonsense says we are not going to procreate the human race unless we have a man and a woman. From the beginning Jesus said, 'It is a man and a woman.' Adam was made and Eve was made for this reason."

The "Duck Dynasty" patriarch added that throughout the human race, "the sins have always been the same."

"We get high, we get drunk, we get laid, we steal and kill," he said. "I am just reading what was written over 2,000 years ago. Those who live like this will not inherit the kingdom. All I did was quote from the scriptures, but they just didn't know it. … The sins are the same, humans haven't changed."

READ: Should A&E Have Suspended 'Duck Dynasty's' Phil Robertson for Anti-Gay Comments

He said that giving the world bad news causes them to "start kicking and screaming," referring to the backlash his comments have generated.

Finally, he told the room that Jesus would take away all sins.

"If you're a homosexual, he'll take it away. If you're an adulterer, if you're a liar, what's the difference? If you break one sin, you may as well break them all," he said. "Why don't we just love each other enough that we wouldn't want to do these things to each other?"

Robertson also shot down claims that he is some country bumpkin who doesn't know what he's talking about.

"We are a bunch of rednecks from Louisiana, but I am not uneducated," he said. "I have a degree from Louisiana Tech."

He also said he's not surprised by all the negative media attention.

"Jesus Christ was the most perfect being to ever walk this planet and he was persecuted and nailed to the cross," he said, "so please don't be surprised when we get a little static."

Representatives for the show have not responded to ABC News' requests for comment.