SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Breitbart News’ Brandon Darby has agreed to debate convicted bomb-maker David McKay at the theatrical debut of the documentary Informant in New York City’s Lincoln Center on September 11.

The film, which has won numerous awards, has been criticized by commentators on both the left and right; the Huffington Post attacked the film for allowing Darby to answer his attackers, while the right has criticized it for allowing attacks on Darby from leftists interviewed in the film to go unchallenged.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

David McKay made Molotov cocktails with a homemade napalm mixture while he was part of an organized radical leftist effort that openly stated they wanted to “shut the Republican convention down by any means necessary” in 2008.

The FBI has said Darby was instrumental in stopping the effort and bringing the plotters to justice, yet left-of-center media outlets largely attacked Darby and claimed his actions were reflective of law enforcement tactics to infiltrate otherwise peaceful protest and Islamic organizations.

McKay’s defense was first that Darby and the FBI made the bombs and planted them on McKay to justify then President George W. Bush’s War on Terror. McKay then changed his story to claim Darby gave him the idea to make the bombs and guided the effort. McKay then changed his story again and admitted he alone had the idea and made the bombs and that he had been lying about the FBI and Darby being involved in setting him up or giving him ideas.

Once in prison, McKay again changed his story to insinuate that Darby was his mentor and that Darby created an environment where McKay felt the need to impress Darby and prove his manhood by making bombs. Regardless of the numerous claims and admitted dishonesty of McKay, many left-of-center media outlets, such as the New York Times, embraced the new version of events and attacked Darby for “encouraging” the bomb plot. PBS and funding from George Soros helped make a documentary defending McKay and his cohort while attacking Darby.

The late Andrew Breitbart discovered Darby and defended him, befriended him, and ultimately convinced him of the importance of fighting back against the radical left and their defenders in the left-of-center mainstream media.

“Andrew taught me to embrace the hate from the left, along with their use of personal attacks when shown incorrect, and to walk into the fire,” said Darby in a phone interview with Breitbart News. “It’s strange that they attack me and attack me, and then attack me for talking back to their false narratives.”

“As the recent Huffington Post piece on the upcoming film shows, when they are shown to have lied on a topic, they simply begin personal attacks,” said Darby. “It was an honor to work undercover with the FBI and I embrace the opportunity to defend what I participated in with them, even if it’s to a hostile crowd who chooses to side with a dishonest leftist bomb-maker for no apparent reason other than to justify their hatred of law enforcement and conservatives,” said Darby.

When asked why he would agree to debate McKay in front of what will likely be a left-of-center audience, Darby replied: “He [McKay] wanted to debate me, I’m not sure why. Maybe he thinks he will get some resolve, but I don’t think he will get the resolve he is hoping for if he chooses to debate rather than have a discussion.”

“It’s an opportunity for dialogue and I think I should embrace the opportunity, just as Andrew [Breitbart] embraced going on Bill Maher’s show,” Darby added. “Sometimes it is empowering to face irrational hate and walk into it, rather than trying to ignore it.”

The event starts at 7:30 PM, Wednesday, September 11, 2013 at the Elinor Bunin Munroe Film Center, Amphitheater, 144 W. 65th St., New York.

The screening will be followed by a discussion with director Jamie Meltzer and subjects Brandon Darby and David McKay. (McKay will join via Skype)

RSVP required to: informantscreening@gmail.com. First come, first served.