Timothy Jost

April 8, 2015

On April 6, 2015, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services released a proposed rule for implementing the Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act of 2008 with respect to Medicaid managed care, CHIP, and Medicaid alternative benefit plans. (fact sheet ) Approximately 9.6 percent of adult Medicaid beneficiaries aged 18 to 64 have serious mental illnesses, 30.5 percent have any mental illness, and 11.9 percent have substance use disorders—a total of 21.6 million beneficiaries. Approximately 8 percent, or 850,000, CHIP beneficiaries experience serious behavioral or emotional difficulties. Mental health and substance use disorder treatment are, therefore, a vital component of the Medicaid and CHIP programs.

Background

The original Mental Health Parity and Addiction Act was adopted in 1996 and was amended in 1997 to cover Medicaid managed care organizations and CHIP benefits. The Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act of 2008 (MHPAEA) amended the original act to require parity with respect to financial and nonfinancial limits between medical and mental health benefits. The MHPAEA was applied to the CHIP program by the Children’s Health Insurance Program Reauthorization Act of 2009 and to Medicaid alternative benefit plans by the Affordable Care Act in 2010. The ACA also included mental health benefits in the essential health benefits that must be covered by individual and small group health plans.

In 2013, the Departments of Health and Human Services, Labor, and Treasury issued final regulations applying the MHPAEA to health insurance and group health plans. In 2013, CMS offered guidance to state Medicaid programs as to the implementation of the MHPAEA through a State Health Official letter, but the proposed regulation released on April 6, when finalized, will at last complete the implementation of the MHPAEA for the benefit of millions of Medicaid beneficiaries (although the requirements do not go fully into effect until 18 months after the rule is finalized).

States that provide Medicaid services through a managed care organization are already required to ensure that the MCO complies with the MHPAEA. A number of states, however, that provide medical/surgical services through an MCO carve out mental health and substance use disorder services and provide them through another arrangement, such as a prepaid inpatient health plan (PIHP) or prepaid ambulatory health plan (PAHP), or they provide them through fee for service (FFS).

What’s In The Proposed Rule?

The proposed rule provides that services provided in these ways must, when combined with services provided through an MCO, comply with the MHPAEA. A state can either modify its MCO contracts to ensure that MHPAEA requirements are met, or it can itself perform a parity analysis to ensure that parity requirements are met considering all elements of the delivery system. Either way, compliance must be publicly documented within 18 months of the finalization of the rule. States are required to develop actuarially sound capitation rates to ensure that MCOs, PIHPs, and PAHPs are compensated for the mental health services they provide, again within 18 months of the final rule date.

The proposed rules also require Medicaid alternative benefit plans (ABPs), which include benchmark and benchmark equivalent plans and CHIP plans, regardless of whether they are provided in MCO or non-MCO programs, to meet the same requirements as those governing MCOs, PIHPs, and PAHPs. CHIP programs that provide full coverage of early and periodic screening, diagnostic, and treatment (EPSTD) benefits are deemed to meet parity requirements. ABP benefits provided only through a FFS delivery system are not subject to certain parity requirements, including those covering lifetime and annual dollar limits on benefits.

The proposed rule does not apply to Medicaid beneficiaries who are provided all services on a FFS basis, although states are encouraged to apply mental health parity requirements in their FFS programs. Neither does it apply to Medicare MCOs that cover dual eligibles, which are governed by Medicare rules.

The basic requirement of the MHPAEA is that financial requirements and treatment limitations applied to mental health and substance use disorder treatment services may not be more restrictive than the predominant requirements or limitations applied to substantially all medical/surgical benefits in the same classification. Financial requirements include, for example, coinsurance or copayment requirements. Treatment limitations include both quantitative (for example, number of visit) and nonquantitatitve (NQTL, for example, prior authorization) treatment limitations. The methods for determining “predominant” and “substantially all” are similar to those used for commercial plans under the MHPAEA final rules. They are complex and will not be explored here.

Financial requirements and treatment limitations are compared within the same type (for example, copayment to copayment, annual limit to annual limit) of requirements and limitations within the same classification of services. Classifications of services include inpatient, outpatient (with subclassifications of office-based and non-office-based outpatient), emergency care, and prescription drugs. Unlike the parity rules that apply to commercial plans, no distinction is made between network and out-of-network services, since Medicaid beneficiaries must have access to out-of-network services without additional cost-sharing where in-network services are not available.

Parity requirements do not apply to long-term care services, which are handled separately. Special rules apply to multi-tiered prescription drug plans. Separate cumulative financial limits (deductibles and out-of-pocket limits) for medical/surgical and mental health/substance use disorder services are not permitted, but separate cumulative treatment limits (for example, numbers of visits) are allowed.

Medicaid and CHIP programs subject to the proposed rule may not apply NQTLs on mental health and substance use disorder treatment services such that processes, strategies, evidentiary standards, or other factors used in applying the limitations are more stringent or restrictive than those applied on medical/surgical services. NQTLs include, for example, medical necessity determinations, formulary designs, step therapy requirements, or exclusions for failure to complete a course of treatment. NQTLs also include for Medicaid purposes standards for accessing out-of-network providers. Plans that use multiple network tiers must construct them and provide access through them in a way that is consistent with parity standards. The current requirement that state Medicaid programs evaluate the need for admission of beneficiaries for inpatient mental hospital care will be eliminated.

Under the proposed rule, Medicaid MCOs, PIHPs, PAHPs, and ABPs must make their medical necessity criteria for mental health and substance use disorder benefits available to any enrollee, potential enrollee, or contracting provider available upon request. They must also make available the reason for denial of payment or authorization for MH/SUD benefits to enrollees. The claim denial requirement does not apply to CHIP programs, which are governed by other external review requirements. CMS estimates that application of parity requirements will increase expenditures by 0.03 percent per year, but that much of this cost will be offset by decreased medical costs.

In other news. CMS has published its list of Key Priorities for FFM Compliance Reviews for the 2015 Benefit Year. The document lists over 60 standards in sixteen categories, as well as eleven regulatory standards that are monitored other than through oversight mechanisms. CMS has also published at its REGTAP website a crosswalk between 2015 and 2016 qualified health plan attestation requirements and a QHP issuer compliance plan and organizational chart checklist.