Here we go again with columnist Steve Politi suggesting that Greg Schiano would be the best fit to coach the Rutgers football team again. It reminds me of the man who leaves his wife and children for a new love. Upon finding that the grass is not greener and the new love rejects him, he puts out the word that he was better off with said first wife and children.

All of the expenses that have been incurred by both parties cannot be recovered. The lawyers get their fees and ultimately, the kids end up deprived.

Can Rutgers start looking for a suitable McMansion or property to bequeath to the possible savior of the Rutgers football team? Would they reshuffle the deck and make changes in the athletic department to suit the rehired coach?

The tuition is high enough for Rutgers students as it is, and the athletic department needs to start using its money more wisely. There has to be some light at the end of the tunnel and pounding on Kyle Flood is not the answer.

Faye F. Carson

Piscataway

Christie hasn't always advocated for poor

As Elizabeth Connolly states in her recent Star-Ledger op-ed about eradicating poverty in N.J., we need to stick to the facts. I wholeheartedly agree, and therefore need to comment on two issues she raises. First of all she cites the expansion of Medicaid as an example of one of the policies the Christie administration has put forth to broaden the safety net for the poor. While I applaud Gov. Chris Christie for expanding Medicaid in 2013, the expansion was a part of Obamacare, a policy that did not come from Christie's administration at all. Gov. Christie has called Obamacare "a federally failed program." He has also said that he thinks Obamacare should be repealed.

In regards to the claim that because of improved revenue Gov. Christie has raised the Earned Income Tax Credit, a few comments are in order. Gov. Christie reduced the EITC for the working poor in N.J. in 2010. This reduction hurt the working poor in the state, effectively raising their taxes, as the country and the state were digging out of the recession. I believe Gov. Christie's decision to raise the EITC this summer is more about his presidential campaign then his concern for strengthening the safety net for the poor.

Michael P. Burns

Kendall Park

Follow The Star-Ledger on Twitter @starledger. Find The Star-Ledger on Facebook.