Sioux Falls, SD

What started out as a rainy morning ended with sunshine and many fixed windshields.

Certified Auto Glass hosted their third annual Free Rock Chip Repair Day in the Western Mall parking lot in Sioux Falls Saturday.

The first repair is free and donations given go toward the Susan B. Koman foundation. President of Susan B. Koman in South Dakota, Rod Goeman says most of Saturday's donations will help others across South Dakota.

"If there's a way we can help them get to the clinics, get care at the clinics we want to make sure that everyone has that opportunity to get a mammogram and be checked. We feel that the best way to stop cancer is to catch it as early as possible and that's really where a lot of end roads have come," Goeman said.

Goeman says the free chip repair raised close to $3,000 within the first two years, and even with the rain Saturday morning, they saw a good turn out.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.