Buy Photo Area communities of faith hold events week of June 14 (Photo: Gannett Wisconsin Media file photo)Buy Photo

Distinguish between Bible, church tradition

Dear Christine Ewerdt and Reporter readers:

I read your Dec. 9 column regarding the history of the "War on Christmas" with interest. Allow me to comment.

First of all, it's necessary to distinguish between what comes from the Bible and what comes from Church tradition. "Christian" leaders claiming to speak in the place of Christ have often given horrible, even deadly, direction to people. That shouldn't surprise anybody. Every book of the New Testament warns against false teachers arising within the Church. If a Christian knows her Bible well, she will not only spot error, but also distinguish between biblical mandates and church tradition.

The Bible nowhere commands Christians to celebrate Christ's birth on Dec. 25 or Easter in the spring, or even to worship on Sundays. We do so in Christian freedom. These are worthwhile traditions that have served God's people well.

Your opinion that Jeremiah 10:2-4 "specifically forbids Christmas trees" is interesting. The Christmas tree tradition came over 2,000 years after Jeremiah. Therefore he couldn't be forbidding them. He was forbidding the pagan practice of crafting and adorning an idol to worship. If people worship and pray to a tree — or any thing for that matter — then they are clearly violating God's will. Likewise, God's word forbidding Jews who lived before Christ's arrival to make a graven image in no way applies to nativity scenes.

I'm also curious how you turn Jesus' direction to remember his death into an "admonishment" of "celebrating his birth." I don't follow that logic.

To avoid any confusion, I won't close with either "Merry Christmas" or "Happy Holidays." Instead, I wish you and other readers the peace that only God can give as you ponder how the eternal Son of God became a human being to save us from our sins.

Pastor James Borgwardt

Redeemer Lutheran Church

Read or Share this story: http://fondul.ac/1Dthtaa