Brooke Dana Brunsvold, 16, died in September 2012

Countless thousands of people see the lights every year. It's unlikely many know the story of heartbreak and enduring love that they illuminate, day after day after day.

"(HEART)" U BROOKE," say the lights, arrayed along a privacy fence at the intersection of Arbor and Crossing drives in Lafayette.

The message, and an accompanying memorial bench, are within a stone's throw of the King Soopers at U.S. 287 and Baseline Road, the hub of one of the most heavily trafficked shopping areas in the city.

And they are not far from where Brooke Dana Brunsvold lost her life at the age of 16, hit by a car when she was crossing U.S. 287 against the traffic light late the night of Sept. 10, 2012.

"People call it 'the Brooke house,'" said her mother, Tracy B-Wilson, who added her daughter's first initial to her own name in her memory. "But we don't do it for attention. It's just part of us now. She stays in our hearts."

Mark Wilson, who married Brooke's mother in 2007 and has had two more children with her, is as reserved in his grief as she is demonstrative. He fashioned the bench for a small memorial garden on their street corner by tiling over plywood, and he makes sure the lights stay on.

"It helps me remember what a good kid she was, what she meant to all of us," said Wilson, who works on the maintenance staff at Affinity at Lafayette, a nearby residential facility for people 55 and over.

Advertisement

"They're always asking me about it because they know where I live," Wilson said of people at his workplace. "They're always saying they drive by, and they see it. Part of the lights went out one time, and one of the people there offered me lights to put back up."

"People have given us money to make sure we take care of our Xcel bill, to keep the lights up," his wife said.

"Last year, they gave us $200, right?" Wilson said. "They gave us $200. 'Help pay your bill.'" That was just stuck with a note on their front door.

Brooke Brunsvold died at age 16 on Sept. 10, 2012. (Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call)

"We think it was the neighbor across the street," Brooke's mother said. "But we're not sure."

'People think grief has an expiration date'

It happens with some frequency that strangers driving by will stop to inquire about the lights and the story behind them.

"I'm always open to talking about it," Wilson said. "I've had many occasions where ladies just driving by stop and ask the same question."

Lafayette's Flatirons Community Church was packed for Brooke's service Sept. 18, 2012, with family, classmates from Centaurus High School and community members moved by the tragedy all there to pay their respects. Ryan Dingler, the boyfriend she'd sneaked out of her parents' house her final night to visit at the nearby McDonald's where he was working, eulogized her, saying, "I've never seen a more beautiful smile."

Brooke was killed trying to re-cross U.S. 287 from the McDonald's. She was apparently headed home.

Life has moved along for many of those who knew her; but inside the home where Brooke's name is still in lights each night of the year, the pain remains a daily visitor.

"I cry every day," said B-Wilson, who keeps a lock of her daughter's hair, with her picture, in a small locket worn around her neck. And indeed, during an interview, tears choked her words to a stop, again and again.

"People think grief has an expiration date, and you're supposed to move on, you're going to make your other kids depressed," she said. "But love never leaves you, and the love of your child never leaves. And we have learned in these two-plus years ... that we'll grieve the loss of her forever. But the healing is the work, and we are working at it very hard."

A little brother's dream: 'Heaven rocks'

Brooke is also survived by her brother, Braxton, 6, and sister, Brianna, 3. At Christmas 2012, the family didn't celebrate, Brooke's siblings too young to entirely understand what was being skipped.

Christmas 2013, realizing that Braxton and Brianna deserved a Christmas, the parents managed a modest level of celebration.

Again, this year, the holiday is being observed, although B-Wilson said her family "sort of helps us and sends up gifts from Florida, so that we don't have to wrap and think about what we can't buy" for Brooke.

Brooke's mother and stepfather, despite the lights and the small memorial garden on the corner of their property, don't try to involve their remaining children in the grieving that dwells on in their hearts as a constant ache.

"They just say, 'Big sissy's fine, she's in heaven," said Brooke's mother. "Sometimes, my little girl waves outside on the deck. And Braxton says he has dreams, and he says, 'Big sissy came in my dream and said that heaven rocks. Mommy, she's OK. Heaven rocks.'"

Brooke Dana Brunsvold, who had a fascination with makeup, will never realize her ambition of going to cosmetology school. And the life she might have had beyond that is a limitless horizon of could-have-beens.

But at an otherwise unremarkable street corner in a small Colorado city, a girl's memory is alive, each day, for every passerby to share.

"She was very loved," her mother said, through fresh tears, "and still is loved. She still is loved."

Charlie Brennan: 303-473-1327, brennanc@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/chasbrennan