Privacy and tech experts have mixed reactions to the 'delete' gap. It's hard to delete an ACA account

Once you finally make it into HealthCare.gov, it’s not clear how you get out.

For those who’ve busted through glitches on the federal Obamacare insurance website to create an account, there’s no clear, obvious way for consumers to delete the accounts if they choose — at least not in the current incarnation.

Story Continued Below

A POLITICO reporter used HealthCare.gov’s customer support chat to request that an account be removed, but the support agent said the request would have to be referred to an “advanced” customer service system.

( POLITICO's guide to understanding Obamacare

The option to delete account information has become a staple of online services, from Facebook to Amazon. But HealthCare.gov isn’t a private-sector business transaction. And on the federal health insurance portal, people for at least the next few weeks will have to create a basic account even to browse health plan options. That doesn’t require all the personal and financial information that would be added to actually enroll in a health plan or seek government subsidies.

Obama administration officials declined to discuss specifics of any delete policy but a Department of Health and Human Services spokeswoman did address privacy. “We take privacy concerns very seriously and have put in place measures to protect consumers’ personal information,” said HHS spokeswoman Joanne Peters. “We have a long track record of working with sensitive information in programs like Medicare and Medicaid.”

Privacy and tech experts had mixed reactions to the “delete” gap.

“You don’t want that information persisting on the website, especially when it’s clear you’re no longer interested in creating the account,” said Chris Rasmussen, policy analyst at the Center for Democracy & Technology.

But information privacy consultant Bob Gellman said government retention standards likely come into play. And the standards for health record keeping is different from those in other sectors.

“At the highest level of generality, I agree that it’d be nice to delete your record at an appropriate point, but it’s messy and you gotta figure out when and how,” Gellman said.

Gellman said there are legitimate legal reasons why the government would have to retain the record. Consumers do see a privacy notice before creating an account.

“It doesn’t sound sinister to me,” he said. “It sounds bureaucratic and that no one’s thought about that yet.”

Pam Dixon, executive director of the World Privacy Forum, said HealthCare.gov appears to fall under the umbrella of the National Archives and Records Administration, which gives agencies leeway on record-keeping for administrative, legal, audit or other operational purposes. She said many health care providers keep records for seven years but if the exchange policy is to keep them forever that would be “disconcerting for a number of reasons.”