Topics: Andrew Cuomo, Barack Obama, Charter schools, Editor's Picks, Education Reform, eva moskowitz, Fox News, neoliberalism, pre-kindergarten, The Left, Business News, Politics News

The GOP’s internal struggles since the 2010 midterms have been so intense, they’ve been described in terms of “civil war,” but the past few weeks have seen major conflicts erupt in Democratic territory, primarily in response to Obama’s centrist tendencies, and their underlying continuity with Bush-era policies. This happened most profoundly in a high-profile education dispute where Obama and his administration were nowhere to be seen, though they had done everything to set the stage, with their own brand of corporate education “reform”: Race to the Top.

On one side, New York Mayor Bill de Blasio addressed a rally in support of his universal pre-K proposal for New York City, to be funded by a tax on those earning $500,000 a year or more. It’s a classic expression of the public universalism of the social democratic vision, epitomized by programs like Medicare, Social Security, the public option and universal public education in general. That vision stands in contrast to the market-based privatized particularism of neoliberalism, epitomized by welfare reform, voucher-based systems like Obamacare, charter schools and for-profit education.

“The facts are on our side. The people are on our side. Now, we have to get Albany on our side,” de Blasio said. The unstated problem: Wall Street is firmly entrenched on the opposite side.

Witness the competing neoliberal rally, organized by high-paid NYC charter CEO Eva Moskowitz, a former New York City Council member, which drew a rah-rah speech from New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo — who opposed de Blasio’s proposal to fund the program through a tax on high earners, and received almost $400,000 from Moskowitz’s hedge fund backers alone (plus more from other Wall Street charter school backers). That rally attacked de Blasio for his modest cutbacks in expanding charter schools co-located in public school buildings, along with his proposal to charge them rent, which is actually required under existing New York state law.

“We will save charter schools,” Cuomo told the pro-charter rally. But that’s just typical political hysteria. No one is threatening to destroy charter schools, despite their decidedly lackluster records.(It’s the same with another neoliberal “reform” favorite, vouchers, as Milwaukee, the voucher pioneer, remains near the bottom of large urban school systems after 22 years of vouchers.) Indeed, more than 30 NYC charter schools had previously rejected Moskowitz’s call to join her rally, in favor of supporting de Blasio’s pre-K rally, saying, “Tuesday is not a day to be divided. Those rallying in Albany next week should stand together with the city and advocate — side by side — for our children, particularly the most underserved.”

What’s more, de Blasio’s successor as city public advocate, Letitia James, is actually suing him over the co-locations he did allow — 36 of 45 locations originally approved by his predecessor Michael Bloomberg. And even James isn’t talking about doing away with charters. In short, Cuomo’s engaged in Fox News-style scaremongering.

If all the above sounds confusing, it’s supposed to. (Just to make it even more confusing, Moskowitz’s hedge fund supporters spent $3.6 million on an ad campaign attacking de Blasio and complaining that Moskowitz’s charter schools can’t afford to pay rent!) In the end, Cuomo put forward a budget placing strict protections on charters, and funding part of de Blasio’s pre-kindergarten program — but without the high earner tax.

As with global warming deniers, so-called education reformers have nothing to lose and everything to gain by spreading confusion. Their sound bites are their strongest weapons — but for that to remain so, they need to ensure that sustained, reality-based discussions never take hold, because their words ring hollow to the well-informed. Another parallel between the two: What they’re up to can’t be reduced to narrow self-interest alone, but can’t be understood without it. Self-interest, ideology, and status are all part of the mix.

Unlike the other conflicts mentioned above, the de Blasio-Cuomo conflict is rooted in deep ideological differences, as Obama’s neoliberal “reform” agenda has much in common with that of Bush before him, and is fundamentally at odds with the Democratic Party’s long-standing commitment to universal public education. It is rooted in decades of elite-generated, corporate-promoted misinformation, promoting a state of sustained panic over public education, even as graduation rates for all racial groups have steadily risen over the years.

The Panic-Reform Agenda’s Five Fundamental Lies

Although hints of it first appeared in response to Sputnik in the 1950s (the book “Why Johnny Can’t Read“ is a classic example), the sustained panic-reform agenda for public education dates back more than 30 years now, and rests on two pairs of fundamental lies, plus a truly demented kicker. The first pair of lies deflects attention away from the real problems of poverty and race-based deprivation. The first lie is that poverty and racial discrimination have nothing to do with bad educational outcomes for those on the bottom of American society; the second, related lie is that providing adequate resources for poor and minority students will not do anything to help them. (Bruce D. Baker, lead co-author of “Financing Education Systems,” a graduate-level textbook, has refuted such lies repeatedly on his School Finance 101 blog, here and here, for example, with multiple references to studies by others here.) It’s particularly ironic that the enemies of public education first deny the importance of adequate funding for poor and minority students, then turn around and express support for “the civil rights movement of our time,” on behalf of a small handful of those whose chances they’ve worked so hard to thwart. (Is it really any surprise that charter schools are more segregated than the public schools they’re trying to replace?)

Once that first pair of lies is swallowed, the way is wide open for the second pair of lies: First, on the one hand, that American education as a whole is vastly inferior to that of other countries (breakdowns of test scores by poverty levels show that it’s not — see here for rough comparisons and here for a detailed analysis). Second, on the other hand, that America can catch up with them by ignoring other countries’ best practices and instead embracing untested models dreamed up by ideologues and hucksters. This second lie is particularly mind-boggling, as leading critic Diane Ravitch has pointed out: “No high-performing nation in the world has handed its schools over to private management; instead, they have a strong and equitable public school system, with a respected teaching profession and a well-prepared staff.”

If we really believe other countries’ schools are so much better than ours, why don’t we simply emulate them? Last, but not least, the kicker is the over-the-top lie that the best people to lead us in this glorious quest for educational nirvana are business leaders of one sort or another who have virtually no experience or training in education, and would probably not last 10 minutes with a class of 6-year olds.

A Nation at Risk — Wrong Way Corrigan Reporting for Duty

These lies have been articles of faith among panic-reformers at least since the early 1980s, around the time of the 1983 report, “A Nation at Risk: The Imperative for Educational Reform,” prepared by Ronald Reagan’s National Commission on Excellence in Education, which warned of “a rising tide of mediocrity that threatens our very future as a Nation and a people.” Within a month of its release, the Washington Post alone ran about two dozen stories about the report, almost one a day.

In early 2011, teacher/author/activist Susan Ohanian, whose 23 books include “Why Is Corporate America Bashing Our Public Schools?,” explained to me how the corporate world picked up the ball and ran with it. “The California Business Roundtable got together and came up with a plan, how they were going to take control of the schools. And the national Businesses Roundtable liked it so much that they adopted it as a national plan,” she told me. “IBM CEO Lou Gerstner played a prominent role in the Business Roundtable at the time, and he was crucial in getting both Bush Sr. and Bill Clinton on board, with similar plans known as America 2000 under Bush, and then, when Clinton was president, it was rolled over into Goals 2000,” Ohanian explained. The longer it continued, the more different ways there were for monied interests to benefit — rather like the housing bubble and the subprime mortgage marketplace — and so the movement continued to grow more and more powerful. There was just one problem: It was all based on lies.

“A Nation At Risk” freaked out over the fact that SAT scores had gone into a slump after 1968. What it failed to note was that large numbers of minorities and poor whites, who had never even taken the SATs before, were now taking the test for the first time, and lowering the average scores, even though they were actually better-educated than those like them in earlier years. Thus, the fact that millions more students now aspired to go to college than ever before was magically transformed from good news into bad! This profound misreading of the SAT results should have been obvious to anyone, given how increasingly competitive the college admissions process was starting to become. But it wasn’t until the early 1990s that a reexamination of SAT data conducted at Sandia National Labs unveiled the truth.

The Sandia Report showed that SAT scores had actually improved or held steady for virtually all student subgroups between 1975 and 1988. In broadest terms, white student scores improved modestly, while minority student gains were substantial. What’s more, from 1970 to 1988, the number of 22-year-old Americans with college degrees had increased every year; the U.S. led all developed nations in 1988. Talk about failure! But the Sandia Report was first repressed, then delayed, and finally ignored, because it didn’t serve the purposes of the Reagan/Bush agenda. That’s hardly surprising, given the Reagan/Bush antipathy for facts. But why are Democrats now just as deeply in denial?

Why the Democrats Fell in Line

Tamim Ansary’s concise, incisive historical account of “A Nation at Risk” and the Sandia Report provides some answers, in terms of the larger political dynamics, and how Republicans’ political success impacted Democrats, regardless of anything going on in education itself. First, Ansary notes a constellation of political motivations going into the preparation of “A Nation at Risk,” not least Reagan’s yawning gender gap, but also the growing economic competition led by Germany and Japan. Although Reagan profoundly misrepresented the report’s recommendations when it was first released, he eagerly embraced it for his reelection campaign, thus effectively abandoning the purist conservative stance of trying to eliminate the Department of Education. “[I]n his second run for the presidency, he gave fifty-one speeches calling for tough school reform,” Ansary wrote. “The ‘high political payoff,’ [Reagan’s Secretary of Education, Terrell] Bell wrote in his memoir, ‘stole the education issue from Walter Mondale — and it cost us nothing.’” Thus, education was the centerpiece of Reagan’s rather successful efforts to neutralize Democrats’ advantage with women, as well as their overall edge on domestic issues.

Cutting to the heart of what lay behind this success, Ansary noted, “What made ‘A Nation at Risk’ so useful to Reagan? For one thing, its language echoed the get-tough rhetoric of the growing conservative movement. For another, its diagnosis lent color to the charge that, under liberals, American education had dissolved into a mush of self-esteem classes.” To supplement Ansary’s observation, it justified the adoption of harsh, punitive attitudes in line with conservative ideology — a shift broadly in line with social historian Michael Katz’s argument in “The Price of Citizenship,” which documents the Reagan era emergence of a “master narrative of policy reform,” which began by shifting focus away from the social problems policies were established to address and onto an alleged “crisis of numbers and costs,” which could be blamed on morally suspect individuals.

This combination of electoral success and narrative redefinition created the opportunity for center-right Democrats to join in — particularly as education professionals were being muscled out. Ansary notes that by the time Bush convened his 1989 education summit at the University of Virginia, “Astonishingly, no teachers, professional educators, cognitive scientists, or learning experts were invited.” Instead, “The group that met to shape the future of American education consisted entirely of state governors,” one of whom was Bill Clinton:

School reform, as formulated by the summit, moved so forcefully onto the nation’s political agenda that, in the 1992 presidential campaign, Bill Clinton had to promise to outtough Bush on education. As president, Clinton steered through Congress a bill called Goals 2000 that largely co-opted the policies that came out of the 1989 Bush summit.

This dovetails with what Ohanian told me about Clinton’s role in 2011, but another education expert I interviewed then, David Berliner, co-author of “The Manufactured Crisis: Myths, Fraud, and the Attack on America’s Public Schools,” added an important point about how Clinton inadvertently altered the education narrative.

“What Clinton got us to do, and Bush [Jr.] capitalized on it, was focus on the achievement gap,” both between whites and minorities, and between affluent and poor, Berliner told me. Superficially, that sounds like a good thing, but Berliner explained, “The achievement gap gets you away from thinking about equal educational opportunity, which was the [focus of] the Johnson years.” Johnson was a former teacher, Berliner pointed out, who “said that a lot of the problem with schools are that kids are poor, they don’t have good food, they don’t have security, there are drugs and crime, and broken families, and high mobility rates, and migration … That was all input-oriented.” Meaning you look at the kind of resources being provided in order for children to learn.