MARC ROGERS

Sherman Oaks, Calif., Dec. 18, 2013

Pediatricians from across the United States have mobilized to address the critical issue of childhood poverty. We know that poverty is “toxic” to children: toxic to their health and nutrition; toxic to early brain and child development, and toxic to their chances for school achievement and productive adult lives.

In 2012, the Academic Pediatric Association, or A.P.A., formed a Task Force on Childhood Poverty, bringing together leading pediatricians from the United States and Canada to advocate for the needs of children and families living in poverty. The American Academy of Pediatrics, or A.A.P., representing over 60,000 pediatricians, made “poverty and child health” its strategic priority starting in 2013.

We speak with one voice when we stress the importance of implementing early childhood programs, such as home visiting programs to help and mentor families with infants and young children, high-quality universal preschool and child care, and Reach Out and Read, for all low-income children in the United States.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Pediatricians do not view addressing childhood poverty as a partisan political issue. We expect Democrats and Republicans to share a desire to help children and safeguard our country’s human capital and economic future.

We know what works. We know what to do. Let us join together to make this happen.

BENARD P. DREYER

New York, Dec. 18, 2013

The writer, a professor of pediatrics at the New York University School of Medicine, is co-chairman of the A.P.A. Task Force on Childhood Poverty and co-chairman of the A.A.P. Public Policy and Advocacy Committee.

Mr. Shriver is right that we have chosen to invest in seniors rather than children. We’ve also chosen to invest in bailing out banks, insurance companies and automobile manufacturers rather than investing in children. Arguably, all the bailouts were done for good reasons. But our kids are an even better reason — they just lack the political and financial power to command the attention of elected officials.

Photo

While Republicans like Representative Paul Ryan vote for budget cuts that hurt children, the timidity of most Democrats when it comes to talking about poverty has made it easier for such votes to take place.

The gap between what we know about what children need, and what we do to ensure that they get it, has grown larger than ever.

If our actions mirrored our rhetoric, rather than mocked it, we’d be reaping the long-term health, education and economic benefits of well-fed and well-educated American children.

BILL SHORE

Chief Executive

Share Our Strength

Washington, Dec. 18, 2013

Mr. Shriver is right to highlight the scandal of worsening child poverty in the 50 years since Lyndon B. Johnson’s declaration of a War on Poverty. And he’s also on target in comparing our relative success in reducing poverty among seniors with the inexcusable failure to tackle poverty among the young. But it’s important to bear in mind that the roots of America’s dismaying levels of child poverty lie primarily in our neglectful treatment of adults.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Children are poor, after all, because their parents are poor. And their parents are poor because of some combination of lack of work, inadequate pay when they do work and minimal income support if they don’t. We can’t effectively address the poverty of children unless we tackle those structural deficits head-on.

Head Start and other early childhood intervention programs are surely important, and as Mr. Shriver notes, sorely underfunded. But even more generous support for those programs won’t roll back the continuing social disaster of endemic joblessness, declining pay for low-wage work and relentless attacks on benefits for low-income Americans.

As long as we tolerate those conditions, we will continue to suffer the worst child poverty rates in the advanced industrial world. We have the economic resources to do better. The question, as Mr. Shriver suggests, is whether we have the political will.

ELLIOTT CURRIE

Irvine, Calif., Dec. 18, 2013

The writer is a professor of criminology, law and society at the University of California, Irvine.

I was in my 20s when Medicare was passed. I was in favor; I remember arguing with some friends who were opposed that we needed decent health care for older people. Now I am one.

I pay for my Medicare, but I can and am willing to pay more. But children who are ill nourished and poorly educated break my heart, and I fear for our future.

If it takes Head Start from six months of age; if it takes Medicare for all; if it takes more food stamps, let’s do it! Don’t yak about how can we afford it. The question is: how can we afford not to?

I don’t want to see the United States roiled in mediocrity because its people are not educated properly and not in great health. Actually, I won’t see it. I’ll be dead, but how about the rest of you?

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

CAROL S. FRIEL

Cincinnati, Dec. 18, 2013

Mr. Shriver is saying the obvious, and it is sad that it has to be said. But it is all part of a bigger picture in which self-reliance and the frontier spirit of our country’s history is taken to such an extreme that it drowns out the voices of community and compassion and the American tradition of helping one another.

It is a picture in which income extremes are at toxic levels so that a decent minimum wage cannot be passed and it is politically impossible to ask billionaires to pay their fair share of taxes, partly because politicians depend on their huge contributions to get elected. This is a time when government is considered the enemy rather than of the people, by the people, for the people. It is a time when taxes are no longer seen as the price of civilization, but an unfair imposition.

Children cannot pull themselves up by their bootstraps, especially when they do not even have shoes or a warm winter coat or a functioning family, when they don’t come to school ready to learn because of a lack of preschool opportunities. We must repair our safety nets and make it possible for all children to reach their full potentials.

It is not either senior citizens or children, but both. It takes the whole village working together.

INA ARONOW

New Rochelle, N.Y., Dec. 18, 2013

Mark Shriver should be assured that the work of his father, Sargent Shriver, lifted millions out of poverty and to a better life — in the ’60s, yes, but also to this day. But I share his frustration. After 45 years of working on kids’ issues, I’ve not seen such political indifference, even hostility, to helping children.

Conservative belief that private-sector market forces, on their own, will spread our economy’s benefits to all, poor children included, should have been shattered in the 2008 Wall Street debacle. No. Conservatives still want repeal of Obamacare, deep cuts in nutrition, no minimum-wage increases and shredding of a weakened social safety net — raising child poverty to levels unseen in rich democracies.

Part of the answer to fighting child poverty is in your editorial “Why Other Countries Teach Better,” printed on the same page as Mr. Shriver’s letter. Listing reasons for Finland’s success, you note that all schools are for wealthy and poor alike, and include hot meals, health services and family programs. Yes, Finns pay higher taxes, and investing in kids is redistributing income. They also have less crime, low teenage births, more success in school and less child poverty — true also in other rich democracies.

President Lyndon B. Johnson and Sargent Shriver proved that we could lift children and families from poverty. Other presidents and Congresses, Democratic and Republican alike, have believed the same. Without today’s conservative leaders rejoining the fight, millions of children face a grim future.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

MICHAEL PETIT

President

Every Child Matters

Washington, Dec. 18, 2013

The Writer Responds

I appreciate, though disagree with, Mr. Rogers’s constructive criticism that my argument “embraces the Republican either-or mentality between the elderly and those mired in poverty.”

I did not intend to make this simply an either-or argument between seniors and children. The same president that launched Head Start also started Medicare. I am not for children and therefore against seniors. I admire the progress that has been made for and by seniors — in fact, I am jealous!

Why is it, though, that we know what to do to address childhood poverty, as Professor Dreyer writes, just as we know what to do to address senior poverty, but we don’t act on behalf of kids?

I share Professor Dreyer’s view that childhood poverty isn’t a “partisan political issue” and his expectation that Democrats and Republicans should share “a desire to help children.” But Bill Shore is correct that politicians in both parties have made kids less of a priority than seniors, banks, insurance companies and auto manufacturers, to name just a few.

It’s imperative to heed the call from Proverbs 31: “Speak up for those who cannot speak for themselves, for the rights of all who are destitute. Speak up and judge fairly; defend the rights of the poor and needy.”

Until kids and those who advocate on their behalf — including Bill Shore, Michael Petit, Samuel J. Meisels and me — get better politically organized and hold political leaders accountable at the ballot box, change is not going to happen.

MARK K. SHRIVER

Washington, Dec. 20, 2013