The Merrill Lynch RIC Report always has some interesting figures and observations along with its monthly outlook. For investors, it also comes with many near-term and long-term assumptions for its readers. When you hear the panic about rising interest rates coming sooner rather than later it may cause panic about all fixed income classes. It turns out that not all bond classes are equal – and high-yield and leveraged closed-end municipal bond funds look like they are still going to be highly appropriate for more long-term aggressive bond investors and for those investors who are in the highest tax brackets.

Merrill Lynch is certainly not recommending that investors be all in bonds. Depending upon an investors risk profile, the firm has a total asset allocation for its traditional bucket clients as ranging from 11% to 55% in bonds, and 20% to 84% in stocks. The message to consider here is that municipal bonds, and in this case the closed-end funds (CEFs), are being given a very strong allocation depending upon tax brackets.

What investors have to consider about muni-bonds is that they are immune from federal taxes, which is implied to include an additional 3.8% surcharge (that means tax for those paying it) that gets taken away for the Affordable Care Act. While Merrill Lynch does not account for this, some states have state income taxes on municipal bonds if they are issued from other states than the state the investor lives in. In short, some of the stated muni-bond yields may literally be almost double the rate on an after-tax comparison to other traditional bond funds for some investors.

Take this as an example, without considering any state taxes: those in the 43.4% tax bracket getting a 6% tax-free yield have the same after-tax return as a 10.6% from a taxable yield.

24/7 Wall St. has included five of the RIC report closed-end funds which are leveraged municipal bond closed-end funds. Preference was given to those with discounts to Net Asset Value (NAV) and to those which are more actively traded. These closed-end funds include the following funds with Buy ratings at Merrill Lynch:

BlackRock MuniYield Quality Fund (NYSE: MYI) has a 6.3% distribution yield, measured recently with a 5.8% discount to NAV. This BlackRock fund trades about 125,000 shares per day.

BlackRock Municipal Income Trust (NYSE: BFK) was shown to have a 6.3% distribution yield, measured recently with a 4.4% discount to NAV. The BlackRock closed-end fund has an average daily volume of about 85,000 shares.

Nuveen Dividend Advantage Municipal Fund (NYSE: NAD) has a 6.3% distribution yield, measured recently with a 8.8% discount to its NAV. This Nuveen closed-end fund has an average volume of about 74,000 shares.

Pimco Municipal Income Fund II (NYSE: PML) has a 6.4% distribution yield, measured recently with a 0.8% premium to NAV. The Pimco Municipal Income Fund II closed-end fund trades about 125,000 shares per day.

Western Asset Managed Municipal Fund Inc. (NYSE: MMU) comes with a 5.6% distribution yield, measured recently with a 3.6% discount to NAV. The closed-end fund has an average daily volume of about 75,000 shares.

ALSO READ: The 10 Richest Cities & Townships in America

There are many more points made by Merrill Lynch’s May RIC Report stating the case for municipal bonds and muni funds within a fixed income allocation. Again, that is not meant to imply that investors should not be in stocks.