LINCOLN, Neb. (AP) - The newest attempt to provide health insurance to low-income Nebraska residents using federal Medicaid funding and state funding is headed to the Legislature for debate, but it still faces an uphill climb.

A legislative committee voted 4-3 on Thursday to advance the newest version of a bill intended to cover childless adults who have fallen into the so-called Medicaid coverage gap.

Three previous attempts to expand Medicaid under the federal health care law have failed, leading supporters to try a new approach: The bill would use federal Medicaid funding to buy coverage for residents without access to an employer-sponsored plan and would pay a worker’s share of premiums if an employer does offer coverage. People deemed medically frail would receive coverage through the state’s current Medicaid program.

Supporters have also proposed an automatic three-year sunset on the program and an independent review of its fiscal impact so that lawmakers and the governor could decide whether to continue it. The federal government would cover most of the costs, but the state would draw $63 million over three years from Nebraska’s health care cash fund.

The bill “puts the governor and the Legislature in the driver’s seat,” said Sen. Heath Mello of Omaha, a leading supporter of the measure.

Sen. Kathy Campbell of Lincoln, the chairwoman of the Health and Human Services Committee, said the legislation still includes job-training services for recipients that are intended to help them find a better job so they no longer need public benefits.

The Medicaid coverage gap exists because tax subsidies are only available to people with household incomes between 100 percent and 400 percent of the federal poverty level.

The Affordable Care Act doesn’t provide the subsidies for people who make less than that because the law originally required all states to expand Medicaid, which would have covered that population and made the subsidies unnecessary. But in 2012, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the federal government can’t punish states that don’t expand Medicaid.

Nebraska’s health care cash fund holds about $461 million, most of which comes from Nebraska’s share of settlement money from state lawsuits against the tobacco industry. The state receives new settlement money each year.

The deciding committee vote came down to Sen. Roy Baker, of Lincoln, who said he thinks the issue needs more debate.

“This thing is too large for eight people to decide,” Baker said. “This is important enough that it ought to be on the floor” of the Legislature.

Opponents, including Gov. Pete Ricketts, said the proposed changes aren’t sustainable and would divert money from other state priorities.

“The latest plan to fund the proposed expansion of Medicaid under Obamacare in Nebraska opens taxpayers up to significant legal risks and jeopardizes investments in important state priorities,” said Taylor Gage, the governor’s spokesman.

Sen. Mark Kolterman, of Seward, said the health care cash fund already provides $59 million a year to support 21 state programs, feeding largely off the health care cash fund’s interest. The fund was meant as an endowment and adding the cost of Medicaid coverage would start to eat away at the fund’s principal, he said.

Kolterman said the bill’s sunset date would put lawmakers in the difficult position of taking benefits from people who are already receiving them.

The proposed changes in the bill are “going to make it easier to vote against it,” Kolterman said. “It’s just not sustainable.”

__

The bill is LB1032