A lobbyist for not-for-profit and public health centers reiterated the case for Medicaid expansion in Missouri to a crowd of about 30 at the Muleskinners meeting Friday at the Columbia Country Club.

Brendan Cossette, the director of government affairs and general counsel at the Missouri Primary Care Association, said it's vital from an economic, public health and moral standpoint to expand Medicaid coverage. Cossette's organization represents Community Health Centers, which are private not-for-profit or public organizations that provide care to underserved populations.

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Or, use your facebook account: facebook Need an account? Create one now.

Under the Affordable Care Act, states have the option of expanding Medicaid to people making 138 percent of the federal poverty level — $32,913 or less for a family of four.

Right now, a family of four in Missouri making $4,500 or less can apply for Medicaid.

"I don't think any of us can fathom how a family of four can live on that much money," Cossette said.

From a business perspective, Cossette said the General Assembly's refusal to accept the federal offer to expand Medicaid doesn't make sense. The federal government would inject $2.2 billion of Medicaid expansion money into the Missouri economy, covering an additional 300,000 people, Cossette said, and allow for 4,100 more mammograms and 14,000 more pap smears a year.

Cossette said that means more healthy workers for businesses.

"But also it's just the right thing to do," he said.

Cossette said that Medicaid expansion could help keep hospitals — some of which are laying off workers — afloat and especially help rural hospitals, which are often the largest employers in their area.

Supporters of Medicaid expansion say the move would actually save Missouri money. For the first three years, the federal government would pay 100 percent of the costs of expanded Medicaid. Cossette said if Missouri switches to the new Medicaid plan, the state would save $150 million.

But opponents say they fear Missouri could be on the hook for a large tax burden when federal payments get lower. Detractors, primarily in the majority Republican Party, have disputed the economic benefits of Medicaid expansion and say extra Medicaid expenditures down the road could jeopardize funding for education. The legislative session ended in May and with no hope for expansion in sight.

Cossette said some Republicans are softening their stance and others, such as Rep. Jay Barnes, R-Jefferson City, support Medicaid expansion.

Jefferson City resident Steve Shamburger said it just makes sense to expand Medicaid.

"He's preaching to the choir here," Shamburger said.