Leave it to libs: They never let a crisis go to waste.

In the latest example of money-grubbing hubris masquerading as scientific superiority, the head of the National Institutes of Health told the lefty website the Huffington Post in an interview published Sunday that the NIH would already have a vaccine for the Ebola virus that’s got the country on edge – if only the federal government hadn’t been so stingy with research funding.

“NIH has been working on Ebola vaccines since 2001. It’s not like we suddenly woke up and thought, ‘Oh my gosh, we should have something ready here,'” Dr. Francis Collins told HuffPo.

“Frankly, if we had not gone through our 10-year slide in research support, we probably would have had a vaccine in time for this that would’ve gone through clinical trials and would have been ready.”

And what was the “10-year slide” Dr. Collins is bemoaning? According to the same article, the NIH’s total budget between 2014 and 2013 rose from $28.03 billion to $29.31 billion.

Only in a government-funded bureaucrat world does an increase of more than $1 billion amount to some anti-science, barbaric budget slashing.

Because no government-funded agency has ever wasted a dime, right? This is the agency, remember, that announced a $1.5 million study in 2013 to determine why lesbians have a tendency to be overweight, while gay men do not. And who knows? All that money that got blown on the Obamacare website might have bought a damn fine vaccine by now, too.

To their credit, conservatives didn’t take the late Sunday-release lying down, immediately accusing Collins of politicizing the issue for bureaucratic and budgetary gain.

Here’s a sampling:

I do medical research. I would love NIH funding rates to be higher. But for the Dr. Francis Collins to politicize Ebola is unconscionable. — JDM (@sleepdoctorjoe) October 13, 2014

Plenty of people agreed.

@sleepdoctorjoe I am suprised he didn’t pull a Kanye West….”George Bush doesn’t care about black people.” — STPOW22 (@STPOW22) October 13, 2014

@sleepdoctorjoe no – its sadly typical — bee kay (@beekaytulsa) October 13, 2014

That is, it’s typical of a federal bureaucrat — however accomplished — to assume that the amount of spending is directly proportional to success. In the Obama Era, that’s not even close to true.

@sleepdoctorjoe You must understand increase in funding does not necessarily achieve positive results. Ppl have to do the work. Look at VA. — Tel J. Stern (@TellyStern) October 13, 2014

We spent a BILLION dollars on a healthcare site that still isn’t fully functional. Check for #Ebola vaccine $$ there. http://t.co/xmrjZSvr1c — Prudence Paine (@PruPaine) October 13, 2014

And then there’s the question of research, uh, priorities.

Where CDC $$ goes: Bike lanes & farmer’s markets do little to combat dangerous diseases like Ebola, SARS or anthrax. http://t.co/7sGec9hJcJ — David Freddoso (@freddoso) October 13, 2014

Shorter NIH Director: Not enough $$ to study Ebola but we’re experts on rabbit massage, fat lesbians and Seinfeld. — CounterMoonbat (@CounterMoonbat) October 13, 2014

NIH Director Francis Collins blames budget cuts for lack of #Ebola vaccine “How much did the Obamacare website… http://t.co/Z5vL3ORyMT — TavernKeepers (@TavernKeepers) October 13, 2014

That’s a question Huffington Post won’t ask.