Districts to act as financing mechanism for road, infrastructure improvements

Plans for Superior Town Center, as submitted to the town of Superior in August. (Town of Superior)

Nearly every voter in Superior will receive a fairly straightforward ballot in next month's election, with state and county issues to decide on, but no town issues or candidates in the mix.

But for five voters, three of whom aren't even Superior residents, the ballot will go on for another 52 pages, with a total of 62 issues to consider alongside six candidate races.

What's at stake? Just the future of the town's next marquee neighborhood -- its roads, its water infrastructure, its public transit system and its taxing authority.

Members of this select group of five get the privilege of deciding the underlying shape of Superior Town Center, because, as the only ones with a legal interest in the 157-acre property at the southeast corner of McCaslin Boulevard and U.S. 36, they and they alone are charged with forming metropolitan districts.

The five The property owners who will receive Superior's metropolitan districts ballot: James Brzostowicz, Superior resident Patricia Brzostowicz, Superior resident Miles Freyer, Denver resident Isabella Goodson, Fort Collins resident Kyung Menkick, Arvada resident Source: Boulder County Clerk & Recorder's Office

Metropolitan districts -- tax-exempt financing mechanisms used for the installation, operation and maintenance of public infrastructure -- are sanctioned by state law.

Molly Tayer, deputy clerk of the Boulder County Clerk's Office, said metropolitan districts -- often called "dirt districts" -- are a "unique creature," but widely used in the state. They allow real estate developers to publicly finance infrastructure and community amenities by issuing bonds -- up to $145 million in the case of Superior Town Center -- to pay for those improvements, and then impose mill levies, or property taxes, to pay those bonds back.

It's how Ranch Capital LLC, the San Diego-based developer behind Superior Town Center, plans to finance part of the $700 million project, whose plans call for 1,400 homes and up to half a million square feet of commercial space, along with a town square, recreational athletic fields and space for new civic uses. The project was approved by the Superior Board of Trustees in August.

While Tayer acknowledged that Superior's ballot is extremely long and extremely exclusive, it follows the path that dozens of other communities in Colorado have taken when it comes to getting new residential and commercial development off the ground. And the only ones with voting rights when it comes to forming metropolitan districts, she said, are the owners of the land and those with a contract to buy.

Voters must be residents of Colorado, but not necessarily of the municipality where the districts will form.

"The right of voters is tied to the right of ownership," Tayer said.

'Everything in compliance with the law'

In the case of Superior's election, two town residents -- along with residents of Denver, Fort Collins and Arvada -- will cast the final votes on bonding limits, intergovernmental agreements with other political subdivisions, and who gets to sit on the board of directors of the three districts encompassed by the project.

Voter Guide 2013 Look inside Sunday's Daily Camera and here at DailyCamera.com for full information on the candidates and issues on the Boulder County and Broomfield ballots.

One of the voters is Isabella Goodson, daughter of Randy Goodson, developer Ranch Capital's director of real estate.

Kendra Carberry, attorney for the town of Superior, said she understands how a five-voter election that will affect the tax rates of thousands of future residents could rub some the wrong way, but she said nobody right now is living on the property in question and thus nobody is affected by the outcome of the ballot.

"If you already had 100 residents living there, and they didn't get to vote on any of this, that would be taxation without representation," Carberry said. "But they are doing everything in compliance with the law."

She said while property taxes will be higher in Superior Town Center than the rest of town -- the project can impose up to 50 mills in additional property tax over the town's base level -- residents who move there in the future need to approach the neighborhood with eyes wide open, making sure they are aware of what taxing districts they are subject to and what mill levy they will have to pay.

"You need to be aware of what you're buying," Carberry said. "It's like if you buy a condo and you are not aware of the homeowners' association fees before you close -- that's on you."

'There will be full disclosure'

Metropolitan districts haven't been without controversy.

State Sen. Morgan Carroll, D-Aurora and newly selected Senate president, has pledged to reform how special districts operate in Colorado, saying some lack accountability with regards to the revenues they collect from property owners and how those revenues get spent.

Just last month, the Colorado Springs City Council agreed to form a task force to further investigate special districts, their accountability and the council's authority over them.

And the website Colorado Metropolitan District Reform, at metrodistrictreform.com, lays out ways that the formation of special districts can be abused to benefit and empower developers over the residents and municipalities. Attempts by the Camera on Friday to contact someone from the group for comment were unsuccessful.

Goodson said Superior Town Center will be up front with the people who choose to live there and it will give them every chance to participate on district boards and to set policy.

"Every future owner will have the ability to vote if there are changes after they move in and there will be full disclosure at the time they buy," Goodson said.

Contact Camera Staff Writer John Aguilar at 303-473-1389, aguilarj@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/abuvthefold.