Wisconsin has declined to expand Medicaid, but that could still change. (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

Gov. Scott Walker may be forced to reconsider his disastrous decision to reject hundreds of millions of federal dollars for BadgerCare.

This is not because Walker wants to do the right thing by guaranteeing that everyone in Wisconsin has somewhere to go to get affordable health coverage.

Walker may be forced to reverse course because of the shifting politics of healthcare reform and because turning down the money is one of the worst budget decisions in Wisconsin history.

First, the politics of BadgerCare and the Affordable Care Act are evolving.

With the demise of his presidential bid, Walker no longer needs to hold Wisconsin health consumers hostage to the prejudices of Tea Party primary voters.

Furthermore, new opinion research finds that voters are sick of the endless partisan attempts to repeal and obstruct the health care law. They want elected officials to accept that the ACA is here to stay, and work together to build a better health care system. The first step to moving beyond the divisive debate over ObamaCare is taking the enhanced Medicaid money to strengthen BadgerCare, something every other Great Lakes state Governor, both Republican and Democrat, have already done.

The second reason Walker could reverse course on BadgerCare is the disastrous budget consequences. There is already a $210 million structural deficit, and Walker’s BadgerCare decision is costing nearly $400 million and counting. The cost of the decision is growing because of Walker’s failed economic policies. Wisconsin is adding mostly poverty-wage jobs, which is increasing BadgerCare enrollment.

The key question that will determine the fate of BadgerCare is whether Walker plans to serve out his term in office. If he stays and has to submit another budget, he will face the triple whammy of a structural deficit, the cost of rejecting BadgerCare dollars, and the full phase in of huge corporate tax giveaways which will cost the state over half a billion dollars.

If you add it up, there may be no way for Walker to submit a balanced budget in 2017 without taking the BadgerCare money.

Walker has falsely claimed to be protecting state taxpayers, when in fact he is rejecting the safest federal dollars, mandatory spending that has to be repealed by both houses of Congress and sustained by the President. Walker’s budget takes over $14 billion in other federal money, much of it subject to the whims of annual Congressional appropriations.

Walker also claims to be protecting federal taxpayers. But because Walker is forcing low-income Wisconsinites on to the federal marketplace to buy subsidized private insurance, it actually costs the federal government more. If all the people Walker forced off BadgerCare sign up, it will cost federal taxpayers $252 million more per year than providing enhanced BadgerCare money to Wisconsin.

Considering the changing politics of health care, and the nearly impossible budget hole Walker is digging for himself, he may have no choice but to take the BadgerCare money. Walker may be forced to do the right thing after all.

Robert Kraig is executive director of Citizen Action of Wisconsin, online at www.citizenactionwi.org.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1jo3UjD