The late Sen. Frank Lautenberg (D-N.J.) was scrutinized in a federal probe of a company allegedly tied to Dominican drug cartels, according to new FBI documents.

Informants alleged to federal investigators in 1995 that Lautenberg accepted campaign money from Seacrest Trading Co., which had been investigated on suspicion of illegal activities and possible connections with Dominican mobsters. No charges were ever filed against the company.

ADVERTISEMENT

The FBI also opened a “preliminary investigation” into “allegations of possible corruption concerning a member of Senator Lautenberg’s staff,” according to a November 1995 memo. No one in his office was ever charged.

The 130 pages detailing the investigation, obtained by The Hill through a Freedom of Information Act request, are heavily redacted and omit many details from depositions conducted by the FBI. It is unclear how many different people were interviewed in the case.

In a summary of one of the interviews with federal investigators, an informant said Seacrest Trading was involved in money laundering, food stamp fraud and providing loans to New York bodega owners at “usurious” rates.

Following those allegations, and a long redaction in the document, the informant said someone in Lautenberg’s office contacted them, sometime in “late July 1995,” and the two met. All the details of that meeting and a subsequent second meeting were redacted in the documents.

“After the meeting with [redacted] Senator Lautenberg’s campaign contributions through ‘freedom of information’ and discovered that STC [Seacrest Trading Co.] had made contributions to Lautenberg,” the account says. “[Redacted] does not know the number or amounts of these contributions.”

That same informant met with a Lautenberg aide again in January 1996, and "discussed his belief that various politicians had received money from the Dominican cartel," among other things, documents say. While the aide "seemed to be very interested in this information," the informant "did not provide her with actual names of politicians who he maintains accepted money from the cartel.”

The FBI searched Federal Election Commission records in January 1996, seeking political donations from top officials at Seacrest to candidates. The search for donations to “met with negative results,” documents say.

Just more than two months later, investigators closed the investigation of Lautenberg and an aide for “corruption of federal officials — legislative branch; obstruction of justice.”

A Lautenberg aide during this time period told The Hill he knew nothing about the investigation.

The heavily redacted documents from Lautenberg’s FBI file include interviews with investigators, memos, copies of pages from the Congressional Record, and newspaper articles and public records that questioned why federal agencies did not prosecute Seacrest in spite of a lengthy investigation by the Drug Enforcement Administration and other agencies.

Media reports from the time quoted Seacrest Trading’s owner defending his business and dismissing the claims of criminal activity.

People who spoke with the FBI, whose names are redacted, appear to have urged Lautenberg to push for a full congressional inquiry into Seacrest, but the senator apparently never took that step.

Seacrest Trading Co. did receive some congressional attention, however, after a federal agent in New York, Joseph Occhipinti, was convicted of civil rights violations during “Project Bodega” in 1991, a crackdown on New York City bodegas that relied on intelligence that Dominican drug cartels were involved in the bodega-financing industry. (President George H. W. Bush pardoned Occhipinti in 1993, after he had served eight months of a 37-month sentence.)

Former Rep. James Traficant (D-Ohio) made several speeches on the House floor throughout the early-to-mid 90s and submitted documents and affidavits to the Congressional Record to “bring to light all the facts in the case” to back up Occhipinti’s claims that he was set up by the cartel. He highlighted the alleged ties between the cartel and Seacrest Trading Co. in his statements.

Lautenberg’s FBI file includes depositions from Occhipinti — who is not specifically named — though his deposition includes the organization he founded, the National Police Defense Foundation, and articles about him appear in the file.

Occhipinti told The Hill in a telephone interview that he had an interview with the FBI about Seacrest Trading Co. and that he had pushed lawmakers for more action and oversight into the company.