TALLAHASSEE — Gators, lawmakers and state workers were all on hand as Gov. Rick Scott manned his "tax-cut calculator" booth in the Capitol on Tuesday, watching and sometimes participating as he showed people how much they'd save under his plan.

It's part of Scott's efforts this week to push $673 million in tax reductions through the Legislature. The biggest part involves reducing the communication-services tax on cable, satellite and phone service by $471 million.

Dubbing it Cut My Taxes Week, Scott's booth featured stickers, pins, handouts detailing the plan and display screens showing how much consumers would save on their cable and phone bills. When he arrived, Scott was flanked by Albert and Alberta, the Florida Gators mascots on hand as part of the University of Florida's Gator Day celebration.

The mascots didn't find out how much they would save, but Florida Education Commissioner Pam Stewart and Chris Hart, president of Workforce Florida, did use the calculator. They discovered savings of about $100 each over the course of a year if Scott's plan makes it into law.

"You can put in exactly how much your TV and cellphone bills are and see exactly how much you'll get in [savings]," Scott said.

The average consumer spending $100 per month for cable would save about $43 over 12 months under Scott's plan. Those spending $125 per month for cellphone service would save $54 in a year.

Scott has already purchased television ads aimed at persuading lawmakers to pass his cuts, but this week marks his first public, in-person lobbying.

Other parts of Scott's plan include eliminating the sales tax on college textbooks, making permanent a tax break for manufacturing-equipment purchases that ends in 2017 and increasing the corporate-income-tax exemption from $50,000 to $75,000.

Scott spoke an hour after House leaders released their own tax-cut package, replete with their own slogan, "No Tax Is Safe." The package totals $690 million, including Scott's cable- and phone-tax cut and his plan to eliminate sales taxes on college textbooks.

But the House plan also cuts taxes on gun-club memberships, defense contractors hiring Florida subcontractors, businesses investing in research and aviation fuel for flight school. Returning military members would be able to bring back vehicles purchased overseas without a sales tax; the property-tax exemption for widows and disabled people would be increased; and more tax cuts for farm equipment would be added as well.

Also, the sales tax on commercial rent for businesses would be trimmed, and taxes on school concession stands would be eliminated.

A three-day sales-tax holiday for back-to-school items also is in the plan.

Rep. Matt Gaetz, R-Fort Walton Beach, said the House proposal is not only larger but would bring more targeted economic development than Scott's plan.

"When we looked at those options, they were more attractive than other options that didn't provide such a clear return on investment," Gaetz said.

Scott's corporate-income and manufacturing tax cuts are not included in the House plan. Gaetz said that was because the manufacturing tax is in effect for two more years, so the Legislature has plenty of time to eliminate it permanently.

The ultimate size of the tax cuts is far from certain. The House and Senate budgets are more than $4 billion apart, mainly because the Senate includes a plan to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act and an alternative plan for the Low Income Pool, a Medicaid program providing funds for health care for low-income or uninsured patients. The LIP program is scheduled to expire June 30.

Senate leaders have already warned the size of Scott's tax cut may not be feasible.

"That may be a bridge too far; however, I'm still very hopeful of having a very large cut to return to Floridians," said Sen. Dorothy Hukill, R-Port Orange.

Hukill is heading the Senate's tax-cut efforts. Separate bills to install a tax-cut holiday for small businesses the Saturday after Thanksgiving and trim the commercial-rents tax — both of which are included in the House plan — passed through her committee Monday.

grohrer@orlandosentinel.com or 850-222-5564