Don Strasburg's Z2 Entertainment virtual gatekeeper for national-level concerts

A big footprint Concert venues controlled or booked by AEG Live or Boulder's Z2 Entertainment: Boulder Theater, Boulder; capacity 860-1,000 Fox Theatre, Boulder; capacity 625 Chautauqua Auditorium, Boulder; capacity 1,326 1stBank Center, Broomfield; capacity 6,500 Fiddler's Green Amphitheatre, Greenwood Village; capacity 18,000 Ogden Theatre, Denver; capacity 1,600 Gothic Theatre, Englewood; capacity 1,100 Bluebird Theater, Denver; capacity 550 Mishawaka Amphitheatre, Bellvue; capacity 752

In the spring of last year, Scott Rednor, owner of the Shakedown Bar in Vail, was preparing to open a new music venue in downtown Boulder.

He was ready to sign a lease for a building on Walnut Street, but he said the deal fell apart at the last minute.

Not long afterward, Rednor learned why: Don Strasburg, co-owner of Boulder live-music powerhouse Z2 Entertainment, and his associates suddenly were the property's new owners.

"As soon as Don Strasburg got word of it, he put together the funds and bought the building to shut us down," Rednor said.

It's not the first time Strasburg has been accused of using aggressive means to advance his interests, and the concert promoter has come to exert a profound influence on the live-music experience in Boulder and across the Front Range, according to industry professionals in the region.

Z2 Entertainment operates the city's two main music venues, the Boulder and Fox theaters. And, in October, the company announced it had become the exclusive promoter of summer concerts at Chautauqua Auditorium.

That makes Z2 a virtual gatekeeper for national-level concerts in Boulder.

"One person is running the show" at the theater level in Boulder, said Jay Bianchi, owner of Owsley's Golden Road, a bar that hosts live music on University Hill.

Don Strasburg speaks during the Fox Theatre's 20th anniversary celebration in March 2012. Strasburg, a co-owner of Z2 Entertainment, helped open the Fox in 1992 and built it into one of the premier rock clubs in the country. (C. Alan Crandall / For the Camera)

And while Z2 is an independent company, artists treat it as if it's tied to AEG Live Rocky Mountains — the regional live entertainment office of Los Angeles-based Anschutz Entertainment Group — because Strasburg also serves as vice president and senior talent buyer at the regional office.

The extent of AEG's reach and the depth of its resources make it the overwhelmingly dominant player in Denver-area music. Even critics acknowledge that by presenting high-quality concerts, the company has helped raise Denver's live-music stature.

Today it's difficult to flourish as a performing musician in Denver without going through AEG, and it's even harder in Boulder without dealing with Z2.

But the companies' methods, including the sweeping use of "radius clauses" to prevent bands from playing competing venues, rankle many music industry professionals. And some in the business say Z2's reign constricts Boulder's music scene.

Asked about Z2's powerful position, Strasburg said music promoters work in "a very competitive landscape" and that his staff's success benefits Boulder.

"They kill to do anything they can for the Boulder music community ... they're fighting to get the best music for them," Strasburg said. "I believe they should be applauded."

He also stressed that Z2 and AEG Live Rocky Mountains are "completely separate businesses," and that Z2 CEO Cheryl Liguori and her talent buyers, David Weingarden and Chris Peck, do "a phenomenal job, and they don't really need my help."

'Don doesn't want any competition'

Rednor, the Vail venue owner, is also a musician who has toured with Blues Traveler and Dave Matthews, and he's a member of the Dean Ween Group.

The Boulder building he was going to lease, at 1109 Walnut St., is the former site of The Foundry and Absinthe House and, since September, has been occupied by Boulder House.

While he prepared last April to take over the space, Rednor said he sent to Strasburg — out of respect for his role in local music — an email outlining plans for the new venue.

"I got no response," Rednor said.

But he said he heard through an associate that Strasburg was angry. Then he realized that Strasburg and his partners had bought the building from previous owner Frank Schultz.

Rednor had planned to partner with Scott Morrill, co-owner of Cervantes' Masterpiece Ballroom in Denver, to buy talent for the new music venue, and he speculates Strasburg was opposed to Cervantes moving into Z2's territory.

"Don doesn't want any competition anywhere in Denver or Boulder," Rednor said. Morrill declined to comment for this story.

Schultz said he recalls a prospective lessee who intended to open a music venue in the building, but he said he was "nowhere near" ready to sign a deal.

However, Schultz, who owns Tavern Hospitality Group in Denver, initially didn't want to sell, and was thinking about putting one of his company's own restaurant brands in the building. But Strasburg and his associates offered to buy the property at a price so high he couldn't turn it down, Schultz said.

"I was a little bummed, but it was nice to make the profit," he said. "Anything's for sale for the right price."

Strasburg said his purchase of the building was a "personal business decision that doesn't have anything to do with music."

If others saw it as a move to thwart competition, "that's their perspective, I guess," Strasburg added. "I have nothing to say on it."

Public records indicate that Strasburg and his partners, through a limited liability company registered less than a month earlier, bought the building in April for $4.1 million. Schultz paid $2.3 million for the property in 2012.

Boulder House, the new tenant, often features DJs on a sizable stage in the building's main room. Owner Reid Pellegrin, who identified Z2 as his landlord, said he'd like to offer live music, but he has to be "careful."

"I have to get it approved" by Z2, Pellegrin said.

Asked if this was Z2's way of ensuring Boulder House doesn't compete with its landlord for bands, Pellegrin said, "You can take it how you want."

He declined to comment further.

Scott Rednor wanted to open a live music venue in this building, at 1109 Walnut St. in Boulder. Then, he said, Z2 Entertainment's Don Strasburg and his partners bought the building to shut him out. (Quentin Young / Daily Camera)

'Someone will go out of business'

Around 2010, Bianchi — known for his jam-friendly Denver venues Quixote's True Blue and Sancho's Broken Arrow — and a partner developed plans to turn the Flatirons Theatre on the Hill into a music venue.

Located on the southwest corner of 13th Street and College Avenue, the theater is just a block from the Fox.

Word about the plans got back to Strasburg, Bianchi said.

"Don did call me and said, 'Don't even try that. I'll smother you on that,'" Bianchi said.

The message, Bianchi said, was clear: "Hey, don't (expletive) with my territory."

Bianchi said he might have gone ahead with the plans anyway had his partner, Craig Lindsley, not died in 2010.

(Garrett Baum of Urban Frontier, which owns the Flatirons Theatre, said he doesn't recall Bianchi's proposal to develop the property as a music venue. At one time Baum did entertain such a use for the property, but a disapproving reception from city officials prevented it, he said.)

Strasburg said he doesn't recall telling Bianchi he'd "smother" him. He did say that the Boulder market couldn't support another theater-level music venue.

"I don't believe there's enough business," Strasburg said. "If I thought there was enough business, we would think about doing it."

And what if someone else tried?

"What that'll mean is someone will go out of business," Strasburg said.

Bianchi opened Owsley's Golden Road on the Hill last year. He said the bar's main role as "a fertile breeding ground for bands" has so far allowed him to co-exist with Z2's larger rooms.

People stand outside the Fox Theatre on Boulder's University Hill during a Reverend Horton Heat concert last month. The Fox, like the Boulder Theater, is managed by Z2 Entertainment. (Jeremy Papasso / Staff Photographer)

'It's a business'

The Boulder live-music market wasn't always so centralized.

The Fox and Boulder theaters were arch rivals until 2010, when they merged under the umbrella of Z2's management.

Strasburg said the unified company benefits fans, because the theaters used to engage in bidding wars for talent, and those inflated costs were passed on to ticket buyers.

But several music professionals in the region, who spoke on condition of anonymity because they work with Z2 and AEG, say the rise of Z2 comes with its own costs.

The harder it is for independent venues and promoters to operate in a given scene, the less the scene will thrive, they contend.

One local music professional who works with artists throughout the country, said the culture of the Boulder music scene, including among venues, used to better support emerging local artists and embrace a wider variety of genres.

"I don't feel that way any more," he said. "I feel like it's become more and more centralized. It's a business. (Z2) will book what sells ... It's not about developing the local scene, and it's really died off."

Dave McIntyre, the talent buyer for Oskar Blues in Lyons until he retired last year, said Strasburg sometimes enforced far-reaching restrictions that blocked artists from playing competing venues.

"He would say that to bands and it would get back to me," McIntyre said. "They'd say, 'If we want to play Fox Theatre, we can't play here, too.'"

Such restrictions, McIntyre said, appeared to go beyond typical radius clauses, which are standard in the industry and contractually bar acts from performing a certain number of months before and after a show in a given market area.

Scoo Leary, a longtime venue owner and music promoter based in Fort Collins, said Z2 and AEG — which he views as essentially the same entity — have imposed radius clauses that cover the entire Front Range.

"They do this to force the artist to play their venues only, and they reap the harvest," Leary said.

Last March, Phil Dyer, a musician who is also a talent buyer at the Oriental Theater in Denver, posted a complaint on Facebook:

"Certain music venues seem to not like other certain music venues and have told me that if I play this certain music venue or that certain music venue I will not be invited back to play their music venue ... So before you let AEG or Z2 or some other dude with a venue hold you hostage ... remember if you work hard enough and long enough success will come and you can play wherever you want."

(Strasburg responded to the post: "UMM — what are you talking about dude, just asked Z2 team and they have no idea what your talking about.")

Tiffany Nagle, left, dances with Michael Lungren during a Yonder Mountain String Band concert featuring Sam Bush at the Boulder Theater late last month. (Quentin Young / Daily Camera)

AEG 'fairly dominant' in Denver

AEG Live Rocky Mountains was founded in 2006 and has since established a staggering presence in the Denver area, largely through control of key venues such as the 1stBank Center, Fiddler's Green Amphitheatre and the Ogden Theatre. AEG also is the most prolific promoter of concerts at the state's crown jewel venue, Red Rocks Amphitheatre.

Live Nation is the world's biggest concert promoter, but, in Denver, where Live Nation runs the Fillmore Auditorium, it's a distant second.

"Denver is actually one of the few markets where AEG has a fairly dominant position," said Gary Bongiovanni, editor of concert industry trade publication Pollstar.

Cervantes' Masterpiece Ballroom, Summit Music Hall, the Oriental Theater, the Hi-Dive and other smaller rooms in the area survive as scrappy hold-outs or beneath AEG's concern.

In Boulder, eTown operates independently, but the capacity of its downtown concert hall is little more than 200 — about a third of the Fox's capacity — and it offers a more boutique program of artists.

Macky Auditorium on the University of Colorado campus is sometimes cited as an alternative to Z2's venues, but Macky is home to a wide range of performances, including classical and dance, and the next show on its calendar that even comes close to rock or pop isn't until March 31, when the Indigo Girls perform with the CU Symphony Orchestra.

The view from behind the soundboard during a Reverend Horton Heat concert at the Fox Theatre in Boulder last month. (Jeremy Papasso / Staff Photographer)

'Don has enriched the Colorado music scene'

It's easy to understand why artists covet a relationship with AEG.

The promoter, as it has done with My Morning Jacket, Greensky Bluegrass, Elephant Revival and others, can take favored acts from the Fox Theatre to Red Rocks. Venues run by AEG and Z2 have a reputation for being some of the best managed and best sounding in the country.

Even their harshest critics say AEG and Z2 have done much to elevate Colorado's music profile and are largely responsible for the unprecedented vitality of Denver-area concert life.

Strasburg's rivals almost invariably express admiration for his accomplishments.

"Bottom line is Don has enriched the Colorado music scene immeasurably and, to his credit, has helped put this state on the map as a musician's destination," said Leary, the Fort Collins promoter.

More than a few industry professionals report having had only productive dealings with Strasburg and his companies.

Danny Shafer is a popular Boulder County performer who has also bought talent for several smaller rooms in the area, including Oskar Blues.

"I consider him an old friend," Shafer said of Strasburg. "I think he's a smart guy, and I think he comes from the love of the music ... I've always been treated fair and square by the folks at Z2."

Strasburg got his start as a promoter when he was a 20-year-old student at Colorado College in Colorado Springs. He had discovered a band called Phish during a visit to Vermont, and, as he once told CelebrityAccess, "I made it my mission when I returned to college to bring Phish to Colorado."

In 1990, fulfilling that mission, he promoted the band's first shows in the state, at Colorado College and the Boulder Theater. He continued to promote Phish shows after the band started selling out arenas.

In 1992, soon after graduating, Strasburg co-founded the Fox Theatre and helped build it into one of the premier rock clubs in the country. He later served as a promoter for Live Nation in the Denver market until AEG Live poached him.

Now he's accruing the kind of legend status reserved for the likes of late Denver promoter Barry Fey and Chuck Morris, who, as president and CEO of AEG Live Rocky Mountains, works closely with Strasburg.

"He and Chuck Morris and that whole team are pretty well known in the industry," said Bongiovanni, the Pollstar editor.

Among industry professionals across the country, Strasburg isn't singled out for playing unfair, Bongiovanni said, adding, "but anyone who is successful in the concert business is an aggressive individual, because it is so competitive."

Strasburg said that complaints that he leans on artists to remain loyal misrepresents how he does business.

"I can't speak for the other people who work here and book bands. However, my lesson has been if you act like that, you typically don't win a lot of battles," Strasburg said. "The typical way is to have better concepts, better ideas and better offers ... That's what works."

Jake Holsinger dances in the crowd during a YondervMountain String Band concert featuring Sam Bush at the Boulder Theater late last month. (Jeremy Papasso / Staff Photographer)

'It's a sacared vow I have'

Z2 Entertainment has ambitions to expand beyond Boulder.

Last year it took over booking at Mishawaka Amphitheatre, west of Fort Collins. And it attempted to buy the Aggie Theatre, Fort Collins' primary venue for touring artists, according to Leary, its former owner.

Leary said Z2's Liguori approached him about buying the venue.

"It was a strong offer," he said. But instead, in August, he sold the Aggie to Morrill and Adam Stroul, owners of Cervantes' Masterpiece Ballroom in Denver.

"I went with the Cervantes guys because we had developed a relationship and shared a similar vision of how the music business should work," Leary wrote in an email.

That vision includes a policy of permitting bands that play the Aggie to also play venues in Denver and Boulder.

Leary suspects Z2 will keep trying to acquire a Fort Collins venue.

"They tried to buy mine," he said. "I think they've been pursuing a venue for quite some time now."

Such expansion likely would mean broader opportunity for artists in Z2's camp. It could also further squeeze emerging artists and independent promoters in the Front Range.

Rednor, the Vail venue operator, said Z2's control of music in Boulder stunts the growth of "the middle" of the music scene — the artists who have progressed beyond the garage but haven't yet cracked the Fox.

"If you don't care about the middle growing, you're not giving some great musicians a chance to make a living," he said. "It's not fair to the community."

Boulder has the potential for a more thriving middle-ground music scene, he said.

"That a market like Boulder has limited opportunity is pathetic," Rednor said. "I think there should be more opportunity, and there's no reason for it to be a monopoly."

For his part, Strasburg said his goal is simply to bring great concerts to music-loving fans — people like him — and through such events create special moments in their lives.

"We fight day in and day out for the best, that's why we're so passionate," he said. "That's a mission, it's a sacred vow I have, we all have.

"Day in and day out, that's what I think about."

Quentin Young: quentin@dailycamera.com, twitter.com/qpyoungnews