Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell said Monday that her office has been in touch with Texas officials over state efforts to block Planned Parenthood from receiving Medicaid dollars, but she didn’t indicate whether any federal action would be taken.

“I’m not familiar with all the specifics of the local case,” Burwell said during a news conference at Parkland Memorial Hospital. Health and Human Services “right now is doing what we’ve done with other states, which is communicate with the state about our concerns to make sure people are obeying statutes in terms of access to providers.”

The Office of the Inspector General for the Texas Health and Human Services Commission informed several Planned Parenthood affiliates in Texas last week that their ability to provide care through the state’s Medicaid program was being revoked because of alleged violations documented in an undercover video released this summer by an anti-abortion group. The state is also investigating alleged Medicaid fraud stemming from illegal billing practices by the affiliates.

Planned Parenthood has denied any wrongdoing and has until mid-November to appeal the decision.

Texas Democrats have called on Burwell’s office to investigate the decision, calling the state’s actions politically motivated.

Burwell’s comments came during a visit to Parkland to promote efforts to boost participation in the Affordable Care Act’s insurance marketplace ahead of the Nov. 1 start of the open enrollment period.

Texas has the highest rate, and the highest total number, of uninsured residents in the country, according to data released by the Census Bureau last month. In 2014, 19.1 percent of Texans, about 5 million people, didn’t have health insurance, a slight decrease from the 22.1 percent uninsured the year before.

Burwell identified Dallas as one of five priority cities targeted for improved enrollment. She’ll travel to Houston on Wednesday to continue her campaign.

Burwell touted the progress being made in Texas, but said much more work needs to be done to raise awareness about the available options and to educate residents about the subsidies available that can help drive down costs of insurance.

“Emphasizing this affordability point and the importance of the Advanced Premium Tax Credits so that people know care can be subsidized so they can have affordable premiums is such an important part,” she said.

Burwell’s visit included a meeting with Parkland officials, Dallas Mayor Pro Tem Monica Alonzo and leaders from a variety of faith and community groups to discuss efforts to boost Affordable Care Act enrollment.

Burwell praised the groups for playing a key role in spreading information about the law and getting people signed up for coverage.

Parkland chief executive Fred Cerise said 48 percent of the care the hospital provides is to uninsured patients. Any increases in Affordable Care Act enrollment help “take more pressure off Parkland and taxpayers,” he said.

Twitter: @conor_shine