Surging presidential candidate Ted Cruz jumped into fundraising mode late Tuesday to "fight back" after a controversial cartoon depicting his young daughters as monkeys was published and retracted.

"My daughters are not FAIR GAME," the Texas senator wrote in a fundraising email sent to supporters late Tuesday night. "I'm sickened ... I knew I'd be facing attacks from day one of my campaign, but I never expected anything like this."

WASHINGTON POST CARTOONIST DRAWS IRE FOR TED CRUZ CARTOON

"This is an emergency — all hands on deck," Cruz said in the letter. "Click here to make an instant, emergency contribution and help me fight back."

Washington Post editorial cartoon featuring Ted Cruz and his kids from December 22, 2015. (Ann Telnaes/Washington Post)

Cruz wrote that he was seeking to raise $1 million in the next 24 hours to help counter "the liberal media," which he said was trying to "attack and destroy me (and my family) by any means necessary."

The reactionary appeal came just hours after The Washington Post published online, and retracted, a controversial cartoon that took aim at Cruz and his family.

On Wednesday, Cruz made his own questionable animation, posting to Twitter an edited image of Hillary Clinton.

The Washington Post has retracted the cartoon that joked about Cruz using his daughters as political props. (The Washington Post)

"Seems like a better idea for a cartoon: Hillary and her lapdogs," Cruz tweeted along with an image of Clinton walking two dogs — of which includes the text The New York Times and The Washington Post.

He later tweeted another cartoon of Clinton with a pair of dogs labeled "New York Times" and "Washington Post."

HALF OF U.S. VOTERS WOULD BE EMBARRASSED IF TRUMP WAS PREZ

Ted Cruz tweeted this Hillary Clinton cartoon twice on Wednesday, December 23.

The original cartoon to which Cruz had taken offense was drawn by Pulitzer Prize-winning cartoonist Ann Telnaes and featured the Texas senator as an organ grinder in a Santa Claus hat and his two daughters, ages 4 and 7, as monkeys.

It was removed from the paper's site and the paper's editorial editor issued a statement explaining that it had "generally been the policy of our editorial section to leave children out of it."

"I failed to look at this cartoon before it was published. I understand why Ann thought an exception to the policy was warranted in this case, but I do not agree," editorial page editor Fred Hiatt said in the statement.

Ted Cruz tweeted this editorial cartoon of Hillary Clinton on Wednesday, December 23. (Ted Cruz/Twitter )

Telnaes, however, defended her work, tweeting that Cruz's young daughters were "fair game" after being featured in a Christmas parody ad released by the senator's campaign earlier this month. The ad shows Cruz reading parody holiday stories, like "How Obamacare Stole Christmas," to his daughters and wife.

Cruz immediately hit back after the cartoon was published.

"Classy. @washingtonpost makes fun of my girls. Stick w/ attacking me--Caroline & Catherine are out of your league," he tweeted.

Even Cruz's GOP rivals jumped to his defense.

"Wash Post cartoon featuring @tedcruz's children is disgusting. The Post saying the kids are "fair game" is even worse," fellow Republican presidential candidate Marco Rubio wrote on Twitter.