Advertisement - story continues below

Hillary Clinton, who had praised the benefits of Obamacare in the past, did an about-face, saying it is forcing many Americans to take part-time work. One supporter at a town hall meeting in Iowa City, Iowa asked the Democrat front-runner why part-time workers do not get health care benefits.

Hi, I just want to know why there is, like, discrimination against the part-time workers when so many companies are going to part-time when it comes to FMLA?

Hillary responded:

Advertisement – story continues below

Well, that’s why they’re going to part-time. That, and also the Affordable Care Act. You know, we gotta change that because we have built in some unfortunate incentives that discourage full-time employment.

Yet in September, Mrs. Clinton further attached herself to the healthcare law saying that, as president, she would not repeal it.

And we’re the ones standing up and saying that the Affordable Care Act is here to stay. We have come too far fought too hard to let anyone destroy that now. Advertisement – story continues below

Mrs. Clinton noted that some employers only extend health care benefits to full-time workers.

A lot of employers believe if you don’t work 40 hours a week, you don’t get benefits. And that includes you don’t get a health care benefit that might include you’re not eligible for the Family and Medical Leave. You’re not eligible if they have paid sick days, I mean, so there is a dis-incentive within our system that we need to deal with. And I’m really worried about it because there’s a trend to try to move more and more people into part-time work. And, you know, sometimes you want to work part-time. It fits into your family. It fits into your other life obligations. But sometimes you want to work full time, you can’t get a full time job. So I want to look at all of the employment rules.

Do you think Hillary Clinton is interested in changing the health care law? Share and comment below.

Advertisement – story continues below