Lawmakers are expected in 2016 to no longer ignore the state’s already weakened infrastructure, which took a beating during recent floods.

COLUMBIA — South Carolina’s lawmakers are gearing up for what’s going to be a “challenging” and busy legislative session.

Legislators return to Columbia in January, but recent damaging and historic flooding has them facing a costly problem: coming up with the cash to pay for South Carolina’s flood-ravaged roads that were already crumbling.

Before the flood, the S.C. Department of Transportation estimated it needed about $1.4 billion a year for the next 20 years to not only maintain but also improve and expand South Carolina’s roads.

“We have dug ourselves into a hole,” said House Minority Leader Rep. Todd Rutherford, D-Columbia. “And we’ve got to start funding government needs.”

But there’s a lot going on next year. The Senate returns to tackle a House bill that in its current form would increase the gas tax and motorist-related fees to raise an estimated $800 million a year for the state’s roads.

Assistant Majority Leader Rep. Gary Simrill, R-Rock Hill, lamented Wednesday the bill’s lack of traction in the Senate. Simrill, the bill’s chief sponsor, said if it would have passed during the 2015 legislative session, the state’s situation would have been difficult, “but we’d be at least ahead of the curve.”

“I think what this proves is that you can never be too prepared,” Simrill said. “Now, we’re really behind on what we need times two.”

That effort was blocked through a three-week filibuster by Beaufort Republican Sen. Tom Davis, who argued the state’s roads agency should be reformed to ensure it’s not mismanaging taxpayer money.

Davis stressed he’s never signed a no-tax-increase pledge and that he wouldn’t be opposed to raising the gas tax if necessary. But that’s only after lawmakers have ensured that taxpayer money isn’t being misspent.

“Unless you put into place reforms that make a difference, you should never go back to the taxpayer and ask for more money,” Davis said. “I am going to insist on this being a revenue and expenditure discussion.”

Education lawsuit

In addition to fixing the state’s roads, lawmakers are also facing a daunting, 22-year-old task. The Supreme Court ordered the Legislature find a way to provide adequate education to the state’s children living in poor, rural areas. The landmark ruling by the court came after the case was first filed in November 1993.

It’s an issue that several have argued the Legislature put off during the last session; while House Speaker Jay Lucas, R-Hartsville, created a task force that quickly began meeting to tackle the issue, the Senate’s panel has barely met.

The attorney representing the school districts that sued the state, Carl Epps, said that despite everything that’s going on, none of it should distract from the state’s needs in rural districts.

“I do not see this as being an impediment to the state’s ability to fund its needs,” Epps said. “The primary objective is to do it right so that it addresses the children’s needs, and then have a stable source of funding to continue the programs over a long period of time.”

Sen. Wes Hayes, R-Rock Hill, who co-chairs the Senate’s panel, said legislators are working with diligence to come up with a solution, but they’re still trying to figure out what needs to get done.

“We’ve got the roads bill in special order first up,” Hayes said. “Just to get that and the budget done this year will be a challenge in the Senate. Plus, trying to get a major education bill done ... it’s going to be a challenging year.”

Hayes noted it’s also the second half of the Legislature’s two-year session. That means that any bill they come up with during the 2016 session has to pass or it gets scrapped, and lawmakers have to start all over again in 2017.

Election-year politics

Not only do lawmakers have to get a lot done in 2016, they also have to do it with members of both chambers under election-year pressure. That complicates things, Hayes said.

“You’ve got not only the scrutiny of people running for office being looked at closely, but just taking time away to campaign,” Hayes said.

Simrill argued lawmakers need to focus on governing, and the elections will take care of themselves. But history hasn’t been kind to lawmakers who make gutsy calls on election years. Some have already been threatened by constituents and interest groups with challengers after this summer’s Confederate battle flag vote.

Chances are, however, that lawmakers will move on an infrastructure bill, said Scott Buchanan, political science professor at The Citadel. It’s just too early to tell what the bill will look like.

But education wise? That’s a trickier issue; Palmetto State Republican lawmakers are “lukewarm at best toward public education,” Buchanan said. Politically, there’s not much of an incentive to move on the issue during an election year.

“Normally legislators don’t like to do anything big in an election year,” Buchanan said. “Well, they had their chance to do it in ’15. Didn’t do it. Now they’re going to have to deal with it in some form, shape or fashion in ’16.”

Reach Cynthia Roldan at 708-5891.