Published March 9, 2014 at 5:10 a.m. Tweet

Check in early and stay late during OnMilwaukee.com's "Hotel Week" sponsored by VISIT Milwaukee. The next seven days will be packed with stories about historic area hotels, reviews, famous guests, food and drink, overnights with kids and more. Find out what it's like to be a tourist in this town. (Chocolate on your pillow not included.)

The OnMilwaukee.com editors shared their favorite hotels yesterday and now, the Social Circle extends its top pick for vacation overnights.

Below are some of the many responses to the question. Read the entire thread here.

How about you? Where's your favorite hotel?

Barbara Aho: "The Little Russell Hotel in Sydney. With a view of the Sydney Opera House. Each room done up differently. Chocolates and robes and deluxe magazines in this quaint tiny hotel in the Rocks."

Matthew Arndt: "Hotel Palumbo in Ravello (Italy). Amazing views and a beautiful hotel."

Rachel Arndt: "Lafitte Guest House in New Orleans, hands down. Right next door to Lafitte's Blacksmith Shop, great balcony, great room, so many great memories!"

Bryan Atinsky: "In Cappadocia, Turkey, filled with hotels built into caves in the side of Sandstone hills."

Sarah Berg: "Opus Hotel in Vancouver – for our wedding!"

Derek Collins: "Hotel Foster in Milwaukee. Great cocktails. No roaches."

Frank Datzner: "Park Hyatt in Tokyo."

Liz Dupee-Schafer: "Hotel Schloss Fuschl in the Salzkammergut in Austria. Completely amazing."

Colleen Duvall: "Hotel Dracula in Transylvania for Halloween."

Patrick Fox: "The Cosmopolitan in Las Vegas is pretty neat."

Lynn Guerro: "Loved the Trump Soho in New York City. They had the comfiest bathrobes and a tub so big my bum kept floating."

Roy Henning: "The Stanley Hotel. Estes Park, Colo."

Erin Linnane: "We love The Country Inn and Suites in New Orleans. I know it it isn't a place you might think is 'cool,' until you walk in and see how they changed it from an old, factory into a hotel. Beautiful woodwork, beautiful ceiling beams, original bricks and an old motor/belt drive in the lobby. We stay there every time we go to NOLA."

Karl Lusis: "Gaylord Palms in Orlando. A whole different world under glass."

Thomas Mosley: "The Frenchmen in New Orleans and Hotel Coronado in San Diego, but it's been a while."

Jim Phillips: "Iron Horse."

Julie Ragland: "Yunak Evleri, a cave hotel in Cappadocia, Turkey."

Jeff Pawlinski: "Hideaway Resort and Spa, Playa del Carmen, Mexico."

Catalina Quintana-Guzman: "Moon Palace outside Cancun Mexico."

Heather Romano: "Hyatt Regency, Maui! Penguins and fish and a parrot, palm trees and stone walkways with a roof open to the sky in the center of the hotel."

Lisa Rosier: "Ritz Carlton, Santiago, Chile, and The American Club Resort Carriage House in Kohler."

Don Sefton: "The 'coolest' hotel has to be the Encore in Las Vegas. The biggest average suites, absolutely the most luxurious standard beds and elegant bathrooms with glass showers and separate tubs."

Jeanne Marie Spicuzza: "Antica Locanda Montin in Venezia, Italia."

Christina Ward: "The Suminski Innski in Tivoli, N.Y. It's an old riverboat captain's mansion on the Hudson River. Tim Suminski, the owner, has Milwaukee relatives and is a super host. The decor is eclectic, the beds comfortable and everyone is interesting. Plus: Tim let me 'pay' for my room with Wisconsin-centric foods! (He missed real brats.) If you're visiting the Hudson Valley, stay with Tim!"

Barbara Baenen Wheat: "Hotel Schweizerhof Lucerne. Beautiful beyond words and rich in history."