There was no indication that top legislators who have spoken against the idea in the past have changed their mind on the issue.

Buy Photo Sen. Terry Van Duyn, D-Buncombe, speaks with another senator at her desk on the floor of the state Senate before the start of a Senate session earlier this month. (Photo: Katie Bailey/bkbailey@citizen-times.com)Buy Photo

When Sen. Terry Van Duyn, D-Buncombe, worked as a volunteer helping match people up with health insurance plans suited for them under the Affordable Care Act, one of the most distressing things was finding that many people fell into what's called "the gap."

The ACA is designed to ensure that anyone making above certain levels can get health insurance. But many people with incomes below those thresholds still make too much money to qualify for Medicaid or are ineligible for other reasons.

Van Duyn said at a press conference Tuesday that too many of the people she worked with, "in spite of the fact that they worked and worked hard ... didn't make enough to qualify for assistance."

Van Duyn introduced a bill Tuesday to close that gap by providing that anyone making up to 133 percent of the federal poverty level in the state be eligible for Medicaid. The federal government would cover all the cost through next year and 90 percent thereafter. Advocates say an additional 500,000 people would get health coverage.

The bill was referred to the Senate Rules Committee, often the final resting place for legislation Senate leaders oppose, and there was no indication that top legislators who have spoken against the idea in the past have changed their mind on the issue.

"I don't believe throwing more money at it solves the problem," House Speaker Tim Moore, R-Cleveland, told the Associated Press.

He added that about 200,000 people will join Medicaid rolls this year under current eligibility standards as the state grows. "I just don't think it's the proper course for us to take and so I'm in agreement with the Senate leadership that expanding Medicaid is just not the way to go."

Gov. Pat McCrory has hinted he's open to Medicaid expansion if Washington allows a version tailored to North Carolina's liking, but he has said he won't make any decisions until after the U.S. Supreme Court decides a challenge to the ACA. That is expected in June, a point in the General Assembly's 2015 session when it would be difficult to adopt such a major change in state policy.

McCrory signed into law last year legislation banning the state from expanding Medicaid without General Assembly approval.

Van Duyn spoke at a press conference held in conjunction with a day of lobbying of legislators by groups that favor expansion. It came a day after the fifth anniversary of the ACA.

She said expansion "would have a huge economic development impact" by adding jobs in the health care sector, directly creating 29,000 jobs and others indirectly through the increased purchasing power those workers would have.

Not taking the federal money "hurts our economy ... costs us jobs and hurts every person in North Carolina," she said.

Also speaking Tuesday was Linda Dunn, an eastern North Carolina resident who works as a house cleaner and as a nursing home aide so she can care for her 44-year-old daughter, who suffers from mental illness, diabetes and other ailments. Her 73-year-old husband has a job driving people to medical appointments.

"I'm tired," she said. "My health is beginning to take a toll. I won't always be there for my daughter. I've got to find some help for her when neither of us are there to help."

She said the electricity has been cut off to the home her daughter "was so proud to purchase" when she was still able to work and that the house is to be sold at auction later this week.

Medicaid expansion "would not solve all her problems, but it would be a life-saving step," Dunn said.

The Associated Press contributed to this report.

Read or Share this story: http://avlne.ws/1br1NIt