No more moderates?

NO MORE MODERATES? — A financial services exec weighs in on last week’s “Star Wars” battle between Rep. Blaine Luetkemeyer (R-Mo.) and Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D-Mass.) that began at an M.M.-moderated panel at the ABA conference in DC: “What is lost in the Stars Wars fascination between Sen. Warren and Congressman Luetkemeyer is the complete disappearance of the self-described Senate and House moderates.

“These moderates were once key players in providing needed balance between the left wing groups and business. They now talk a big game in private conversations but never dare to cross Senator Warren. Ironically, most of the industry is more disappointed with the inaction of the moderates than the rhetoric of the Warren faction.”

Story Continued Below

OBAMA LANDS IN CUBA — Via our man in Havana, POLITICO’s Edward-Isaac Dovere: “President Barack Obama kicked off his two-day trip to Cuba by meeting with embassy staff and hailing the visit as a ‘historic opportunity’ to engage with the Cuban people. … After touching down in Havana on Sunday afternoon, Obama connected with the top U.S. diplomat in Cuba, Charge d'Affaires Jeffrey DeLaurentis, who introduced the president at the Melia Habana hotel. …

“Obama then talked up the groundbreaking nature of the trip, which caps a year-plus effort to normalize relations with the Communist country, which has been isolated for more than a half century. While Obama has not yet made significant progress in convincing Congress to lift the embargo, he has acted unilaterally to ease other travel and business restrictions that have gone a long way in re-establishing ties between the two countries”

EXECS ON THE GROUND IN CUBA — Via the White House, some of the top U.S. execs visiting Cuba during the President’s trip: Jose Andres, Chef/Entrepreneur, Think Food Group; Saul Berenthal, Partner, CleBer;Ursula Burns, CEO, Xerox; Brian Chesky, President & Founder, Air BnB/PAGE; Julie Hanna, CEO, Kiva; Daymond John, CEO, Fubu; Soledad O'Brien, Starfish Media; Daniel Schulman, CEO, PayPal; Ken Siegel, General Counsel, Starwood; Arne Sorenson, President & CEO, Marriott; Sheel Tyle, New Enterprise Associates

CRUZ RIPS TRIP — Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas) writes in POLITICO Magazine: “Communist Havana has always been a magnet for the radical chic of the left, drawn like moths to the flame of this western outpost of totalitarian Communism. … Now this scene will include a president of the United States. On Sunday, President Barack Obama, a retinue of celebrities in tow, is expected to arrive in the Cuban capital to hang out with Raul Castro and his henchmen, all of which will be breathlessly documented by the media mavens along for the ride.

“Meanwhile, political prisoners languishing in dungeons across the island will hear this message: Nobody has your back. You’re alone with your tormentors. The world has forgotten about you. They will not be on TV, rubbing elbows with the Obamas or left-wing politicians like Nancy Pelosi. There will be no mojitos at the U.S. Embassy for them. Raul Castro denies their very existence. News reports say there are more than 100 long-term prisoners of conscience in Cuba. Nobody knows for sure, as the Castro regime does not grant international organizations access to its prisons.” http://politi.co/1Sc0Vb9

ANTI-TRUMP PAC RAISES $5M — POLITICO’s Ken Vogel: “A super PAC dedicated to stopping Donald Trump raised $4.8 million from a handful of rich Republican families as it desperately tried to impede the real estate showman’s path to the GOP presidential nomination. The political action committee, Our Principles PAC, received $2 million from TD Ameritrade co-founder Joe Ricketts and his wife Marlene Ricketts (who have now donated a total of $5 million), according to a reported filed Sunday night with the [FEC] …

“The report showed $1 million donations from New York hedge fund billionaire Paul Singer and from Arkansas investment backer Warren Stephens, whose family also donated $2.5 million in February to the Club for Growth, another group spending heavily against Trump. Our Principles PAC spent nearly $2 million on ads attacking Trump last month. It has continued its assault this month” http://politi.co/1Mw4THh

GOOD MONDAY MORNING — Welcome back. Is your bracket as shredded as mine? Email me on bwhite@politico.com and follow me on Twitter @morningmoneyben.

DRIVING THE WEEK — President Obama continues his Cuba visit on Monday including an official photo and bilateral meeting with President Raul Castro … Primary voters head to the polls in Arizona and Utah on Tuesday (and Idaho for Democrats). Trump leads in Arizona but is set to get trounced by Ted Cruz in Utah where Mormon voters basically despise him. From there the fight will move to Wisconsin, which votes April 5th. If Cruz can top Trump there, the odds of a contested convention will rise considerably … Treasury Secretary Jack Lew on Tuesday at 10:00 a.m. testifies before House Financial Services on the state of the int’l finance system … House Financial Services subcommittee has a hearing at 11:00 a.m. Tuesday on the SEC budget … Existing home sales at 10:00 a.m. Monday expected to drop to 5.32M from 5.47M … New Home Sales on Wednesday at 10:00 a.m. expected to rise to 510K form 494K … Third estimate of Q4 GDP on Friday at 8:30 a.m. expected to be unchanged at 1.0 percent … Treasury Secretary Lew and Deputy Secretary Raskin on Monday afternoon participate in the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) principals conference call.

M.M. SIDEBAR — Speaking of the convention, can we agree to drop the phrase "brokered"? Because there are no brokers left. Who is going to cut a deal at the convention? Leo McGarry? If there is a floor fight, it will just be a bloody brawl. Hence "contested" rather than "brokered."

THIS MORNING ON POLITICO PRO FINANCIAL SERVICES — Patrick Temple-West on the SEC's delay of a decision on the IEX stock exchange application — and to get Morning Money every day before 6 a.m. — please contact Pro Services at (703) 341-4600 info@politicopro.com

“OFF MESSAGE”: ABRAMSON ON CLINTON — “In the latest 'Off Message' Podcast with Glenn Thrush, Jill Abramson defends the NYT’s coverage during her tenure, which many Clinton allies (including Bill himself) believed was out to get them, but says that ‘purity’ is expected from women candidates, resulting in more scrutiny. In a far reaching conversation, Abramson discusses her relationship with the Clintons — delivers a nugget that she once worked as a consultant to one of Bill’s early campaigns, explains that the media was late to the Trump party, and much more.” http://apple.co/20XmGCU

ASIA SLIPS — Reuters: “Most Asian stock markets slipped on Monday after three consecutive weeks of gains as a retreat in oil prices made investors cautious, but losses were tempered by hopes that China may soon cut interest rates again as pressure on the yuan eases. The wobbles in the oil market, a general downturn in commodities and cooling growth in China have rattled financial markets in recent months. … Fears about the outlook for global growth were also instrumental in the U.S. Federal Reserve's move last week indicating a slower path for future rate increases.” http://reut.rs/1UIGYuG

RYAN RUNNING? — Stan Collender in Forbes: “It’s clear to me that [House Ways and Means Chair Paul] Ryan (R-Wisc.) is lining himself up to be this year’s Republican presidential nominee if the GOP convention turns to someone else other than the current candidates. … Even if it means there will be no budget and perhaps no appropriations this year and fiscal policy yet again will be unavailable as an economic tool, Ryan is letting the budget debate unfold in a way that will appeal directly to the Republican voters that have been most active during the primaries and caucuses …

“Ryan is allowing the House to consider a budget resolution that is nothing more that a Republican presidential election year platform statement with a list of the red meat issues — including yet again repealing Obamacare — that most appeal to the GOP’s uber conservatives. That’s also why the budget resolution effectively includes a repudiation of the spending caps agreed to by former Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio), who left Washington just ahead of the efforts by the House Freedom Caucus to run him out of town on a rail” http://onforb.es/1MvQISv

CLINTON HAULS IN $30M; BERNIE $42M — POLITICO’s Annie Karni and Kenneth P. Vogel: “Hillary Clinton raised $30 million in contributions last month, nearly doubling her monthly fundraising haul from January — but still trailing behind Bernie Sanders’ $42 million February haul. Clinton’s campaign ended the month of February with about $31 million in cash on hand. While Clinton spent about $4 million more than she raised in February, that’s not an unusual practice during one of the busiest months of the primary campaign, when all four early nominating states go to the polls.” http://politi.co/25eo8R8

BANKS TURN DOWN JUNK BOND DEALS — WSJ’s Matt Wirz, Liz Hoffman and Emily Glazer: “Banks are increasingly turning down companies seeking financing to pay for debt-laden takeovers after the recent market rout left them saddled with debt from earlier deals. Credit Suisse Group AG, Jefferies Group LLC and Wells Fargo & Co. are among the firms turning down new requests for financing — typically from low-rated companies — as they retreat from the lucrative but risky business of backing debt-heavy buyouts …

“Banks guarantee the funding in these deals, hoping to then unload all or most of it to bond and loan investors. They promise to provide the money themselves if they can’t find others to buy the debt. But as markets swooned in the months since the summer, investors have lost their appetite for the riskiest securities, making them harder to sell. Some banks have unloaded the debt at discount prices, taking losses, while others are holding the loans in hopes of getting better prices later” http://on.wsj.com/1ZhQYM4

AMAZON FLEXES LOBBYING MUSCLE — NYT’s Celia King: “Ever since Jeff Bezos started the website Amazon to sell books, he has wrestled with how to deliver its products as quickly and cheaply as possible. Today, Amazon, now a retail giant, remains obsessed with this issue, building its own fleet of drones, buying trailers for trucks and signing up drivers for on-demand deliveries. And nowhere is the company’s push to become a logistics and delivery powerhouse more evident than here in the nation’s capital. Amazon has emerged as one of the tech industry’s most outspoken players in Washington, spending millions on this effort and meeting regularly with lawmakers and regulators.

“Amazon has pushed officials to allow new uses for commercial drones, to extend the maximum length of trucks, to improve roads and bridges and to prop up a delivery partner, the United States Postal Service. … The money Amazon spent on lobbying in 2015 nearly doubled, to $9.4 million, compared with the year before, which helped to pay a bigger lobbying staff and pay for a new office to house them. … Amazon’s spending grew at a faster pace than any other big tech company’s” http://nyti.ms/22r7eQ8

WALL STRET FACES NEW “CLAWBACK” PUSH — FT’s Alistair Gray, Stephen Foley and Ben McLannahan: “Wall Street executives are facing further scrutiny of their pay deals as governance crusaders push to beef up bonus ‘clawback’ regimes. Campaigning shareholders want JPMorgan Chase, Bank of America and Citigroup to toughen schemes that put senior bankers on the hook for future losses. Details of clawback arrangements vary by bank, but at present bonuses can typically only be recouped if executives have acted fraudulently or are guilty of willful misconduct.

“The banks say they already have robust clawback schemes in place. BofA and Citi said the mooted overhaul would hurt their ability to attract and retain talent. But critics complain the existing policies are ineffective and fail to do enough to curb excessive risk taking. … Motions dictating pay policies have had limited success in the past, although a resolution demanding JPMorgan provide more details on when it claws back bonuses from executives attracted 44 per cent support last year” http://on.ft.com/1TZMbzv

GOP BOSS: GET READY FOR CONTESTED CONVENTION — WSJ’s Josh Mitchell: “The head of the Republican Party on Sunday sought to prepare the party for a contested convention, a shift that reflects growing unease among many in the party with the prospect of a Donald Trump nomination. Speaking on several of the Sunday talk shows, Republican National Committee chairman Reince Priebus said the party is actively ‘preparing for the possibility’ that the party’s presidential nominee will be chosen by delegates through a series of ballots at the July convention in Cleveland. …

“Mr. Priebus said such a scenario wouldn’t be ‘nefarious’ and that he would begin a campaign to demystify the process of a contested convention for the public. ‘This is a delegate-driven process,’ Mr. Priebus said on CNN’s ‘State of the Union.’ ‘The votes that happen in the states enfranchise the delegates to go to the floor and vote. No one’s disenfranchised. In fact they’re empowered by the delegates they receive.’" http://on.wsj.com/22wVqbS

ALSO FOR YOUR RADAR —

HOW DIVORCE MAKES RETIREMENT CRISIS WORSE — Slate’s Helaine Olen: “Divorce impacts both sexes in retirement, but it hits women especially hard. … According to a 2014 report by the General Accounting Office, 4 percent of married men and 5 percent of married women over the age of 65 live in poverty. On the other hand, almost 11 percent of divorced men and 18 percent of divorced women have incomes that put them under the poverty line. That’s more than those who find themselves in financial trouble thanks to widowhood. Only the never-married have it worse.” http://slate.me/25dMVof

JEB BUSH PUT HIS OWN MONEY IN AT THE END — WP’s Matea Gold: “In the last weeks of his flagging presidential bid, former Florida governor Jeb Bush loaned or gave his campaign nearly $407,000 as it struggled to pay its bills. New [FEC] filings show that Bush's campaign spent $3.6 million last month before he dropped out Feb. 20 — raising just $1.18 million in the same period. A large share of the money came from the candidate himself, who gave his campaign $56,983.50 on Feb. 1. The next day, he loaned the campaign $250,000. And on Feb. 16, four days before the South Carolina primary, he gave an additional $100,000.

“While Bush's campaign was running out of cash, his allied super PAC still had ample resources. Right to Rise USA raised just under $179,000 in February but still ended the month with $16 million left of its $119 million haul … Bush and his advisers had initially believed that having a well-stocked super PAC would be one of his greatest assets” http://wapo.st/1pv4NtW

STAFF MOVES: KLEIN TO BROOKINGS — Per email from Aaron Klein: “I have left BPC after almost 4 years, having had a great experience with a wonderful group. I will be starting at Brookings in Economic Studies on April 1st. I will continue my focused on financial regulation as well as branch out into broader regulatory policy issues.”

** A message from the Property Casualty Insurers Association of America (PCI): Hurricane Season is right around the corner. Home, auto, and business insurers are committed to assisting policyholders in need, quickly and efficiently. Insurers have a strong track record following even the most devastating of natural disasters. In the wake of Superstorm Sandy, insurers settled more than 130,000 flood claims, with only one percent of claims going to litigation. The private insurance sector paid more than 1,500,000 million Sandy claims from all other insured losses, with less than one percent going to litigation. But there is still work to be done. Insurers are looking at new tools and methods to improve our response after natural disasters. The industry also is working with Congress to make improvements to the flood insurance system. Building safer, stronger, more resilient communities is a goal for us all. We are all in this together. Learn more about the Property Casualty Insurers Association and the industry’s efforts at http://bit.ly/FloodHQ and at @PCIAA. **