Today, Your Legal Corner will discuss "Student Loans."

In a perfect world, parents would have set aside enough funds to financially help their child through college or perhaps a child's seasoned grandparents would have selected to do the same. Alternatively, enter the real world, where parents may get sick, injured or lose their jobs, making it most difficult to save for the child's college education. Grandparents may also have struggles such as having to pay for assisted living or nursing home care, leaving little funds to contribute to a college education. A myriad of issues can, and often do, arise.

Further, not every child is going to receive a generous scholarship, be a supreme athlete, or have a high GPA/SAT score. Yet, should any of these factors dictate that a child not have an opportunity to attend an institution of higher learning? Of course not, that is why student loans were made available; to support a student who seeks higher learning despite an inability to pay, with the understanding that six months after graduation repayments on the student loan would commence.

The main issue at hand is the affordability of the student loan repayment programs. According to White House statistics, more than 70 percent of today's underclassmen graduate with debt, which averages $29,400. In response to this situation, the Healthcare and Reconciliation Act recently was modified by Executive Order, which expanded two student loan repayment programs. Specifically, the Pay As You Earn Program, and the Forgive Any Remaining Debt Program were modified effective for students enrolling in the year 2014.

Pay As You Earn

With the Pay As You Earn loan option, borrowers choosing the income based repayment plan will now pay no more than 10 percent of their annual income above a basic living allowance. The law has been adjusted from its prior 15 percent. For example, a single borrower with a starting salary of $30,000 a year with a debt of $20,000 would have a reduction of approximately $110.per month according to www.whitehouse.gov.

Forgive Debt

When the Forgive Your Debt Program is selected, borrowers who have faithfully made their loan payments will see the loan forgiven after only twenty years of consistent payments as opposed to the previously required twenty-five years. For those in public service, any remaining debt is forgiven after ten years of service. Public service workers would include teachers, nurses, and those in military service. For more information, go to Public Service Loan Forgiveness.

If you are a teacher, a new borrower and have been teaching full-time in a low-income elementary or secondary school or educational service agency for five consecutive years, you may be able to have as much as $17,500 of your subsidized or unsubsidized loans forgiven. For more information, go to Teacher Loan Forgiveness.

Important to note is there are borrowing dates where the above listed loan programs are excluded. Check with studentaid.ed.gov/repay-loans/forgiveness-cancellation for additional information on the programs you may be eligible for.

As of July 1, 2014, all new student loans will be direct loans made by private companies under an agreement with the Department of Education. The goals of these programs are to make higher education more affordable and accessible to all Americans.

Should you have legal questions regarding a student loan contract, contact an attorney!

Till next week, God bless, keep smiling and remember who's in Your Legal Corner, when YLC will discuss "Student Loan Debt Discharge."

---

Victoria M. Dalton is a dedicated Family/Elder Law Attorney with the Law Offices of Hoffman Dimuzio. Call 856-845-8243 for further information. Email correspondence to vdalton@hoffmandimuzio.com or ylcdirection.com.