Snatch of the Day! BT stuns Sky and ITV after bidding £900million to screen live Champions League games



BT says it wants to make football more 'accessible and affordable'

Will screen a number of matches involving British teams for free

First time a single UK broadcaster has won exclusive rights

British Telecom yesterday delivered the biggest shake-up in football broadcasting in two decades.



BT Sport left rivals BSkyB and ITV stunned after bidding almost £900 million for the rights to screen live Champions League and Europa League matches.



The telecoms giant will show a number of matches for free, including the finals of both competitions, in a deal that will cost the channel £299 million per season for three seasons from 2015-16.



Arsenal's Welsh midfielder Aaron Ramsey (right) celebrates scoring the opening goal with Arsenal's German midfielder Mesut Ozil (left): Champions League and Europa League matches will now be screened by BT

BT has already secured the rights to show 38 live Premier League games a season and is now hoping that the new deal will greatly increase its subscribers and encourage more customers to buy broadband, phone and television services from them.



Live Champions League matches are currently shared between ITV and Sky Sports, but from 2015 they will only be shown on BT Sport.



BT promised to make football ‘more accessible and affordable’ and said it will show a match involving each participating British team for free every season.



While BT said it was the first time a single UK broadcaster had won the exclusive live rights to all matches from the two tournaments, BSkyB said the deal was ‘far in excess’ of its own valuation.



BT chief executive Gavin Patterson said: ‘I am thrilled BT Sport will be the only place where fans can enjoy all the live action from the Champions League and Europa League.’



Bayern Munich's Arjen Robben with the Champions League trophy

John Petter, head of BT’s consumer division, said: ‘Our research showed that half of all homes in the country would like to watch more premier sport but one in five will not pay the £40 or so that Sky charges.’



BT’s victory is the most significant event in football broadcasting since 1992, when BSkyB acquired the rights to broadcast live fixtures from the newly formed Premier League in a deal worth £304 million over five years



In a statement, BSkyB said BT had ‘overpaid’. ‘We bid with a clear view of what the rights are worth to us. It seems BT chose to pay far in excess of our valuation,’ it said.



‘There are many ways in which we can invest in our service for customers. We take a disciplined approach and there is always a level at which we will choose to focus on something else. If we thought it was worth more, we’d have paid more.



‘Nothing changes until 2015 and we look forward to 18 more months of live Champions League on Sky Sports. We will now redeploy resources and continue to bring customers the best choice of TV across our offering.’



Mr Patterson said BT Sport is not charging existing broadband customers to watch live Premier League football but will be charging for some Champion League games from 2015, although no pricing structure has been published.