Whidbey General Hospital in upstate Washington is coming to terms with a glitch in their billing system which left the healthcare provider strapped for cash before its hospital board approved a multi-million-dollar line of credit. A similar situation befell Saint Francis Hospital and health Centers in New York between 2012 and 2013 and led its filing for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection this past December.

What do the two hospitals have in common beyond their financial woes? The answer is the source of their problems. Both Whidbey General and Saint Francis are full-fledged, hospital-wide adopters of health IT systems — from clinical to billing — provided by Massachusetts-based Meditech.

Reporting last week in the South Whidbey Record, Nathan Whalen revealed that Whidbey General will end up spending more than $7.5 million to implement its Meditech EHR system, which the hospital chose to implement to avoid facing penalties under the Affordable Care Act in May 2013.

A public relations liaison told Whalen that the “glitch” in the billing system led to delays in sending bills to patients, and at one point the hospital had only enough cash to safely function for 2.5 days. The hospital board eventually resolved the shortage by approving $4 million in credit from which Whidbey General moved to draw $2 million.

The cause of the glitch has not been revealed, but its effects still linger. Although no accounts have gone into collection and the hospital has provided a grace period and extended payment plans, Whidbey General has its work cut out for it if the hospital is to pay back the line of credit in four months as reported. On top of that, the hospital has its next systems upgrade scheduled for March.

The more dramatic case is that of Saint Francis whose difficulties implementing its billing system have proven more severe. Heading into what should be a celebratory year for the institution which turns 100 in 2014, John Ferro of the Poughkeepsie Journal reported last month that the hospital faces more $50 million in debt to its creditors because of a poorly managed implementation of its financial system from Meditech.

The Meditech systems were implemented in September 2012 and the real problems began between October 2012 and the following spring when bills went uncollected and the hospital’s uncollectible revenue grew significantly, a figure that the hospital’s CEO Art Nizza put at “tens of millions of dollars.”

Additionally, Saint Francis was not charging enough for the services provided to its patients. “Not only had vast sums of money been lost, but the hospital had been undercutting its ability to make up the difference,” Ferro writes.

Currently at stake is the hospital’s future. Hudson Valley’s Health Quest System has its sights set on acquiring Saint Francis for a sum of $40 million.

It then comes as no surprise that former CEO Robert Savage tendered his resignation in March and that the Sisters of Saint Francis of the Neumann Communities, owners of the organization, deposed the Chairman of the Board of Directors George Whalen III in August along with several other directors.

It remains unclear what the glitch in question actually is and whether it was caused by its designers or implementers. In both cases, it should be noted that clinical care was unaffected. In either case, it is likely to raise concerns for other users to investigate in order to avoid a similar situation befalling them.