House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Kevin Brady (R-Tex.) is shaking up the committee assignments. (AP Photo/Charles Dharapak)

SHAKING UP THE WAYS AND MEANS COMMITTEE. When Paul D. Ryan (R-Wis.) was named Speaker of the House last month his rapid rise to the top of House Republican leadership set off a domino effect of promotions in the House Ways and Means Committee. Chairman Kevin Brady announced on Wednesday a complete overhaul of the subcommittee assignments for committee Republicans. The Hill has the details:

New Chairman Kevin Brady (R-Texas) announced the changes that includes adding Rep. Tom Rice (R-S.C.) and adjusts the names and sizes of several subcommittees. “These Republican subcommittee chairs and members will play a crucial role in taking real steps toward fixing our country’s broken tax code, reining in the IRS, reforming the nation’s welfare programs, expanding trade, replacing the Affordable Care Act and saving Social Security and Medicare for the long term,” Brady said in a statement. Rep. Charles Boustany (R-La.) will lead the tax policy subcommittee moving from the human resources panel with tax reform topping the agenda of Ryan and Brady.

AN EITC MOMENT FOR OBAMA AND RYAN. President Obama and Ryan don’t agree on much when it comes to reforming the individual side of the tax code but one potential area of agreement is an expansion of the Earned Income Tax Credit. Both men would like to include more single individuals in the program which acts as a financial incentive for low-income workers. Chuck Marr at the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities has a new analysis of how the two could come together on some policy changes.

The EITC, however, largely excludes workers who aren’t raising children and completely excludes them if they’re under age 25. A young man just out of school who’s in an entry-level job gets nothing, and a middle-aged woman with grown kids who works for the minimum wage at the local nursing home gets close to nothing. Speaker Ryan and President Obama propose to change that — in almost exactly the same way. They would phase in the credit more quickly as a worker’s earnings rise, raise the maximum credit to about $1,000, and lower the eligibility age from 25 to 21. These changes would make a big difference. Currently, as the chart shows, a childless worker with poverty-level wages receives an EITC of $172, not nearly enough to offset the $1,188 he or she owes in income tax and the employee share of payroll taxes (to say nothing of the employer share, which economists generally agree ultimately falls on workers in the form of lower wages). The Ryan/Obama proposals would give that worker an $841 EITC, a major step towards lifting the worker back to the poverty line.

FINDING A LONG-TERM SOLUTION TO THE BUDGET CRISIS CYCLE. Economists and budget watchers often debate the idea of shifting to a tw0-year budget cycle in hopes of creating more certainty in the system, but Rudy Penner at the Tax Policy Center says that shift wouldn’t be a great idea, according to TPC’s Howard Gleckman.