TALLAHASSEE — Florida's gubernatorial contest is becoming a war over women voters.

Last week, Charlie Crist launched his second advertising salvo attacking Rick Scott on issues important to women. This one calls the governor "extreme" for opposing women's access to abortion and contraception coverage and opposing equal pay for women.

Instead of standing up for Scott's anti-abortion positions, Republicans are countering with spots that highlight Crist's flip-flops on abortion and taking other steps to soften his image with women.

One new spot, with Scott's wife, Ann, providing the narration while the couple walks on a beach, says "Rick believes in Florida, and Florida can count on Rick."

"We are on the path to be the No. 1 place in the world to raise a family," Scott, accompanied by his wife, told an audience of mostly women last week at the Park Plaza Gardens Restaurant in Winter Park. "Think about your family for a second. You care about these things: I want a job. I want to build my business. I want independence. I want my kids to get a chance at a great education so they can get a shot at their dreams ... I want to live in a safe community," he said, drawing roaring applause.

Polling suggests Crist still holds an edge among women, but it might be shrinking. In a Quinnipiac University poll from late July, Crist held a 15-point lead among women over Scott. This month's Public Policy Polling survey found Crist with a seven-point advantage, similar to other polls.

That may explain why Democrats are pulling out the stops to court women by playing up social issues.

Scott was bashed for appearing recently in North Florida with U.S. Rep. Steve Sutherland, who is running against the daughter of former Gov. Bob Graham. Sutherland has taken heat for a men-only fundraiser and questioning whether opponent Gwen Graham had ever been to a "lingerie party."

"Rick Scott apparently doesn't think he needs women to win," state Democratic Party Chair Allison Tant told reporters.

But Republicans are pushing back that Crist's appeal is just part of his long list of policy course-corrections, including:

•After being an NRA-backed governor, the Republican-turned-Democrat now favors background checks and limiting gun-magazine sizes.

•After calling the federal health-care law a "government takeover," he now stands behind Obamacare and has suggested he would try to carry out its optional Medicaid-expansion through an executive order.

•The Republican Crist backed Florida's constitutional ban on same-sex marriage. The Democratic candidate Crist wants it repealed and proclaims "the entire country has seen a new age of enlightenment" on the issue.

But one issue where he claims consistency is on abortion, noting repeatedly how he voted against legislation requiring a waiting period for an abortion as a legislator in the 1990s. But he has alternated between calling himself pro-life and pro-choice.

Crist "isn't pro choice; he's multiple choice," said Scott campaign spokesman Greg Blair.

Crist voted to override a veto by then-Gov. Lawton Chiles of an abortion ultrasound bill. And he has supported legislation requiring a waiting period for minors seeking abortions since then.

"I'm pro-life, but I don't impose my will on others and never have thought that was appropriate," Crist told the Orlando Sentinel editorial board. "While I've always felt — particularly on social issues as a former Republican — sort of like a round peg in a square hole, my positions and my actions on these issues have never been inconsistent."

Crist's message on abortion rights was apparently good enough for the state's primary advocacy group, Planned Parenthood, which formed a Florida PAC for the first time and endorsed Crist earlier this month.

Barbara Zdravecky, the group's treasurer, said the decision was simple: Scott "is extraordinarily dangerous to us."

The organization notes a long list of bills Scott has signed designed to place more "road blocks" up for women seeking abortions, including mandating a woman receive an ultrasound before an abortion; adding new requirements to the state's "Parental Notice of Abortion Act''; and directing more state dollars from the sale of "Choose Life" license plates to anti-abortion advertising.

Scott's backers who support his action on abortion-related issues have taken a lower-key approach. Florida Right to Life, which has endorsed Scott and praised his action on abortion bills last session, did not return requests for comment.

"Scott's campaign is smart to remind Floridians that when they look into the political soul of Charlie Crist on most any issue, they will find nothing but a political pragmatist who stands for nothing but winning the next election," said Florida Family Policy Council Chairman John Stemberger.

Staff writer Scott Powers contributed to this report. adeslatte@tribune.com or 850-222-5564850-222-5564.

CallSend SMSAdd to SkypeYou'll need Skype CreditFree via Skype