Buy Photo Aiden Hughes, 4, and his brother Owen Hughes, 2, of Creme Ridge greet the Easter bunny. Allaire Village hosts an Easter event centered around an Easter egg hunt of 10,000 eggs for kids of all ages. (Photo: Doug Hood/Staff Photographer)Buy Photo

Instead of giving away 10,000 Easter eggs in one free for all, for the first time ever the Allaire Village Easter Egg Hunt split the pastel-colored prizes into 49 separate searches.

There was some confusion: Four-year-old Kaylee Gortner wasn't totally sure how many seven eggs — the maximum each child was allowed to snatch — actually was. When the hunt began, she scooped up a purple plastic egg, but eschewed the bag, preferring instead to return each egg to her mother waiting outside the roped-off area.

"They were giving me the eggs instead of putting them in their bags," said a laughing Tara Gortner, Kaylee's mother, who was there with her cousin's two daughters, Reyna, 4, and Marley, 7.

The village, which is nestled inside of Allaire State Park, brought the Easter event back just a few years ago after a hiatus that spanned much of the 1990s and 2000s, according to events manager Abigail Murphy. They draw about 2,000 people every year and the sunny skies — although a strong wind made it brisk — likely brought that many out on Saturday, she said.

This is the first year in which they've adopted a divisional approach where kids were split into five different age groups with hunts going off every 15 minutes from noon to 3:45 p.m.

"There's three or four hunts going on at any time," Murphy said before excusing herself to countdown the start of another hunt through her megaphone.

Sprinkled in among the families, the Easter bunny, an alpaca and Clifford the Big Red Dog were a handful of historical re-enactors in bonnets and ankle-length skirts or turn-of-the-century Army shell jackets. Allaire Village is a non-profit educational and historic preservation organization that recreates the sights and sounds of the Howell Works Company, an early 19th Century iron producing community.

Kat Muller, volunteer coordinator at the Village, said the village's original residents would not have spent the day holding Easter egg hunts. A more buttoned-down celebration of an important religious holiday would have been the order of the day, she said.

Saturday's Easter event also doubled as opening day: the Village is opening one month earlier this year.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1D50qd1