Students staged a protest at Standley Lake High School Friday morning. (Credit: KCNC)

Two high schools in the Jefferson County school district canceled classes Friday because almost 60 teachers called in sick.

Our sister station KCNC reports that the absences were part of a "sick-out," staged in protest of two school board actions.

Thursday, the school board meeting grew heated as the board discussed two controversial issues: teacher evaluations and pay, and changes to classroom curriculum.

The Denver Post reports that the teacher evaluation system has been the topic of discontent among educators. According to the Post, teachers unanimously issued a vote of no confidence for the school board president one week ago after the board's conservative majority moved towards a pay plan that would deny raises to teachers rated ineffective or partially effective if they're not on probationary contracts.

The board is also considering establishing a panel to review the way advanced placement classes in U.S. history would be taught under the Common Core State Standards. Under the proposal, the board would review "curricular choices for conformity to JeffCo academic standards, accuracy and omissions, and to inform the board of any objectionable materials."

On the school board website, the board listed several criteria that instructional material must meet, overseen by the committee.

Curriculum must "promote citizenship, patriotism, essentials and benefits of the free enterprise system, respect for authority and respect for individual rights," the proposal reads.

"Should present positive aspects of the United States...content pertaining to political and social movements in history should present balanced and factual treatment of the positions.

"Materials shouldn’t condone civil disorder, social strife or disregard of the law," the proposal said.

This has sparked concerns about censorship.

In lieu of class, Standley Lake students staged a protest at the school Friday morning, showing support to their teachers. Teens held signs reading "Germany still teaches the Holocaust;" "My education is NOT your political agenda;" "Free thinkers > school board puppets."

"We need to learn how to think critically and analytically. And we can’t do that if we’re censoring,” a student at Standley Lake High School told KCNC.

Parents told KCNC the student protests were education in action.

“Seeing these kids, making these signs, standing out in the hot sun. This is the civics lesson. This is what America is,” one woman at the protest said.

District leaders say they are not ruling out disciplinary action for the teachers.