WYTHEVILLE — Democrats in the Fightin’ Ninth have picked a military veteran to carry their banner in this year’s congressional races.

Derek Kitts, a Purple Heart recipient from Christiansburg, won the 9th District party’s nomination Saturday at a convention put on in Wytheville.

He’ll now go on to challenge three-term incumbent Rep. Morgan Griffith, R-Salem, in the fall elections.

“My motivation is personal. This area is my home,” Kitts, 47, said as he addressed the convention and its 147 delegates.

The district needs a hard-charging representative who’ll “stand and fight toe-to-toe” to advance its interests, he said.

“We have resources here the rest of the state can’t even imagine,” he said. “We’re second to none. That needs to be represented.”

Kitts, who recently retired after 24 years in the U.S. Army, beat out Bill Bunch of Tazewell County for the Democratic nomination.

Party members said it marked the first time the 9th District Democratic Committee has had a contested race for the congressional slot since 1982. That was the year former Rep. Rick Boucher first won the nomination.

Bunch, a farmer and retired postal worker, is an ardent backer of Bernie Sanders and his campaign platform mirrored that of the Vermont senator’s.

He and Kitts spoke well of each other throughout the campaign, and he quickly threw his support to Kitts after Saturday’s vote.

“I’m proud of the race that we ran,” Bunch said. “My opponent is an excellent candidate, and we’ll be working very hard for him without any reservation.”

Kitts, a self-described Blue Dog Democrat, has called for a new Appalachian infrastructure push to expand cellphone and internet connectivity in Southwest Virginia and neighboring regions.

He’s supported the Affordable Care Act as a starting point for change, but said amendments are needed to achieve things like lower prescription prices.

On guns, he’s described himself as a strong supporter of the Second Amendment. He’s backed universal background checks but opposes limiting magazine sizes or assault-style weapons.

Kitts’ supporters stressed his service record and approach to leadership during introductory remarks at the district convention. Kitts did four combat tours while in the Army — three in Iraq and another in Afghanistan. He was awarded two Bronze Stars.

In his own remarks, Kitts said Southwest Virginia Democrats have been too quiet in recent years and urged them to raise their voices to drown out “the trumpets” in the political world.

“We don’t need to be quiet,” he said. “We don’t need to be ashamed of what we do and what we stand for. … We talk about health care, we talk about jobs, we talk about infrastructure. But we don’t talk loud enough and we don’t do it strong enough as a party. These are voices we need to push forward.”

Kitts and other speakers criticized Griffith at times, describing him as detached leader who hasn’t represented the district well.

“If you see me get wound up, if you see me get angry, my anger is directed at one person and one thing and that’s the current representative we have in this area who doesn’t represent who we are,” Kitts said.

Griffith, reached for comment Saturday afternoon, said he’s looking forward to the election and “taking my conservative message out to the 9th District of Virginia.”

He added he doesn’t know Kitts well yet, but said Democratic Party leaders are out of sync with the district.

“I think the voters of the 9th District understand that Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton don’t have the answers they’re looking for,” he said.

The general election is Nov. 8. Democrats last fielded a challenger against Griffith in 2012. He won that race with 61 percent of the vote.