Opinion

End funding disparity for treatment of mental, physical illnesses

Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 End funding disparity for treatment of mental, physical illnesses 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

For Jennifer Hoff, disparity in medical treatment for severe mental illnesses in the Medi-Cal system, compared with, say, heart disease or diabetes, can be seen in the face of her 21-year-old son, Matthew, who sits in an 8-by-13-foot cell at Calipatria State Prison. He is serving a 14-year sentence for felony robbery.

"When my son turned 18, he was given a plane ticket and his shoelaces, and returned (from a residential psychiatric care facility in Montana) to the streets of Orange County to 'direct his own care,' " said Hoff, who traveled to Sacramento recently to take part in the first "Right2Treatment" rally held at the state Capitol. "He doesn't believe he is sick so, of course, he ends up on the street. My beautiful boy has the words 'Crazy Boy' tattooed across his face, yet they tell me he isn't sick enough (to be placed on a psychiatric hold). Now, he's sitting in prison because he walked into a BofA with a sticky note demanding $1,000, after getting drunk and deciding he wanted to leave town."

Being mentally ill and psychotic at the time of the commission of such a crime is not a mitigating factor, Hoff said, except in capital cases. In Matt's case, his public defender did not bring up either his illness or his intoxication.

"Matt was seen as just another 'violent offender,' " Hoff said, "instead of this being what it was - an (access to mental health care) issue."

Matt Hoff is one of roughly 600,000 adults in California receiving Supplemental Security Income and Medi-Cal - the state-federal health insurance program for the poor.

Matt was first diagnosed with schizoaffective disorder and bipolar disorder when he was 7 years old, and later, because of the severity of his symptoms and the lack of treatment facilities in California, his parents moved him to a residential treatment facility in Montana. He lived there from age 12 to 18.

But when he returned to Orange County, his mom said, things quickly deteriorated. Within six months, he was arrested for "sticking up" a Subway sandwich shop, that is, demanding money and food. He served time, and then reoffended with the BofA robbery.

Matt did not have a weapon, only a threat that he'd "blow the place up" if his demand wasn't met.

But in California, if you "instill fear" in another human being for a perceived loss of life during the commission of a crime, Hoff explained, it will bump the charges up to a felony, even if you do not have the means to carry out the threat.

Hoff has joined dozens of other parents, siblings, spouses and providers in the mental health field in calling for a "Right2Treatment" - shorthand for four key changes that advocates say are needed for Medi-Cal beneficiaries with serious mental illnesses:

(1) Enforce parity.

(2) Integrate mental health care with mainstream physical health care as the Affordable Care Act calls for.

(3) Create uniform standards of care statewide, county to county.

(4) Establish accountability that those standards are being met.

"We're refusing to pay for the sickest," Hoff continued. "Those disabled by their illness find themselves lost in a world that denies the reality of a biological disease and offers talk therapy over intensive psychiatric treatment. It is a world that has laws allowing sick people to live in the street until they die in the gutter."

A state policy of discrimination

Disparity of care exists on at least two levels for Medi-Cal recipients with serious mental illnesses, critics contend.

The first is in the failure to provide coverage as defined in the federal Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act of 2008, which mandates that deductibles and co-pays and limitations that apply to physical illness treatment apply equally to mental health and substance-use disorder benefits.

Perhaps most glaringly, note critics, is that the state will not pay its full match of the federal Medicaid funds for "medically necessary" treatment of mental illnesses. While the federal government does not limit what it will pay for Medi-Cal mental illness claims, the state does. California caps the funding by budgeting only a fixed amount.

There is no cap on the amount that the federal government will pay for its 50 percent share of "medically necessary" treatment of physical and mental illnesses for Medi-Cal beneficiaries, according to the Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services.

California does not "cap" the amount of Medi-Cal money for qualified "medically necessary treatment" of physical illnesses. It does for mental illnesses.

California's share is paid for from a separate pot of money from vehicle license fees and a portion of the state sales tax. Most Medi-Cal recipients receive their mental health care through county mental health programs. The amount available to each of the counties depends on how much the economy generates. The amount available does not relate to caseload or the degree of need.

This disparity between funding for physical illness and mental illness treatments translates into extended wait times to see psychiatrists, few resources to stabilize patients experiencing a mental health crisis, inadequate personnel to monitor medications, and a dearth in services such as supportive housing and intensive case management. We see the results on the streets every day: increased contact with law enforcement, repeated hospitalizations and homelessness. Can you imagine such a scenario for poor Californians with heart disease or Type 2 diabetes?

Rose King, widely considered to be the "mother" of Proposition 63, the California Mental Health Services Act, and founding member, along with Teresa Pasquini, of both Family and Consumer True Stories and Right2Treatment advocacy groups, contends: "The prejudice is built into funding formula."

For 23 years, the state has not met its obligations to Medi-Cal beneficiaries with serious mental illnesses. With the federal Affordable Care Act now having swelled the state's Medi-Cal rolls by another 1.5 million individuals - all of them guaranteed mental health care as an essential benefit - it is time for legislators and the governor to address the initial problem of disparity in a meaningful way.

Early discharges deny patients healing care

The second disparity of care is that psychiatric patients routinely are prematurely discharged from psychiatric hospitals. This abuse - and the reason behind it - is rooted in federal reimbursement policies.

According to Dr. Cam Quanbeck, psychiatrist and medical director of the Cordilleras Mental Health Center in Redwood City, disparity can be seen in the way inpatient psychiatric stays are reimbursed by Medi-Cal. It is also the cause of the lack of psychiatric beds in most counties.

Inpatient psychiatry is a money loser. Psychiatric beds are scarce because only a fraction of a patient's hospital stay is determined to be "medically necessary" and thus reimbursable under the federal rules, Quanbeck explained. A psychiatric unit gets paid zero for days deemed not "medically necessary." Medi-Cal and Medicare reimbursements cover about 20 percent of a community psychiatric unit's operating costs.

Quanbeck said if hospitals provide good inpatient care, they are punished financially.

"If you provide good clinical care, the patient will quickly no longer meet the Title IX 'medical necessity' (the reason why they were admitted) criteria for reimbursement. Then the hospital starts losing money," Quanbeck said.

"If you provide poor care and the patient doesn't improve during their stay, e.g. has incidents of aggressive behavior, remains suicidal, gravely disabled, etc., you make more money because you can bill for inpatient days while that behavior persists."

What is abundantly clear is that if the premature release of people with cardiac distress or kidney disease resulted in continued suffering or even death, there would be a hue and cry so loud from those affected, and the public at large, that legislators would be unable to ignore the problem.

But as Patrick Kennedy, the former Democratic congressman from Rhode Island who has had his own struggles with mental illness, said in a hearing this spring at the state Capitol, "It's really shocking, the extent of disparity in treatment."

Calling parity in mental health care the "civil rights issue of our time," Kennedy asserted that because of stigma, people with mental illness tend not to speak up for themselves the way people with breast cancer and AIDS have. "When was the last time you heard someone with bipolar disorder say, 'It's absolutely wrong the way you're treating me, and I'm not going to stand for it?' "

Seize the day

California is able to get around federal parity laws now because of two federal waivers - both of which are up for renewal in 2015, one in June and the other in October.

Mental health advocates, including former Assemblywoman Helen Thomson, whose AB88 provides more rigorous mental health parity for people with private insurance than its federal counterpart, are calling upon legislators to seize upon the upcoming deadline. This is the moment to work up an alternative that will bring true mental health parity to California.

So far, legislative leaders are dodging the issue. Instead of addressing disparity, they give it lip service. (In a taped state Senate hearing at the Capitol in July 2013, Senate President Pro Tem Darrell Steinberg said, of the need for parity for poor Californians, "We must do more.") Yet, legislatively, lawmakers are focused on bills that fail to address the central issue: How does California start paying its fair share match for medically necessary treatment for those Medi-Cal beneficiaries with serious mental illnesses?

Meanwhile, the state Department of Health Care Services, under which mental health care now falls, bluntly claims that "parity exists" in California.

To Thomson, the state's federal waivers, the disparity in treatment and the lack of access to quality mental health care is evidence of years of neglect of a population that has no voice.

"It's happening because we continue to discriminate against those who are mentally ill," Thomson said. "It's that simple."

To learn more Information about the mental health parity issue and how to obtain care for a loved one through the Medi-Cal system is available at: www.disabilityrightsca.org www.right2treatment.org www.treatmentbeforetragedy.org California's Medi-Cal Benefits website: bit.ly/V1Zz9U