TOP STORIES

We’ve got more questions about Theranos’ credibility:

Diagnostics startup Theranos is on the lookout for a laboratory director to oversee one of its key facilities, amid questions raised in laboratory circles about the qualifications of a physician who now runs the lab. — Wall Street Journal

On that note, Venrock partner Bryan Roberts explains what makes investing in a company like Theranos treacherous, particularly investing in a good story rather than in good science. — The New York Times.

AstraZeneca has agreed to acquire ZS Pharma in a $2.7 billion deal. The company’s signature product is a treatment for high potassium levels, which is associated with chronic kidney disease and chronic heart failure. — Bloomberg

LIFE SCIENCES

A one year old Leukemia patient became the first to undergo a procedure in which she received modified immune cells from another person through gene-editing technology. Previously the technology had been used on a patient with HIV. — Nature

gene-editing technology that allowed her to Quintiles founder Dr. Dennis Gillings is set to retire from his role of executive chairman at the close of this year. —Businesswire

Solid Biosciences gets $42.5 million Series B from Biogen and other venture investors to pursue a therapy for Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy. — Xconomy

Allergan has acquired medical device company Northwood Medical Innovations that’s a spinout of Health Enterprise East and West Hertfordshire Hospitals NHS Trust. — Pharma Times

Boston Scientific files patent infringement suit against Edwards’ Sapien 3 TAVR. — Fierce Medical Devices

FDA panel seeks tougher antibiotics labeling. —Wall Street Journal

Medtronic has released its 2015 integrated performance report, highlighting higher patient acquisition rates after its Covidien buy and its $1.64 billion investment in research & development. — MassDevice

Gilead, AbbVie asked by U.S. for Hepatitis C Pricing. — Bloomberg

PAYERS-PROVIDERS

A survey of more than 600 primary and specialty-care physicians across the U.S. suggests mistrust of major insurance companies is an issue across the industry. — HealthCare Dive

Providing more care than necessary may work to lower a doctor’s risk of being accused of malpractice. — Reuters

An interview with Albany Medical Center CEO James Barba on leading a hospital through Affordable Care Act changes. — Albany Business Journal

In advance of the North Shore-LIJ Health System’s name change to Northwell Health in January, New York State’s largest health care provider this week unveiled its new logo and visual identity to more than 61,000 employees. — North Shore LIJ

TECHNOLOGY

Validic announces international growth with new clients and integration partners, enhances mobile bluetooth and Apple health offerings. — PR Newswire

Duke University published a study in the journal Obesity this week which shows that, over a two-year period, neither a specially designed mobile app nor a coaching intervention that utilized a mobile app was any more effective in promoting weight loss than the control intervention — a handful of fliers from a doctor visit. — MobiHealthNews

Quest Diagnostics is using analytics vendor Medivo to sell de-identified patient lab results to drug companies, to hone their marketing to individual physicians. — HISTalk

A former staffer at UK-based health IT business Ascribe earned herself a four and a half year jail sentence after she was convicted of stealing $900,000 from the company over a five year period. She was hired even though she had a criminal record for stealing from a previous employer. EMIS Group acquired the business in 2013 — HISTalk

POLITICS

Collapsing Obamacare co-ops signal big trouble to come. — The Fiscal Times

A LITTLE BIT EXTRA

While some individuals are able to dismiss that chocolate bar in favor of a healthier snack, others are unlikely to be so composed. But according to a new study, this may be because the brains of some people are “hardwired” to crave foods high in fat and sugar. –Medical News Today