Sean Hannity’s fee-fees are vewy hurt by criticisms of Senator Ted Cruz. But Hannity’s not too disturbed to stoop to sleazy, unfounded rumors about Bill Clinton to use against Hillary Clinton.

Earlier this week, Hannity all but declared newsly-announced Republican presidential candidate Ted Cruz a conservative martyr.

HANNITY: It didn’t take long for the mainstream, liberal media and those on the left to attack him on everything from his stance on climate change to his latest announcement that he may be signing up for ObamaCare. …This is the same group of people… that kissed Obama’s backsides. I mean, sucked up big time.

Oh, how dare they!

Unfortunately for Hannity, even his own, all-conservative panel didn’t exactly show a lot of love for Cruz.

Guest Bernard McGuirk said Cruz “comes off as a little bit smarmy, and a dilettante and he’s a grandstanding narcissist.” However, McGuirk also said he’s “smart, he’s good on his feet and anybody who can raise the ire of these angry wackadoos had something going on, good for him.”

Guest Jedediah Bila sounded a lot more pro-Rand Paul than pro-Cruz. But she could appreciate the victimhood. “Be prepared for this,” she warned. Paul, Scott Walker, and Marco Rubio are also “guys that the media is going to go after ‘cause these are the ones that they’re afraid of. So they’re going to have to paint you as psychotic, they’re going to have to paint you as every possible thing.”

But painting Hillary Clinton as the wife of a pedophile or pedophile pal is A-OK for this crew. Before the segment was out, Hannity went after Bill Clinton with the unsubstantiated smear that even Bill O’Reilly shot down:

HANNITY: So they have this big story about Jeffrey Epstein, convicted pedophile guy, friend of Clinton. Clinton flies to Orgy Island, young girls, sex – can you imagine any of these Republican candidates having that background, hanging out with this guy, taking money for his foundation and getting the pass that the Clintons are getting?

Hannity later announced that according to Roger Stone (a Hillary-hating dirty trickster), Epstein gave money to the Clinton Foundation “after even he got in trouble with the young girl thing.” As if that indicated some kind of bond of perversion.

What Hannity didn’t say is that there is no evidence tying Clinton to Epstein’s sexcapades. BuzzFeed did an exhaustive investigation into the issue and, as the title of its article indicates, found “Plenty Of Innuendo, But No Hard Evidence Of New Clinton Sex Scandal.” BuzzFeed reports that flight logs indicate Clinton flew on Epstein's jet for professional reasons and “never flew with his wealthy friend anywhere near” the so-called “Orgy Island.” It’s Virginia Roberts, Epstein's alleged "sex slave" who is writing a “tell-all memoir,” who claims Clinton traveled there in 2002. Even so, she has said, “I have never seen him have sexual relations with anyone.”

But instead of challenging Hannity, the panel piled on. Guest Tom Shillue “asked,” “Was it called The Orgy Island before they went to it? I think that would have been a tip-off.”

That got big laughs from guest Bernard McGuirk. McGuirk also complained that conservatives would not get this “pass” that Clinton is getting.

Before long, the gang was sneering about Hillary Clinton’s lack of charisma.

But speaking of getting passes for hanging around with creeps and crooks, Hannity has some ‘splaining to do about his own behavior. Like how he promoted racist criminal Cliven Bundy’s armed insurrection against the U.S. government, or the radio airtime he gave to white supremacist Hal Turner, or when he cozied up to anti-Semite Mel Gibson while shutting Jewish Alan Colmes, Hannity's then-cohost, out of the interview.

Apparently, Hannity thinks his viewers are too stupid to notice that he does the very things for which he points fingers at others. The sad thing is, he may be right.

Watch the hypocrisy below, from the March 25 Hannity show.