HICKORY, N.C., Nov. 17, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- Dale Jarrett Racing Adventure, Inc. (OTC: DJRT), is pleased to announce that it's proxy for the disposition of the company's racing adventure has been approved. The company is now in the process of preparing and filing the necessary documents to change the name to 24/7 Kid Doc, Inc. and to obtain a new stock symbol more appropriate to the company's new identity.

24/7 Kid Doc, Inc. is an online Pediatric care provider committed to providing fast, easy and cost-effective access to Pediatricians and Pediatric Nurse Practitioners. Patients can have video visits with these providers from their smartphones, iPads or computers when they need it most, at any time day or night.

Setting itself apart from other online medical providers, 24/7 Kid Doc will not only be offering pay-as-you-go Doctor visits, it also offers monthly memberships and has created a value-added program for the rapidly expanding number of companies developing cost effective alternatives to the Affordable Care Act. By integrating 24/7 Kid Doc's online Pediatric care within their offered services, these associations will be able to significantly reduce their delivery costs thereby providing them with the opportunity to reduce total premiums to all families.

According to CEO Tim Shannon, "We are in the final stages of preparing to launch our online services and to implement our nationwide marketing plan. Beta-testing of our services begins January 1st 2016 in conjunction with 24/7 Pediatric Care Centers of Florida."

Forward-Looking Statements

Certain of the statements contained in this press release contain forward-looking statements that involves risks and uncertainties. Such forward-looking statements are within the meaning of that term in Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. Dale Jarrett Racing Adventure, Inc. has based these forward-looking statements on its current expectations and projections about future events, based on the information currently available to it. The forward-looking statements contained in this press release may also include statements relating to Dale Jarrett Racing Adventure's anticipated financial performance, business prospects, new developments, strategies and similar matters. Dale Jarrett Racing Adventure disclaims any obligation to update any of its forward-looking statements, except as may be required by law.

For more information contact

Tim Shannon – CEO 1-888-467-2231

SOURCE Dale Jarrett Racing Adventure, Inc.