Baton Rouge native and autism awareness advocate Shelley Hendrix is downright excited about the possibility of running for Congress in Louisiana's 6th District. But, while she's "very, very seriously considering it," she's checking with a few more leaders around town before making her final decision.

When word first got out Tuesday (Feb. 11) she was thinking about jumping into the race, Hendrix was stuck trying to get a flight out of the snow-laden Atlanta airport. Now that she's successfully back at home in the capital city, and, with the news broken, she's been able to gauge interest in her run more openly.

"It's been hard to sit on that egg," Hendrix told NOLA.com | The Times-Picayune on Wednesday afternoon. She told outgoing 6th District Rep. Bill Cassidy, R-Baton Rouge, she was considering the run a few weeks ago and is now meeting with local business leaders.



Cassidy is stepping down from the seat later this year to challenge Mary Landrieu for her Senate seat.

The biggest challenge for Hendrix, a moderate Republican who moved to Baton Rouge with her family at age nine, will most likely be fundraising. Several other candidates, including Republican small businessman Paul Dietzel II and state Sen. Dan Claitor, R-Baton Rouge, have a head start in the money grab game and can claim more name recognition.

The field is also already bloated, with three other Republican hopefuls -- tea party columnist and retired Navy captain Bob Bell, lawyer and small businesswoman Cassie Felder and educational consultant Charles "Trey" Thomas -- already declared. Democrats Richard Dean Lieberman of LaPlace and Quentin Anderson of Baton Rouge round out the group, which already boasts seven candidates.

But Hendrix said this "exploratory phase" will help her judge the possible success of a run: "I want to get additional input and that's what I'm doing...This just feels right and I just want to see if it feels right for other people."

Hendrix lives in Baton Rouge but travels regularly for her job as the Grassroots Development Director of the national advocacy group Autism Speaks. She said her passion of furthering autism awareness began in 1998, when her then two-year-old son Liam was diagnosed with the disorder.

Hendrix and then-husband Aidan Reynolds steeled themselves for the possibility of having a child doctors said would probably never speak. At first, Hendrix felt daunted by the possibility -- until it pushed her to take the issue straight to those that directly made funding and research decisions.

"One night I had a completely nervous breakdown about it," Hendrix said, referring to her son's diagnosis. "I woke up the next morning and I said, 'we need to found a nonprofit organization and I need to go to Washington.'"

That's just what she did. Unlocking Autism took her throughout the halls of the U.S. Capitol advocating for increased funding and awareness about the issue. Now, at 18, Liam is not only talks, but is thoroughly chatty.



After she and her husband divorced, Hendrix returned to Baton Rouge and worked at the Greater Baton Rouge Business Report selling advertising. In 2007, she found her job at Autism Speaks and has since then returned to Congress and even to the Defense Department, where she has served on a panel charged with researching ways to further autism research in the U.S.

She said this knowledge of Washington will help her work across the aisle to affect change if she decides to run for the seat. It would also be "an opportunity to give service back," she said, as she and her brother are among one of the first generations of Hendrixes since the American Revolution not to serve in the military.

On issues, Hendrix said her live experiences have steered her toward the middle. She identifies as a moderate Republican, who is "fiscally conservative" and "socially tolerant." She is pro-life, but believes there should be exceptions in place for victims of incest and rape, and in cases where it is necessary to save the life of the mother.

"I personally have not had an abortion and I don't think that's something that I would have chosen," said Hendrix, "(but) I would personally not hold that against someone and judge someone."

She hasn't yet taken a position on the Medicaid expansion available under the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare. But she said her own family's experience with medical expenses make her sensitive to the need of those without health care coverage.

"There are some good points with regard to the ACA, and it is the law of the land now," said Hendrix. However, she added: "I do think there are some things that could be fixed."

Hendrix said members of Congress need to "work smarter and not harder towards our future," and should focus on working across the aisle. She hopes to bring her passion for politics, which began in her junior year of college and dates back to when she was a legislative intern for then-state lawmaker, now East Baton Rouge Mayor Kip Holden, to the job.



"I just have worked hard to make our community work together, and to make Republicans and Democrats work together to make it happen."

. . . . . . .

Lauren McGaughy is a state politics reporter based in Baton Rouge. She can be reached at lmcgaughy@nola.com or on Twitter at @lmcgaughy.