Cutting the ribbon to officially open the Wayne County Health Center in Wayne are Wayne County Executive Warren Evans (left); Dr. Mouhanad Hammami, director of the Department Health, Veterans and Community Wellness; Wayne County Commissioner Al Haidous, D-Wayne; and Dr. Mert Aksu, dean of the University of Detroit Mercy School of Dentistry. (Photo: submitted)

When it comes to health care in Wayne County, the numbers speak for themselves — the county is ranked 82nd of 82 counties in the state and is home to 25 percent of all Michigan’s uninsured population.

“There is a tremendous need for people to be able to get medical, dental and mental healthcare,” said Wayne County Executive Warren Evans at the ribbon-cutting for the new Wayne Health Center, aimed at improving local healthcare access.

Located at 33030 Van Born in Wayne, the 25,000-square-foot center has been transformed into a full-service, federally-qualified health center with eight remodeled exam rooms thanks to a $700,000 grant from the federal Department of Health and Human Services.

Participants in the Women, Infants and Children program will have increased access to care with the number of evaluation rooms going from two to four allowing increased access to care.

The facility’s dental suite will expand the number dentistry stations from three to five later this spring. The new health center will deliver an expanded level of services that include immunizations, behavioral health, nutrition, counseling, pediatrics, obstetrics/gynecology and WIC.

The primary service area for the center is residents in the cities of Wayne, Westland, Romulus and Inkster where Evans noted there is only one primary care doctor for every 4,100 residents. But the services are available to anyone and not limited by residency.

“We’re rated as worst for healthcare in the state. I don’t care how you crunch the data, we’re still at the bottom,” Evans said. “How do we address it when communities don’t have the money they should. We need to pool our resources and talents. We’re looking for a new model.”

The expanded center is the result of a partnership, Evans said, not just with the communities of Wayne County but also with Beaumont Health, the University of Detroit Mercy School of Dentistry and the county Department of Health, Veterans and Community Wellness.

“Our residents will greatly benefit from these new partnerships,” Evans said. “Now it’s more convenient for residents to receive the health services they need and deserve. For example, when you visit this center, physicians and health care professionals from the Family Medicine program of Beaumont Hospital-Wayne are working side by side with Wayne County’s public health nurses.”

Under what is termed “No Wrong Door,” the goal is to provide the needed health care in one location and also seek out people who may not be aware that they qualify for programs, according to Dr. Mouhanad Hammami, director of the Department Health, Veterans and Community Wellness.

“There are significant uninsured and under-insured people. The Affordable Care Act has gone a long way to addressing that but there are still underserved people,” Hammami said. “They don’t know that they qualify for ACA.”

If the center needs to refer someone to another facility, Hammami said that care will be provided on the same income-based sliding scale as the center uses. “If they are low income, they will pay a nominal fee and that is often waived,” he said.

Along with public service announcements, fliers and other informational venues, Hammami said that health center staff will also work to glean what health care needs people have when they come in for an immunization, for example.

“Our front desk personnel will do screening. Someone might be applying for a (health department) permit. The staff will ask if there is a child in the family or a veteran,” Hammami said. “We will rely on word-of-mouth. When they come in for WIC, we’ll ask if they have a primary care physician.”

The remodeled dental area isn’t expected to be completed for another 3-4 weeks and will feature five dental chairs donated by UDM Dental School, whose students will provide care.

“We understand that dentistry is an important part of health. You will not be healthy without a health mouth,” said Dr. Mert Aksu, dean of the UDM School of Dentistry. “You have a better outcome with a clean mouth.”

A number of public officials attended the ribbon-cutting including Wayne County Commissioner Al Haidous, D-Wayne, who was recognized by Hammami for his support of the project.

“I’m so proud to see this event in Wayne, the heart of Wayne County. It will provide many important services,” Haidous said. “For many years, Wayne County was business as usual. Change is difficult. You need strong leadership. Change had to be implemented as quick as possible.”

Haidous credited Evans with working to make changes to benefit residents, like the health center, without worrying about the political impact.

LeAnne Rogers is a reporter for Hometown Life. Contact her at lrogers@hometownlife.com, 734-883-9039 or on Twitter: @LRogersObserver.

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1MqRJAy