Red Zinger/Coors Classic race launched 40 years ago this summer

U.S. Cycling Monument uscyclingmonument.com

Although decades have passed, artist Kimmerjae Johnson remembers clearly the first time she watched a pack of cyclists clad in brightly colored racing bibs sprint toward the finish line of the Coors International Bicycle Classic in North Boulder Park.

That image, still so vivid, is what inspired a proposed piece of public art Johnson designed to commemorate the race — which was first called the Red Zinger Bicycle Classic — and to reflect Boulder's place in the history of cycling.

A team is working to raise $215,000 to build a monument to the Red Zinger bike race and to Boulder's place in cycling history. (Bluestem Studio / Courtesy rendering)

In 1987, she stepped outside of her then-home on Fifth Street and found herself face-to-face with thousands of people, crowded together to watch the competitors cross the finish line.

"I found a little spot lining the streets next to other people, and I'm not kidding you, the entire town was on the street," she recalled. "A few minutes later, this peloton of racers came flying by a few inches from my face. It was unbelievable. I couldn't believe the speed, I couldn't believe that they could be so close together. It was really just beyond description."

Johnson, who now lives in Lafayette, and others want to install at North Boulder Park a piece of original, abstract art about 50 feet long, 18 feet tall and 20 feet wide. After announcing the idea in 2010, the group is still working to raise $215,000 to fund the project, which is being called the U.S. Cycling Monument.

Advertisement

Many credit the Red Zinger/Coors Classic stage race with putting Boulder and the United States "on the map" for competitive cycling, including Zach Johnson, Kimmerjae's husband and one of the advocates for the project.

Zach Johnson added that the monument would also be a testament to Boulder's outdoor lifestyle, including cycling for commuting and recreation.

"The monument not only will honor and celebrate the bike races, but on a bigger scale, launching the U.S. onto the international stage," he said. "It celebrates the race but also Boulder and Colorado's role in international cycling."

Celestial Seasonings launched the race in 1975 — 40 years ago this summer — to promote the company's Red Zinger tea. In 1979, Michael Aisner took over the race and the Coors Brewing Co. became its second sponsor.

Aisner believes the race, which drew 50,000 to 60,000 spectators in its later years, made Boulder a hub for the world's best cyclists, triathletes, runners and other athletes.

"We have had an influx of athletes move to Colorado because they found the benefits of altitude and living in a town as bike-friendly as Boulder," he said.

He added that it helped establish the careers of countless professional cyclists, including three-time Tour de France winner Greg LeMond, who twice won the Coors Classic.

Boulder resident and national champion Dale Stetina won the race in 1979 and 1983.

Another local, Olympic medalist, national champion and two-time Tour de France stage winner Davis Phinney, won the final Coors Classic in 1988.

Connie Carpenter-Phinney, Olympic gold medalist and 12-time national champion, won the race in 1977 and 1982. The two were married in the fall of 1983.

Davis Phinney, whose Boulder-based Davis Phinney Foundation supports people with Parkinson's disease, said many racers in the Red Zinger/Coors Classic era "fell in love" with Boulder at the time. He was 15 the first time he witnessed the race and 18 when he first competed.

Riders approach the finish line of the 1975 Red Zinger Bicycle Classic. (Robert Alexander Carpenter / Courtesy photo)

"The first-ever Zinger was my introduction to bike racing, and watching the riders whizz past inches away from both me at the side of the road and each other was simply breathtaking," said Phinney, the winningest cyclist in U.S. history. "I rode my bike home completely enthralled and announced to my parents, 'I'm going to race bicycles.' ... It literally changed my life."

Sarah Kuta: 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta