Patrice Etlin Courtesy of Advent International

Earlier this week Advent International closed the largest-ever buyout fund for deals in Latin America, collecting $2.1 billion from investors for investments primarily in Brazil, Mexico and Colombia.

The firm, which has a long history of investing in Latin America, will search for opportunities in the region’s various economies.

Private Equity News spoke to Advent’s São Paulo-based managing partner Patrice Etlin about the challenges posed by the region, growing competition for assets, and countries on the radar for buyout firms.

How did you convince investors to back the new fund in a difficult and uncertain macroeconomic environment in Latin America?

We are seeing a challenging macro environment in Brazil particularly, and there have been a lot of discussions about the economic outlook around Brazil. Investors still have a long term view in the region. We had very high demand from new and existing investors, and were pleased to be able to raise the fund in less than six months.

How attractive are Brazil, Colombia and Mexico for buyout opportunities?

In our main market, Brazil, there is close to zero GDP growth. It will be difficult next year. Even when macroeconomic conditions are bad, you have sub sectors which have interesting opportunities, like our recent investment in the education sector.

Mexico is getting a lot of attention these days. There was a [recent] push for economic and political reform, and throughout the fundraising we perceived there was clearly renewed interest from LPs [investors] in Mexico. The outlook is more positive and it is a market with less active players.

Colombia is the market we operate in that is growing the most. It has become a more competitive market in terms of private equity opportunities, and some local funds have raised money in the last few years. It reminds me of Brazil 18 years ago, when I started out. Colombia is a great market and very interesting.

Latin American investors supported the new fund. Are the region’s investors opening up to investing in private equity?

We have seen an increase in terms of Latin American pension funds giving money to us, the funds are becoming more sophisticated. It particularly is a phenomenon in the Andean countries, not so much in Brazil. The Brazilian pension fund industry is very domestic focused.

Your fund is considerably larger than the one raised in 2010. Will you be changing the size of your deals, or the type of deals you look for?

There will be no change to what we have been doing. We are still looking at the same sectors, including healthcare, education, retail, consumer. In terms of deal size, that will also be the same, between $150 million and $250 million equity size.

Although Brazil, Colombia and Mexico are your main focus, the fund is allowed to invest in other countries too. Which other countries are attractive?

We have a broad mandate in the region. From our office in Colombia we look at Peru, where we have been screening the market for a couple of years. We are seeing interesting opportunities there. We are still monitoring the situation in Argentina, we have been successful there in the past. We have also spent time in the Caribbean, and have looked at Central America. However 80% of our deals are in Colombia, Mexico and Brazil.

Given the lack of major private equity firms in the region to sell to, what will be the most likely exit route for your investments in the near term?

Over 18 years, we have sold 33 companies, only seven were IPOs. [Roughly] 75% have been strategic sales to trade buyers, and one case of a sponsor sale. Going forward, I don’t see the mix changing.

Do you expect to see more global buyout firms raise Latin America funds?

We may eventually. Every year there are only three or four cases of secondary buyouts in the market. There are still not a lot of mega funds in the market, and it is unclear whether this will change. There was a lot of interest in Brazil, but with the recent economic outlook that may have decreased a bit.

(Private Equity News is a U.K.-based trade publication owned by Dow Jones & Co.)