Raphael Avery's situation is triggering broader look at meeting needs

After Lafayette's Bob L. Burger Recreation Center was unable to accommodate a 6-year-old resident with Down syndrome in its after school program, staff are on the fast track to implementing changes that would boost inclusivity throughout the city.

A partnership with Out & About, a recreation program serving people disabilities, could provide a quick fix as staff continues pursuing long-term solutions after Raphael Avery was turned away from the Bob Burger After School Enrichment (BASE) Program in October.

Following a three-week trial run that began in August, facility administrators told Elizabeth Lichtenstein that staff could not provide adequate care for her youngest son to remain in the program, which her other son also attends.

"As a mom, it hurts to have one child be welcomed to play in an afterschool recreation program while one's younger child — the one with a publicly feared diagnosis — is turned away," Lichtenstein wrote in a blog post last month calling the center out for excluding Raphael.

Recreation director Curt Cheesman said a registered nurse who observed the trial period told administrators that Raphael would require resources beyond the facility's means to continue attending the program that includes physical activities, cooking lessons and reading time for children ages 5 to 12.

'It's not about convenience'

Advertisement

Inclusivity is a priority for the center, Cheesman said, but BASE staff are not trained to handle Raphael's individual needs.

"The major issue is that our young friend has some severe disabilities that require some one-on-one and personal care for things like being able to chew food," Cheesman said. "I have to look out for our young friend's safety."

The center has provided sign language interpreters to accommodate deaf participants in sports programs. Lafayette nonprofit Imagine! brings people with disabilities to the rec center multiple times a week for activities and programs like Out & About.

Raphael Avery, 6, a Lafayette resident with Down syndrome, plays with his mother Elizabeth at Lafayette Elementary on Friday. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

Out & About Director Colette Marie called staff flexible and welcoming and the center very inclusive as compared to similar institutions.

"It's not about convenience. It's about making it work for everyone and they get that," Marie said. "They've always had flexibility and a welcoming tone, which makes a difference about how participants feel about going to a place. And they feel good about going to Bob Burger."

Raphael took swim lessons at the rec center, which worked well in the 30 minute sessions that allowed for constant parental supervision and smaller teacher-to-student ratios than BASE, Cheesman said.

"A soccer program or something along those lines where a parent is there is fine," Cheesman said. "The difference is that Raphael would be dropped off and we would be responsible for the personal care. That's not a standard practice of recreation facilities. This is a difficult level of care. We're not equipped for that."

Cheesman said the center's mainstream programs have served multiple kids with special needs, but never to the extent that Raphael would require in BASE.

"It's our desire to figure out how to make this work," Cheesman said. "But it's a complex issue with multiple layers so it's not going to happen overnight."

'It's for the whole community'

Public calls for action from Lichtenstein and Raphael's father, Greg Avery (who once worked at the Daily Camera), and an outcry of support for the family from a handful of area residents during a Monday City Council meeting are adding to the city's sense of urgency.

Connor Long, a 21-year-old Louisville resident with Down syndrome, asked officials to lead by example by providing opportunities for people with disabilities to participate in community activities.

"I have a full and some would say extraordinary life. Not because I'm extraordinary, but because I had ordinary opportunities, inclusive opportunities," Long said Monday. "If I can do inclusive recreation, Raphael can probably do it too. Let's find out."

Mayor Pro Tem Gustavo Reyna extended an invitation to local families to speak at Monday's meeting.

"When you have a community that is informed and you provide training to councilors and to those who run the programs, then you have a more inclusive program, a richer program all around," Reyna said. "It's not just for the person who's being accommodated. It's for the whole community."

Cheesman aims to present options to City Council during its Nov. 17 or Dec. 2 meeting, including partnering with Out & About who would provide staff support for BASE, inclusion training for recreation staff and advice about institutional liability and protocol.

Breaking down barriers a full-time job

Decisions about how to improve recreation programs reach beyond Raphael's needs developing a foundation for inclusion practices citywide.

"This really dictates how we handle this in the future, at different Rec Center programs, at the Senior Center, citywide," Cheesman said. "It's not just about accommodating our young friend. It's bigger than that."

Lichtenstein said despite recent hurdles she plans to send Raphael back to BASE with his brother once accommodations are in place.

"I want my children to go to an after school program together," Lichtenstein said. "It's a civil rights issue. He belongs included in public activities. People shouldn't have to be segregated. It's 2015."

Lichtenstein said breaking down barriers for her son has become a full-time job.

Educating organizations, program directors and others who question Raphael's ability to integrate is nothing new for Lichtenstein, but the rewards of cultural shifts and watching others learn from Raphael are endless, she said.

"That's all I've wanted," Lichtenstein said. "It sucks. It's a lot of work, a lot of doors slammed in my face. But that's part of being a mom of a kid with special needs."

Whitney Bryen: 303-473-1113, wbryen@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/soonerreporter