Man, nothing's funnier than the Affordable Care Act, right, guys? Right? As the deadline to sign up for Obamacare approaches, many st

Man, nothing's funnier than the Affordable Care Act, right, guys? Right? As the deadline to sign up for Obamacare approaches, many st

Man, nothing's funnier than the Affordable Care Act, right, guys? Right?

As the deadline to sign up for Obamacare approaches, many states are left scrambling to enroll stragglers (i.e. millennials) before February 15th. In Illinois, the state has turned to a Chicago comedy institution to generate awareness for Get Covered Illinois, the official healthcare marketplace for the Land of Lincoln.

Taking a page from the President's playbook when he appeared on Zach Galifianakis' 'Between Two Ferns,' the state has tapped The Onion, America's Finest News Source, to create a humorous ad campaign for the initiative. Check it out.

Onion Labs, the satirical news site's in-house agency, created the faux Luck Health Plan, a "no-plan healthcare plan" with the slogan, "You'll Be Ok, Probably." Commercials for Luck trumpet the fact that the plan has zero monthly premiums, little paperwork, and "no real benefits." While the majority of the ads are hilariously dedicated to the fake organization, they finish with both a reminder that 'Luck is Not a Plan' and a call-to-action to "Get a Real Plan" at Get Covered Illinois.

As The Onion's SVP of Content told Mashable, the state "wanted to sell this fairly serious topic in a way that would cut through to Millennials, which is an audience that actively rejects advertising; speaking down to them or doing dull work is the fastest way to get ignored.”

Along with the TV spots, a Twitter feed, and its own website, the fake campaign also has a spokesperson, "health hacker" A.J. Mack. Via a microsite that lives on The Onion, Mack offers "health hacks" for people without coverage, like how to check your blood pressure with a bike pump and how to use a dating site to find doctors for free.

Finally, The Onion has also written several sponsored posts for Get Covered Illinois, like Uninsured Man Hoping For Gift Card To Local Hospital For Christmas. With the state's rich history in comedy - last year, Time Magazine named Chicago the funniest city in America - it's no surprise that Illinois would leverage humor to sell healthcare to the masses.

Perhaps we'll even see a couple funny campaign videos from Mayor Emanuel this election? (Yea, probably not).

(Image via LuckPlan.com)