Make sure your contract is up to date

Before the party and event season kicks into high gear, rental companies should examine their tent rental contracts to make sure they’re sufficiently protected. This is especially critical for rental companies that haven’t reviewed their contracts within recent memory, since rules, regulations and requirements around tented events have changed over the years, says James Waite, Esq., an attorney and partner with

Winters & Waite, Wichita Falls, Texas.

In some cases rental contracts may be out of date or inadequate, exposing the business to liability and expensive claims.

“For example, issues like underground utility notification and marking, NFPA [National Fire Protection Association] clearance requirements, and OSHA [Occupational Safety and Health Administration]-required evacuation plans and escape routes were virtually never covered in the past,” says Waite.

“Nowadays, it’s almost always a necessity, even if the rental operator plans to install every tent,” Waite says. “Other issues — such as products liability, capacity constraints, fall protection for aerial equipment, insurance coverage requirements and damage waivers — were only occasionally addressed in the past; sometimes adequately, sometimes not.”

However, rental companies exclude these at their peril. Consider damage to underground lines. Every state has a law requiring the marking of underground utilities prior to any digging or staking to avoid damaging those utilities. Some rental companies transfer this responsibility to

the renter via the rental contract.

Even if the contract doesn’t transfer the responsibility for marking public utilities to the renter, it should address damage to private underground lines — such as electricity leading to outbuildings, drainage systems for pools and septic lines, for example — that can’t be located by public utility companies. The contract should hold the renter responsible for marking the lines and/or hold the rental company harmless for any damage, even if the lines are marked.

Waite says this can be accomplished by including a strong indemnity, defense and hold harmless provision and language such as the following: “you (the lessee) agree to … advise all local utilities and cable companies and clearly mark all underground utilities before driving stakes or using any items(s) to dig or disturb the ground surface (call 811 at least three (3) full business days in advance); [and] … maintain and post in a public place on or near the tent an OSHA-compliant evacuation plan …”

The purpose of this wording is threefold, Waite explains. It:

Satisfies the rental operator’s duty to instruct and warn customers of potential hazards associated with the use of rental equipment.

Provides written evidence that those duties have been satisfied, at least with respect to the most obvious hazards.

Creates a contractual obligation on the customer to comply.

However, if the renter fails to have the lines marked and the rental company stakes anyway, the rental company will be liable for any resulting damage to public utilities and possibly also to private lines, depending upon the strength of the contract.

Consider this example: A rental company had been supplying a tent to a country club annually for several years. The rental contract held the renter responsible for marking the underground utilities. The renter did this the first year, but in subsequent years the lines weren’t marked because the tent was installed in essentially the same location. One year, a stake hit an electric line, the club lost power, and the rental company bore the cost to repair the damaged line and to rent generators for the club until power was restored.

Ideally, contracts also will stipulate that tents are temporary structures, not intended to protect people or property from severe weather or other emergencies, Waite says. Again, the language serves as a warning to customers and, along with an indemnity, defense and hold harmless provision, precludes claims for damage to the renter’s or others’ property.

For example, when a sudden severe thunderstorm brought down a tent, the emcee made a claim against the rental company for the damage to his equipment. Because the rental contract included both an indemnity clause and a warning that, as a temporary structure, the tent wouldn’t protect against severe weather, the claim was denied.

In addition to the above, Waite says contracts should always include the following basic protections:

An acknowledgement the customer has received proper instructions and warnings.

As assumption of risk provision.

A warranty waiver.

“A proper rental contract can not only help you win lawsuits, but enables you to avoid being sued altogether,” Waite says. “The best advice I can offer rental operators is to protect yourself beforehand. After a mishap occurs, you’ll be relying on the form of rental contract you had the customer sign.”

For more information, Waite can be contacted at 866-582-2586 or j.waite@wwlegal.net.

Maura Paternoster is risk manager for ARA Insurance in Kansas City, Mo. For more information, call 800-821-6580 or visit ARAinsure.com.