<p>With Patrick Murphy now running for the U.S. Senate, candidates are lining up for his District 18 House seat. (FILE PHOTO)</p>

By Isadora Rangel of TCPalm

Alan Grayson entered the U.S. Senate race in July swinging at opponent and fellow Democratic congressman Patrick Murphy on two issues he said will define what is expected to be a heated primary next year.

“Patrick wants to cut Social Security, cut Medicare,” Grayson told his hometown Orlando’s WKMG-TV during his candidacy announcement. “Patrick’s running in the wrong primary. He should be running as a Republican, because that’s who he really is.”

Grayson’s attacks don’t hold up. Murphy, who represents Martin, St. Lucie and northern Palm Beach counties, hasn’t proposed or voted for cutting Medicare and Social Security since taking office in 2013.

“I think this is only the beginning of what we are going to see with Alan Grayson throwing out outlandish claims that voters need to investigate,” said strategist Screven Watson, the Florida Democratic Party’s former executive director.

SCROLL DOWN FOR THIS FACT CHECK

Liberal Grayson’s use of the entitlement programs to attack his moderate and one-time Republican opponent so early in the race wasn’t random. Democratic primary voters tend to be older and more left-leaning than those in the general election, so senior issues such as retirement and health care access likely will play a big role in this contest, Watson said.

Murphy and Grayson have good records on senior issues, said Max Richtman, CEO of the National Committee to Preserve Social Security and Medicare, citing as an example their vote against a 2013 Republican budget that would have turned Medicare into a voucher program.

Both have been quick to display their support for the programs since entering the race for presidential candidate Marco Rubio’s open seat. Grayson announced in late July he refiled a bill that died last year to expand Medicare coverage to eyeglasses, dental care and hearing aids. On the same day, Murphy and Grayson were among 60 Democrats who signed a resolution supporting “policies to protect and expand Social Security and secure its long-term future.”

Grayson also co-sponsored a Democratic bill introduced in March to change Social Security’s cost-of-living adjustment, raise the income cap for contributions and increase payroll contributions by 0.05 percent per year for 25 years to keep the program sustainable past 2034. Murphy co-sponsored a different Democratic bill filed last month that attempts to keep disability benefits solvent by merging Social Security’s disability and retirement programs.

THE ISSUE

In 2013 and 2014, Grayson voted 100 percent with the Alliance for Retired Americans on 20 votes affecting retirees, while Murphy scored the lowest among Florida Democrats with 60 percent, according to a congressional voting record report.

Among Murphy’s “anti-retiree” votes were opposing a Democratic budget proposal that shielded social programs from cuts, and supporting a bill that changed the Affordable Care Act’s minimum work hours for employer-provided health coverage from 30 hours to 40 hours.

For Grayson, Social Security and Medicare will shape the primary. He said one of the problems affecting seniors is the double taxation of Social Security benefits — when workers contribute to the program and when they receive their benefits — and offered a bill that died last year to exempt benefits from income taxes.

“It is the issue,” Grayson said. “We have been cheating seniors for years now.”

MURPHY GETS NOD

Despite Murphy’s lower score on senior issues, the Florida Alliance for Retired Americans likely will endorse him in the primary, President Emeritus Tony Fransetta said. Although Grayson has a good record, he said Murphy has a better chance going up against a Republican in the general election. Many Democrats consider Grayson too liberal and divisive.

Murphy has a good pro-retiree record for a congressman representing a district that leans Republican, Fransetta said. He also has supported the alliance’s views when contacted by its members, such as his recent opposition to giving Obama fast-track authority to negotiate a Pacific Rim trade deal, which Grayson also opposes.

“We like them both (candidates) and I’m not going to say anything negative about Grayson, who’s done well in his district,” Fransetta said. “Patrick Murphy was in a very tough district that tilted Republican and he supported us. That shows it takes a lot of character when you don’t have that comfort zone and you vote the right thing.”

FACT CHECK

The claim that Murphy wants to cut Medicare and Social Security is based on the following, according Grayson campaign spokesman Kevin Franck:

CLAIM: In a CNN interview during the 2013 fiscal cliff discussions, Murphy said “we are going to have to look at cuts across the board” and “we are going to have to look at some structural changes to some programs like Social Security and Medicare.”

FACT: Murphy didn’t specifically propose cuts to Medicare and Social Security and previously has said he supports raising Social Security’s $118,500 annual income cap on contributions to keep the program solvent beyond 2034. Grayson proposed the same measure in an unsuccessful bill last year.

CLAIM: The mission statement of United Solutions Caucus, a bipartisan group Murphy formed with House freshmen soon after taking office, states “while protecting current recipients and seniors, we must reform the Medicare and Social Security’s long-term financial obligations by addressing rising health care costs and changing demographics.”

FACT: The mission statement doesn’t mention cuts.

CLAIM: During a 2012 WPTV election debate for his House seat, Murphy criticized his tea party opponent, then-Rep. Allen West, for blocking a budget deal based on the bipartisan Simpson-Bowles plan, which would have cut Medicare, increased the retirement age and slowed the growth of Social Security benefits.

FACT: Murphy didn’t endorse Simpson-Bowles and in 2013 he — along with the majority of House members, including Grayson — opposed asking Obama to use it as framework for his proposed budget.