21-year-old shooter arrested "for actions unrelated to the shooting"

LONGMONT -- Police are investigating a Friday night shooting at a home on the 2500 block of Cambridge that left 18-year-old Premila Lal dead.

Lal was a recent Niwot High School graduate.

Early Saturday morning, Longmont Police Cmdr. Jeff Satur said that a 21-year-old man who shot the woman and then assisted two other witnesses to take her to Longmont United Hospital was cooperating with the investigation.

Satur announced that the man, identified as Nerrek Galley of Orem, Utah, had been arrested about 2:11 a.m. "for actions unrelated to the shooting."

Satur said the shooting is not gang related and that drugs and alcohol do not appear to be involved. But he declined to offer many details about what witnesses told officers about the situation at the home on Friday evening.

Nerrek Daniel Galley, 21, a former Utah resident who gave his current address as 2531 Cambridge Drive, is suspected in the fatal shooting of 18-year-old Premila Lal, 18, a Niwot High School graduate. ( Courtesy Facebook )

Satur added, however, that "we can characterize this young woman's death as unintended and extremely tragic."

Satur confirmed that a report that Lal had been hiding in a closet and that Galley shot her when she jumped out and startled him -- "is consistent with our investigation."

Satur said, "This shooting was isolated to the home on Cambridge Drive and does not appear to be motivated by anger ... At this time we are continuing to investigate the circumstances of the shooting, but there is no danger to the community."

Police were called to Longmont United Hospital at 8:02 p.m. Friday on a report of an 18-year-old woman who had been shot, Satur said. Two minutes later, officers were called to 2531 Cambridge Drive on an "unknown problem" at the house. Officers quickly learned that the two calls were related.

The woman died shortly after 9 p.m. at the hospital, Satur said.

"We're the ones who called the police," said a neighbor, who asked not to be identified.

She said her husband was outside and "heard yelling and screaming" from the house at 2531 Cambridge Drive. Her husband then saw three or four individuals come out of the house and get into a vehicle and speed away, leaving the front door of the house open.

Longmont Police evidence tech Cindy Lawley takes photos outside a house Friday night, Sept. 6, in the 2500 block of Cambridge Drive in Longmont. (Matthew Jonas/Times-Call)

The neighbor woman said her husband walked over and saw blood and an abandoned mobile phone on the stairway. He came and got her, she looked at the scene inside from outside the door, and they then called 911.

"We didn't hear any shots," the neighbor woman said.

Satur said four people -- the victim, shooter, and two witnesses, ages 12 and 15 -- were in the home at the time of the shooting.

On Saturday night, Satur said the 15-year-old is Lal's brother and the 12-year-old, her cousin.

A man who asked not to be identified said some occupants loaded up a U-Haul truck Sunday and apparently left. He said he believed a younger family lived in the home and that he frequently saw a man hanging around out front speaking on his phone. He said the man took on a "gangsta" type attitude.

The woman who lives in one of the neighboring homes said Saturday morning that the people who'd moved out were the parents of children who attended school in the Niwot area. She said from what she understood, the children lived with a relative during the week and stayed with their parents on weekends.

Satur confirmed that some residents had moved, but the house was still occupied. He declined to say who lived in the home.

Nicole Coleman, who grew up in the neighborhood, said she does not know the people who lived in the home and was shocked to hear of the crime.

"We never usually have anything happening here," she said.

The Boulder County Coroner's office is investigating the cause and manner of the Lal's death.

The neighbor woman said she thought some of the occupants' children were students at St, Vrain Valley School district schools.

Galley is suspected of child abuse, reckless endangerment and permitting a juvenile to have a firearm, according to an arrest report Satur provided to the media late Saturday morning.

Satur said those potential charges stem from Galley allegedly having allowed Lal's 15-year-old brother to have a handgun in his possession without the permission of the boy's parents, which Satur said is a felony under Colorado law.

Longmont police officer Billy Sawyer's report said that when Sawyer arrived at the Cambridge Drive home shortly after 8 p.m. Friday, "I observed blood on the steps inside the residence. The front door was open but there was a glass door that was closed an unlocked."

The Longmont Police mobile command center is seen Friday, Sept. 6, in front of a house in the 2500 block of Cambridge Drive in Longmont where an 18-year-old woman was shot. (Matthew Jonas/Longmont Times-Call)

Sawyer said in his report that while clearing the residence, including his conduct of a protective sweep to ensure there were no injured parties inside, he saw a handgun, with a live round stuck near its slide's ejection port, lying on the top of the stairs in the home's living room.

Sawyer said in his report that police are requesting the court to set a high bond for Galley because he has "no ties to the community with a permanent residence." Sawyer said Galley "has been in Colorado for a very short time and his family lives in Utah."

Galley was transported from Longmont United Hospital to Longmont police headquarters to be interviewed. Officers there notified Galley of his Miranda rights and he agreed to discuss the incident.

Satur asked that anyone with information about Galley, about people who have recently occupied the home, or other information that might assist police in the investigation should contact Northern Colorado Crime Stoppers, 1-800-222-TIPS (8477).