Sophomore Golditch slides in at left tackle

Colorado State will start the season with Sam Carlson (left) remaining at right tackle, with Zack Golditch (center) at left tackle. ( Mike Brohard / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

FORT COLLINS — What Will Friend said he wanted at the beginning at fall camp was to have his front five established with a few weeks to go, allowing the Colorado State offensive line to build a chemistry with each other.

What the new offensive coordinator and offensive line coach was presented was five players who had started multiple games in their careers, but also a hole to replace at left tackle with the graduation of Ty Sambrailo, now in line to be the Denver Broncos starting left tackle.

Yet it was the interior of the line that delayed the process more than anything, with Kevin O'Brien playing injured most of camp, Jake Bennett returning from two major surgeries and Fred Zerblis missing a few days with an ailment.

With the opener a week away, Friend had his wish granted (give or take a few days), and those involved are confident all will be set when the season kicks off.

"I believe so," said Bennett, who started the first three games of 2014 at center but has slid to guard. "I think we can make sure we don't have any hiccups in our communication and be solid. We'll be good to go. We've just got to make sure this next week we keep talking and communicating, make sure everything is 100 percent."

O'Brien, who replaced Bennett last year at center, is back in his spot. Zerblis and Sam Carlson give the Rams two players who didn't miss a start last season, and Bennett will pair with sophomore Zack Golditch, who will make his first career start protecting Nick Stevens' blindside.

Advertisement

"We feel he's the best right there and doing a nice job," CSU head coach Mike Bobo said of Golditch. "We get Nick Calender back, and he's a guy we feel can play tackle, and hopefully we have a rotation where we keep guys fresh and can play three tackles."

Bobo said he feels comfortable with the top eight linemen in the rotation, including sophomore Trae Moxley, who can play guard and tackle (as can Calender) and true freshman Colby Meeks, who can back up on the interior.

Colorado State's offensive line dealt with some injuries in camp, but with a week before the first game, the starting five is set and bonding. (Mike Brohard / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

More importantly, the guys up front all share a comfort with the guys they're beside, since most of them grew up together as first-year starters.

"I think, with the exception of Golditch, we've all played together," Zerblis said. "I think we all mesh really good. We've learned the playbook over camp, so I think we're all right and we'll be OK up front. Not the big question mark like last year."

For awhile, it was just a matter of keeping them healthy. Bennett, who missed most of last season with a knee injury, also had a shoulder issue cleaned up surgically, and it was giving him problems at the beginning of camp. Be it at guard or center, he's just glad to be back in the lineup.

He said it took about a minute to get the juices flowing, a week to really get back in the flow of football. To his teammates, he looks like he's back to normal, back to the guy who impressed Bobo so much on tape.

"He looks good. Obviously he didn't get a spring ball, so he's a spring behind, but he's got it up here in the head, and he's picked it up just fine," Carlson said. "It's some minor footwork deals he has to take care of. I think he looks great coming off surgery."

The last detail Bennett had to catch up on in camp was the tempo of the offense, a key aspect the rest of his teammates were introduced to in camp. While Bobo has talked about using up to nine receivers, four tight ends and three running backs, the biggest guys will have to keep the pace in the no-huddle offense.

Carlson laughs at the notion, admitting it was a bit of an eye-opener for them in the spring. Now, he looks at it as an advantage.

"As soon as the ball's dead, you get up off the ground, hustle right back to the ball and get set," he said. "It makes you tired, but it makes the defense more tired, because they have to do a lot more moving, and you already know what to do."

Mike Brohard: 970-635-3633, mbrohard@reporter-herald.com and twitter.com/mbrohard