Good to be home. The Avalanche returned early Sunday morning and had the rest of the day off. Practice Monday and the second home game is Tuesday against the visiting Florida Panthers.

Center Matt Duchene appears to have an excellent handle on what ails this team. Inadequate offense one night, inadequate defense the next. Inconsistency that affects what happens in all three zone. The lone win came Monday at Boston, and the offense struggled in that 2-1 affair. Defending was poor Thursday at Ottawa and Saturday at Montreal, and Colorado blew its first of three consecutive leads in Tuesday’s overtime loss at Toronto. Goals for/against: 9/20.

The Avs are 1-4-1 — just a year after beginning 6-0.

“When you’re not scoring you tighten up as a group and you’re not able to defend as well, because you’re tight,” Duchene told me Saturday after the 3-2 loss to the Canadiens. “I think that’s our case right now. (But) we’re fine. We’re going to be OK. We’re right there every night; it’s not like we’re getting blown out or anything. Right now we’re just sabotaging ourselves. I don’t think it has anything to do with other teams. They’re playing well but we’re sabotaging ourselves.”

More on what Duchene said after his 10-shot performance against the Habs in the game story.

Also, Terry Frei has a column in Monday’s paper/online. We will link that here when it posts.

Duchene’s left wing, Jamie McGinn, had this to say: “We had lots of chances. It’s unfortunate because, we had a lot of shots but we didn’t play to our potential. We gave up too many good rushes to them, where “Pick” (Calvin Pickard) kept us in it. Once they start coming (Avalanche goals), they’re going to come in bunches. But we definitely have to tighten up defensively.”

Quinnipiac freshman Landon Smith could perhaps help the Avs offensively, next season or beyond. The standout from Greenwood Village has two goals and four points in his first three NCAA games, with his goals coming in Saturday’s 3-3 tie against No. 9-ranked UMass-Lowell. Smith, who turned 21 Saturday, attended the Avs’ prospects camp in July as a free agent and might not last more than a year or two in college, given his resume. He led the British Columbia Hockey League with 43 goals last season and was named the league’s MVP, and was among six finalists as Canada’s junior-A player of the year.

Here’s what QU coach Rand Pecknold said after Saturday’s game: “Landon Smith was really good tonight. He played great — he had a lot of jump. He’s certainly a highly talented kid.”

Our own Nick Groke (@NickGroke) has Avalanche practice Monday.