Jerry Seib: Reasons for U.S. and China Cooperation In the past few years, the relationship between the U.S. and China has hardened. However, recent global crises have allowed for cooperation between the two countries.

A meeting between an American president and the pope is always big news—and always an event that stirs up interest in the political world about how the event might affect “the Catholic vote.”

The Catholic vote is in quotation marks there because the phenomenon actually is pretty hard to pin down. Indeed, one can argue that there isn’t really an identifiable Catholic vote, because the millions of Catholics who vote have reliably tracked the national vote at large for decades now.

Pope Francis addresses the crowd from his private apartments on March 23 at the Vatican. Agence France-Presse/Getty Images

First, a couple of notes about Thursday’s scheduled meeting in the Vatican between Pope Francis and President Barack Obama. As today’s Capital Journal column notes, there will be a tendency to view this meeting as a confab between a more liberal pope who has de-emphasized the church’s conservative stands on social issues, and stressed more Democratic-friendly themes such as income inequality and compassion toward gays.

But that analysis is a bit simplistic. The pope has changed the tone and emphasis of the Vatican’s approach to its flock, but he has hardly changed church teachings on issues such as abortion and gay marriage, which inevitably still will create tensions.

The one political fact that is indisputable is that Pope Francis has won widespread popularity on President Obama’s turf, among Americans generally—self-described liberals as well as conservatives–and American Catholics in particular. A Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll released last week showed that 55% of Americans surveyed said they had a positive view of the pope, compared to just 7% with a negative view. Six in 10 Catholics agreed with the statement that “Pope Francis has renewed and strengthened my religious faith and commitment to the Catholic Church.”

The impact of such things on the American political scene is much harder to determine. Every presidential election cycle brings a bout of speculation about how Catholics are reading the election, and whether any tensions or agreements between America’s bishops and policy makers will steer Catholic votes.

But as the accompanying chart shows, the Catholic vote tends to mirror the national vote, uncannily so. In every election since 1972, when exit polls began giving us a clearer fix on how various demographic groups voted, the winner of the Catholic vote also has won the national vote. (That was even true in 2000, when Democrat Al Gore won the Catholic vote and the popular vote, even as he lost the Electoral College vote to George W. Bush.)

And more often than not, the share of the Catholic vote going Democratic or Republican has been within a point or two of the national vote. In fact, in recent elections, the tracking has become especially close. In each of the last two presidential elections, for example, President Obama’s share of the Catholic vote was just one point off of his share of the overall vote.

The lesson: There are more than 75 million Catholics in the U.S., and they are an important electoral bloc, but they are far from a monolithic one.

More:

Seib: Don’t Expect a Mind Meld When Obama, Pope Meet