Republicans came into 2015 controlling both the House and Senate for the first time since 2006, with promises to govern effectively and prove they were more than just the party of no. Having flown off for spring vacation last week, this seems a natural time to ask: How have they done so far?

The short answer: Despite roadblocks, stumbles and infighting earlier this year, the new majority party entered the Easter break with governing momentum following hard-fought budget agreements in both chambers.

Democrats see things differently, of course. They point to the first 11 weeks of the 114th Congress and claim Republicans still don’t know how to run things on Capitol Hill.

The numbers both support and belie this. It’s true that only six bills have been signed into law thus far, but that’s close to the norm during President Obama’s time in office in years following elections. Six bills were enacted in the first three months of 2013; seven were signed in 2011.

For Republicans, however, simply getting bills onto the president’s desk is a significant win. Obama had vetoed just two pieces of legislation in the first six years of his administration, but Republicans successfully forced vetoes on two in the past 90 days: One bill approved the Keystone XL pipeline and another would have blocked a National Labor Relations Board effort to streamline union elections.

In the House, Republicans felt they had momentum because they were able to rally enough members to pass a budget agreement, and a likely deal was reached on a fix for the formula to pay Medicare doctors, two high-priority items that were question marks going into the final week before the break.

Republican senators were similarly pleased with a budget agreement, and also praised the way Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell has opened up the amendment process on legislation, something that was a constant source of frustration under Harry Reid.

But things aren’t completely unstuck on Capitol Hill, and even Republicans weren’t universally singing their own praises, as some admitted that there is still a long way to go to get things on track. Most lawmakers questioned were reluctant to assign Congress interim grades, and the grades that were given for the first three months of the new Republican Congress fell all over the map.

A Promising Start

January began, oddly enough, with bipartisan consensus. On the second day of the new Congress, the House passed a reauthorization of terrorism risk insurance by a vote of 416-5; the Senate passed it, 93-4, the next day, and Obama signed the measure into law four days later. It was the only piece of legislation the president signed in January.

The rest of the month in the House saw a number of Republican “message” priorities: votes to cancel Obamacare’s 30-hour workweek provision and increase it to 40; approve the Keystone XL pipeline; fund the Department of Homeland Security while halting President Obama’s immigration executive actions; and a bill to prohibit taxpayer-funded abortions, among others.

“You’ve seen a lot of arm waving and you’ve seen a lot of what looks like motion, but not much has gotten done,” Democratic Rep. Jim McDermott said.

In the Senate, the entire month was spent in a back-and-forth over the pipeline, culminating in 33 votes on amendments to the legislation. Some Democrats joined their GOP colleagues in cheering the open amendment process, which brought nearly twice number the votes as the 15 Harry Reid allowed in all of 2014.

Dick Durbin, the second-ranking Democrat in the Senate, even praised new Majority Leader Mitch McConnell on the Senate floor, and said he hoped the two parties could work together to continue allowing open floor debate.

“What we’ve seen over the last several weeks is the Senate I remember, the Senate I was elected to, the Senate where there was active debate, deliberation, amendments,” Durbin said. “And for some members, it’s a new experience.”

Sen. Marco Rubio also praised McConnell, but complained that Democrats have stepped in to block Republicans at nearly every turn. His grade for the 114th Congress’ first three months: “A for effort, probably C+ for results.”

“I’d give Sen. McConnell a real bonus point for trying to have a process that works, that allows everyone a vote on their amendments,” Rubio told RCP. “He’s confronted, of course, a Senate minority party -- and Sen. Reid -- that’s decided to become obstructionist … by putting up roadblocks in front of every initiative that the Senate’s trying to do.”

Despite praise for the way they debated the Keystone legislation, the upper chamber spent nearly a month on the measure before Obama vetoed it, as promised. The attempt to override fell short, and Republicans’ first priority in the new Senate fell flat, as predicted.

February started much the same as January. The Senate took up the Clay Hunt Suicide Prevention Act -- which had passed the House without a single no vote three weeks earlier -- and passed it, 99-0. Obama signed it a week later, the only bill that would get his signature in February other than a one-week, temporary funding measure for the Department of Homeland Security.

Beyond that, the year’s shortest month was consumed by the DHS impasse. Republicans insisted on amendments blocking Obama’s action delaying deportation for possibly millions of undocumented immigrants and accused Democrats of supporting executive orders the GOP called unconstitutional. Democrats flat-out refused to even consider funding bills with the immigration riders attached and accused the GOP of playing games with national security and giving in to the far-right wing of the party.

In other words, it was the same old game of Capitol Hill gridlock.

The stalemate lasted weeks, with even House GOP leaders unable to marshal support within their own party for a temporary three-week fix (more than 50 Republicans voted against the measure). Ultimately, they reached a deal to fund DHS without any immigration riders.

“They’ve found new ways to obstruct even their own objectives,” Hawaii Sen. Brian Schatz said of the GOP. “It’s one thing to obstruct the governing party, it’s an entirely different thing to actually put obstacles in your own way. … The point when you’re in charge is to govern and I think they, to put it charitably, are still getting the hang of it.”

Sen. Mark Kirk, a moderate Republican facing a tough re-election battle in 2016, was highly critical of his party’s attempt to attach immigration to homeland security funding. Despite that, he still gave the Senate an A- for the first three months of 2015.

“The move to attach controversial stuff to a key spending bill was not a strategy that I agreed with,” Kirk told RCP. “… When you’re blessed with the congressional majority, you’re blessed with the power to govern. If you’re going to govern, you have to govern responsibly.”

Some GOP members still consider passing DHS funding without the immigration amendments the biggest disappointment of the new Congress. Alabama Sen. Jeff Sessions, who was one of the most vocal opponents of the president’s immigration actions, said it came down to messaging. Though he gave the Senate a B grade for its work so far, he said Republicans were “ineffectual” in their DHS arguments.

Rep. Jim Jordan, the chairman of the conservative House Freedom Caucus, also called the DHS battle the biggest disappointment of the new Congress, and agreed that messaging was a big reason for the failure. Republicans had the right arguments, he said, but didn’t make them stick.

“We needed to run a two-month campaign,” Jordan said. “Instead, I think many members waited until the last couple weeks to try to make the argument.”

Post-DHS and in the race toward the Easter break, House Speaker John Boehner partnered with Democratic counterpart Nancy Pelosi to strike a long-term deal on the Sustainable Growth Rate payment method for doctors who treat Medicare patients, which Congress has tackled annually since 1997. House leaders came to a 10-year agreement on the payments. Majority Whip Steve Scalise predicted the day before the vote that there would be a huge majority supporting the fix, and the tally proved him right: The bill passed by a stunning 392-37 margin.

“Don’t look now but we are actually governing,” North Carolina Rep. Renee Ellmers said on the House floor last Thursday.

Boehner called the “doc fix” a “true win for the American people” but downplayed the process. “It was an opportunity that presented itself, and the door opened and I walked in,” he said over the weekend on CNN. “It’s as simple as that.”

The vast majority of Democrats supported the measure, and they were equally pleased an agreement was reached. Minority Whip Steny Hoyer gave Congress a D for its work thus far, but said without the SGR fix, it would have been an F.

“We both wanted to make it permanent, and that bill was worked on in a way that I think … was a very positive performance of the Congress, of the House of Representatives,” Hoyer said. Other than that, he called Republicans “a deeply divided party” and “ineffective in pursuing positive policy.”

Agreement wasn’t as easy to achieve in the upper chamber, where an all-night vote session on budget amendments prevented senators from taking up the SGR fix before breaking for vacation -- thus missing the March 31 deadline. McConnell assured his colleagues late Thursday night that they would take it up the measure immediately upon returning in April.

A senior GOP aide said the agreement in the House didn’t necessarily mean there would be bipartisan support for big-ticket fixes down the road, including those needed for the highway trust fund and the debt ceiling. But the aide said leaders could use the Medicare fix as a blueprint for how to attack these deadline-oriented issues.

Steve Israel, the chair of the Democratic Policy and Communications Committee, took a different view. He said the Medicare fix showed that Democrats hold a significant amount of power despite the GOP having its largest majority in the House since the Great Depression.

“What we know for a fact now is that nothing can happen in this Congress without Democratic votes,” Israel stressed. “For as long as they’re willing to acknowledge that they need Democrats to pass anything of any importance, we’ll be willing to provide the votes. Our votes, however, can only support bills that reflect our priorities.”

Asked about Democratic claims that fractures in the GOP conference gave the minority power, a senior GOP aide pointed to the budget, which had passed a day earlier without any Democrats in support.

Budget deals set priorities

When Republicans met for a joint House-Senate retreat in Hershey, Pa., in January, one of the topics discussed was the importance of passing a budget proposal on each side of the Capitol. Though such outlines don’t have the force of law, they serve as statements of priority and guidelines for appropriations the remainder of the year. Controlling both chambers, Republicans saw it as essential that they pass budget resolutions to lay the framework for their plans going forward. Despite a divide over defense funding and how to provide it, the House narrowly passed leadership’s preferred version of the budget, 218-208.

“This is a huge deal,” Scalise said after the vote, calling the budget proposal “a visionary document for America, for how we’re going to get our country back on track.”

Senate Republicans were also able to narrowly push through their proposal, 52-46, with just Ted Cruz and Rand Paul joining all Democrats in voting against it.

Several Republican senators, when asked how they viewed the work they had done so far this year, highlighted that vote as a substantial achievement.

“It’s been tough,” John McCain said. “If we get a budget done, I think it’ll be progress.”

His Senate pal Lindsey Graham expressed a similar sentiment, saying before the budget vote, “I would say if we passed the budget, we’re off to a good start. If we don’t, we’re no better than [Democrats] are.”

Rubio said before the vote that he thought a budget agreement would provide necessary momentum for the work to come, adding that he expects the C+ grade he gave the chamber to rise to a B+ in the coming 30 days.

More than just the doc fix hangs in the balance for the Senate, however. While the House passed multiple bills aimed at helping victims of sex trafficking, the Senate got stuck on just one thanks to an amendment preventing funds being spent on abortions. Despite the trafficking legislation having broad bipartisan support, the Senate left for vacation without having passed it, still mired in substantial disagreements over the abortion language. The delay in that vote also held up a confirmation vote for attorney general nominee Loretta Lynch, who has been waiting more than a month since winning approval from the Judiciary Committee on a bipartisan vote. Durbin, who said his grade for this new Congress would be “incomplete,” admitted last week he was worried about the Lynch vote, and Democratic senators have been loudly pushing for McConnell to bring her nomination to the floor.

Despite those disagreements, John Cornyn, the second-ranking Senate Republican and author of the trafficking bill, said he is confident a solution will come quickly after the recess. Following that and the Medicare fix, the Texas lawmaker says things will be looking up.

“I think hopefully in the next couple weeks we’ll look back and things will look a little more hopeful,” he said. “Right now they seem kind of stuck.”