Slowing the Presidential Regulation Train

This evening’s first presidential primary debate ushers in the real start of the 2016 race for the White House.

That means we’ll finally start to hear how all the candidates vying for the nomination — so far 17 Republicans and at least three Democrats — plan to solve the issues that are most important to us.

Many Americans might tune in tonight to see whether Donald Trump manages to steal the show.

But after reading several letters from Uncommon Wisdom Daily readers, I know many of you will be looking for hints about a topic that inspired some very strong debates right here in this space over the past week …

***

This morning I read an outstanding study from George Mason University. Its Mercatus Center is a free-market think tank that does some great work in advancing market-based solutions to large-scale problems.

The study looked at the growth of regulatory restrictions handed down by the president, the executive branch and the federal government agencies that serve the administration.

Given the tremendous power of the presidency in 21st-century America, you can expect whoever wins the golden ticket to continue to use that power to impose their regulatory stamp on society.

We know this based on past behavior, as outlined to us by Mercatus.

Here’s the study’s opening paragraph, which sets the stage for why this is an important issue for everyone:

Presidents and their administrations wield extraordinary authority over federal regulation. While executive agencies can only write rules within the bounds set by Congress, their mandates are often expansive. Presidents set priorities, appoint and direct agency leadership, and determine how and when to review proposed or existing rules for cost-efficiency and consistency. These decisions materially affect the pace of regulatory accumulation during a president’s time in office, which in turn affects the cost and complexity of doing business in the United States.

Let’s take a look at how Mercatus calculated this, and what the results revealed.

***

The key term here to note is "regulatory accumulation."

The study counted individual restrictions in the Code of Federal Regulations, or CFR, which contains all regulations currently in force. The annual publication of the CFR allows Mercatus to basically keep a running tab of individual restrictions.

Not so surprising was the fact that every president from Jimmy Carter to Barack Obama increased the total number of regulatory restrictions during their respective presidencies.

According to Mercatus:

Across no president’s term did the total number of regulatory restrictions actually decline. The cumulative effect of these increases by successive presidents is a near-doubling of total regulatory restrictions, from about 580,000 when President Carter took office to about 1,070,000 in 2014.

Ouch!

If you’re an opponent of Big Government intrusion into our lives via the nanny state, then this runaway presidential regulation train is not good news.

So, which presidents were the biggest, most active nannies?

***

The table below shows that hands-down, President Obama wins the title of Biggest Nanny-in-Chief.

As Mercatus describes it:

President Obama not only oversaw the greatest increase in regulatory restrictions in a single term, his first, but as of 2014 he has edged past President George W. Bush as the president with the greatest total increase in restrictions since 1976.

Other interesting findings in this study show that while Presidents George W. Bush and Bill Clinton both added regulations at similar rates across their two terms, President Clinton added significantly fewer restrictions overall compared to Bush.

The reason I find this interesting is that Clinton’s second term was pretty darn good for both the economy, and the financial markets.

Similarly interesting to me is that during his first term, President Reagan was responsible for a substantial increase in regulation. Yet during his second term, there was a tiny increase in restrictions.

Like Clinton, Reagan’s second term also coincided with a good economy and a strong stock market. (Right up until that pesky little 1987 "Black Monday.")

One other similarity between Clinton’s second term and Reagan’s second term is that both were embroiled in scandals — Clinton with the Lewinsky matter and Reagan with Iran-Contra.

Could we conclude from this that presidential scandals are actually good for the economy and the markets?

I’m tempted to say yes, but the more logical conclusion is that those respective scandals likely distracted each Nanny-in-Chief from meddling in the country’s affairs too much. That could be part of why things were good during those aforementioned administrations.

Mercatus concludes its analysis with a word of advice for 2016 presidential contenders:

Future presidents will need to look to their predecessors to determine how to effectively manage the cumulative effect of regulation and maintain the necessary conditions for entrepreneurship and growth.

When assessing the presidential candidates in tonight’s debates, and for the remainder of the 2016 election follies, it would be wise to keep this lesson in mind.

***

What’s your take on the acceleration of the presidential regulatory train? Can it be stopped, or should it be stopped? And, who amongst the score of current candidates is most likely to slow the pace of executive restrictions?

Send me your thoughts and let me know by leaving a comment on our website or by sending me an e-mail.

***

U.S. stocks dropped for the sixth-straight day, as traders took risk off the table in anticipation of Friday’s July jobs report release. Elsewhere in the news today …

• Tesla Motors (TSLA) shares sank more than 9% Thursday, their biggest one-day drop since September 2014. This came one day after the company trimmed its vehicle delivery forecast for the year from 55,000 … cars to 50,000 to 55,000. • Viacom Inc. (VIA) shares tumbled some 13% after the company reported lower-than-expected Q3 sales. The miss was the second high-profile media fail in two days, as Walt Disney (DIS) shares disappointed Wednesday. • Keurig Green Mountain (GMCR) dropped almost 30% today after the company reported decent earnings but weak guidance for the coming quarter. This leads us to wonder — might Coca-Cola (KO), which owns a large stake in the company, use this pullback to buy more or potentially even buy it out? • Gold futures were higher Thursday as the selling in equities pushed some money into safe-haven assets such as the yellow metal. • After a three-day slump that sent the Greek banking stock index down 63%, the index managed to close 11% higher today.

Good Luck and Happy Investing,

Brad Hoppmann

Publisher

Uncommon Wisdom Daily