Playing up his experience in the private sector and noting he is not a career politician, businessman G.G. Galloway launched his bid for the U.S. House on Thursday.

Galloway is running as a Republican for the seat currently held by U.S. Rep. Ron DeSantis, R-Fla., who is aiming for the U.S. Senate in 2016. The district currently stretches from the Jacksonville suburbs in St. Johns County south to Volusia County but it could be impacted by the Florida Supreme Court managing redistricting.

A Realtor with Coldwell Banker, Galloway played football for Clemson University and even made the Seattle Seahwaks in the National Football League (NFL) back in the 1970s. Galloway has been active in the community, serving on Team Volusia, sitting on the board of the Volusia County Association of Responsible Developers and as president of the Daytona Beach Association of Realtors and Ormond Beach Main Street USA.

As he launched his bid, Galloway talked about his experience in the private sector and how it prompted him to run for Congress.

“I have lived the American dream of building a business and raising a family, and now I want to work to make sure that same opportunity will be available for my children and grandchildren,” said Galloway. “The federal government is getting in the way of the ability of everyday Americans to earn a living and pursue a better future for their children. It is time for us to tell Washington how to work, not the other way around.”

Galloway focused on fiscal issues, calling for the federal government to play a smaller role so the private sector can grow.

“I am not a career politician,” Galloway said. “I know what it takes for an economy to grow. From Obamacare to needless and counterproductive EPA regulations, federal policies are crippling rather than supporting our free-enterprise system.

“I know firsthand that big government makes it harder to start and grow a business and support a family,” Galloway added. “We’ve got to expand economic opportunity by getting government out of the way and letting people keep more of what they work so hard to earn.”

Former U.S Rep. Sandy Adams, R-Fla., and former New Smyrna Beach Mayor Adam Barringer are currently running for the Republican nomination. Other possible Republican candidates include former St. Johns County Commissioner Mark Miner, GOP activist and consultant Brandon Patty and former Duval County Sheriff John Rutherford.

Reach Kevin Derby at kderby@sunshinestatenews.com or follow him on Twitter: @KevinDerbySSN