Steven Avery listens to testimony in the courtroom on March 13, 2007 at the Calumet County Courthouse in Chilton. (Photo: Morry Gash/AP)

Gov. Scott Walker was never going to pardon Steven Avery. Never, ever, ever. No matter how many online petition signatures there were and no matter how many Americans hungrily binge-watched a documentary series. It was never going to happen.

That’s because Walker does not pardon anybody. Not only has he never issued a pardon in his five years as governor, but he’s also suspended the pardon advisory board itself. There is no one in the executive branch reviewing applications for potential pardons. Walker is not interested.

In the case of Steven Avery, the subject of the artfully-produced Netflix series “Making a Murderer,” it is hard to find fault with Walker’s decision. The governor confirmed this week that he would not issue a pardon for Avery, the Manitowoc County man who was wrongfully convicted and imprisoned for 18 years in a 1985 sexual assault he did not commit — only to be charged with and eventually convicted of murdering 25-year-old Teresa Halbach only a couple of years after he was released from prison.

“Making a Murderer” is a huge hit because the story is bizarre, complex, confounding, infuriating. It makes a strong, even shockingly persuasive case that police and prosecutors mishandled the case, that at least some evidence tying Avery to the murder was likely planted there, that at least one witness — Avery's mentally-disabled nephew Brendan Dassey, who was 16 at the time — was coerced.

None of that means Avery is innocent, though, and in some ways it’s the very complexity of the case that makes Avery a bad candidate for a gubernatorial pardon. If Avery deserves a new trial, as some have argued, that should happen within the justice system itself, which exists, at least in theory, to weigh evidence and procedures and determine culpability.

And if “Making a Murderer” points to a need for changes within that justice system, a need to rebalance or reform the way evidence is gathered or considered, then that is a cause for policymakers to take up. A pardon would do nothing to address the broader, more systemic issues the series points to.

So Walker's decision not to pardon Steven Avery is defensible and probably correct. A good rule of thumb: Refrain from making policy decisions based on anything that has theme music.

But what about the governor’s broader stance on pardons? The power to pardon or commute sentences is part of the state’s constitution for a reason -- as in the U.S. Constitution, it is an executive check on the judicial branch. By refusing to even consider any of the thousands of cases offered for the governor’s consideration, Walker has essentially forfeited this constitutional duty.

What does a reasonable use of this constitutional power look like? The case of Eugene Haywood of Peoria, Ill. is an instructive example.

Haywood was represented by a long-ago friend of mine in college, Judith P. Miller, with whom I have fallen out of touch. She wrote an op-ed about it in the Chicago Tribune:

When Haywood was 25, he was charged by federal prosecutors in Peoria with selling crack cocaine with two other people. He'd been dealing since he was 15 and had been convicted a couple of times, but he'd never served more than a couple of years in prison. He wasn't a gang member, and after trial his prosecutor conceded that he wasn't even a so-called "career offender," or the leader of his little three-person drug conspiracy. But he still faced a mandatory sentence of life without parole.

In December, President Barack Obama granted clemency to Haywood, who had served 14 years of his sentence for a nonviolent drug crime. Miller argues that the case demonstrates the need for reform of mandatory minimum sentences. Haywood was guilty of the crime. The problem was that the punishment didn't fit the crime.

Wisconsin has cases that are not so different. A couple of years ago, an Iraq war veteran named Eric Pizer who pleaded no contest to assault charges in a bar fight that happened two days after he returned from the war asked the governor for a pardon that would have allowed Pizer to pursue his goal of becoming a police officer. He got the same hard no as everyone else who's asked Walker.

As a purely political matter, issuing no pardons is probably the easiest thing for Walker to do. In some cases, including arguably the Avery case, it might even be the right call. But our justice system is not perfect, and the outcomes it deals out are not always just. That's why pardon power exists — if only Walker would use it.

Robert Mentzer is storytelling coach and a columnist for Gannett Central Wisconsin Media. Contact: robert.mentzer@gannettwisconsin.com, 715-845-0604; on Twitter:@robertmentzer.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1OS83Fa