Syracuse, N.Y. -- The state is taking steps to prevent customers of Health Republic, a failing Obamacare insurer, from losing their health coverage.

The state also announced it has launched an investigation of Health Republic because the insurer did not accurately report its financial condition to regulators.

The state recently ordered Health Republic to shut down by Nov. 30 and told consumers they had to enroll in a new plan offered by another insurer on the state health insurance exchange by Nov. 15 in order to ensure they don't lose coverage Dec. 1.

The state is extending the deadline. Consumers who don't enroll online by Nov. 15 can call a special customer service center by Nov. 30 to enroll in new policies that take effect Dec. 1. The number is 1-855-329-8899. Consumers can call 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. Monday through Friday and 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. Saturday and Sunday.

Health Republic customers who don't take action will be automatically enrolled in other plans available on the state health insurance exchange. They will be given an opportunity to decline the coverage if they do not want it. Consumers automatically enrolled in a new plan will still be eligible to receive premium subsidies.

Health Republic, backed by $265 million in federal loans, debuted in 2014 and captured the biggest share of new business on the state's health insurance exchange created by the federal Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare. It has about 200,000 customers in New York, including 4,060 in Central New York.

Health Republic is going broke because its prices were too low and it did not receive as much as expected in federal payments to protect it from heavy losses, experts say.

The state Department of Financial Services, which regulates insurers, said it is investigating Health Republic's inaccurate financial reporting. The department said the insurer underreported its financial obligations. State insurance industry officials have criticized the department for cutting Health Republic's insurance rate hike requests earlier this year, even though it was aware of the insurer's financial problems.

Here are other steps the state is taking to protect Health Republic customers:



Deductibles: Consumers who had Health Republic plans with annual deductibles will not be charged by their new plans for the amount of deductible they already met so far in 2015. Consumers may need to provide their new plan with evidence that they have met all or part of the 2015 deductible, and should keep their deductible records.

Prohibition against surprise bills: Doctors and other providers will be prohibited from collecting or attempting to collect from Health Republic consumers amounts that are owed by Health Republic. Additionally, state law requires insurers to permit consumers to obtain the services of an out-of-network provider if the insurer does not have an in-network provider with the appropriate training and experience to meet the consumers' health care needs.

Ensuring continuity of care: Health Republic members in an ongoing course of treatment with a provider for a life-threatening or a degenerative and disabling condition or disease, or in the second or third trimester of a pregnancy when their new coverage becomes effective may be able to continue to receive care from their provider for up to 60 days (or through pregnancy) under their new policy, even if their provider does not participate in their new health insurer's network.

Contact James T. Mulder anytime: Email | Twitter | 315-470-2245