The candidates' relentless negativism has gotten out of hand.

Showing her colors. (Photo: Kevork Djansezian, Getty Images)

Listening to several of the presidential candidates these days can leave the impression that America is turning into some kind of hellhole.

On the Republican side, one hears constantly of America’s pending demise, brought on by high taxes, excessive regulation, unpoliced borders, low moral standards, unconstitutional government, feckless foreign policy and a dwindling military.

Retired neurosurgeon Ben Carson kicked off Thursday's GOP debate by declaring, "The nation is heading off the abyss of destruction." Front-runner Donald Trump regularly tells audiences that "our country is going to hell." Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida has put out an out an ad that might best be called “Mourning in America.” It closely tracks Ronald Reagan’s famously sunny “Morning in America” ad of 1984, only it paints an unrelentingly bleak picture, asserting that "our country is more vulnerable, divided and diminished than ever before." More divided than ever? Has Rubio never heard of the Civil War?

On the Democratic side, one hears Bernie Sanders’ endless tirades about how Wall Street has so rigged the economy that a political revolution — by which he means a lot of spending on government benefits — is needed.

To a large degree, these candidates are mirroring the gloom many Americans feel in the wake of the Great Recession and amid the rise of the Islamic State terrorist group. But the candidates are also playing a cynical game, trying to alienate or depress much of the electorate so that only their most ardent supporters turn out at the polls.

Voters should be wary of this pessimism. Despite the many difficult problems facing the nation, in many ways the United States is in remarkably good shape. Its military, while squeezed by tight budgets, is far superior to any other. Its private sector and university systems are envied worldwide. And its economy has held up while numerous others have faltered.

Since the bottom of the Great Recession, 13.6 million jobs have been created, pushing the unemployment rate from 10% to 4.9%. Since the beginning of the Obama administration, federal taxes have averaged 16% of the economy, the lowest during any presidency since World War II.

Gasoline prices have fallen by about $2 per gallon in the last year and half, putting $100 a month in the pocket of a typical driver. About 17 million people have gained heath insurance through Obamacare, while overall health care inflation has been restrained. American public policy has made major strides in such areas as crime, education and teen pregnancies and is beginning to show results in curbing obesity.

American companies, meanwhile, have tapped vast new reserves of oil and gas while improving wind and solar. In personal technology, they have continued to dazzle. Just 10 years ago, Facebook was limited to college campuses. Smartphones and tablets did not even exist.

The millionaires and billionaires that Sanders likes to castigate include people such as Facebook co-founder Mark Zuckerberg, Microsoft founder Bill Gates and famed investor Warren Buffett, all of whom have pledged much of their fortunes to charitable good works.

As Buffett observed over the weekend in his annual letter to Berkshire Hathaway shareholders, his neighbors in Omaha live better than John D. Rockefeller Sr. did in his day, thanks to developments in such areas as transportation, entertainment, communication and health care. "For 240 years, it's been a terrible mistake to bet against America, and now is no time to start," Buffett wrote, adding that "the babies being born in America today are the luckiest crop in history."

Abroad, the United States remains remarkably popular: A median of 69% of people overseas have a positive image of the U.S., according to the Pew Research Center. (The number would be higher but for the unpopularity of the U.S. — and the West in general — in Russia and many Muslim countries.) As for immigration, well, would you rather live in a country that people around the world still want to come to, or a nation where everyone is trying to get out?

America is, of course, not without problems. One of the biggest, in fact, is exemplified by these very politicians — its dysfunctional political culture built on polemics, confrontation and intransigence. This culture hinders efforts to address difficult challenges such as wage stagnation, middle-class manufacturing jobs lost to globalization and technology, rampant opioid addiction, escalating debt driven by unaffordable benefit programs, and a fraying world order.

The candidates' relentless negativism, however, has gotten out of hand. The United States is still a great country.

USA TODAY's editorial opinions are decided by its Editorial Board, separate from the news staff. Most editorials are coupled with an opposing view — a unique USA TODAY feature.

To read more editorials, go to the Opinion front page or sign up for the daily Opinion e-mail newsletter.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/214FoTS