LONDON--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Racepoint Global, an integrated marketing communications agency at the intersection of influence and action, announced today the addition of seven innovative healthcare brands to the agency’s client roster, ranging from healthcare technology, life sciences, diagnostics and imaging to telehealth brands.

Racepoint will be conducting various programmes for these clients, from earned media efforts and influencer mapping to website redesign, content development, disease education and patient communications.

“We are seeing a direct correlation between the growth of the healthcare industry and the need for brands to engage agencies like Racepoint to help them differentiate with powerful narratives and positions around market drivers like the NHS reforms in the UK and the Affordable Care Act in the US,” said Peter Prodomou, President at Racepoint Global. “Racepoint’s experienced healthcare team continually tracks the evolution of key trends such as the adoption of value-based care, patient engagement, better coordination of care across the healthcare supply chain and improved clinical outcomes. Our healthcare experts understand the unique requirements of communicating in a regulated industry, helping each client build an unshakable presence with a thought leadership voice and position.”

“We chose Racepoint Global because they immediately understood that we didn’t want to hire a PR firm just for the sake of having PR,” said Tom Ferry, president & CEO, Curaspan. “As a first time exhibitor at HIMSS, it was important for us to collaborate with an agency that is familiar with the show, has established media relationships and experience elevating a niche brand to a national audience. The Racepoint Global team secured more than a dozen HIMSS briefings and we’re looking forward to building off of that success.”

New Racepoint Global client partnerships in the UK and US include:

Spinal Modulation Spinal Modulation is a provider of neuromodulation pain therapy for people with chronic pain. Its implantable device stimulates the dorsal root ganglion (DRG) with electrical pulses that help to mask the pain signals.

Curaspan Curaspan is the United States leading provider of care transition solutions. Working directly with hospitals, post-acute care providers and payers, the software-as-a-system helps reduce readmissions, shorten length of stay and improve patient outcomes.

Evariant Evariant is the leading provider of a CRM platform based on a centralised healthcare data hub, analytics, and communications engine.

Gamma Medica Gamma Medica developed the LumaGEM Molecular Breast Imaging (MBI) system, a functional imaging modality, used to detect breast cancer. With its sensitivity and specificity unmatched by other modalities and its ability to nearly quadruple the detection of invasive breast cancers, MBI is an ideal secondary diagnostic tool for complex mammograms, such as those with dense breast tissue.

GenoSpace GenoSpace provides a comprehensive platform for precision medicine to enable interpretation, analysis, reporting and collaboration on high-dimensional genomic and other biomedical data. With specific applications supporting research, development, pathology and clinical care, many of the most advanced precision medicine organisations are powered by GenoSpace.



Healing for People Healing for People is an energy medicine clinic focused on treating common physical, mental and emotional conditions and diseases. By correcting the imbalances in the human energy anatomy, Healing for People is enabling those who suffer from ailments such as migraines, chronic pain, fibromyalgia, post-traumatic stress and anxiety, the ability to live fuller, richer, healthier lives.

Stanford Children’s Stanford Children’s Health, with Lucile Packard Children’s Hospital Stanford at its core, is a California-based, internationally recognised leader in world-class, nurturing care and extraordinary outcomes in every paediatric and obstetric specialty from the routine to rare, for every child and pregnant woman. Together with Stanford Medicine physicians, nurses, and staff, it delivers innovative care and research through partnerships, collaborations, outreach, specialty clinics and primary care practices at more than 100 locations in the U.S. western region.



About Racepoint Global

Racepoint Global is an integrated marketing communications agency that puts brands at the intersection of influence and action. Our powerful combination features the best in digital marketing, strategy, public relations and stakeholder communications. We start with a powerful story, then create, distribute, and activate content in places people naturally engage, affecting opinion, shaping perception, and driving decisions. To do this, we draw on a powerful network of earned and paid influencers, a deep partner network, and self-published, wholly-owned, and unbranded communities. Clients in technology, healthcare, life sciences, consumer, public policy and public affairs depend on Racepoint Global’s unique approach to impact key outcomes. Time again, our approach drives better results for our clients. For more information, visit www.racepointglobal.com.