Downtown Cleveland is getting an aha moment this week.



Tonight, Thursday, Aug. 7, marks the start of AHA! Cleveland, a three-day public art lighting project that calls attention to the big changes taking shape in the city’s landscape.



The event, produced by LAND studio and supported by Cuyahoga Arts & Culture and Cleveland Public Power, takes place on downtown’s malls and features the dramatic work of international artists. (You can preview their installations here.



Here’s how LAND studio describes what you’ll see:



”The artist collective Obscura Digital will use 3D video mapping for this multisensory experience that is sure to amaze and mesmerize audiences.



When you’re not light gazing, you can find sanctuary in Cleveland Public Library’s Eastman Reading Garden and observe artist Iván Juárez’s Drawing Lines, a continuous thread of nearly 15,000 feet of rope that filter natural light and forge new passages and space.



Finally, as part of the festival of lights, you can take a dip in a figurative pool on the Mall. Jen Lewin’s, The Pool, will create swirling circles of lights and color that people can interact with.”



There are free, family-oriented events each night in addition to the installations: Thursday, 8 p.m., PechaKucha Night Cleveland, Volume 23; Friday, 7:30 p.m., Believe in CLE community yoga class; Friday, 8 p.m.: East Meets West Slow Roll Bike Ride.



For a sense of what you’ll see, check out this YouTube video:









This and that

Best-laid plans …: Remember high-speed rail? And how it was going to be a big focus of the Obama administration?



Hasn’t really worked out.



“Despite the administration spending nearly $11 billion since 2009 to develop faster passenger trains, the projects have gone mostly nowhere and the United States still lags far behind Europe and China,” The New York Times reports.



“While Republican opposition and community protests have slowed the projects here, transportation policy experts and members of both parties also place blame for the failures on missteps by the Obama administration — which in July asked Congress for nearly $10 billion more for high-speed initiatives,” the paper says.



A major bump in the road to high-speed rail came when Florida, Ohio and Wisconsin, all led by Republican governors, “canceled high-speed rail projects and returned federal funds after deeming the projects too expensive and unnecessary,” the newspaper reports.



However, “The Obama administration’s management of previously appropriated high-speed rail funding has been as clumsy as its superintending of the Affordable Care Act’s rollout,” says Frank N. Wilner, a former chief of staff at the Surface Transportation Board, a bipartisan body with oversight of the nation’s railroads.



Instead of putting the $11 billion directly into those projects, critics say, “the administration made the mistake of parceling out the money to upgrade existing Amtrak service, which will allow trains to go no faster than 110 miles per hour,” according to The Times. “None of the money originally went to service in the Northeast Corridor, the most likely place for high-speed rail.”



Fingers crossed: With any luck, this will be out of date soon.



Forbes.com runs its annual list of America’s Most Miserable Sports Cities, and of course, Cleveland is on it. We’re No 3, though, behind Atlanta and Phoenix, which both have seen sports teams win championships more recently than the Browns, Cavaliers or Indians.



How does that work? From Forbes.com’s explanation:



”We grade the misery of major sports cities (only those with 75 cumulative years in the NFL, NBA, Major League Baseball and the NHL are considered) based not so much on sheer futility as the “letdown factor.” That is, which teams have been good enough to build up fans’ hopes only to fall short of the brass ring in the end. Those that probably pop into your mind right away: the Braves (19 postseasons; one championship), the Phoenix Suns (eight trips to at least the Western Conference Finals, no championships), and the Buffalo Bills (one AFL championship in the pre-merger days, then 0-for-4 in Super Bowls). All three of those cities make our top five.







Come 2015, perhaps with the LeBron/Kyrie/KLove-led Cavaliers, this all will be moot.







A few of her favorite things: Cleveland native and arts patron Agnes Gund shares some of the things she likes best in this short feature in WSJ magazine.



Among them: a colorful photo of dogs shot by William Wegman; peppermint-stick flavor ice cream from Graeter’s in Cincinnati, an animal sculpture made by a student at P.S. 139, in Brooklyn, as part of the Studio in a School program; and two books, “The Rise by Sarah Lewis” and “Letters from London.”



She also has a big-time love of flowers.



“I always have them around me,” Gund says. The feature includes a picture that has flowers from Ronaldo Maia, “who has a real artist's eye,” she notes. “I love peonies and also lilies of the valley, because they were my father's favorite." Her father was George Gund II, president and board chair of the Cleveland Trust Co.













You also can follow me on Twitter for more news about business and Northeast Ohio.