Jerry Springer advocated for citizens’ re-assessment of political morals and involvement as a spur-of-the-moment speaking engagement at Grounds for Thought on Thursday October 8.

Springer’s original plan was only to speak as the keynote at the Ohio Democratic Party Blue Cocktail Hour. As a way to try to engage younger voters and less politically involved citizens, a make-shift event was held at the coffee shop/bookstore popular with University students. Sporting a yellow checkered shirt and navy blue blazer slacks– no tie – Springer meandered around the assortment of books, looking like just another customer. He bought two books: The Idea of America by Gordon Wood, and All of My Best Friends by George Burns. There were only about ten people in attendance as the event started, but as time went by more people stood by and listened to the television host and former mayor of Cincinnati.

“I know it’s cliché, but this is America,” Springer said about Ohio to start off the half-discussion, half-lecture, reminiscing on the years he worked and lived in Ohio. An audience member (a local Wood County Democrat) brought up the declining factory industry in Ohio, including glass factories in Toledo, the rubber factories in Akron and the steel refineries in Youngstown and Cleveland. Another audience member observed that all these industries catered to the automotive industry, which is also dealing with decline, especially in Toledo with the Jeep plant. This is where Springer started his address, talking about how the capitalistic system needs a balancing force to make sure that people do not live poorly.

“There needs to be a resurgence of unions…all Americans, working class people, should be able to join unions, even if there is not a particular one at their job. There ought to be a labor force in America,” said Springer.

Using unions as an example of a solution, Springer segued into what he labeled “the biggest threat in America” – the gap between the rich and the “great masses.”

“Are we really making anyone’s lives better,” said Springer, about the laws that state and national congresses pass that help primarily the wealthy. “What am I going to do with another plane?”

Springer continued by saying that this gap has caused distrust of the government and institutions in general, and led to political outsiders like Dr. Ben Carson and Donald Trump to run and gain traction among people. This is where Springer laid out his plan for what politicians should do. He said that every American should have quality health care, a good education and enough food to eat every day.

“It shouldn’t even be a discussion,” said Springer in regards to repealing the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, often referred to as Obamacare.

From here Springer appealed to the moralistic side of Americans, saying that everyone should vote the same way as they would help a stranger in trouble. “Just do what your mother told you in third grade. Be nice,” he said.

Ending the lecture portion, Springer took audience questions about Speaker of the House John Boehner’s pseudo-resignation announcement and Pope Francis’ environmental advocacy during the recent papal trip to America, explaining his interpretations on those events in the frame of Democratic Party fundamentals.