Ending a heated labor dispute, Kaiser Permanente has reached a tentative agreement with the nurses union that will create hundreds of new nursing jobs and give nurses a 14 percent pay hike over three years.

After reaching the tentative pact on Friday, the California Nurses Association called off a two-day strike that had been set for Wednesday and Thursday.

"We're excited to be moving forward," said Katy Roemer, a nurse at Kaiser Oakland and a member of the bargaining team.

The contract affects registered nurses and nurse practitioners at 21 Kaiser hospitals and about 35 clinics, mostly in Northern California.

The nurses union said the contract calls for Kaiser to add 540 positions for beginning nurses. The union had maintained that Kaiser was dangerously understaffed, especially since adding 422,000 members last year, many because of the Affordable Care Act, commonly called "Obamacare."

The raises will be awarded through across-the-board pay hikes and lump-sum payments, the union said. Nurses also will keep a pension plan and won increased Kaiser contributions to their 401(k) retirement plans.

Kaiser Permanente said it wouldn't comment on the contract's specifics until after the nurses ratify it, but in a prepared statement, administrator Gregory A. Adams wrote: "This agreement is aligned with our commitment to improve our quality and affordability and to be a national model for the delivery of health care."

Advertisement

Adams is group president and regional president of Kaiser Foundation Hospitals and Health Plan in Northern California.

Roemer insisted that safety and quality of care were the union's paramount concerns.

"We feel like we've gotten some really good patient protections," she said. "We were really concerned because of staffing."

The settlement calls for nurses to participate in a committee to work with Kaiser management to address nurses' concerns about care standards, according to the union.

Although striking nurses last fall accused Kaiser of maintaining insufficient protections against the Ebola virus, the proposed contract language does not add new provisions to specifically protect against the spread of infectious diseases.

If ratified by the union membership, the contract will be retroactive to September and will extend through August 2017.

The proposed agreement does not affect a contract dispute between Kaiser Permanente and its mental health staff.

Contact Sharon Noguchi at 408-271-3775. Follow her at Twitter.com/noguchionk12.