Smart Talk is a daily, live, interactive program featuring conversations with newsmakers and experts in a variety of fields and exploring a wide range of issues and ideas, including the economy, politics, health care, education, culture, and the environment. Smart Talk airs live every week day at 9 a.m. on WITF’s 89.5 and 93.3. Listen to Smart Talk live online from 9-10 a.m. weekdays and at 7 p.m. (Repeat of 9 a.m. program) Host: Scott LaMar

What to look for on Smart Talk Monday, November 30, 2015:

Under the Affordable Care Act or Obamacare, employers with 50 or more full-time employees are required to submit healthcare reporting in January, 2016. Despite the fast approaching deadline, many local employers still have little idea about what they need to turn in to the IRS and how to collect this information.

Many employers who have put off the reporting until now will likely struggle to fill it out correctly. If they report incorrect information, they could end up impacting an employee's eligibility for a subsidy.

We'll learn more about the requirement and what must employers do on Monday's Smart Talk. Our guest is Rob Glus, a consulting actuary and chair of Conrad Siegel Actuaries health and welfare committee.

This segment is part of WITF's Transforming Health project covering health news and in depth analysis of today's evolving Health Care landscape. Visit us at TransformingHealth.org. Transforming Health is an educational partnership of WITF, Penn State Hershey Medical Center and WellSpan Health.

To learn more about health insurance in Pennsylvania, explore the online Transforming Health tool Getting Covered. It's an easy-to-use guide for understanding year three of Pennsylvania's new healthcare system, how to access health insurance, and how to make the most of your plan to ensure positive health outcomes for you and your family.

Rob Glus

Also, mention malaria in America, and many people think back to U.S. soldiers in Vietnam or in the South Pacific during World War II. Malaria was eradicated in this country in the 1950s, but in Sub-Sahara Africa, 594 thousand people die from malaria every year. A group of local clergy and churches have joined in a campaign called Imagine No Malaria.

We'll discuss their efforts on Monday's Smart Talk