I was wildly fortunate to spend three days this week in New York City, learning from some of the brightest minds on aging, and gorging myself on the latest facts, figures and theories about what might really happen as we baby boomers scramble over the hill and beyond.

The Age Boom Academy is a yearly conference for journalists offered jointly by the Columbia Journalism School and Columbia University's Mailman School of Public Health. The premise of this continuing education opportunity is to help us media people dig beneath the surface politics and polemics of generational change.

But what's lingering most in my mind right now goes even deeper than Social Security solvency projections and the intricacies of Medicare financing. Two wise women at the conference — standouts in academia but also especially thoughtful and original in their approaches — spoke about aging in ways that made me feel so great about covering this fascinating topic that applies to every single one of us.

Ursula Staudinger is a lifespan psychologist who recently left Jacobs University Bremen in Germany to found a new Aging Center at Columbia. Wendy Lustbader is a social worker and therapist who teaches at the University of Washington, and the author of several books on the world of elders. The latest — which I look forward to reading — is, Life Gets Better: The Unexpected Pleasures of Growing Older.



Here, spilling straight from my notebook, are some of their observations worth mulling over:

Staudinger on the working life of elders: "As our lives grew longer, we chose to work less. What does that tell us about the meaning of work and cultural achievement? The discourse was, let's get rid of work; and a major achievement was, how early can we retire? There seems to be an increasing wish of people 70-plus and 75-plus to continue to work. We should watch this carefully."

On the wisdom of elders: "If we can be sure that the cognitive basis is intact, we are better able to make use of the experience we have stored. But accumulated experience only comes to fruition if I confront it regularly with new experience."

Lustbader on the upside of old: "Life gets better as we get older on every level except the physical. The closer we get with and to death — in terms of a relationship with death and in terms of chronology — the greater the vivaciousness with which we wake up in the morning. You don't waste your time, and the things that used to hurt and bother you with regard to your ego recede."

On ageism: "It makes young people feel bad about their futures. It makes middle-aged people conceal their age when they should be proud of it."

On "senior moments" (a phrase she loathes): "Senescent memory loss is real. I can't retrieve things the way I used to. But here's the exciting part: The knowledge that you have in a chosen field that you stay with all your life creates deep tracks in your brain." When it comes to tapping these tracks of lifelong expertise, "the elder can leave the 20-year-old behind in the dust."