CINCINNATI – This flu season is one of the worst in recent years, and one reason is the flu shot has been largely ineffective.

An ever-evolving strain of the virus is the culprit, and it's made the flu shot inadequate more than two-thirds of the time.

The vaccine was produced in February 2014, according to the CDC, and included two strains believed to be imminent this season: H3N1 and H3N2. However, the rapidly evolving H3N2 strain mutated and wasn’t detected until March, too late to include in the season's vaccinations.

As a result of the flu strain’s mutation, this year's vaccines were only 33 percent effective, Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, told ABC News.

"The influenza vaccine that was prepared for this year’s flu season is poorly matched to half of H3N2 viruses circulating," the Ohio Department of Health recently reported.

The mutated H3N2 influenza strain is making 95 percent of those with the flu this season sick, said Dr. Madhuri Sopirala, medical director of infection control at UC Medical Center. She is seeing a 40-percent increase in flu among her patients.

“We’re having a severe flu season this year,” Sopirala said.

The Tri-State is among 29 states experiencing high levels of influenza-like illnesses, according to the Centers for Disease Control. In Ohio, 1,919 flu cases have been reported so far. In Northern Kentucky, 1,341 cases have been reported, including five deaths.

Two infants have died in Ohio so far this flu season.

READ MORE: Flu epidemic keeps docs, parents on their feet

The uptick in cases is due to the unpredictability of flu strains.

The World Health Organization’s committee of experts chooses which viruses to include in the upcoming season’s vaccine.

“They predict what will happen next year based on the strains that we had this year,” Sopirala said.

“It’s hard to predict. You have a new strain now that the vaccine does not include,” Sopirala explained. The vaccine must be created early enough in the year so it can be manufactured and distributed to be ready for shots before flu season hits.

Despite the ineffectiveness of this year's vaccine, Sopirala and others are still recommending flu shots to protect against other strains of the virus.

“It still offers protection, so I’d definitely get the vaccine,” she advised.

The CDC is also recommending that doctors prescribe an antiviral drug, such as Tamiflu, as a second line of defense as soon as possible to patients with confirmed or suspected influenza who are hospitalized, or may be at higher risk for complications.