Sometimes, as a progressive journalist of opinion, you have to take one for the team. Sometimes, though, you look at the people on your side of the political line and think, "These people. Yeesh."

There's currently a major kerfuffle surrounding everybody's go-to place for a nine-dollar banana, Whole Foods. It turns out that WF was selling products made with prison labor, including various cheeses and farm-raised fish. This rankled some people, who raised hell, and now WF, being an American corporation and (therefore) cowardly, has decided to take these products off its shelves. Huzzah, say the people with far too much time on their hands.

Michael Allen, a prison reform advocate, said Whole Foods informed him of its change in policy after he organized a protest at one of the company's stores in Houston this weekend. Whole Foods Market Inc. is based in Austin, Texas. Although other companies sell products made by inmates, Allen said he thought it was hypocritical of Whole Foods to do so. "They say they care about the community, but they're enhancing their profit off of poor people," Allen said, noting the pay that inmates receive for such work.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

I'm sorry, but this is not only stupid. It's PETA-level stupid. Nobody wants our prisons turned into sweatshops – as they are in places like Texas and Georgia, where inmates work and don't get paid at all. But, by most accounts, this is the kind of program we should have in all our prisons. The inmates get paid to work outdoors, learning state-of-the-art farming and aquaculture skills, and working with animals, which almost every expert in prison reform points to as a calming influence. In fact, one of the facilities in question is one of the very few water-buffalo farms in America. And water-buffaloes, I am told, produce some fine mozzarella.

Not only does tending to goats or water buffalo get prisoners out of their cells, but there's something to be said for working in nature, according to Beth Waitkus, the director of the Insight Garden Program, which teaches prisoners in California gardening skills. "I personally think that any time a person has a chance to get their hands in the dirt, that's great," she said in an interview. "The benefit of being connected to nature, no matter what the circumstances, I think is a plus." The 13-year-old program she runs, which started at San Quentin and will debut its first garden at Solano State Prison in the coming weeks, goes beyond job training. In addition to getting their hands in the dirt, men who volunteer for the Insight Garden Program study a classroom-based curriculum that Waitkus said is based on neuroscience research and geared toward "activating the whole brain," as she put it.

Most Popular

It baffles me why you would want to screw around with a program like this on the back end. The more I read about this, the more it seems that the real objection is that Whole Foods is selling products made with low-wage prison labor–although, as prison wages go, what these convicts make is pretty decent, considering the skills they're learning–at an exorbitant cost. The problem with that is that Whole Foods sells everything at an exorbitant cost, and that its founder, John Mackey, is something of a libertarian foof. (He got himself boycotted during the fight over the Affordable Care Act because his views toward health-care as a right owed too much to moocher-queen Ayn Rand.) This seems more like an action taken against the food chain than against the prison farming program, but it's that program that can suffer from it. And, for god's sake, won't someone think of the water buffaloes?