The New Orleans Firefighters Pension and Relief Fund's current state threatens the financial future of the city of New Orleans and the fund's ability to provide benefits that its members expect. The pension fund is distressed and dangerously underfunded by at least $393.7 million as of Jan. 1, 2014, based on liabilities of $478.5 million and the market value of assets of $84.8 million. The plan was about 18 percent funded at the beginning of 2014.

New Orleans is far from the only government having an underfunded municipal plan, but even among the poorly funded plans across the country, the firefighter fund stands out. Independent experts have described the fund's financial status as being among the worst they have ever encountered. For the upcoming budget year, the city will spend more money from its general fund on firefighters pension costs than it will on the rest of Fire Department operations - including salaries. Eleven percent of the city's total $536.8 million 2015 general fund operating budget covers firefighters pension related costs - more than the combined budgets of the New Orleans Recreation and Development Commission, Parks and Parkways and the Sanitation Department.

In late October, Mayor Mitch Landrieu signed an executive order establishing the Firefighters Pension Reform Working Group, whose charge is to develop and recommend for adoption by the mayor, City Council and Legislature a comprehensive long-term solution to the pension crisis. Membership includes city officials, firefighters' representatives and citizen representatives with expertise in relevant business fields such as accounting, finance and risk management. The city and the Business Council of New Orleans and the River Region have retained nationally renowned municipal pension experts to help the Working Group develop a consensus recommendation on a path forward that not only stabilizes the fund, but also ensures that this never happens again.

The Business Council strongly believes that all parties - employees, retirees and taxpayers - have a mutual interest in this effort. Restoring the long-term viability of the fund will not be easy, but it is essential to our city's future financial and operational stability -- and you can help get it done.

In recent years many American cities have found themselves in a similarly tenuous position and have made progress toward more sustainable retirement systems. The process employed by the Working Group has proven successful in other municipalities facing similar challenges. With the parties showing a renewed commitment to finding a solution, and the experts providing a roadmap that has worked in other cities, we have a better chance than ever before to reach consensus on how to fix our current funding problems and to establish a sustainable system that is fair to retirees, active firefighters and taxpayers. The experts agree and our own experience has shown, public involvement is absolutely fundamental to the process.

Pensions and retirement funding is a complicated issue and solutions will likely require action by our elected officials at the local and the state level. And, as was the case with many of the successful post-Katrina reforms, addressing the firefighters pension fund woes will not be successful without significant public input and engagement. Without an unflinching commitment by the public, we would never have successfully reformed our levee boards or consolidated the seven separate tax assessors in Orleans Parish into a single, parish-wide office. The critical status of the firefighters pension fund is another one of those complicated but crucial problems that will not be solved without a concerted effort by the people of New Orleans to make sure the work is done.

It is time for everyone to get informed and stay engaged. Attend the public Working Group meetings. Contact your elected officials. Spread the word to your neighbors. Go to the Working Group's website for pertinent information including meeting schedules, meeting minutes, and meeting agendas: http://nola.gov/firefighter-pension-reform/.

Paul Flower is chairman of the Business Council of New Orleans & The River Region.