Photo

TO: 2016 Presidential Candidates

FROM: The Image Rehabilitation Subcommittee of the R.N.C.

RE: Our big, fat gay predicament

Dear Gentlemen and Carly Fiorina,

No matter how much we’d like the ceaseless chatter about gay marriage to go away, it won’t, not with the Supreme Court about to hear another round of arguments on the issue and not with this inextinguishable debate over “religious freedom” laws.

And we Republicans find ourselves in a bind, caught between the Bible Belt and a need for fresh accessorizing, between Mississippi and modernity, with evangelicals over here and millennials and soccer moms over there. We have a primary process that won’t graduate anyone who loves the gays too much but a general election that could, for the first time, punish anyone who loves the gays too little.

And so we must calibrate. Triangulate. Pink triangulation, let’s call it.

This is our mission, manifest in semantic loop-de-loops and oratorical gobbledygook from candidates like Scott Walker, who recently reminisced about an unnamed relative’s same-sex nuptials. Observe how he handled that: by making clear that he didn’t go to the ceremony, only to the reception. That’s called having your wedding cake (presumably from a baker with no religious objections) and eating it, too. Also note Ted Cruz. Out of one corner of his routinely scowling mouth, he speaks of a “jihad” by the gays to force even stern Christians like him to endorse same-sex marriage. Out of the other, he says that if one of his daughters came out as a lesbian, no worries!

Ted trumpeted this tolerance during a fund-raising sweep through New York City, at a meet-and-greet hosted by two wealthy gays. There are two lessons in his relaxed posture. First, fashion different words for different ZIP codes. Second, remember that as loud as Scripture talks, money talks even louder, and some gays have oodles of it.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Let’s fill in a bit of background. We here on the Image Rehabilitation Subcommittee, convened after the 2012 defeat and those unfortunate references to immigrant self-deportation, have reached the conclusion that the gay issue poses real peril for the party. And that’s not so much because a recent survey found that as many as 60 percent of Americans now support same-sex marriage. Most of those Americans don’t vote for a candidate based on his or her position on two men or two women tying the knot. Gay marriage isn’t their first priority and possibly not even their fifth.

But Americans have rallied around the gays to a point where beating up on them just looks crotchety and mean, the precise qualities that we are trying to move the party’s image past. When some Americans in their 20s say that they would never vote for us, it is not because they dislike us on the small-government or limited-regulation fronts. It is not because they think Democrats are better stewards of the economy. It is not about abortion.