Bad blood boiled over even before the puck dropped Saturday night in the University of Denver’s 3-1 loss to North Dakota. DU and UND don’t have to try hard to dislike each other.

After Denver’s 4-1, runaway victory the night before, North Dakota coach Dave Hakstol inserted some muscle into his lineup, perhaps hoping to push the Pioneers around. He added 185-pound defenseman Nick Mattson and freshman lefty Johnny Simonson.

But while No. 11 Denver and No. 1 North Dakota traded ill will early on, matching retribution penalties, the two new bruisers from Grand Forks put North Dakota out front.

Mattson’s slap shot goal off two posts, after Simonson won the puck in the corner, set North Dakota on its way to a victory over the Pioneers at Magness Arena.

PHOTOS: Denver University vs. North Dakota

“Our biggest problem is we never came down from the high from last night,” DU coach Jim Montgomery said. “And I don’t know how many hours of sleep our guys got. The emotion we spent feeling good about ourselves really cost us a lot of energy.”

North Dakota (13-4-2, 6-3-1 National Collegiate Hockey Conference) salvaged a split at Denver (10-5-0, 4-3-0) for the fourth consecutive year. UND snapped the Pioneers’ streak of wins over top-ranked teams at four. Denver last lost to a No. 1 team in March 2011, against North Dakota in an NCAA Tournament Midwest Regional.

Mattson’s goal, nearly 14 minutes in, came after Simonson dug out the puck in the corner. Mattson skated a U-turn, then sliced toward the middle in front of two DU defenders. His wrist shot, while he was falling down, hit off both posts behind Pios goaltender Tanner Jaillet.

North Dakota dominated the first period, with a 15-7 shot advantage. It set up a rush of goals in the second period.

North Dakota’s Bryn Chyzyk broke out down the left side, feigned a shot to freeze Jaillet, then slipped a pass to Nick Schmaltz for a goal from the far side.

Less than two minutes later, North Dakota’s Michael Parks rushed a similar play from the right side, wrapping a pass back to left wing Drake Caggiula, the NCHC’s leading scorer, for an easy one-timer.

“We knew they were going to come out strong after we took it to them on Friday,” Denver sophomore defenseman Will Butcher said. “They didn’t catch us off guard, but we didn’t come out as sharp and quick.”

Denver erased the shutout in the third when Josiah Didier set up Nolan Zajac for a slap shot goal from the top of the right circle that beat North Dakota’s Zane McIntyre.

Nick Groke: ngroke@denverpost.com or twitter.com/nickgroke