Two major new studies indicate that the rate of growth for health-plan costs is at near-historic lows, thanks in part to the effects of the Affordable Care Act and new strategies by employers to limit costs and encourage better price-awareness among employees.

Segal’s Health Plan Cost Trends Survey finds that projected cost trend data is now growing at the slowest rate in 14 years. Meanwhile, PwC’s Health Research Institute projects a medical cost trend for this year of 6.5 percent — even lower than in 2013, itself a year of slowing cost trends. Both studies attribute at least some of the trend to Obamacare, as well as the tepid economic recovery and employer initiatives. Here’s Ed Kaplan, Segal’s national health practice leader:

Although it remains to be seen if the deceleration of projected trend data is influenced by short-term economic forces, the influence of the Affordable Care Act, improved efforts around lifestyle changes such as weight loss and smoking cessation, early detection of disease, or some factor not yet identified, there continue to be changes in the system that could have long-term implications for healthcare costs.”

The Segal report notes that provider reimbursement arrangements are beginning to shift from fee-for-service to alternative payment models such as bundled payments, that participants are becoming more educated consumers and that costs are becoming more transparent.

PwC says the slow recovery and decreased personal wealth has reduced some of the demand for healthcare and has resulted in a “new normal” in healthcare spending patterns. It notes that individual consumers, who are bearing more responsibility than ever for their own healthcare costs, are questioning the need for and sometimes delaying procedures, imaging and elective services. Hospitals are working hard to hold down expensive readmissions (and thus avoid getting hit by the ACA’s penalties in that area) while employers are creating high-performance health networks for major procedures such as heart surgery and spinal fusion, in which employees travel to select providers for these specialized services. Companies expect these high-performance networks to save them money, even with travel costs factored in.

However, there’s no reason for complacency: Both reports note that other trends will exert upward pressure on health costs in the near future. These trends include ongoing consolidation among hospitals and clinics, PwC notes. The rate of consolidation among providers has increased by 50 percent since 2009, which can lead to price increases of up to 20 percent or more, according to the report. Expensive and complex biologic drugs may also push up costs, as more new drugs continue to be introduced to the market, says PwC. Segal’s Kaplan notes that although cost trends continue to decelerate, overall health plan costs are still on the rise. “Plan sponsors must be ready to implement new requirements introduced by the ACA, and will need to play an active role to continue to get the most for their benefit dollars.”

Share on Facebook