The possibility of the federal government shutting down next week is becoming more and more real. With a looming deadline of Sept. 30, Congress is working — seemingly unsuccessfully — to pass legislation that keeps the government funded for at least a few more months.

But many Republicans are unwilling to negotiate a plan that continues to fund the Affordable Care Act. If the government shuts down on Oct. 1, it will affect more than just Washington, D.C. You could see changes in your own life because of the inability of the House of Representatives and the Senate to agree on legislation.

Here are some of the ways your life could be affected due to a possible government shutdown, according to the Congressional Research Service.

1. If you are a non-essential federal worker, you will be put on furlough.

A furlough is the placement of the employees in a temporary, nonduty, nonpay status. However, there have been cases in which workers placed on furlough due to a shutdown have been paid after it ends. Certain agencies that work towards national security, food safety, air traffic control and traffic safety will continue to work despite a shutdown because they provide essential services. President Barack Obama and Congress will continue to work without pay until the shutdown is resolved.

2. Your vacation plans could change.

National parks, museums and monuments will be closed. This means a loss of millions of tourists and the revenue they would bring to a community. During the 1995 and 1996 government shutdowns, 368 National Park Service sites were closed, which led to a loss of seven million visitors. The closure of the museums and monuments led to a loss of approximately two million visitors.

3. You won’t be able to leave the country.

Any applications for a passport or visa will be unprocessed until the end of the shutdown. During the 1995 and 1996 shutdowns, between 20,000 and 30,000 visa applications from foreigners went unprocessed. Additionally, 200,000 U.S. applications for passports were not processed and, consequently, the tourism and airline industries lost millions of dollars.

4. Your health could be at risk.

New patients might not be accepted at the National Institutes of Health clinical center and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention could end disease surveillance, which is what happened during the 1995 and 1996 shutdowns. Calls to a hotline at the NIH about diseases were also not taken.

5. You won’t get a gun permit as quickly as you’d like.

The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives will postpone the review of any applications it receives for alcohol, tobacco, guns and explosives.

6. You’ll still get your mail.

The United States Postal Service will work through a shutdown because it is self-funded, so you’ll still receive your bills and junk mail.

7. Your trash can will overflow.

If you live in Washington, D.C., you’ll have to wait before anyone comes to empty your garbage cans. This is because the city is funded by Congress.