Overall, does claims trading help or hinder the chapter 11 process? Should additional disclosures be required?

The issue of whether claims trading “helps or hinders” the chapter 11 process has been debated for many years. What began as a cottage industry in the early days of the bankruptcy code, the trading of bankruptcy claims has grown into a multibillion-dollar platform with funds raised solely for the purchase of trade claims in bankruptcy cases. Permitting a vendor to sell its trade claim provides a liquidity source to an otherwise captive creditor. It would be fundamentally unfair to prevent a creditor from selling its claim and the repercussions could be significant with vendors being forced to file their own bankruptcies. A search of the docket in any sizeable bankruptcy case will show hundreds, if not thousands, of entries stating “Notice of Transfer of Claim,” with the names of the seller, buyer and the face amount of the claims being sold. The current disclosure requirements serve a very simple purpose, to alert the debtor that the ownership of the claim has passed to the buyer and any distributions in the case should follow. The motivation of the buyer and seller are totally irrelevant in the eyes of the bankruptcy code and rules.

The primary focus of the claims trading debate is on whether additional disclosure should be required in transfer notices. The most common suggestion is that the notice should include the sale price, purchase date, whether the buyer has purchased other claims against the debtor and if the buyer is working in conjunction with other parties in the case. In his article “Claims Trading Warps the Bankruptcy System,” Kenneth Rosen advocates that imposing these additional disclosure requirements will “balance the playing field” in bankruptcy negotiations. The article provides some examples where a distressed-claim purchaser could utilize its leverage of having purchased the claim for less than face value to potentially frustrate the debtor’s reorganization efforts.

A major problem with requiring such additional disclosure in the name of “transparency” is that it would likely have a ripple effect on other trading. The theme would have to be carried forward to the secondary holders of bond and bank debt in order to truly level the playing field. All holders of debt would suddenly be required to disclose their basis in such debt in the name of “fairness.” To take such disclosure to a silly extreme, should vendors also have to disclose their cost/margins because it is unfair for them to make a profit when doing business with a debtor? A bankruptcy process with full and complete disclosure of all the trading information would actually tilt the field greatly in favor of the debtor, who already is in the driver’s seat by virtue of the exclusivity period, the automatic stay and other assorted protections afforded to it under the bankruptcy code.

While Congress dictated that the purpose of the bankruptcy code is to give a debtor a fresh start, it never intended to handicap the ability of creditors to maximize the recovery on their claims. Drastically changing the disclosure requirements would do just that.

Brett Miller is the managing partner of the New York office of Morrison & Foerster LLP, where he is a partner in the business restructuring & insolvency group and co-chair of the distressed real estate group.