ASHBURN — Wide receiver Rashad Ross is all too familiar with the gut-lurching feeling that comes with the roller-coaster ride of trying to make an NFL roster.

He’s experienced the lows, like being released from the Tennessee Titans’ practice squad after signing as an undrafted free agent in 2013. He signed to the Kansas City Chiefs’ practice squad and was waived the following offseason.

Ross joined the Washington Redskins and was waived again last August, then signed with the Chicago Bears and was promoted to the active roster. Ross played two games before he was released once again, doing the practice squad dance until he signed back with the Redskins’ squad last December.

On Saturday, Ross experienced perhaps the highest of highs in his young career when he made the Redskins’ 53-man roster after an impressive preseason performance.

Ross admitted he was relieved to make the team, but knowing the process all too well, the Arizona State product understands nothing is guaranteed.

“All my hard work I put in, I felt like it all came together,” Ross said Sunday at Redskins Park. “It felt good, like all the hard work I put in was worth it, but I can’t sit back and relax because like I said, I’ve been on the practice squad two years and being on the practice squad and seeing how it goes around, they bring people in every week to replace somebody.

“Knowing that just because you’re on the team today doesn’t mean you’re on the team tomorrow makes you want to work harder just to stay and keep your spot.”

Ross finished the preseason as the NFL’s leading receiver, catching 25 passes for 266 yards and four touchdowns.

Entering the preseason finale against the Jacksonville Jaguars, Ross was competing for a job as the team’s sixth receiver. The Redskins were set with DeSean Jackson, Pierre Garcon, Ryan Grant, Andre Roberts and rookie Jamison Crowder.

Hardly five minutes into the game, Ross started to move the needle with a 19-yard punt return. That set the table for a performance that would have made it difficult for the Redskins to cut him. He finished the game with 10 catches for 103 yards and a touchdown.

Though Ross‘ performance was inspiring, the Redskins were still faced with what appeared to be a difficult decision. With ultimately one receiver spot available, it would have been difficult to keep both Ross and Evan Spencer, the team’s sixth-round draft pick out of Ohio State.

Spencer had just two catches for 16 yards in the preseason, but the team was high on his potential. He sustained a concussion in the team’s third preseason game against the Baltimore Ravens and missed the final preseason game, opening the door for Ross to make the team.

Spencer, who was cut from the team’s 53-man roster on Saturday and designated as injured, was not claimed Sunday. He reverted to injured reserve and can negotiate an injury settlement once he clears concussion protocol, which would open the door for him to sign with another team.

If Spencer was in fact healthy, it may have complicated the decision to keep Ross. Based on Ross‘ performance, it was nearly impossible for the team to cut him, as coach Jay Gruden acknowledged Sunday.

“You talk about going out there and making plays, I’d be lying to you if I had cut him,” Gruden said. “You’d say, ‘What about this guy? This guy made all kinds of plays and you cut him. You’re lying.’ We talk about taking advantage of your opportunities, making plays and we’re going to do what’s right by you and the right thing was to keep him.”